Academia: Safety Net Or Threat?
LEAD: Trying to identify musical trends in a crazy-quilt culture can be frustrating.
Even as the prophets of serious pop proclaim the dawn of a new age of democratic art, equally earnest thinkers for whom pop may be no more than a sound made by a very small gun examine the evidence and see Western music being homogenized and trivialized beyond hope by the new levelers.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  Strawberry's lack of maturity and lackadaisical play both on defense and offense make him expendable.
He definitely should be traded to the American League for a number of quality players, while he still has value.
By trading him, it may help him to grow up and also help the Mets, by showing that even big name stars can be traded.


No Misha
LEAD: When somebody else tried to call the tune, Mikhail Baryshnikov decided to walk instead of dance.
Last week, nine months before his planned resignation as artistic director of the American Ballet Theater, Mr.
Baryshnikov abruptly quit.
Angered by the company management's removal of one of his staff members, as well as by a dispute over the troupe's finances, the dancer said through a spokesman that he was ''not taking orders from anyone, especially unfair ones.


'Liberal Democracy' Almost Defines Japan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Michael Caine Turns Homicidal
LEAD: It is a character that Michael Caine seems born to play.
Sinister yet seductive, immoral yet irresistible, he conceals his madness with a coating of charm.
When a beautiful young co-worker, played by Elizabeth McGovern, discovers that he may have committed a horrible crime, he quickly and effortlessly puts his powers to work.


THE WORLD HAS NEVER BEEN QUITE THE SAME
LEAD: Anglomania is fine, but only up to a point.
This is particularly true when you are a military-affairs columnist.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: 'A Jeffersonian Compact'; The Statement by the President and Governors
LEAD: AT the end of the education conference last week at the University of Virginia, President Bush and the country's governors issued what they called ''a Jeffersonian compact to enlighten our children and the children of generations to come.'' Declaring that ''the time for rhetoric is past,'' they issued this statement.


MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.
LEAD: David Burnham's article ''The Abuse of Power: Misuse of the I.R.S.'' (Sept. 3) was timely.
As head of an organization working to establish the first AIDS thrift shop, I wrote in frustration to my Representative and Senator, asking to have the Internal Revenue Service agent removed from our case only the week before your article was published.


Soviets Set to Mix, Mingle and Play
LEAD: The National Hockey League, after two decades of wistful glances toward the progeny of the Soviet Union's hockey program, is about to embark on a lesson in wish fulfillment.


Notre Dame Sails Past Purdue, 40-7
LEAD: Anthony Johnson rushed for two touchdowns and Tony Rice passed for a career-high 270 yards, leading top-ranked Notre Dame to a 40-7 defeat of Purdue today.
The victory was the 16th in succession for Notre Dame.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  YIDDISH THEATER


THE WORLD: A Voice From Bogota; War on Drugs, for Real, With Casualties
LEAD: HOW can I describe what a journalist in Colombia thinks and feels in these times?
How can I explain the fear, the rage, the frustration that engulf journalists every time they sit down in front of their computer screens to perform the professional ritual of commenting on a situation that floods Colombians every day with surreal brutality?


Freelance Exchange Encourages Ideas
LEAD: In reference to the recent articles ''Homeworkers warned of Fraudulent Schemes'' and ''More On L.I.
Are Working at Home, (Aug. 27) in which myself and my organization, the Long Island Freelance Exchange, were mentioned, I would like to advise you of a few errors and exclusions regarding the organization's services and locations.


Fallback Scheme
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa McCloskey Weds in Capital
LEAD: Lisa Siobhan McCloskey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert James McCloskey of Chevy Chase, Md., and George Joseph Brodmerkel 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Brodmerkel Jr. of Pittsburgh, were married yesterday at the Shrine of the Most Blessed Sacrament in Washington.
The Rev.
Percival D'Silva officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony.


If Your Line Is Cellular, Give a Ring
LEAD: After Shayna Felts, a computer-science and engineering major, graduated last spring from Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., she did not have to look hard for a job.
Ms.
Felts, 22 years old, was recruited by Bell Laboratories, the research and development arm of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, to write software for high-level computers.


Rail Support
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drug Agency Ends Its Investigation of Pilot
LEAD: A newspaper reported today that Federal drug investigators have found no evidence of drug smuggling or gun running by a Washington lawyer whose small plane crashed into the Atlantic after an 800-mile flight with him unconscious at the controls.


Two Parties Agree to Endorse One Slate of Judicial Candidates
LEAD: VOTERS in the county will face no significant judicial choices in the next three general elections, in the wake of decisions made by the two major political parties.


Chicago Journal; A New Process Is Used In a Ritual of Cleansing
LEAD: Right now, it's just a small corner of the market, but Howard Skolnik thinks he could be on to something a lot bigger.
This week he unveiled a process for making what he thinks is the first kosher steel shipping drum.


Surgery for Jacoby
LEAD: The commissioner of the Southwest Conference, Fred Jacoby, received a heart transplant Friday night and was listed in critical condition yesterday at St.
Paul Medical Center in Dallas.
The 61-year-old Jacoby, who became commissioner in 1982, suffered congestive heart failure in April and entered the hospital's intensive care unit Aug.


In Europe, East Prevails Upon West
LEAD: NEARLY 50 years after the Western democracies lost Eastern Europe to Communism, they are beginning to see how they can help Poland and Hungary find a way back.
What they lack, diplomats here say, is an overall strategy for the effort, one that will probably require leadership from the United States.


Cast in Bronze, the Keys To an Ancient Culture
LEAD: Prehistoric bronze objects - powerful images of great technological refinement made in ancient Sardinia - are compelling relics of the little-known nuraghic culture.
The people who made them derive their name from nuraghi, the truncated stone towers that rose on the Mediterranean island between the 15th and 6th centuries B.


John Walker, 64, Episcopal Bishop in Washington
LEAD: The Rev.
John Thomas Walker, the first black Episcopal bishop of Washington and a staunch crusader against racial discrimination at home and abroad, died of heart failure at Georgetown University Hospital yesterday.
He was 64 years old.
Bishop Walker had undergone triple bypass surgery Friday, the Episcopal Diocese of


Final Go-Rounds For Old Carousel
LEAD: CAROUSEL lovers can take a last spin on the turn-of-the-century Flying Horses at a Middlebury amusement park for free today and next Sunday.


18 Hurt in Cleveland Crash
LEAD: A tractor-trailer loaded with steel coils hit the rear end of a disabled tourist bus today, and the police said 18 people had been hurt.
The victims were carried to various hospitals, and there was no word on the severity of their injuries.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  Why not?
They have traded all the other players who might have made the Mets great again.
People like Hubie Brooks, Wally Backman, Mookie Wilson, Len Dykstra, Roger McDowell, Rick Aguilera, David West.
And on and on.
So why trade Strawberry and let him hit .350 with somebody else?


Campus Life: Boston U.; Legislator Seeks Dormitory Status For Apartments
LEAD: A city legislator's proposal that would force some landlords to register their buildings as private dormitories and could eventually lead to the use of resident advisers to help curb student rowdyism in off-campus housing has met with opposition from students in this high-density college town.


Advantages of a Hand Scraper
LEAD: BEFORE sandpaper became popular, woodworkers, especially cabinetmakers, relied on a simple tool called a hand scraper for smoothing wood prior to applying finish.


Christina Dockstader Weds
LEAD: At the Princeton University Chapel, Christina Dare Dockstader, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tod Allen Dockstader of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Randy Eugene Kinard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn Eugene Kinard of Allentown, Pa.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Steffey Morrow, a Methodist minister, officiated.


Rachel Bramson Weds B. S. Giese
LEAD: Rachel Bramson, a daughter of Leon Bramson of Chevy Chase, Md., and Mary Van der Tuin of Southfield, Mich., was married yesterday to Benjamin Sherwood Giese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graham Giese of North Truro, Mass.
Annamarie Pluhar, a justice of the peace, assisted by the Rev.
Francis A. Hubbard, an


New York Area Aids Islands After Hurricane
LEAD: Donations and supplies from people in the New York metropolitan area to help the victims of Hurricane Hugo in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands have amounted to at least $7 million since the storm devastated parts of the Caribbean less than two weeks ago, and the relief effort is continuing.


Advantages of a Hand Scraper
LEAD: BEFORE sandpaper became popular, woodworkers, especially cabinetmakers, relied on a simple tool called a hand scraper for smoothing wood prior to applying finish.


POSTINGS: Photo Exhibition Opens; Land-Use Debate
LEAD: A sweeping land-use change, the Lower Density Contextual Zoning Amendment, has prompted heated controversy since it was adopted by New York City's Board of Estimate in June.
Requiring new residential construction to be compatible with existing housing, it will affect half the city's residential land.


Echoes of a Princely Past in a Many Layered City
LEAD: NEVER WAS THERE A CITY THAT LIVED more in the present than does Delhi today.
To arrive at the Indira Gandhi International Airport, and drive from there into New Delhi, is to be struck at once by its unfinished appearance.
Huge public housing estates in unpainted concrete rise out of the gravelly red soil where cattle still linger, as if no one had informed them that the past was over, fini.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Kite Leads U.S.
Into Title Match: Tom Kite converted mistakes by Christy O'Connor of Ireland into a playoff victory that sent the United States into the championship match in the Dunhill Cup tournament yesterday at St.
Andrews, Scotland.
O'Connor put his ball into a stream on the first extra hole of the decisive match.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Doing Time


Pamela Polcini, Designer, Weds
LEAD: Pamela Grace Polcini and Dr.
Carl Dietrich Reimers 3d were married yesterday at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
John Andrew and the Rev.
Ledlie I. Laughlin.
The bride is a daughter of Paula Polcini of Yonkers and the late Damon P. Polcini.
Her husband is the son of the Rev.
Carl D.


Correction
LEAD: An article last week about the fragrance industry misidentified the company that introduced Fahrenheit perfume.
It is Christian Dior.


Cutting Capital Gains Tax: New York Boon and Burden
LEAD: A boon to the wealthiest New Yorkers and a burden on local governments already struggling with severely diminished Federal support was one scenario sketched by executives and public officials last week as they assessed the possible effect in New York City if the capital gains tax rate is reduced.


Mubarak Repeats Offer to Meet With Shamir
LEAD: The Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, made a rare telephone call to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir on Friday night and repeated a conditional offer to meet with the Israeli leader, an official said today.


Christa M. Carey, Broker, Is to Wed
LEAD: January wedding plans have been made known by Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Carey Jr. of Duncan, Okla., for their daughter Christa Marie Carey and Richard Wolfe Dunn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Dunn of Boston.


Review/Music; Quartet Opens Shostakovich Project
LEAD: Dmitri Shostakovich was 32 years old and had five symphonies behind him when he completed his first string quartet, in 1938.
At his death in 1975, the symphonies and quartets had reached parity - 15 each.
The cycles complement each other, with the symphonies standing as his more public pronouncements and the quartets as records of his private turmoil.


Hearing Set on Aged, Disabled Poor
LEAD: A CONGRESSIONAL hearing in Central Islip this week will throw a national spotlight on an innovative Suffolk County program that can better enable localities to shoulder the burden of their growing population of the elderly and disabled poor.


A Monastery Stay: Expect the Austere
LEAD: NESTLED in the Sabine hills 30 miles north of Rome, the Imperial Abbey at Farfa was the most important monastery of the Carolingian period in Italy.
Writers of the time said it had no equal for its situation, the splendor of its artisans and its importance politically.
Because it had Charlemagne as its protector and owned vast territories in central Italy, Farfa was considered one of the most powerful Benedictine abbeys in Europe and one of the most famous buildings of the Middle Ages.


GOODBYE NEWARK: ROTH REMEMBERS HIS BEGINNINGS
LEAD: Philip Roth's ''Goodbye, Columbus,'' published in 1959 as the title novella in a collection of stories, has turned out to be an enduring commentary on postwar America and, more specifically, the Jews who were part of it. ''Goodbye, Columbus'' won the author the National Book Award at the age of 26.


Hungary Refuses to Sign East Bloc Statement
LEAD: Hungary refused to sign a final statement at a meeting of Communist officials from 12 countries, saying the document made false accusations against West Germany, a report by the Hungarian state press agency said.


THE PLEASURES OF PLONK
LEAD: Finding fine wines really isn't all that difficult.
It can cost plenty, but it can be done.
A 1945 Petrus?
Or a 1934 Le Musigny, Comte de Vogue?
Or a magnum of '28 Krug?
Just say the word; Christie's or Sotheby's or your favorite wine shop will probably be able to track it down.


Many Leaning to Florio, New Jersey Polls Show
LEAD: Three new polls on the race for Governor of New Jersey indicate that voters who have made up their minds or are leaning toward a candidate now favor the Democrat, Representative James J. Florio, over his Republican opponent, Representative Jim Courter, by substantial margins.


The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2
LEAD:  In the Middle Ages, pilgrims traveled for months in the quest for sacred places.
Today's travelers go on different quests - the search for a radiant English landscape, a princely Indian capital, a perfect Pacific beach - and the best part is often the journey itself.


BUT NOAH WAS NOT A NICE MAN
LEAD:  A HISTORY OF THE WORLD IN 10 1/2 CHAPTERS  By Julian Barnes.  309 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Margaret Tsang Wed to Eugene Miao
LEAD: At St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn., Margaret Elizabeth Tsang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. Tsang of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Eugene Anthony Miao, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ling Miao of Palos Verdes, Calif.
The Rev.
Leo Gorman officiated.


London Isn't Ireland
LEAD: To the Editor:


Congress Courts the Dangers Of Living for the Moment
LEAD: THE legislative behemoth that Congress will be wrestling with for the next month or so is artfully described as a deficit reduction package, and in the narrowest sense that description is correct.


Windham Isn't Bowles
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Kidding
LEAD: So there was this Jew, this Italian and this black guy, and none of them was laughing last week.
The comedian Jackie Mason, who joined Rudolph Giuliani's mayoral campaign a few weeks ago to inject a note of humor and help attract Jewish support, was roundly panned last week for tossing off a flurry of racially tinged one-liners aimed at the Democratic candidate, David N.


Bronx Man Beaten in Attack That Police Call Race-Related
LEAD: A Hispanic man was severely injured as he was chased and beaten by a group of whites in the Belmont section of the Bronx early yesterday in what the police said was a racially motivated assault.


BLACKMAILING BILLY ROSE
LEAD:  THE BELLAROSA CONNECTION  By Saul Bellow.  102 pp.
New York:  Penguin Books.
Paper, $6.95.


U.S. Is Seeking to Increase Military Ties With Singapore
LEAD: The Bush Administration has offered to step up military cooperation with Singapore, Defense Department officials report.


Elitist View
LEAD: To the Editor:


Music That Rouses or Soothes - in Small Doses
LEAD: Like pharmacists, composers peddle stimulus on the one hand, narcosis on the other.
Two 20th-century miniaturists represent these two poles.
One rouses our minds, the other invites them to dream.


Village Needs a New Firehouse but Cannot Settle on a Site
LEAD: WITH a thriving business district, good schools, stately Victorian homes and regular commuter train service to Manhattan, the Village of Ridgewood has everything a successful bedroom community can offer.
Everything but a new firehouse.


Pavarotti Withdraws From Met 'Gioconda'
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti has canceled his series of performances in ''La Gioconda'' at the Metropolitan Opera in January because he must undergo treatment for sciatic nerve inflammation, the company has announced.
The tenor Nicola Martinucci will replace him in the first two performances, on Jan. 15 and 19.


At One Regatta, Friendly Rivalry
LEAD: It wasn't until two weeks ago that the Italian team competing this weekend in the International Yacht Club Challenge learned it would be coming to New York.


A WINNING SORT OF LOSER
LEAD:  MILE ZERO  By Thomas Sanchez.  349 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Help the East Look Ahead
LEAD: Immediate concerns are about the ability of reformers in the East to weather the transformations made possible by the internal crises in Poland and Hungary, already peeking over the horizon in Czechoslovakia and East Germany.
No one can doubt that it's in the West's interest to help, even if how and how much have to be figured out.


Nancy D. Burns, Scientist, Marries
LEAD: Nancy Dayton Burns, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Robert P. Burns of Branford, Conn., and Christian N. Kafoglis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Z. Kafoglis of Bowling Green, Ky., were married yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Branford by an uncle of the bride, the Rev.
Edward J. Burns.


CONFESSIONS OF A SMARTYBOOTS
LEAD:  FOR LOVE &amp; MONEY  A Writing Life, 1969-1989.
By Jonathan Raban.  344 pp.
New York:  An Edward Burlingame Book/Harper &amp; Row.


Urgent Need Seen To Protect Beaches Of South Carolina
LEAD: Gov.
Carroll A. Campbell Jr. says South Carolina urgently needs to build 65 miles of protective sand dunes before mid-October to prevent high tides from doing further damage to a coastline already devastated by Hurricane Hugo.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sept. 17 about fall lectures gave an incorrect date for a talk by Daniel Robbins at the Neuberger Museum in Purchase about the museum's collection.
It is Oct. 29, not Oct. 20.


Fashion: On the Street; Pants Suits, Soft And Voluminous
LEAD: Those who yearn to be in the fashion forefront ought to keep an eye on the soft pants suits emerging from the workrooms of a few precedent-setting designers.
The term avant-garde could aptly be applied to the prototypes shown here.


How Velazquez Seizes The Truth That Is Art
LEAD: I recall a trip uptown to the Hispanic Society prompted by Manet's ''Dead Christ and the Angels'' in the Met.
I was a college student who could not believe that an old-fashioned painting could be at the same time so loose and so beautiful.
But it was.
Passages of Christ's body were painted with angular, creamy brushstrokes that appeared to be lifting off the canvas.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the effect of divorce upon children omitted the title of a book and the name of Dr.
Judith S. Wallerstein's co-author.
The book is ''Second Chances'' (Ticknor &amp; Fields, New York, 1989).
The co-author is Sandra Blakeslee, a contributor to The New York Times.


Film Festival; Uncommon Places In Avant-Garde Trilogy
LEAD: When the three film makers represented in the New York Film Festival's ''Avant-Garde Visions'' program took questions after the press screening, the first one was, ''Do your titles mean anything?'' Whether this question was mischievously philistine or just inarticulate, the panel's moderator repeated it in a delicately rephrased form: ''Would you talk about the meaning of your titles?


Elizabeth Mason, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Mason, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Stayton Mason Jr. of Roslyn Estates, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert John Hay Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hay of Portsmouth, R.I.
The Rev.
Lawrence Costello performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Roslyn, L.I.


Miami Struggles; Quarterback Hurt
LEAD: Miami lost its starting quarterback with a fractured knuckle but rallied behind his substitute and a field-goal kicker today to beat Michigan State, 26-20, and raise its record to 4-0.


Fashion; Pants for Weekends or Whatever
LEAD: Pants, pants and more pants.
That's what designers on both sides of the Atlantic overwhelmingly suggested for fall.
They showed them for day, for evening, for weekends and for work.
They showed them with tailored jackets, with oversize tunic sweaters and with simple white cotton shirts.


STREETSCAPES: Millburn Pumping Station; A Rundown 'Abbey' Gets New Life as Condominiums
LEAD: RIDERS on the Long Island Rail Road could mistake it for an ancient, war-damaged abbey.
There is a huge hole in its roof and its Romanesque-style tower and walls have gaping holes, with moss and small trees growing all over the structure.


TV'S ARSENIO HALL: LATE-NIGHT COOL
LEAD: ON A BRIGHT MID-SUMMER Wednesday, on the south side of Sunset Boulevard, off La Cienega, Arsenio Hall, the latest prince in the late-night realm where Johnny Carson is king, got a towering present: a billboard with a picture of him sprawled like a diva on a couch, smiling the smile of a Cheshire cat.


&gt;Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My screened porch has a concrete slab floor.
For years, I have been painting this floor with an acrylic concrete deck paint, and in April the paint bubbles and lifts in large sections.
I scrape these areas and then repaint the floor, but the bubbling and separating grow worse each year.
Is there a way to correct this?


Africa Airports: Cautionary Tale
LEAD: The day after a French airliner broke up over the desert of southern Niger, killing all 171 people on board, I arrived at the airport in Niamey, the capital of Niger, for my flight to Abidjan.


Homeless Need Aid From Commuters
LEAD: AS a member of the vast army of commuters that passes through Grand Central Terminal twice a day, I am pained by the seemingly hopeless plight of the homeless and by my inability to be of help.


Q and A
LEAD:  Maintenance Deduction


The Many Aspects of Hospice Care
LEAD: Stephanie Johns missed the basic point underlying hospice care in her letter.


Wine; VINO FINO
LEAD: POOR MICHAEL Broadbent.
He bit off, as they say, rather more than he could chew.
Mr.
Broadbent, if you didn't know, is the urbane wine director of Christie, Manson &amp; Woods International, the London auction house better known simply as Christie's.
The job requires an immense knowledge of wine, of course, and Mr.


Retailers Find Shoplifting a Growing Burden
LEAD: A WELL-DRESSED customer entered a White Plains clothing store recently.
Julian DiDonato, who owns the store, Dakota Dry Goods Ltd. on Mamaroneck Avenue, recalled that they exchanged a friendly word or two.
It wasn't until after the customer left, Mr.
DiDonato said, that he noticed a pair of deerskin gloves, valued at $59, were missing.


Farm Belt Gambling On an Oil
LEAD: Farming is always a gamble, but this year Richard Rice and his son Michael are putting down a bigger wager than usual.
They are using about 130 of their 1,000 acres to plant a crop that most American farmers have never produced.


Review/ Pop; Philip Morris Superband Plays It Light
LEAD: New York City appears to be blessedly in the middle of a big-band revival.
The recent appearances of several repertory orchestras and regular engagements by the orchestras of Buck Clayton, Mel Lewis and Illinois Jacquet have all served to raise the standards for big bands.
As a result, the Philip Morris Superband, which gave a concert at Town Hall on Sept.


Ms. Jack Weds A. H. Rowan 3d
LEAD: The nondenominational First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Claudia Badger Jack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Claude Kress Jack of Greenwich, and Archibald Hamilton Rowan 3d, the son of Mrs.
Theodore W. O'Connell Jr. of New York and Greenwich and the late Mr.


THE GLORY THAT WAS GREECE'S
LEAD: Beginning in 1801, when Greece was still part of the Ottoman Empire, the British Ambassador to Constantinople, the seventh Earl of Elgin, acquired from Turkish authorities much of the sculptural ornament of the Parthenon in Athens.
Known as the Elgin Marbles, the sculptures are generally recognized as the most sublime expression of the Classical Greek style of the fifth century B.C.


A Doctor for Struggling Economies
LEAD: If Hollywood were casting it, Jeffrey Sachs might be the Indiana Jones of economics.


VATICAN AND EAST LOWERING BARRIERS AT A RAPID TEMPO
LEAD: At a dramatic pace that would have been unthinkable only a year ago, the Vatican and the Eastern bloc have begun to forge fundamental changes in their relationship, easing mutual suspicions and lowering diplomatic barriers that had been intact for decades.


A Poet's Safe Haven In Amherst
LEAD: THE RUSTY BRICK, CENTER-ENTRANCE FEDERAL HOUSE that Emily Dickinson lived in most of her life is registered with the United States Department of the Interior as ''The Dickinson Homestead.'' It is planted on a small rise directly across Main Street from Valley Bicycle and the Black Sheep Farm Kitchen, in the town of Amherst, Mass.


Legacy of Innuendo Splits a State Anew
LEAD: Some of the suspicion and mistrust that pervaded the social turbulence here in the 1960's are being replayed 25 years later in a court fight over a defunct state agency that spied on and harassed participants in the civil rights movement.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  TRIBUTE TO THOREAU


DATA BANK: Oct. 1, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7


Martha W. Miller Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Martha Waite Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barton Huntington Miller of Wilmington, Del., and Lee, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Hart Bolling 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bolling Jr. of Greenville, Del., and Nantucket, Mass.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
David Lockhart at the First Congregational Church of Stockbridge,


In Brazilian Race, a Communist Stands Out
LEAD: Flipping through Brazilian television channels one recent evening, viewers had the choice of a comedy, ''Cockroach Cabaret,'' an action show, ''Tank Commando,'' or a one-hour interview with Roberto Freire, one of 28 minor-party candidates for President.


Something Basic Is Wrong in America
LEAD: A serious look at the composition of the United States-Japan bilateral trade imbalance shows that the United States is becoming highly dependent on Japanese high-tech industrial products.


Exiled King's Body Returned
LEAD: Thousands of people turned out in Yugoslavia's southern republic of Montenegro today for the return of the remains of their last king, who died in exile in Italy in 1921.
It was the first time a Communist country allowed the return of the remains of a former royal ruler.
The remains of the King, Nikola Petrovic, the Queen, Milena, and their two daughters, Vjera and Ksenija, were carried to the ancient Montenegrin capital of Cetinje, 125 miles south of Belgrade, for reburial.


Pamela S. Snyder Marries in Darien
LEAD: Pamela Spotswood Snyder, a daughter of John A. Snyder of Darien, Conn., and the late Sue Davis Snyder, was married yesterday to Earle Kirkpatrick Borman 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Borman Jr. of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Frederick T. Bender, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of the bride's father.


Words of Beauty And Terror Inform A Graham Classic
LEAD: Martha Graham was sure of one thing about her new version of ''American Document,'' a dance she originally choreographed in 1938: ''I know some people - some of the old birds - may hate it,'' she said. ''They'll hate it simply because it's different and not the 'American Document' they saw before.


Cambodian Guerrillas Claim Capture of 3 Towns


An Opera Rivalry Rivals Civic Rivalry
LEAD: Those longtime California competitors, San Francisco and Los Angeles, are now engaged in an operatic rivalry that may wind up benefiting both cities.
For decades, the San Francisco Opera perched alone on top of its roost as the West Coast's only opera company of national distinction.
But today there is a flock of opera companies there that has attracted widespread attention, from Seattle through San Francisco to San Jose, Los Angeles, Costa Mesa, Long Beach and San


A Cotswolds Journey: Back Into Time
LEAD: THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF GLOUCESTER-shire is stone country - Cotswold stone, oolitic limestone.
What lies beneath the soil is reflected above in the golden glow of cottages, churches, manor houses, the dry stone walls that snake up the hillsides.
There is no building material to match this limestone: it reflects and absorbs light in a way that perfectly matches the shifting, changing moods of the countryside.


Lebanese Peace Conference


Chinese Specialties Served at the Grill
LEAD: A HUGE grill manned by two or three chefs and the barbecue meals it produces are the cornerstone of Khan's Mongolian Garden in Stamford, and the grill is what sets this newcomer apart from other Chinese restaurants in the area.


Life Styles; At a Tribute to Films, Stars From Two Coasts
LEAD: It was Lights!
Camera!
Action! at the National Building Museum here on Tuesday night as actors, producers, directors and writers joined President and Mrs.
Bush and a number of political leaders in a celebration of the 25th anniversary of the American Film Institute.


Questing; Adventures And Visions
LEAD: When pilgrims of the Middle Ages saw the spires of the great Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, they knew that their adventure was at an end.
The goals may be different for today's pilgrims - although Santiago still holds rich rewards - but the pleasure of the traveler's quest remains.
The past rises from the present: houses and landscapes, informed by imagination, are populated by poets and princes, saints and charlatans.


Campus Life: Wisconsin; Condom Olympics Seek to Encourage Safe Sex Practices
LEAD: Organizers of last Sunday's Condom Olympics at the University of Wisconsin say their event may not have had the spectacle of Seoul but their goals were just as noble.


In Monology, to Play It Right Do It Yourself
LEAD: Ten years ago, no one in television would have dreamed of scouting out jarring forums of New York downtown theater for material that could play in Peoria.
Yet this November, HBO will feature Reno, one of downtown's most promising monologuists, performing at P.S. (Performance Space) 122, a former public school on the Lower East Side that's becoming a breeding ground for cable specials.


South Africa Disbands Special Police in Namibia
LEAD: South Africa disbanded its police counterinsurgency force in Namibia today in response to pressure from the United Nations and complaints of intimidation from civilians in the territory.


Anglican Head Prays With the Pope in Rome
LEAD: Making his first official visit to the Vatican, the Archbishop of Canterbury prayed alongside Pope John Paul II today as the two spiritual leaders discussed future reunification of the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches.


Drunken Drivers Hear From Victims
LEAD: DRUNKEN drivers are listening to survivors of the tragedies that such drivers cause, through a new program for first offenders called the Victim Impact Panel.


How's Old Burt Reynolds? Doing Fine, Thank You
LEAD: It comes to few men to be as successful in films as Burt Reynolds has been.
For five consecutive years, a record bested only by Shirley Temple, he parlayed an easygoing insouciance, a riverboat gambler's charm and a genial bonhomie into a run as the world's No. 1 box-office draw. ''I am a part of film history, and that pleases me no end,'' he says quietly.


Accountants Play for Laughs
LEAD: Martin Edelstein, a New York accountant whose cheeky biography states that he co-edited ''Tax Planning for the Little People'' with Leona Helmsley, has a gripe. ''How come we never see movies where John Wayne is the head of the tax department?'' he protested. ''Or what about Conan the Certified Public Accountant or Friday the 15th?


Editors' Notes
LEAD: A front-page article in The Times Book Review today discusses the publicity fanfare that has heralded political memoirs, including Nancy Reagan's forthcoming book, ''My Turn.''


Parcells Likes Brainy Types
LEAD: Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants has always liked the size (6 feet 5 inches and 290 pounds) and drive-blocking ability of Damian Johnson, his starting offensive right guard.
But most of all, he likes his brain.


San Francisco's Real Mission
LEAD: EACH TIME AMERICA SEALS ME IN A laminate of deadlines and Dow Jones averages, bills due and bills payable, I journey to a place where urgencies fade, colors brighten and all claims on reality begin to look relative.
Just a stroll down the hill - though, like a good Californian, I usually drive - leads me out of my silent, wind-scoured, chillingly pretty neighborhood into a raucous, mouldering, charmingly unscrubbed caldron.


PASTIMES: Sunday Dinner; Dining, Paris to Beijing, And All in Manhattan
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Alcala


WHAT DO YOU EXPECT FOR $2.25 MILLION?
LEAD: I am thrilled to learn there is no shortage of people who are able to pay $2 million to $10 million for a house in Beverly Hills.
To think - on my modest income, I am in the same tax bracket they are!


Handke's Afternoon
LEAD: To the Editor:


The People's Republic at 40, at Odds With the People
LEAD: THE People's Republic of China prepared to mark its 40th anniversary today with splendid dragon dances and fireworks, but with little joy.


A World of Pottery in Vermont
LEAD: FINE handcrafts, especially pottery, have become a major attraction for visitors to southern Vermont.
Whether the basic plan is to camp out under the summer stars, gaze at the fall foliage, or zoom down a sugar-white ski slope, more and more Vermont vacationers are visiting some of the region's many craft centers and artisans' studios, seeking something to take home that will not merely be a reminder of the trip but also a work of art.


Soviets Seek Proper Word For Property
LEAD: The Soviet Legislature is to digress from the gloomy, down-to-earth business of next year's budget on Monday to consider what may be the ultimate issue: who owns the Soviet Union?


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/SCIENCE
LEAD:  FEEDING YOURSELF  By Vicki Cobb.
Illustrated by Marylin Hafner.  32 pp.
New York:  J. B. Lippincott. $11.95. (Ages 5-8).
GETTING DRESSED  By Vicki Cobb.
Illustrated by Marylin Hafner.  32 pp.
New York:  J. B. Lippincott. $11.95 (Ages 5-8).


Correction
LEAD: The Personal Finance column last week misstated the rule that determines when the wages of children employed by their parents become subject to Social Security tax.
Because of recent changes in the law, the tax applies to children 18 years of age or older, not to younger children.


N.C.A.A. Aims to Keep Out of Politics
LEAD: When Theodore Roosevelt summoned representatives of Harvard, Princeton and Yale to the White House in October 1906, he told them in no uncertain terms that the Federal Government would not hesitate to impose its own solution for ending the mounting violence in college football.
He offered two options: clean up the sport or have it abolished.


IN THE HOSPITAL, WAITING FOR A SAVIOR
LEAD:  DIRTY WORK  By Larry Brown.  236 pp.
Chapel Hill, N.C.:  Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill.


Duke Rallies to Stun Clemson
LEAD: Just a week ago, after watching a rout of his Duke squad, Coach Steve Spurrier pronounced his team's chances of victory in the coming game against Clemson as one in a million.
Today, that most improbable triumph came to pass, as the Blue Devils defeated the previously unbeaten Tigers, 21-17.


Suzanne E. Hyer, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: At Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in Amherst, N.Y., Suzanne E. Hyer, a partner in the New York law firm of Hinckley &amp; Silbert, was married yesterday to Joseph F. Savona, a partner in Dockery, Savona &amp; Scully, a law firm in New York.
Msgr.
Francis T. Sorci and the Rev.
Peter Pastore, a cousin of the bridegroom, officiated.


A Dirty War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Where Washington And Moscow Line Up On Arms Control
LEAD: AFTER the summer doldrums, the arms control process has received a shot of adrenaline, helping the Bush Administration counter Democratic accusations that it is taking a timid approach in its dealings with Moscow.


High-Stakes Strike Looms for Hospitals
LEAD: Pinning its fortunes to a sharp escalation of a long-simmering contract dispute, the state's largest hospital workers union is preparing for a high-stakes strike Wednesday against most of the New York City area's private hospitals and nursing homes.


Candidate Is Ruled Off Ballot; Only Buffalo Mayor Remains
LEAD: In a ruling that could leave Mayor James D. Griffin of Buffalo unopposed in his bid for a fourth term, a state judge last week invalidated the independent candidacy of a former chief city judge who was the runner-up to Mr.
Griffin in the Democratic primary.


Tamara Weiss Marries Gary A. Stuber
LEAD: Tamara Weiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Weiss of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday at her parents' home at Gay Head on Martha's Vineyard to Gary A. Stuber, a son of Audrey Stuber of Copake Falls, N.Y., and the late Alfred Stuber Jr.
The ceremony was performed by Luther Tackmash Madison, a Wampanoag Indian medicine man; William Sloane Coffin; the bride's father, and Betty Ann Bryant, a justice of the peace in Chilmark,


Meal Memorializes AIDS Victim
LEAD: AN unusual new cookbook out this month is donating part of its profits to providing meals for people with AIDS. ''The Open Hand Cookbook'' (Pocket Books, $18.95) is a compilation of menus donated by 60 California chefs.
Edited by Robert C. Schneider, a chef associated with several California restaurants (among them the Hayes Street Grill and the Pier 23 Cafe in San Francisco), the focus is on nourishing meals chefs cook for friends.


WHAT'S DOING IN: San Diego
LEAD: Not everyone in this conservative military town approves, but San Diego this fall hosts what is billed as the largest festival of Soviet art and culture ever brought to the United States.
The Soviet events represent a kind of reverse glasnost, part of Mayor Maureen O'Connor's efforts to show that San Diego is more than just a warm quiet place by the ocean for retired naval captains to tend their gardens of hibiscus and oleander.


Here Comes Supersquirrel
LEAD: SQUIRRELS are not among my favorite creatures.
Actually, they're listed high on my rodent list.
Besides, I'm afraid of them.
This fear is strongly rooted in my childhood, when my parents took me to the Bronx Zoo and a squirrel, aggressive little thing, chased me.
No, I have no need for squirrels.


POSTINGS: Where the Trains Run; 18 Duplex Condos in Midwood
LEAD: The site, at Avenue I and East 16th Street in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, is not promising.
On one side, the Q and D trains of the IND subway line go rattling by.
A hundred feet away, the Long Island Rail Road runs four freight trains a night.


TUNIS: A RAGOUT WITH A SECRET
LEAD: Sometimes a dish is so haunting you can't get it out of your mind.


Pitt Ties West Virginia, 31-31
LEAD: A 42-yard field goal on the game's last play capped a 22-point rally for Pitt tonight and enabled the Panthers to tie West Virginia, 31-31.
Ed Frazier kicked the field goal and the Mountaineers were undone after leading, 31-9, at the end of the third quarter.


A Chilling Evening Down on the Farm
LEAD: AS surely as B follows A, evil transpires in plays set in isolated houses in remote rural regions.
Peter Colley's play, ''I'll Be Back Before Midnight,'' currently at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, is set in such a farmhouse.


Many Happy Returns
LEAD: MY grandfather, who grew up in what was once Prussia, got his first taste of the American West from Karl May, a 19th-century German author who wrote about the prairie with uncanny vividness considering that he had never seen it.


The Graying of America's Countryside
LEAD: WHEN Helen Augelli retired as the principal's secretary at Newtown, Conn., High School in 1986, she and her husband, Joseph, moved to Kitty Hawk on the North Carolina Outer Banks.
They had summered there for years, bought a building lot a few years ago, and when the time came, moved into their beach house to stay.


Saberhagen (23-6) Has Top E.R.A. (2.16) of Year
LEAD: Bret Saberhagen set a club record today with his 23d victory and clinched the American League earned run average title as the Kansas City Royals beat the Oakland Athletics, 6-1.


A POTENT BREW IN PONAPE
LEAD: One of my more exotic gastronomic quests occurred in 1978, during a trip with a photographer friend through the Micronesian Islands in the Western Pacific.
Along the way, we stopped in Ponape, a 129-square-mile volcanic island famous for its rugged beauty and for the ancient ruins of Nan Madol, man-made islets believed to have had both religious and defensive significance.


FOR ONE THING, IT'S NOT BLUE
LEAD:  DANUBE  By Claudio Magris.
Translated by Patrick Creagh.  416 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Mary Sullivan and Peter Fisher Wed
LEAD: Mary Susan Sullivan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Sullivan of Summit, N.J., and Peter Ryerson Fisher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger D. Fisher of Cambridge, Mass., were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in West Tisbury, on Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
The Rev.
James C. Martin officiated.


Conspiring to Lie
LEAD: To the Editor:


It's Toronto in the American League East
LEAD: In each corner of the clubhouse, there were Blue Jays with their heads buried in towels.
Now and again, a head would emerge, eyes ringed red and burning.
There were, though, no tears, for the only hurt the 1989 season produced was the wonderful sting of champagne.


The Battle Is Joined Against the Mighty Flea
LEAD: THEY were everywhere.
On the floor.
The furniture.
The cat.
Me.
The futility of battling an army of nearly microscopic, indefatigable creatures called fleas has left me confident that roaches won't be the lone survivors of a nuclear disaster.


Hurricane Left Grievous Wounds To Land and Spirit of Puerto Rico
LEAD: In most parts of Puerto Rico that were ripped apart by Hurricane Hugo, children rush out now to greet the helicopters that fly in with aid.
But not on Culebra.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  In 1986, Strawberry helped the Mets to a championship, and in 1988 he was robbed of the MVP.
Leave Darryl alone and allow him to be the respected star he would be in any other city.
Are we allowing history to repeat itself by giving away another franchise player and future Hall of Famer?
KEVEN P.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Belmar  $347,000  307 Seventh Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, w/w carpeting, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Jackson  $109,900  43 Cassville Freehold Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, den, patio, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,597.


Linda Veith Wed To Bruce Glover
LEAD: Linda Susan Veith, a daughter of Karen Veith and Dr.
Charles J. Veith, both of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Bruce William Glover, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Thomas Glover of Rowayton, Conn.
The ceremony at the Lower Brandywine Presbyterian Church in Centerville, Del., was performed by the Rev.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.47
7.48
7.89
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.60
8.60
7.77
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.43
6.44
6.02
Bank Rate Monitor


Lawyer Married To Ms. Hamilton
LEAD: Jeanmarie Hamilton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Hamilton of Fair Haven, N.J., and Richard Allen Drucker, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Drucker, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward O. Miller officiated.


In 1990's, What Price Scarce Labor?
LEAD: Workers in the 1990's will have one advantage they have lacked for nearly 25 years: scarcity.
This shortage will have profound implications for both managers and employees into the 21st century, economists and labor experts say.


Mary Sue Howley to Wed
LEAD: Mrs.
Peter D. Howley of Bronxville, N.Y., has announced October wedding plans for her daughter Mary Sue Howley and Paul Gerard Dwyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Dwyer of New York.
Ms.
Howley, 27 years old, is the marketing associate in the incentive department at Dean Witter Reynolds in New York.


The Fallout From the Font Wars
LEAD: The Font Wars, as the competition among industry leaders is known, went ballistic last week at the Seybold Computer Publishing Conference here, and the outcome will fundamentally change the way software looks on computer screens and the way documents look when they are printed or sent to other computers.


Buffaloes Score 45 For Ex-Teammate
LEAD: Fifth-ranked Colorado honored the memory of a fallen teammate today, then defeated Washington, 45-28, scoring the most points allowed a visitor at Husky Stadium in 60 years.


Developer Is Host Of Meeting on Jay Site
LEAD: A LITTLE more than a decade ago, the developer Diane G. Millstein purchased a 23-acre site in Rye overlooking Long Island Sound and began drawing up a plan for a series of houses.
Last week, several of the key participants in the lengthy dispute that ensued accepted her invitation to meet in her Mamaroneck home and discuss a resolution.


ART VIEW
LEAD: Every museum director dreams of the exemplary acquisition - the one that will appear to have found its way to the museum with a beautiful inevitability.
Almost never, of course, does it happen like that.
But that is how it can look in retrospect, just as when we have watched a golfer hole out in one we forget that, before the little white ball nestled down at the bottom of the hole, luck, wind, weather and a supreme degree of nervous concentration all had a part to play.


Cards' Back Is Out
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals placed the running back, Stump Mitchell, on the National Football League's injured-reserve list yesterday and activated the rookie defensive back Marcus Turner off their developmental squad.
Mitchell, the franchise's No. 2 career rusher and its leader in combined yardage with 11,988, suffered a severe knee injury in last Sunday's 35-7 loss to the Giants.


How Much Does New Jersey Really Like Republicans?
LEAD: ON a recent visit to New Jersey, President Bush portrayed the race for governor as a referendum not only on eight years of Republican leadership in Trenton, but on the national party's values and policies in the 1980's.
Calling the New Jersey election ''crucial,'' Mr.
Bush said, ''This election will decide whether New Jersey continues to have the kind of leadership which balances a sound economy and sound ecology, and whether its leadership says 'no' to higher taxes and 'yes' to extending the prosperity of the last eight years.


A Cross Between Buckminster Fuller And Buck Rogers
LEAD: Paolo Soleri is a frustrating figure to put your finger on: the parts of him do not quite fit together.
Architect, scientist, visionary, philosopher and engineer, Soleri is truly successful only as a visionary.
His architecture hovers between the magical and the totalitarian; it is late Frank Lloyd Wright blown up to gargantuan scale.


VICTORIES OF THE SPIRIT
LEAD: We were delighted to see the magnificent pictures of the senior olympics in your magazine but were disappointed that you did not mention Washington University and its unique role in Olympic history.


Righetti Will Be a Starter Next Season
LEAD: Dave Righetti's days as a Yankee relief pitcher are over.
Next season, he will be a starter again.


Baur's Passes Help As Lafayette Wins
LEAD: Frank Baur silenced most of his doubters today with his first pass of the day as he rifled a 53-yard line-drive between two defenders to Dave Baird for a touchdown 50 seconds into the game, as Lafayette beat Columbia, 52-14.


O'Rourke and Brodksy Meet in First Debate
LEAD: THE campaign for County Executive began its final and most crucial phase last week with the first confrontation - a debate in Mount Vernon - between the two-term Republican incumbent, Andrew P. O'Rourke, and his Democratic challenger, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky.


Vietnam Goes Home, Still Casting an Eye Over All of Indochina
LEAD: AT the final farewell ceremony for Vietnamese soldiers here last week, the General Secretary of the People's Revolutionary Party of Cambodia, Heng Samrin, was the centerpiece of a typical socialist-style tableau of Politburo leaders and distinguished guests.


Not Won Over But Worn Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinosaur Show Not for All
LEAD: Does Estelle Stanecky still have to be told by someone else that if she stands on a windowsill of the Empire State Building she's likely to fall? (''Dinosaur Display Can Be Scary,'' Letter, Sept.17.) Or has she now -- having put away childish things -- learned it for herself?


Cambodia Expects Resurgence of Khmer Rouge
LEAD: While Vietnamese officers who have returned from Cambodia routinely assert that the Phnom Penh army is now good enough to stand on its own, they also volunteer nearly uniform respect for the guerrilla tactics and skill of the Khmer Rouge, the main military force opposing Prime Minister Hun Sen.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  No.
Certainly he's not always a model player.
But the Mets would miss his power.
So a hasty trade when his value is down would be a serious mistake.
I wouldn't want a whole team of Darryls.
But one is certainly a good thing.
MARC I. WHINSTON  Flushing, Queens


No Compromise
LEAD: It took an act of Congress to end an act of defiance.
Last week, 25 months after going to jail in the District of Columbia for defying a court order and a few days after fast action by Congress, Dr.
Elizabeth Morgan, a plastic surgeon, went free.
She was imprisoned for civil contempt in 1987 after refusing to reveal the whereabouts of her daughter, Hilary, now 7, for court-ordered visits with Dr.


Griffin Outpoints Cuban for Only U.S. Gold Medal in Moscow
LEAD: Eric Griffin, who lost a chance to make the 1988 United States Olympic team because of a positive test for marijuana, stood tonight as the world amateur boxing champion at 106 pounds.


For U.S. Coins, a Great Day Is About to Dawn
LEAD: To the Editor:


VICTORIES OF THE SPIRIT
LEAD: Congratulations on your photographic feature ''Victories of the Spirit'' (Photographs by Mary Ellen Mark, Aug. 27).


Paying Attention To the Schools Is a National Mission Now
LEAD: MANY educators and state officials feared that President Bush's ''edu-cation summit'' last week at the University of Virginia would be little more than an extended photo opportunity for the man who has vowed to be ''the education President.'' But afterward, there was growing agreement among the experts that something more substantive had occurred.


Campus life: Illinois; Stadium Fire May Be Part of Vandals' Attacks
LEAD: Vandals set fire to the football field at Memorial Stadium, hours after the Fighting Illini defeated Utah State University 41-2 in the team's first home game, the authorities said.


Laurie Anderson Sings the Body Electronic
LEAD: Seated at her kitchen table in her downtown Manhattan loft overlooking the Hudson River, with a mug of coffee and a pack of Marlboros, Laurie Anderson, famous for her multimedia cyber-punk performances complete with filtered voices and electronic violin, tells a story of hang-gliding in Rio last July, a pair of wings looming over her head, a perfect view of the local pollution below:


In Ethiopia, Unlikely Warriors Against AIDS
LEAD: In a tin-roofed, shanty-like classroom where primary school students usually struggle to learn math, a smartly dressed prostitute posed her problem to a nurse conducting a seminar on AIDS.


It's Over Now That It's Over
LEAD: Yogi Berra has been a player, coach and manager for 45 years.
As a player, he won three most valuable player awards.
As a manager, he won pennants in each league.
Last week he announced his retirement and today in Cincinnati, he will end his career, finishing it as a coach with the Houston Astros.


20 Questions
LEAD: The world is full of unexpected things, or at any rate of things where you'd never expect them.
Match the following artifacts with the places where they may be found.
Note that any question may have more than one answer; conversely, any answer may fit more than one question.
Any score is passing. rr


PASTIMES: Sunday Menu; Corn (and Tomatoes) In an All-Season Salad
LEAD: A salad with tomatoes and corn is obviously best in summer or early fall.
But it can be made when the tomato and corn seasons are just a memory.


WHAT DO YOU EXPECT FOR $2.25 MILLION?
LEAD: Diane K. Shah must be congratulated.
She has managed to convey, in her article ''What Do You Expect for $2.25 Million?'' (Sept. 10), much of what is wrong with our society.


Life Style: Sunday Outing; In a Temple Setting, Tibetan Artifacts
LEAD: The Jacques Marchais Center of Tibetan Art, on Lighthouse Hill on Staten Island, aims for authenticity.
To arrive at the museum, visitors who use public transportation must take a 10-minute walk uphill, the traditional path to arrive at a Buddhist monastery.
The humility of the climb is intentional.


T.G.M.F. (Thank God, More Fridays)
LEAD: There's no compelling reason for the week to have seven days.
Different cultures have different lengths of the week, ranging from four days in the Bantu and Ibo tribes in Africa to eight days in ancient Rome.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Brentwood  $120,000  49 Gates Avenue  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old high ranch; dining room, den, half acre; taxes $3,300.
Hicksville  $160,000  81 Woodbine Drive North  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement with workroom; taxes $2,100.


Lebanese Legislators Hold Talks in Saudi Arabia
LEAD: Lebanese legislators who have survived more than 14 years of civil war gathered here today for peace talks intended to overcome differences over the deployment of Syrian forces and Muslim demands for greater political power.


Sun Finally Shines on the Blue Jays
LEAD: To Dome or not to Dome?
That was the question for the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday.


A Youngster's Efforts On Behalf of the Police
LEAD: THE Bristol police department is now two bullet-proof vests richer because of the efforts of a 4-foot 9-inch, 87-pound resident who said he was concerned about police officers being shot in the line of duty.


Prospects
LEAD:  Seeking the Dollar's Level


Anne Wise Weds Jonathan Bailey
LEAD: Anne Seymour Wise, a student at the Temple University Medical School, and Jonathan Arthur Bailey, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, graduates of Wesleyan University, were married yesterday at the Friends Meeting House in Westtown, Pa.
The Rev.
Fred S. Enman, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


French Premier Faces Strikes and Left's Fire
LEAD: It looks as if it might be a long hot autumn for France's Socialist Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, as he hears rumblings on his left over his efforts to hold down social spending and salaries for Government workers.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:  CLASSICAL  Copland: 'Appalachian Spring' Suite, 'Short Symphony' and Other Works  Orpheus Chamber Orchestra.
Deutsche Grammophon 427 335; CD and cassette.
Copland originally wrote ''Appalachian Spring'' for 13 instruments, all that could fit in the pit for the 1944 premiere of the Martha Graham ballet - a version he suppressed once the suite for full orchestra caught on.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  No.
Since I'm a Chicago native, any detriment to your team makes it easier for my team to win the division.
MARK J. KASPER  New York


In Search of An Ancient Mediterranean
LEAD: DESPITE HAVING SPENT MORE THAN TWO decades living and traveling along its shores, I often had the sense that I had never really seen the Mediterranean - at least not as I had envisioned it after my horizons (not to mention my expectations) had been lifted by the lyricism of F. Scott Fitzgerald and Andre Gide, Norman Douglas and Lawrence Durrell.


Best Player Not Necessarily the M.V.P.
LEAD: The name of Kevin Mitchell is pratically engraved on the 1989 National League most valuable player award.
Why not?
Mitchell has been the best all-round hitter in baseball this season and he has helped power the San Francisco Giants to a division championship.


Jennifer Tanner and Richard Taylor Are Married
LEAD: Jennifer Harris Tanner, the daughter of Evelyn Schmidt Tanner of New York and Marvin Allen Tanner of Coplay, Pa., was married yesterday to Richard Zachary Holbrook Taylor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Lee Taylor Jr. of Easton, Md.
The Rev.
Donald Etherton officiated at the Trinity Episcopal Cathedral in


Fashion; In Fitting Room, a Little More Equality
LEAD: For many women, finding the perfect dress or outfit is only half the battle.
Then, it must be altered.


CRACK'S DESTRUCTIVE SPRINT ACROSS AMERICA
LEAD: AS BROADWAY CUTS UP through the Upper West Side of Manhattan and into Washington Heights, it gradually turns into a giant Caribbean bazaar.
The avenue abounds with bodegas, farmacias, unisex beauty salons, bargain clothing outlets, restaurants serving pollo and platanos, and travel agencies offering bargains to the Dominican Republic.


Mother Who Left Baby Is Pregnant Again
LEAD: A woman who gave birth in a jetliner restroom in July 1988 and left the infant in a wastebasket will not go to jail until December because she is expecting another baby in mid-October.


IMAGINARY PEOPLE IN A REAL WAR
LEAD:  TO ASMARA  By Thomas Keneally.  290 pp. New York: Warner Books. $18.95.


PROTESTS GO ON IN SOUTH AFRICA
LEAD: Scores of black and mixed-race families picnicked and swam at a white beach near Cape Town today, ignoring police officers who told them that they were breaking the law.


Review/ Dance; An Updated Version of the Narcissus Myth
LEAD: Dance 2000, the Felice Lesser Dance Theater, is certainly ambitious.
It uses ballet as its basic technique, yet remains open to other stylistic influences.
Felice Lesser favors serious themes in her choreography, and she sets her troupe dancing to contemporary music.


THE FALL OF A FAMILY
LEAD:  THE GEORGICS  By Claude Simon.
Translated by Beryl and John Fletcher.  322 pp.
New York: Riverrun Press. $29.95.


Chicken Salad and Catastrophic Care
LEAD: In a famous scene from the movie ''Five Easy Pieces,'' Jack Nicholson is told he cannot get a side order of toast in a restaurant.
He comes up with a hostile and imaginative solution.


Seize The Moment
LEAD: Secretary of State Baker is a political craftsman of uncommon toughness and skill, as the Democrats have learned to their regret.
In his new role he may prefer the statesman's aura.
But he has a chance now at a diplomatic prize that requires his political instincts.


Votes in Congress
LEAD:  Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate  1.
Star Wars: Vote on a complicated amendment to a military spending bill for the 1990 fiscal year that would restore $300 million in spending on the anti-missile program.
A ''no'' vote would hold the spending at roughly $3.7 billion.


Campus Life: Virginia; Vacating Rooms In Dawn Searches For a Bush Visit
LEAD: Arthurian romances were on Kathy Lavezzo's mind until Federal agents with German shepherds came to her classroom door at the University of Virginia.


Despite Ban, Chilean Army Gets 15 U.S. Copters
LEAD: The Chilean Army has taken delivery on 15 helicopters bought from a United States manufacturer, but American officials say the transaction does not represent a lifting of the ban on military sales to Chile.


Pork That is Pinker and Purer Appeals to the Japanese
LEAD: The Japanese don't like the pale, watery pink color Americans seem to prefer in pork.
They like their meat to be deeper in color.


Stephen P. King, Architect, 44
LEAD: Stephen P. King, an architect, died of cancer Friday at his home n East Hampton, L.I.
He was 44 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Sony Expands Into Hollywood
LEAD: Sony is buying into Hollywood.
Columbia Pictures accepted a $3.4 billion offer from the Japanese electronics giant.
Columbia produces several successful television series but its movie division has lagged.
The biggest attraction for Sony executives, led by the president, Norio Ohga, apparently was the 2,700 films in Columbia's library.


Editors' Notes
LEAD: An article on page 8 of the Arts and Leisure section today about a new production of a Martha Graham work describes Mikhail Baryshnikov as artistic director of the American Ballet Theater through the 1990 season.


For U.S. Coins, a Great Day Is About to Dawn; Handfuls of Puzzles
LEAD: To the Editor:


DATA UPDATE: October 1, 1989
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Aug. 89
July 89
Aug. 88
New York
3,946
3,656
4,156
New Jersey
3,580
2,164
4,412
Connecticut
1,244
1,040
1,692
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


New Hours at Met Museum
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum of Art has announced that it will discontinue Tuesday evening hours and will stay open until 8:45 P.M. on Fridays and Saturdays, starting this week.


Q and A
LEAD:  Soccer Cup


JOE COLLEGE
LEAD:  PATERNO: BY THE BOOK  By Joe Paterno with Bernard Asbell.
Illustrated. 287 pp.
New York:  Random House. $18.95.


The Midwest Tries to Slow The Flow of Eastern Trash
LEAD: EACH week, the trucks roll westward and southward from New Jersey, New York and, to a lesser extent, Connecticut, filled to overflowing with one of the East Coast's rising new exports.
It is garbage, tons and tons of unsorted household refuse and miscellaneous municipal waste, stuffed into semi-trailers and headed for landfills in western


A Dirty War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canal Project Sets Off U.S.-Mexico Clash Over Water for Border Regions
LEAD: An American Government plan to renovate a California canal has locked the United States and Mexico in a major dispute over the use of water from the Colorado River.


Another Colombian Crop Takes Off: Flowers
LEAD: In the high Andean plains here, Reynaldo Garcia Navas lives in a world bounded by Thanksgiving, Valentine's Day and Secretary's Day.


Christine Chang, Designer, Weds
LEAD: Christine Chih Chuan Chang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yuan Chang of New York, was married yesterday to William Shriver Hanway, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
William Hanway of Hypoluxo, Fla.
The Rev.
Susan Harris officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.


Historical Footnote
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rose Seeks Some Help
LEAD: After being banished from baseball amid allegations that he violated major league rules by betting on baseball, including making wagers on his own team, Pete Rose has concluded that he has a problem and has sought professional help.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  Darryl has proven to be a liability in the field, lazy on the bases, and a poor hitter in both his average and his power when men are on base.
Would the Mets be sacrificing home runs by trading Darryl?
Probably.
But more importantly, would the Mets be a better team with a player in right field who batted, played hard everyday, and who hit better than .260 for a career?


For the Homeless, Public Spaces Are Growing Smaller
LEAD: IN recent years, New York City officials have done little to stop thousands of homeless people from staying in the city's bus and rail terminals, some subway stations and parks.
But lately, as the number of homeless people and the number of complaints about them have continued to rise, the officials seem to have taken a tougher approach.


Glittering Icons
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reassessment Is Never Painless
LEAD: Civic Action Council's Property Tax Committee watches with sympathy the looming specter of reassessment in the City of Long Beach (Sept. 19, ''In Long Beach, Revaluation Brings Specter of Higher Taxes'').


Three-Day Fair to Open
LEAD: DOZENS of craft artists in 31 states have been polishing, stitching or waiting for their kilns to cool in the last-minute preparations before they pack up for the trek to New Jersey this week.
Despite the prospect of a long, rigorous drive with a van full of fragile glass, comic ceramic pots, jewelry or handmade clothing, nearly 1,000 people applied to show their work at the 13th annual Morristown CraftMarket.


Alternatives to Bankruptcy
LEAD: ''Personal Bankruptcy Filings Rise on L.I.'' (Sept. 10) was informative and helpful.
However, I would like to correct the impression that there are no nonprofits on Long Island to assist people with financial counseling.


Film Festival; Video Era in Hungary, In 'The Documentator'
LEAD: Free enterprise's new appeal to some of the Communist-bloc countries is examined with bitterness and occasional wit in ''The Documentator,'' a 215-minute Hungarian film that takes advantage of other aspects of the same political thaw it satirizes.


Lincoln E. Frank And Molly O'Neil Wed on Fishers I.
LEAD: Margaret Thomas O'Neil and Lincoln Elliot Frank were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Alice Cary Brown attended the bride.
The best man was E. Scott Mead.


Julia Tualavera Plans to Marry
LEAD: Julia Talavera and Robert McKay Pflieger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Ely Pflieger of Washington, plan to be married this month.
The announcement was made by the prospective bride's mother, Mrs.
Edwin Flye Stetson 2d of Chevy Chase, Md.


Family Reunion at the Bruce Museum
LEAD: THE works of Leonard Ochtman (1854-1934), his wife, Mina Fonda (1862-1924), their daughter, Dorothy (1892-1971), and their son, Leonard Jr. (1894-1976), are all at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich.
It is a reunion for a family that appeared together for the first time in the 1912 inaugural show of the Greenwich Society of Artists, which was also held at the Bruce.


For Peter Hall, the Curtain Keeps Rising
LEAD: It was 1955, and Peter Hall, the 24-year-old son of an East Anglian railway clerk, was sitting in his office one morning at the Arts Theater in London when the telephone rang.


Miss DeBerardine Weds
LEAD: Veronica Ann DeBerardine and Bruce Cameron Bennett, associates in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, were married yesterday in Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Frank Del Prete performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Gabriel.


Stagflation for Female Engineers
LEAD: When Andrea Robertson began studying electrical engineering five years ago at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, she was usually the only woman in the lecture halls.


Good Luck, Shane
LEAD: May Cindy Soehner with the mighty attitude My Son Can Do Absolutely Nothing Wrong While Everyone Else Can Do Absolutely Nothing Right be blessed with stupendous good luck so that Shane can turn out a happy and productive member of society.


Chef's Signatures in Huntington Village
LEAD: LAST year, East Northport's Peter's Inn headed my list of exciting food finds.
This neighborhood bar-turned-gourmet restaurant was a diamond in the rough.
Its sparkle emanated from the unexpectedly innovative dishes created by the chef, Bruce Grasley.


IN QUOTES
LEAD:  ''It's hard for a politician to vote against a tax cut.''
Newt Gingrich, of Georgia, House Republican whip.


The Quest for a Pacific Beach
LEAD: UNDER SOME COCONUT PALMS NEAR THE entrance to Manuel Antonio Park, a woman sells juice.
Little capital investment has gone into this business: a booth, a glass juice squeezer for oranges, a machete to cut coconuts constitute the operation.
The woman twists and presses the oranges for me with wholehearted vigor.


Japan's Market Is Closed Drum Tight
LEAD: Just over a decade ago, the company I work for decided to enter the Japanese market with a high-tech amorphous metal alloy we had developed in our New Jersey laboratories.
Determined to avoid the pitfalls that had doomed the efforts of so many other foreign companies on Japanese soil, we named a Japanese-born and educated executive who worked for Allied-Signal Inc.


The Many Aspects Of Hospice Care
LEAD: For whatever reasons, Stephanie Johns's letter to the New Jersey editor on Aug. 20 is a bitter and angry attack on the ''freestanding'' hospice.
As a volunteer for the Center for Hope Hospice in Roselle, I would like to offer comments that might have a salutary result for her.


The Many Aspects of Hospice Care
LEAD: Without offering excuses for why a particular hospice program proved inadequate to serve the writer's needs, I must respond to Stephanie Johns's statements: ''Hospice care is akin to no care at all'' and hospice care at home is of no benefit for the women...''who have to care for the terminally ill.


Top Dogs Aplenty, But Few Top Hats
LEAD: The only top hat seen at the Metropolitan Opera's opening Monday was worn by David McDermott, an artist.
The opera was ''Aida,'' and Michel Orloff, a descendant of Ismail Pasha, who commissioned the opera in l870, attended.
Later, at the Waldorf-Astoria, Saul Steinberg rang the dinner bell at a dance honoring Carolyne Roehm and Henry Kravis for their philanthropy.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.  $490,000  299 Elm Road  5-bedroom, 3 full- and 2 half-bath, 59-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, family room, w/b stove, deck, 0.62 acre; taxes $6,564.
Chappaqua, N.Y.  $1.2 million  300 Millwood Road  6-bedroom, 6-bath, 77-year-old colonial; library, pub room, studio, sauna, service wing, pool, 3-car garage, 3 acres; taxes $13,920.


Chris Meade and Michael Motta: Personal Trainers
LEAD: Chris Meade and Michael Motta could be called stylists, but they do not work with fabric, paint or precious metals.
Their creations involve muscle and strength, power and agility.
Mr.
Meade, 33 years old, and Mr.
Motta, 37, are personal exercise trainers to some of the most visible, fit bodies around.


Tolstoy's Little Universe
LEAD: THE SERFS ARE GONE FROM YASNAYA POLYANA, BUT birches still sway on this serene piece of Russia that was universe enough for the riotous creativity of Leo Tolstoy.
Here, on his aristocratic family's estate, the writer and moral reformer was born, and here he alternately despaired and then took heart from fallible humanity, reworking its lessons and language into art.


Voice of American Drawing New Critics
LEAD: Bruce S. Gelb, the new director of the United States Information Agency, says he heard ''no complaints about the Voice of America, not one at all,'' when he met Soviet officials in Moscow this month.


Living At Home: Love's Duties
LEAD: I don't think Erika Goodman in writing ''What Am I Doing at Home?'' (Opinion, Sept. 3); really understands not only her parents but what her own responsibilities are.
If she does, she certainly doesn't express herself very well.
I know if I were living with her, I wouldn't be too happy with her attitudes.


Waging Protest Against the Machines of War
LEAD: DRESSED all in black, her cropped gray hair hidden under a black bathing cap, Kathleen Boylan stepped into the water.
It was 3 A.M. on the Thames River near New London, Conn.
All was quiet except for the occasional lapping of waves and the sound of Mrs.
Boylan struggling to shed her shoes.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MINGUS/MINGUS: Two Memoirs.
By Janet Coleman and Al Young. (Creative Arts Book Company, $14.95.) Charles Mingus was one of the more tempestuous talents of jazz: a bassist, bandleader, composer and dynamo of creativity who never let up.
Two of his friends wrote this recollection of his life and times.


It's Over for Yogi
LEAD: Yogi Berra's announcement that he's about to hang up his uniform for the last time calls for the usual statistical rundown.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: It is always risky to copy a previous game without subjecting it to your own independent study, even if it is the moves of the world champion you are following.
This becomes truer than true if your present opponent happened to be the champion's opponent in the earlier game.


Kings and Blackhawks Geared to Test Flames' Depth and the Red Wings' Grit
LEAD:  SMYTHE DIVISION


Virgil Thomson, Composer, Critic and Collaborator With Stein, Dies at 92
LEAD: Virgil Thomson, whose homespun, subtly sophisticated compositions and witty but trenchant criticism made him a central figure in American intellectual life for 55 years, died early yesterday in his suite at the Chelsea Hotel in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old, and his health had been in decline for several months.


Crack, Bane of Inner City, Is Now Gripping Suburbs
LEAD: Crack, which has been devastating entire inner-city neighborhoods, has begun to claim significant numbers of middle- and upper-class addicts, experts have found.


THE TRUE SPICE OF SICHUAN
LEAD: Even with my Cantonese ancestral and culinary roots, I have always had a passion for the fiery foods of Sichuan.
A year or so ago, in the markets, restaurants and food stalls of the region, I finally tasted the real thing (not Taiwan- or Hong Kong-influenced or, even worse, Americanized - the foods with the * next to the menu listing).


Meriden Loses Claim to Fame
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tish Barroll Wed To J. B. Frederick
LEAD: Letitia Humphreys Barroll, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Barroll of Baltimore, was married yesterday to James Bradley Frederick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore J. Frederick of New Britain, Conn.
The Rev.
David H. LaMotte officiated at St.
Christopher's By-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Gibson Island,


Working Warily With Japan
LEAD: INSIDE the Austin, Tex., laboratories of Sematech, the research consortium struggling to restore American manufacturing skills in memory chips, the Japanese are distinctly unwelcome.
The clean rooms where chips are fabricated are closed to most foreigners.
When Sematech needed a Nikon repairman to keep a vital piece of equipment running, he was walled off from the rest of the lab.


On Language; Country Matters
LEAD: THE WHOLE COUN-try has gone &gt;country.


MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.
LEAD: David Burnham focused on I.R.S. abuses that occurred prior to 1976, the year in which sweeping revisions were made to Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code.
The provision as it reads today carries stiff penalties (5 years' imprisonment and a fine of up to $5,000 for each offense) for abuse of the information gathered by the Internal Revenue Service.


Works in Progress; Egging Them On
LEAD: SEA TURTLES ARE LARGELY mysterious creatures.
Because they are pelagic, meaning they live their entire lives in the open ocean, most of what we know about them comes from observing the females, who periodically visit beaches, mainly in warm-water regions, to lay eggs.
There are no estimates as to the extant population, but it is evident, from the numbers of turtles that become casualties in the course of commercial fishing and the loss of their egg-laying habitat to beach development, that they are a dwindling breed.


Food; CAMPFIRE CACHET
LEAD: THE SMELL OF a wood fire on a crisp fall day has a certain allure to a certain set of people, those susceptible to the imagined romance of snuggling indoors near the flames on a chilly night.
Since much of my childhood was endured in a house that relied on wood fires for both cooking and heating, the mystique has always mystified me.


Linda Buchanan Has a Wedding
LEAD: Grace Episcopal Church in Madison, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Linda Vincent Buchanan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter T. Buchanan of Madison, to David Coyne Flanagan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Flanagan of Norwich, N.Y.
The Rev.
Karen Murphy performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgr.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Back to China: A 10-Day Tour For $1,339


Dr. Duchesneau Weds Dr. Michelle Paris
LEAD: Duchesneau, a resident in pediatrics at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, and Dr.
Joseph Michael Lally Jr., a resident in ophthalmology at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Piscataway, were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.


GOOD SCHOLAR, GOOD FRENCHMAN
LEAD:  MARC BLOCH  A Life in History.
By Carole Fink.
Illustrated. 371 pp.
New York:  Cambridge University Press. $29.95.


The Fallout of Autumn
LEAD: HERE they come, floating so merrily and drifting so gracefully down into my yard.
I marvel at the colors, but only for the moment, for I know each leaf will soon fade and lie in the shadow of another and another and another.


A Rock Singer Returns, With a Difference
LEAD: Having spent most of the 1980's delving into musical territory outside the pop-rock mainstream, Linda Ronstadt returns to contemporary pop with a strong new album, ''Cry Like a Rainstorm - Howl Like the Wind'' (Elektra 96082; all three formats).


Miss Golier Weds Timothy Wright
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J., Susan Christine Golier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Golier of Montvale, N.J., was married yesterday to Timothy Lee Wright, a son of Joan M. Wright of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., and the late David K. Wright.
Msgr.
John McDermott officiated.


How to DeadenA Live Concert
LEAD: Assuming that music has been around nearly as long as people have been talking, then recordings, which first became available soon after Thomas Edison figured out his wax cylinder in 1877, have been around for just a short blip on the long graph of mankind.
But in that short time, recordings, and the technology that allows them to exist, have radically changed music.


Man to Appeal Ruling on McKinney Estate
LEAD: The man who claims to have been the late Congressman Stewart McKinney's lover for five years plans to appeal a probate court ruling that essentially denies his claims to the estate.


Griffith's 'Intolerance,' Given the Blush of Youth
LEAD: Imagine an elephant as big as a brownstone, rearing back, straight up, on its hind legs.
Place the pachyderm atop a column twice as high again.
The column is on an arch, flanked by scores of stairs.
Multiply by six, surround with stenciled walls taller than Times Square billboards, throw in a few more oversize elephants, sundry 10-foot lions and 5,000 antlike humans on a movie set.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  NEW YORK.
By Djuna Barnes.
Edited by Alyce Barry. (Sun &amp; Moon Press, Cloth $24.95, Paper $12.95.) To Djuna Barnes, author of the novels ''Ryder'' and ''Nightwood,'' New York could never be discovered in its demographics or statistics. ''The real Bronx has nothing to do with facts,'' she wrote, ''as the real Greenwich Village has nothing to do with facts, as no real good woman has anything to do with facts.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about airline safety included incorrect figures from the National Transportation Safety Board.
In 1979, 354 people were killed in accidents involving large commercial jet flights flown by United States airlines.
This year 277 have been killed.


POSTINGS: 190 Units in Greenburgh; Ponds as Centerpieces
LEAD: A 190-unit Georgian colonial-style development will go up over the next two years on a former public school playing field on Stadium Road near Route 100A in the Town of Greenburgh, N.Y.
The project, called Pondside, will include 94 two- and three-bedroom town houses and 96 one- and two-bedroom condominium units around two manmade ponds.


Liftoff for Armchair Travelers
LEAD: In the course of his new 12-part PBS series, ''Travels,'' which begins tomorrow night at 8, John Heminway devotes an hour to ''Yesterday's Travelers,'' notably Lowell Thomas, James Fitzpatrick and Osa Martin Johnson, who introduced a generation of homebound moviegoers in the 1930's and 40's to faraway places and exotic peoples.


Episcopalians Compromise on Women's Role
LEAD: The danger of a split in the Episcopal Church over the ordination of women as priests and bishops has receded after a compromise statement was unanimously adopted by the church's House of Bishops Thursday.


After the Hurricane
LEAD: HURRICANE HUGO battered the Caribbean two weeks ago, just as island resorts and hotels were readying for their high season.
And for some, it will not be business as usual for a long time.


No Headline
LEAD:  THE ADVENTURES OF GOODNIGHT &amp; LOVING  By Leslie Thomas.  510 pp.
Los Angeles: Price Stern Sloan. $15.95.


Owner and Skipper of Tanker Fined for Spill
LEAD: The owner of a tanker that spilled 300,000 gallons of heating oil off Newport when it ran aground in June has been fined $500,000 and its captain has been fined $30,500.


Sun Setting on Pakistan's Horse-Drawn Tonga
LEAD: On the streets of Rudyard Kipling's town, now choked by traffic and blanketed in exhaust, there is scant space and little time left for the tonga.


Film Festival; A Trip Into the Middle Ages, and a View of Langston Hughes
LEAD: Both Meredith Monk's ''Book of Days'' and Isaac Julien's ''Looking for Langston'' are strong-minded films that juxtapose the past and the present; that is all they have in common. ''Book of Days,'' which transports its audience into the Middle Ages, has visual grace and a good deal of artistic success.


Joyful Dancing in '42d Street'
LEAD: WHEN the curtain slowly ascends on ''42d Street'' at the Paper Mill Playhouse, an all-out blast of tap dancing is under way.
Here, indeed, are ''those dancing feet'' that the title song invites us to ''come and meet,'' and all at once, one is overtaken by the rush that only a real live musical can produce.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: My mailbag has been filled to the brim of late, perhaps because everyone's pictures from summer vacation were not what everyone hoped they would be.
A few of the questions asked have a potentially wide audience, so here goes.


Fond Memories of the 'King of Swing'
LEAD: WHEN Loren Schoenberg was growing up, musical groups like the Beatles and the Grateful Dead were the voices of his generation.
But he longed for the sound of another time, made popular by big-band greats like Benny Goodman.
For Mr.
Schoenberg, an opportunity to work with the renowned ''King of Swing'' was a dream come true.


Recycling Recipe: Easy as Pie
LEAD: WOE be unto anyone who dares to drop a banana peel into my trash container. ''That goes into our kitchen garbage pot!'' I scold. ''Right, I forgot,'' comes the remiss reply, and the banana peel is duly dropped into the covered half-gallon container that sits sentry next to the kitchen sink.
We call it the K


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''These new addicts are business executives and house painters and doctors and receptionists.
And if you met them on the street or at the Little League game, you wouldn't have a clue they're smoking their brains out on crack back home in the basement.''  - Dr.
Arnold M. Washton.  [ 1:2. ]


Valdez Vows
LEAD: To the Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Thin Legs, Fat Bats


The Airlines Industry Is a High Flyer
LEAD: When America West Airlines, a midsize carrier based in Phoenix, sent recruiters to schools that train mechanics, it often ran into a problem. ''An outfit like Delta Airlines would come in a day ahead of us and hire the entire class,'' said Leroy Paulson, vice president for technical services.


Morris Fox, Pharmacist, 102
LEAD: Morris N. Fox, founder of the company that makes Smith Brothers cough drops, died Wednesday.
He was 102 years old.


Advantages of a Hand Scraper
LEAD: BEFORE sandpaper became popular, woodworkers, especially cabinetmakers, relied on a simple tool called a hand scraper for smoothing wood prior to applying finish.


Supreme Court Rich In Cases of 'What If?'
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Marxist Pillar Trembles


Iain Bruce Wed To Linda Lewis
LEAD: Linda Ellen Lewis, the daughter of Richard Forest Lewis of Norwich, Conn., and the late Frances Lewis, was married yesterday to Iain Hay Bruce, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald M. Bruce of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Harold Donald Smith performed the ceremony at the Park Congregational Church in Norwich.


Ileana Cotrubas to End Her Singing Career
LEAD: The Rumanian soprano Ileana Cotrubas announced her retirement today during a rehearsal at the Royal Opera House.
She said her recital here on Thursday would be her farewell appearance in Britain.


For U.S. Coins, a Great Day Is About to Dawn; Eliminate All Bills
LEAD: To the Editor:


A B&amp;B's Appeal Beyond Lodging
LEAD: AN establishment in New London now offers A&amp;A along with B&amp;B - that is, art and antiques as well as bed and breakfast.


Meal Memorializes AIDS Victim
LEAD: AN unusual new cookbook out this month is donating part of its profits to providing meals for people with AIDS. ''The Open Hand Cookbook'' (Pocket Books, $18.95) is a compilation of menus donated by 60 California chefs.
Edited by Robert C. Schneider, a chef associated with several California restaurants (among them the Hayes Street Grill and the Pier 23 Cafe in San


&gt;Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My screened porch has a concrete slab floor.
For years, I have been painting this floor with an acrylic concrete deck paint, and in April the paint bubbles and lifts in large sections.
I scrape these areas and then repaint the floor, but the bubbling and separating grow worse each year.
Is there a way to correct this?


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Sept. 23  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $535,000  11 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  (Brevoort)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining alcove, terrace, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,099, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Weigner Real Estate)


Selling Yourself on Madison Ave.
LEAD: One day last March, Marc Eisenoff walked into the office of Ira Madris, deputy creative director at McCann-Erickson Worldwide advertising, to ask for a raise.
The 39- year-old senior art director spotted one of the agency's executive recruiters.
For a split second, he thought that might be standard procedure - but she wasn't smiling.


How to Fill The Retirement Void
LEAD: MANY people make elaborate plans in advance for their retirement.
I did not.
And when it was forced on me last fall at age 65, I was totally unprepared.
But I felt it shouldn't be a problem.


Trademarks for Special Cuts To Give Them Brand Pizazz
LEAD: A well-done chunk of meat with solid bone on one side and a hefty strip of fat on the other, the fried pork chop was once the perfect foil for Jello salad with marshmallows.


Ankara, at the U.N., Will Press Bulgaria on Turks
LEAD: Turkey's Foreign Minister asserted in an interview this week that Bulgarian officials must restore the ''usurped'' rights of people of Turkish origin living in Bulgaria.
He said his Government would call on the General Assembly to give political support to the Bulgarian Turks.


Shortwave Makes News
LEAD: The Canadian sociologist Marshall McLuhan used to speak of a ''global village'' as the likely result of the electronic age.


New Season's Theme is International
LEAD: WITH Strindberg, Shakespeare and Shaw at Yale Rep, Buchner, Moliere and Wilde at Hartford Stage and Feydeau at the Long Wharf, the new theater season has the makings of an international playwrights festival.


Suzanne Millard Weds R. K. Stanners
LEAD: Suzanne Marie Millard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. F. Millard of Southport, Conn., and Hobe Sound, Fla., was married yesterday at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church in Fairfield, Conn., to Robert Kevin Stanners, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Stanners of Stuart, Fla., and Old Saybrook, Conn.


Lest Anybody Forget
LEAD: To the Editor:


READERS RESPOND TO ARTICLE ON TUTORING A CHILD AT HOME
LEAD:  'Trivial' Orders? Whose Definition?


Wagner Routs Alfred, 35-19
LEAD: Ray Benevenuti threw three touchdown passes and Greg Harris scored twice as undefeated Wagner routed Alfred, 35-19, yesterday on Staten Island.


Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


Hugo Shows How to Save Lives While Much Is Lost
LEAD: IT will be months if not years before this coastal city and much of the rest of the Carolinas can put Hurricane Hugo's ravages behind them.
But some lessons of the nation's most costly storm ever are already becoming clear.
Some are comforting.
Some are not.


Suspect Found Hanged in Jail
LEAD: A 27-year-old Brooklyn man who had been arrested on burglary charges committed suicide in his cell at the 48th Precinct station house in the Bronx early yesterday by hanging himself with his sweatshirt, the police said.
The body of the man, Robert Cribb, of 345 Dupont Street in the Greenpoint section, was found by a police officer at 12:47 A.M.


Review/Theater; A Private Eye, a Piano And the Usual Suspects
LEAD: Charlie Peters's new little comedy, ''Hollywood Scheherazade,'' is an innocent piece of nonsense.
Utterly innocent.
It is over soon enough, in little more than an hour, but it could have made its points and won all its laughs in a quarter of that time.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: When a Government office sends Government mail through a Government Postal Service, who pays?


After a Half-Century, The Class of '39 Returns to Rye
LEAD: AN even 100 we were, the Rye High School Class of 1939, an easy number for statisticians.
Now, at the 50th anniversary of that event, at least 57 percent of our class is still alive and accounted for.
That's 57 people.
Twenty-four percent are known to have died; the rest are listed as ''not found.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: The 19th-century American fascination with wealth fostered an American art form - the trompe l'oeil painting of paper money.


1929 Aviation Feat Commemorated
LEAD: SIXTY years ago, an aviation legend climbed aboard an airplane, placed a canvas hood over its cockpit, took off, circled and landed without ever having seen the ground.


Treacy Moran Is Married
LEAD: The marriage of Treacy Barbara Moran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Farley Moran of Madison, N.J., to Carl Watson Badenhausen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl S. Badenhausen of New Vernon, N.J., took place yesterday at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon.
Msgr.
John Corr performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Mets' Most Ominous Day: It Ran Gamut of Season
LEAD: Maybe it began on the day in March when they gathered for the annual team photograph in spring training and Darryl Strawberry threw a punch at Keith Hernandez, and then huffed out of camp for a day of sulking on the sidelines.


Anita A. Wager, Banker, Marries
LEAD: Anita Andrews Wager, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Wager of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to George O. Richardson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richardson Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Brown officiated at the Smithfield United Church, assisted by the Rev.
Martin Wager, a Lutheran minister who is an uncle of the bride.


Question Of the Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD:  Absolutely not.
Trading away Strawberry would become a blunder similar to the exportation of Nolan Ryan and Tom Seaver.
Darryl is the premier left-handed power hitter in the National League.
He has been plagued by injuries all season which have resulted in a drop of his statistics.
RICHARD S.


Russia's Reborn Splendor
LEAD: WANTON destruction, in wartime, was once a frequent German amusement.
In 1871, for instance, the palace of St.-Cloud, outside Paris, was shelled for the sheer fun of it.
And during World War II, Hitler's army, as it whiled away the siege of Leningrad, destroyed the imperial palaces just outside the city.


Alaska Oil Fund's Dividend Is Second Largest
LEAD: This year, when thousands of people in Alaska felt the effects of the nation's largest oil spill, the state's residents will receive their second largest annual check from Alaska's oil wealth savings account.


FOR WOMEN GOLFERS, LIFE IN THE ROUGH
LEAD: AS THE SKY GROWS PASTEL OVER THE FAIRWAYS, A GROUP OF EX-cited corporate executives at the Beaconsfield Golf Club, outside Montreal, are busily draining their highballs.
Each of them, all men, has paid more than $1,000 to buy a round of golf with a Ladies' Professional Golf Association touring pro.


Virgil Thomson Dies


Hang On To the Old One
LEAD: To the Editor:


TALKING: 'Gazundering'; Soft Market Puts Sellers On the Spot
LEAD: WHEN the housing market is weak, sellers are sometimes forced to accept less for a home than the price stipulated in the sales contract.
Brokers and lawyers say buyers are increasingly chipping away, between the signing of the contract and the closing, in an effort to get the seller to lower the agreed-upon price.


Meal Memorializes AIDS Victim
LEAD: AN unusual new cookbook out this month is donating part of its profits to providing meals for people with AIDS. ''The Open Hand Cookbook'' (Pocket Books, $18.95) is a compilation of menus donated by 60 California chefs.
Edited by Robert C. Schneider, a chef associated with several California restaurants (among them the Hayes Street Grill and the Pier 23 Cafe in San Francisco), the focus is on nourishing meals chefs cook for friends.


Toon Is Finding Injuries Are Part of Job
LEAD: When Al Toon has a pain, Joe Walton suffers.


NASA Names 5 Shuttle Crews
LEAD: The space agency Friday named astronaut crews for five shuttle missions.
Those named included Dr.
Mae C. Jemison, the first black woman selected for space flight.


'Question Authority'? Learn First
LEAD: According to Cindy E. Soehner, her son, Shane, is ''the kind of child who keeps teachers on their toes.'' From her description, he is also the kind of child who can't stop talking long enough to listen and learn, who demands his way, who doesn't recognize authority, and, when he doesn't get his way, he is ''an underachiever, a discipline problem, and an unhappy little boy.


For Once, Something Good Happens to the Nice Guy
LEAD: Before the taping of the first episode of ''The Famous Teddy Z,'' a new and much-praised CBS sitcom that takes an amused look at life in a Hollywood talent agency, Hugh Wilson went out and asked the live audience if they knew what an agent was.
The crowd got a little testy. ''Of course we know what an agent is,'' said one guest.


WHEN RUINS WERE THE RAGE
LEAD:  THE SEARCH FOR THE PICTURESQUE  Landscape Aesthetics and Tourism in Britain, 1760-1800.
By Malcolm Andrews.
Illustrated. 269 pp.
Calif.:  Stanford University Press. $49.50.


Nancy Malloy, Student, Weds
LEAD: Nancy Ann Malloy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Malloy of St.
Louis and John's Island, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Andrew Axilrod, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Axilrod of New York.
The Rev.
Walter Modrys and the Rev.
Paul G. Sheridan officiated at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New


Sailing Fiji's Far Waters
LEAD: SUNLIGHT COMES THROUGH THE HATCH OF the crew compartment in this 50-foot sailboat - now at anchor in Suva, Fiji - and wakes me at dawn.
I've taken the lower berth, 24 inches across at its widest point.
Through the hull, a few inches from my ear, I hear snapping shrimp crackle softly like popcorn as they graze along the bottom of the sea.


Army Marches Over Harvard
LEAD: Army demonstrated clearly today why Ivy League schools no longer want any part of the Cadets on a football field.


Pre-deb Set Learns How Not To Slurp
LEAD: The tony crowd clustered on the corner banquette in the Hotel Pierre's classy cafe chatted idly about class schedules and the latest Freddy Krueger film, while waiters served steaming bowls of double beef consomme with julienned vegetables.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Posting on Sept. 10 gave an incorrect time for the start of condominium sales at the Coronado, at Broadway and West 70th Street.
Sales are currently under way.


Sexist as a Matter of Course
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Headliners column last Sunday referred incorrectly in some copies to the year in which Bernhard H. Goetz shot four teen-agers on a subway train.
It was 1984, not 1974.


Jury Duty: Hard Time
LEAD: A recent cartoon in the Wall Street Journal summed up jury duty (About Long Island: They Also Serve Who May Only Wait'' Sept. 3) when it showed the foreman reading, ''We find the defendant guilty and recommend he be sentenced to jury duty.''  Marjorie Fener  Hempstead


THE WORLD HAS NEVER BEEN QUITE THE SAME
LEAD: Drew Middleton's Francophobia mars an otherwise entertaining account of his 1939-40 experiences.
An article explaining the reasons for his Francophobia would be most welcome. (A surly waiter? An unhappy love affair, perhaps?) J.S.
CARTER  New York, N.Y.


R. J. Lyman Wed To Ms. Schnurr
LEAD: Leslie Anne Schnurr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Thomas Schnurr of New York and Sheffield, Mass., and Richard Jeffrey Lyman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bardwell Lyman Jr. of Wayland, Mass., and Sweden, Me., were married yesterday at Our Lady of the Valley Roman Catholic Church in Sheffield.


Victor Gaetan Weds Eleanor Kennelly
LEAD: Eleanor Bride Kennelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Kennelly of Hartford, was married yesterday to Victor Alexandre Gaetan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ion Gaetan of Ploesti, Rumania.
The Rev.
John Gigrich officiated at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Washington.


MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.
LEAD: The tax code, like other American products, should become obsolete every five years.
Planned obsolescence would force the writers of the tax code to be concise.
A lawmaker, pressed for time, might write a few pithy pages but would not have the patience to amend a 2,000-page fossil.
DUWASKY SNOW


A Drive to Improve Products and Compete With the Price of Chicken
LEAD: Three developments could profoundly reduce production costs and, in turn, consumer prices for pork:


Fan Travels Heartbreak Lane
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


OBRYCKI'S: PARADISE ENOW
LEAD: Baltimoreans are a real nice bunch of guys, but they have this thing about their old part of town.
Imagine a compulsion to take all visitors to New York through Corona for their dose of urban quaintness.
Nevertheless, the children of the Chesapeake like nothing better than to stroll through this engulfing blockade of row houses, with their multicolored faux brick facing and three-step stoops, beaming as if they were Roosevelt showing off Campobello.


Lawrence: Keepers Of the Flame
LEAD: OUTSIDE THE LOBBY DOOR OF THE HOTEL LA FONDA DE Taos hangs a wooden sign: ''D.
H.
Lawrence, Author: Lady Chatterley's Lover.
This is The Only Showing of the D. H. Lawrence Controversial Paintings since his Exhibition Was Permanently Banned by Scotland Yard, When his show Opened at the Warren Galleries, London, in 1929.


Rogina Haase, an Engineer, Marries
LEAD: Rogina Louisa Haase, a daughter of Dr.
Mary Louise Mallery Haase of West Winfield, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Benjamin Jeffries, the son of Benjamin Eustis Jeffries of Chelsea, Mass., and the late Philippa Roosevelt Jeffries of Boston.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed by the Rev.


At Home in Tuscany
LEAD: IT all seemed very Italian, renting a house in Tuscany with my husband, our two sons and my mother, all five of us piling in and out of the car wherever we went.
The two women collecting money for the use of the public toilets at Pisa's Campo dei Miracoli thought it was terrific.
They laughed when my husband kept shelling out coins as we straggled in, one by one.


Backing for Valvano
LEAD: Although North Carolina State admitted basketball players who were academically unqualified, the basketball coach, Jim Valvano, was not to blame and should not resign.
That is the view, anyway, of Bruce Poulton, whose resignation as the university's chancellor took effect yesterday.


Dana Nungesser Marries
LEAD: Dana Ashcraft Nungesser and Eric Richard Macy, vice presidents at the New York investment firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, were married yesterday at the Church of St.
John on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J.
The Revs.
Alfred M. Niese Jr. and David B. Earnest performed the Episcopal ceremony.


Tracy L. Seretean Plans to Be Wed To Glenn I. Levin
LEAD: Mrs.
Farol Seretean of Washington and Martin B. Seretean of Boca Raton, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Lynn Seretean, to Glenn I. Levin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold A. Levin of Ardsley, N.Y.
The wedding is to be this month.


THE THEOLOGY OF THE BOMB
LEAD:  THE MEANING OF THE NUCLEAR REVOLUTION  Statecraft and the Prospect of Armageddon.
By Robert Jervis.  266 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press. $21.95.


Marchers in Minsk Demand Further Chernobyl Cleanup
LEAD: Thousands of Byelorussians, denouncing local leaders, marched through the center of Minsk today to demand further measures to clean up the aftermath of the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the Ukraine.


Budget Beds: An Inside Look At New Motels
LEAD: THE last two times I was on the road for research, I started gathering information on new types of inexpensive accommodations along the highway or near the airport.
Three of four of the places explored were parts of chains, so you could reasonably expect to find the same thing each time.


Miss Fraser Wed To Bruce Gregory In East Hampton
LEAD: Jennifer Nicoll Fraser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Goodall Fraser of New York and East Hampton, L.I., and Bruce Webster Gregory, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Gill Trexler Gregory of Dallas, Virginia Beach, Va., and Northeast Harbor, Me., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Francis D. Creamer and the Rev.


A Bid to Reap Profits From a Trimmer Pig
LEAD: Consider the pig.
It has a public relations problem.
That erstwhile tub of lard apparently has 50 percent less fat than it did 20 years ago but few consumers know it.


Glitter and Gleam: A Show of Glass in New London
LEAD: THE glitter of glass objects and the history of glassmaking are the focus of an exhibit at the Lyman Allyn Art Museum in New London.
Entitled ''All That Glitters Is . . .
Glass,'' the exhibit does indeed glitter and gleam, with special lighting on some items like an 1820 English candelabrum with facets and drops.


Jamming on the Other Side of Midnight
LEAD: In a television studio in lower midtown Manhattan, where episodes of ''The Phil Silvers Show'' once originated, ''Night Music'' (formerly called ''Sunday Night'') is taping the first show of its second season, scheduled to air tonight in the New York area on Channel 4 at 12:30 A.M.
It is 10 o'clock at night, but the host, David Sanborn, tailored in his trademark black and gray, wears sunglasses during rehearsal.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A Posting on Sept. 17 on the renovation of a building at 555 Broadway contained several inaccuracies.
The cost of the project, between Prince and Spring Streets in SoHo, will exceed $12 million when it is completed by the end of the year.
The Vrej Baghoomian art gallery has taken 12,000 square feet on the second floor.


The Wisdom of the Tooth Fairy
LEAD: &gt;WHILE back, my son lost a tooth, and I lost my temper.
Actually, it happened the other way around.
First, I lost my temper, and then the tooth came out.


&gt;Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My screened porch has a concrete slab floor.
For years, I have been painting this floor with an acrylic concrete deck paint, and in April the paint bubbles and lifts in large sections.
I scrape these areas and then repaint the floor, but the bubbling and separating grow worse each year.
Is there a way to correct this?


Review/ Theater; Absurdist Double Bill
LEAD: Although Robert Pinget's reputation as an experimental novelist - as a leader of the nouveau roman movement in France - is secure, his role as a playwright is more problematic.
These problems are not resolved by the Ubu Repertory Theater production of two Pinget one-acts, ''Abel and Bela'' and ''Architruc.


Falsely Shouting Fire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Retirement Thins State Worker Ranks
LEAD: NEARLY one-fourth of the seasoned investigators in the western district of the state police will not be showing up for roll-call after today.
At Western Connecticut State University in Danbury some ''mega-classes'' are being taught because so many professors will not be returning tomorrow.


Rules Needn't Destroy Individuality
LEAD: How sad that Cindy E. Soehner has chosen to home tutor her 8-year-old son, Shane, rather than send him to school.


Burly Penguins and Fluid Canadiens Already Seem Poised for Run to Top
LEAD:  PATRICK DIVISION


The Emelin Incentive To Its Subscribers
LEAD: THE bluegrass and variety series have begun at Mamaroneck's Emelin Theater, but five other music cycles are waiting in the wings, with subscriptions still available.
That is important to know, because the Emelin has fewer than 300 seats, which sell out quickly for the more popular events.


Hutchins at Chicago
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sculptures That Test the Idea of Opposites
LEAD: ''MATERIAL FORMS'' is a show by 10 sculptors at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts here.
The brochure says that it ''explores the tensions created between surface and volume, natural and man-made materials, abstraction and representation, ancient and modern civilization.''


Not-So-Happy Fiscal New Year
LEAD: No ball descended from the top of the Washington Monument at midnight last night to celebrate the new fiscal year.
There was nothing to celebrate.
The budget deficit in the old year had grown -again.
The new year's budget is a sham.
And problems are piling up for future years.
Despite much talk about the urgency of deficit reduction, President Bush and


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: For 33 years two countries have dominated the world team championship for the Bermuda Bowl, now sponsored by Japan's NEC Corporation.
Italy and the United States have won every event, 22 in all, since France won in 1956 in Paris.


Lost? Here's Mr. Directions.
LEAD: I SOMETIMES think that people must think that my name is Rand McNally.
It seems that a day doesn't go by when some motorist doesn't pull up to me when I'm walking and asks me directions.


THE WORLD HAS NEVER BEEN QUITE THE SAME
LEAD: Drew Middleton's article ''The World Has Never Been Quite the Same'' (Sept. 3) brought back memories of the early days of the war.
I had arrived in England in early August, a Czechoslovak refugee, and the start of the war was almost a relief, an event that we knew had to come.


Colette: Home Of the Heart
LEAD: BENEATH THE STANDARD FRENCH ROAD SIGN FOR ST.-Sauveur-en-Puisaye, in Burgundy, another larger one proclaims with elaborate flourish that this is ''Colette's Country.'' In the village itself, crude hand-lettered wooden arrows point the way to the house where she was born.
Dun-colored signs identify every street but one - there, on fresh royal-blue enamel (blue was her favorite color), a sharp white replica of her signature marks the ''Rue Colette.


Policeman Slain in Santiago
LEAD: Gunmen thought to be leftist extremists ambushed a national police van answering a bogus call for help in San Miguel, a working-class district of Santiago, late Friday, killing a police corporal and wounding a patrolman, the authorities said.
Youths had erected burning street barricades nearby, apparently as a distraction.


WHAT A CHILD IS GIVEN
LEAD: Deborah Franklin's article raises some interesting questions.
She cites numerous instances in which there is evidence that heredity dictates the traits of individuals - including quite minor traits - but she reports that on such fundamental issues as a person's ''niceness'' or the tendency to ''criminality'' heredity does not seem very important.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  PICASSO: Creator and Destroyer, by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington. (Avon, $4.95.) Considering how badly he treated his lovers, Picasso's painting ''Les Demoiselles d'Avignon,'' with its twisted, tormented women, might have been a family portrait.
Last year our reviewer, James R. Mellow, called this biography ''a lively and tendentious book.


Some Bases Not Covered
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Richard and Robert Rathe: Exhibit Designers
LEAD: At cocktail parties, the Rathe brothers draw blank stares when they try to explain just what it is that Rathe Productions Inc. produces.


Indian Police Kill 5 Protesters
LEAD: The police fired on crowds protesting the arrest of a separatist leader in northern Jammu-Kashmir state, killing at least 5 and wounding 75, officials said.
The authorities imposed a curfew and sent soldiers in Anantnag, where three people were killed by police gunfire on Friday, a Government spokesman said.


How to Give Student-Athletes a Better Chance for an Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dissident Parishioners End Bridgeport Protest
LEAD: Dissident parishioners of a predominantly Polish church here say they have decided to end their protest after 41 weeks of demonstrations at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church.


Advantages of a Hand Scraper
LEAD: BEFORE sandpaper became popular, woodworkers, especially cabinetmakers, relied on a simple tool called a hand scraper for smoothing wood prior to applying finish.


No Headline
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-27  East Germans left Bonn's embassy in Prague, where they had been camping, and boarded buses on their departure to West Germany.
Page 1  Ankara, at the U.N., will press Bulgaria on Turks  19  Vatican ties with the Soviet bloc have begun to fundamentally change, with an easing of mutual suspicions and a lowering of diplomatic barriers that had been intact for decades.


Alabama Beats Vanderbilt
LEAD: An Alabama cornerback, John Mangum, halted a frantic Vanderbilt rally with a pass interception at the 16-yard line today as the 13th-ranked Crimson Tide held off the Commodores, 20-14, in a Southeastern Conference matchup.


Correction
LEAD: A report on Sept. 17 about the wedding of Allison D. Barrall misidentified her father, Dr.
John H. Barrall.
He is an assistant professor at the Brown University medical school.


POSTINGS: Grant's Farm; History Subdivided
LEAD: A part of what was once Ulysses S. Grant Jr.'s Westchester County farm has been subdivided and offered for sale to anyone who wants a piece of history along with the privacy that 10 or 15 acres can provide.


Developer's Empire Keeps Growing
LEAD: WITH more than 94,000 apartments in his company's portfolio, Samuel J. LeFrak, 71 years old, is among the nation's largest landlords.
The Lefrak Organization is the principal developer of the massive Newport complex, an office, residential, shopping and marina complex that is the largest development along the Hudson River in New


WASHINGTON MEMOIRS: BOMBSHELL OR BUST
LEAD: ''As far as I was concerned, Donald Regan's crack addiction, wife beating and cruelty to animals were his own business, but when I discovered that he held the rank of colonel in the Soviet K.G.B., I put my foot down and said, 'Ronnie, this man has to go.' ''


Stella Madrid Takes Matron
LEAD: Stella Madrid stamped herself as the nation's leading 2-year-old filly with an easy victory in the $136,200 Matron Stakes yesterday at Belmont Park, and Adjudicating scored a narrower and less meaningful victory in the $114,600 Cowdin for 2-year-old colts.


Drug Trafficking and Poppy Growing Finding a Lush Home in Guatemala
LEAD: Farmers cultivating the lush volcanic mountains above this isolated city have in the last two years become one of the hemisphere's largest producers of opium poppies, from which heroin is made.


Training of Nuclear Staff Is Called Inadequate
LEAD: THE Millstone 3 nuclear power plant, where as of Wednesday six plant operators had failed a new safety examination being given by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, is not the only plant plagued by such failures, critics of training in the nuclear power industry say.


F.D.A. Questions Use of Grain in 3 Cereals
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration says it has serious concerns about how much of a grain is used in three new breakfast cereals and about the manufacturers' claims that the cereals can help lower cholesterol.


A Village Seeks Its Identity Through the U.S. Postal Service
LEAD: WITH more than 300 employees, the Harris Graphics Company is the largest employer in the village of Pawcatuck, but its corporate letterhead lists its address as Rhode Island, because Pawcatuck, a village in Stonington, has no post office.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Grymes Hill
LEAD: WHEN David and Marjorie Hack moved to Staten Island's Grymes Hill in 1979, they couldn't afford anything better than a $65,000 handyman special on the fringe of the decaying, high-crime Stapleton neighborhood.
Now, 10 years and $150,000 later, the 1910 eight-bedroom Victorian is almost completely restored and is valued by brokers at about $420,000.


Design; AS TIME GOES BY
LEAD: MANHATTAN BROWN-stones that have remained single-family houses are a rarity these days, especially those that have retained their original layouts and intricate architectural details.
The rooms in this 1860's house were remodeled, but nearly 80 years ago during the Edwardian era.
In the intervening years, they have been lovingly preserved and purposely decorated to reflect the spirit of the place.


A Cabaret Tribute to Billie Holiday
LEAD: FOUR months before she died of cirrhosis and heart failure, a ruin at the age of 44, Billie Holiday was relegated to singing in a seedy bar in South Philadelphia.


Tax-and-Spend Democrats Never Learn
LEAD: People like to say the only certainties in life are death and taxes.
Medical science is making headway against death, and Democrats in Congress appear to be working hard to retain the certainty of the second.


Frans Hals: Unabashed Painter of Portraits
LEAD: If there is a time for everything, the time for Frans Hals came in the middle of the 19th century, some 200 years after he died.
Hals had spent more than five decades as a portraitist in his adopted city of Haarlem, a position not without significance but hardly one that qualified him as eminent.
Painters of grand historical and religious scenes were considered artists of ambition; portraiture was an altogether more lowly endeavor.


More Stern Charges
LEAD: A week after publishing an athlete's claim that he supplied illicit human growth hormones to Florence Griffith Joyner six months before she turned in a stunning series of performances at the 1988 Olympics, the West German magazine Stern has published what it described as a secret East German report suggesting that Griffith Joyner's thighs expanded two inches in the year before the


Heidi C. Kesseler Weds Executive
LEAD: Heidi Christine Kesseler and John P. Langton 2d were married yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
The Rev.
Andrew Mullins performed the Episcopal ceremony.


Shoreham Story: Unbridled Greed
LEAD: Every time we think we have seen the most bizarre event yet in the Lilco-Shoreham story, another one arrives to surpass it.
One of the most curious is the disclosure that hundreds of thousands of dollars were paid out to Lilco's chairman, William Catacosinos, as a reward for negotiating the deal with Governor


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Pulaski Day Parade, Fifth Avenue between 26th and 52d Streets will be closed today from noon to 4 P.M.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Devils have signed two goaltenders, Craig Billington and Ronald Melanson, and assigned them to the team's Utica farm club in the American Hockey League. . . .
Janet Evans, the swimmer who won three gold medals at the 1988 Olympics, was named the Women's Sports Foundation Amateur Athlete of the Year.


TWO SEEKERS IN THE SOUK
LEAD: During dinner at the Nile Hilton, in Cairo, a chatty captain recommended we try what he called feteer, a kind of filled pancake sold at snack shops throughout the city.
The best one, he added, was to be found in the bazaar, somewhere near the big mosque.


Wistful Visit By a Welcome Season: Sweet, Fleeting Indian Summer
LEAD: OCTOBER has within it a time, a smell and a feeling of its own.
The contrast between the deep greens of early September and the polychromatic botanical display of mid-Autumn jars the eye.


Santiago's Golden Legend
LEAD: SANTIAGO DE COMPOSTELA HAS BEEN A lodestar for visitors for more than a thousand years.
The world's first guidebook was written in 1130 by Aimeri Picaud, a French monk, to give information to travelers on their way there.
In the early Middle Ages, between 500,000 and 2 million people came each year.


Paul Mavis Wed To Victoria Boies
LEAD: Victoria Anne Boies, a daughter of Elaine Boies of Staten Island and the late Dr.
Jack Jay Boies, was married yesterday to Paul Anthony Mavis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Nestor Mavis of Cedarhurst, L.I.
The Rev.
John H. Walsted performed the Protestant ceremony in the Jade Room of the Waldorf-Astoria in New


WHAT A CHILD IS GIVEN
LEAD: I was encouraged by Deborah Franklin's article ''What a Child Is Given'' (Sept. 3).
My adoptive mother suffers from bipolar illness, and I spent much of my early childhood wondering if I, too, would suffer from it.
I know now that my concern about ''contracting'' her illness was unnecessary, but the emotional scars of growing up in an unstable family remain.


Social Events
LEAD:  Party in Prospect Park


The Taxpayer's Turn to Win a Few
LEAD: The number of rounds in which the taxpayer emerges the victor after battling the Internal Revenue Service are precious few, but lately the Government has been taking it on the chin.
In a variety of court cases that provide lessons for average taxpayers, individuals have prevailed.
They have won disputes over deductions of home office expenses and personal computer purchases and they were awarded legal fees for litigation that arose because of heavy-handed I.R.S.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Joyce Anisman-Saltman; 'There Is Humor in Everything'
LEAD: THERE is little else that will make a person feel as good as will a good laugh, says Joyce Anisman-Saltman, a professor who lectures on the importance of humor.


Small Business Is Overwhelmed By Health Costs
LEAD: Millions of small American businesses that provide health coverage for their employees have been staggered in recent months by insurance rate increases of 20 percent to more than 100 percent.


Miss Wettlaufer, A Teacher, Weds
LEAD: Jennifer Scott Wettlaufer, a daughter of Mrs.
David Southam Innes Ker of Dundas, Ontario, and Conrad Penn Wettlaufer of Buffalo, was married last evening to Michael Kent Sednaoui, a son of Mrs.
Michael C. Sednaoui of Washington and New Haven, Vt., and the late Mr.
Sednaoui.
The Rev.
John Smiley officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in


From New Arrivals to Shifts in Rules, a Season of Change
LEAD: The arrival of several Soviet players is only one of many personnel shifts in the National Hockey League as it opens its 73d season this week.
None are as dramatic as Wayne Gretzky's move last season from Edmonton to Los Angeles, but a few teams won't seem the same with familiar faces in different places.


J. W. Kirby Wed To Miss McCabe
LEAD: Karen Lyden McCabe, a government securities marketing representative at Shearson Lehman Hutton in New York, and Jefferson Walker Kirby, an associate in the corporate finance department at the Bankers Trust Company in New York, were married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
The Rev.


Italy's Vin Santo: A Sip of Hospitality
LEAD: IN Tuscany and neighboring Umbria, vin santo is the wine of hospitality.
Whatever the time of day, a guest is offered a small glass of the amber dessert wine. ''It's the wine of hospitality, the wine of friendship and of courtesy,'' explains Giacomo Tachis, winemaker for the 650-year-old Tuscan firm Antinori.


Sally Skeele and George Post Jr. Marry
LEAD: Sarah Hayden Skeele, the daughter of Ruth Richardson Skeele of White Plains and Robert Billington Skeele of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to George Browne Post Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Post of Norwalk, Conn., and Isleboro, Me.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speere Jr. officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in New


Victory for Neighbors of Ohio A-Plant as Lawsuit Is Settled
LEAD: Upholding a central contention of the plaintiffs, a Federal district judge has approved a $78 million settlement in a lawsuit against the Government by neighbors of a uranium processing plant.


For Philippine Rebels, Strength Exceeds Strife
LEAD: Three assassinations attributed to guerrillas this week have enhanced the Communist rebellion's image of strength even as it is being dogged from within by serious political and logistical problems.


Power From Space Is Pollution Free
LEAD: Most of the discussion about preserving the ecology of our planet has focused on Earth-based solutions.
These have been aimed at protecting the environment and providing energy to meet the demands of the planet's expanding population.
In the near- to mid-term, these are important and valuable steps.


5 Facing U.S. Charges In Dallas Race Attacks
LEAD: A Federal grand jury here has indicted five men linked to racist skinhead groups in connection with vandalism at a Jewish temple and attacks on black and Hispanic people.


Campus Life: Harvard; Campus Rent Rise Affects Businesses Run by Students
LEAD: For student organizations, rental space at Harvard has always been hard to come by.
Now, it's more costly as well, as Harvard raises rental fees for the first time in a decade, in some cases.
The largest group affected is Harvard Student Agencies, a student-run corporation that provides jobs for hundreds of undergraduates, writing and publishing the popular ''Let's


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about thefts of statues from parks in Buenos Aires described the poet Antonio Machado incorrectly.
He was Spanish, not Argentine.


Jamie Jett Wed In New Mexico
LEAD: Jamie Denise Jett and C. Carter Walker 3d, 1987 graduates of the Rhode Island School of Design, were married yesterday in Las Cruces, N.M.
The Rev.
James Galbraith performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church.


Anna Quindlen Will Write a Times Column
LEAD: Anna Quindlen, former reporter, editor and columnist for The New York Times, will begin a new column on the paper's Op-Ed page in January.
Her appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of The Times.


A Humbling Account
LEAD: To the Editor:


RADON IN JERSEY CALLED GRAVE RISK
LEAD: Radon gas has become the most serious environmental health threat in New Jersey, state environmental officials said today, causing more cancer cases than exposure to hazardous waste sites, drinking-water contaminants or food with pesticides.


1940's Baseball Hit a Chord
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Meal Memorializes AIDS Victim
LEAD: AN unusual new cookbook out this month is donating part of its profits to providing meals for people with AIDS. ''The Open Hand Cookbook'' (Pocket Books, $18.95) is a compilation of menus donated by 60 California chefs.
Edited by Robert C. Schneider, a chef associated with several California restaurants (among them the Hayes Street Grill and the Pier 23 Cafe in San Francisco), the focus is on nourishing meals chefs cook for friends.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  WHITE BEARS AND OTHER UNWANTED THOUGHTS: Suppression, Obsession, and the Psychology of Mental Control.
By Daniel M. Wegner. (Viking, $18.95.) Try - try as hard as you can - not to think about a white bear, says Daniel M. Wegner, a professor of psychology at Trinity University in San Antonio, at the start of his book, ''White Bears and Other Unwanted Thoughts.


Outdoors; Waterfowl Season Opens This Month
LEAD: New York State's waterfowling seasons get under way this month, and they and the daily bag limits are much the same as last year.


British Soldier, 20, Charged With Security Leak in Ulster
LEAD: A 20-year-old British soldier was charged today with leaking confidential photographs, names and addresses of suspects on security files in Northern Ireland.
The soldier, Shaun Cunliffe, a member of the Air Defense Regiment of the Royal Artillery, was freed on bail after a hearing.


Woman Scorned?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan's Giant Banks on the March photos of Yuko Oana and John McGillicuddy after the CIT deal (NYT/Vic DeLucia);
LEAD: Dai-Ichi Kangyo, the world's largest bank, isn't trying to catch the fancy of millions of American consumers, as Toyota and Sony have.
It will settle for a close relationship with 10,000 or so corporate treasurers.


New Orleans Resists High-End Condos
LEAD: JEROME GOLDMAN, a local developer and marine architect, had always dreamed of a home with a view of the Mississippi River.
When a downtown site on the river became available in 1984, he decided to build a 14-story condominium there so he could enjoy a panoramic view of the city and the waterway from his penthouse.


&gt;Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My screened porch has a concrete slab floor.
For years, I have been painting this floor with an acrylic concrete deck paint, and in April the paint bubbles and lifts in large sections.
I scrape these areas and then repaint the floor, but the bubbling and separating grow worse each year.
Is there a way to correct this?


A 'New Dylan' Crosses Paths With the Old
LEAD: During the 1970'S, when one singer-songwriter after another was touted as ''the new Bob Dylan,'' the promiscuous announcement of so many imminent successors to one of the most influential rock artists of the 60's eventually became a joke.
It wasn't until 1981 that the automatic comparison of every up-and-coming troubadour with Mr.


Expectations Confront Reality
LEAD: The time: late July.
The place: the local 10-plex.
The weather: horrid.
The line: unbelievably long.
Every kid from miles around has been brought to the movies this afternoon, and most of the buzz is about ''Batman.'' They've been hearing about it for weeks; they all want to see it, and most of them aren't going to get in.


WHAT A CHILD IS GIVEN
LEAD: Unfortunately, the laws concerning secrecy in adoption records have not kept pace with findings in medicine and psychology.
Only two states -Alaska and Kansas - give adult adoptees access to their birth records on demand, and the vast majority of other states have ''sealed records'' laws that effectively prevent reunions between adoptees and their birth families.


Miss Brown Wed To John DeClue
LEAD: Elizabeth Grace Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Brown of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Martin DeClue, a son of Marjorie M. DeClue and Albert S. DeClue, both of Bainbridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward J. Dougherty officiated at Our Lady of Princeton Roman Catholic Church.


CRY, THE BELOVED CITY
LEAD:  JERUSALEM  City of Mirrors.
By Amos Elon.  286 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


The Great Theater That Is Munich
LEAD: WHEN I GET TO MUNICH, THIS IS WHAT I do.
I check into the Hotel Vier Jahreszeiten - if I can afford it, which is not every year -and I take a room overlooking a quiet side street from which I can see the unmistakable upper bulge of the rebuilt opera house (which in Munich is called the National Theater).


Counted At Last
LEAD: MY daughter would be proud of me.
In my advanced middle age, I finally attended my first rally.
And I stood up and was counted.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE CURRENT CLIMATE.
By Bruce Jay Friedman. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly Press, $18.95.) In his novel ''About Harry Towns,'' which was published 15 years ago, Bruce Jay Friedman presented a disturbing portrait of a hedonistic Manhattan playboy.
The life of Harry Towns, a moderately successful screenwriter in his 40's, degenerates through episodes of drug abuse, disease-spreading sex and finally the molestation of his girlfriend's daughter.


L'AFFAIRE TOUVIER: OPENING OLD WOUNDS
LEAD: YOU COULD CALL IT A WAR game.
Let's say you were a young Frenchman during the Occupation and you chose the losing side, the wrong side, the German side.
Let's say you were tried in absentia and sentenced to death as a war criminal.


ANSWERS TO THE QUIZ ON PAGE 106
LEAD: 1-L: Vienna.
The headdress, in the Ethnological Museum, was acquired by Cortez and passed into Hapsburg hands, probably through Charles V.


Nancy O'Brien Is Wed in New Jersey
LEAD: Nancy Theresa O'Brien, a daughter of Raymond V. O'Brien Jr. of Colts Neck, N.J., and Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., and the late Theresa Sweeney O'Brien, was married yesterday to Scott Harold Meisenzahl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Meisenzahl of Rochester.
The Rev.
James J. Fischer officiated at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson, N


Paraguay's Progress
LEAD: Last year, Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner, dictator of Paraguay for 35 years, paid a rare visit to the United Nations.
When Paraguayan exiles attempted a peaceful protest, they were set upon by pro-Stroessner goons.


ROASTING THE ACADEMICS
LEAD:  AN APPETITE FOR POETRY  By Frank Kermode.  242 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.


EAST GERMANS GET PERMISSION TO QUIT PRAGUE FOR WEST
LEAD: With their hopes for freedom suddenly granted, several thousand East German refugees were allowed to leave the West German Embassy here tonight and were being transported to West Germany.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on page 17 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the film ''Breaking In,'' which will close the New York Film Festival, gives an incorrect date.
The film will be shown on Oct. 9, not tomorrow.


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF AN ANGELHEADED HIPSTER
LEAD:  GINSBERG  A Biography.
By Barry Miles.
Illustrated. 588 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Downtown Brooklyn; Metrotech's Start Signals a Neighborhood Comeback
LEAD: AFTER years of delays, the steel frame now rising for the first building in Metrotech, a $1 billion office and academic complex in Brooklyn, is just one sign that the ambitious plan of city officials and private developers to remake downtown Brooklyn is finally under way.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/SCIENCE
LEAD:  WHALES  By Seymour Simon.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
New York:  Thomas Y. Crowell. $14.95. (Ages 5-8)  THE SIX BRIDGES OF HUMPHREY THE WHALE  By Toni Knapp.
Illustrated by Craig McFarland Brown.
Unpaged.
Colorado Springs, Colo.
The Rockrimmon Press. $15.95. (Ages 9 to 13)


'Class War' Pitch Now Fails, Democrats Find in Tax Defeat
LEAD: The Democratic defeat on the capital gains tax in the House of Representatives this week is raising new questions on Capitol Hill about the party's message, the strength of its leadership and its ability to hold the line against a popular President.


Zina Glazebrook: Window Display Designer
LEAD: As a child, Zina Glazebrook used to get together with a friend and move all the furniture around. ''It used to make my mother nuts a bit,'' recalled Ms.
Glazebrook, who was born in Philadelphia, grew up in Bedford, N.Y., and is 39 years old. ''But for me I guess it was the genesis of what I'm doing now.


The Last of Fernando
LEAD: A pet bull named Fernando wandered from a pasture and trapped five people in a convenience store for 45 minutes Wednesday, until a veterinarian shot him with a tranquilizer dart.
No one was injured in the episode, but it prompted Ishmael Gomberoff, Fernando's owner, to make plans for his sale next week.


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep planting, especially evergreens, new perennials and shrubs.
If the new lawn is at least three inches tall, start mowing; last call to seed bare patches in the established lawn; cover with twigs or burlap to keep birds and rodents from scratching at the seed.
Odd Perennial


Appealing Guest Lists Highlight Season
LEAD: THE Jorgensen Auditorium at the University of Connecticut in Storrs today opens an impressive - and international - fall season that will include appearances by the Canadian Brass, the Moscow Virtuosi, the Royal Winnipeg Ballet, the Orchestre de la Suisse Romande and the Vienna Choir Boys.
Two orchestras, the New Haven and the


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  VIRTUOSI OPENER


Review/ Music; The Composer as Instrumentalist
LEAD: Bernadette Speach, a pianist, and Jeffrey Schanzer, a guitarist, are also composers who draw on a healthy variety of musical influences.
They perform and compose both individually and collaboratively, and on Saturday evening they offered a few of their recent works at Roulette.


Year in Rome T&gt;urns Composer's Requiem Into a Celebration
LEAD: SHE is back from paradise, with an Italian wardrobe and a new appreciation of the ''air kiss.'' Michelle Ekizian's year at the American Academy in Rome is over, and she has now begun to assess its influences.


Fight Baseball's TV Fadeout
LEAD: For 37 years, the ''Game of the Week'' has been Saturday's national Main Street, a televised grandstand linking baseball to provinces hundreds of miles from the nearest big league city.
It is network television's longest-running sports program; indeed, according to the A. C. Nielsen Company, it is the most popular April


Poland's Censors Beginning to Fade
LEAD: Poland's censor, still officially ensconced in the Government bureaucracy, reached for his scissors 2,528 times last year, and 80 percent of his snipping was done in 20 mostly non-Communist, church-related newspapers.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It's truly amazing, but no longer surprising, the questions asked, and the comments made, by comparative strangers at social gatherings.
You've just bought a new apartment - how much did you pay for it, and what's the maintenance?
You're getting a divorce - they've just gone through one and regale you with more personal details than you ever want to hear.


MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.
LEAD: Show us any business with 123,000 employees that does not have a few bad apples within its ranks.
Yet, after 35 years as a tax practitioner, I have found the I.R.S. personnel to be helpful and to be trying only to do their best to get their job done.


Coping in an Italian Castle
LEAD: IT is called Castello di Polgeto, it's near Umbertide in Umbria and we rented its only ground-floor apartment.
With it came our own cherry tree in full fruit, our own owl and cuckoo, our own private garden with two elegant cypresses flanked by a low stone wall.
On one side of the garden stood a small stone barn where the previous owner had wintered his lemon trees; behind us rose a hollow 70-foot tower connected to a wing of the castle by the tower bridge under which we parked our car.


Giuliani Sets Out on Tricky Task of Attacking Dinkins
LEAD: The quivering anger of Rudolph W. Giuliani as he defended his criticism of David N. Dinkins last week made painfully clear the predicament he faces: How to raise enough doubts about his rival for the New York City mayoralty to beat him without being accused of beating up on him.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Capital Gains: Politics and Poor Data
LEAD: In the debate last week before the House of Representatives voted to lower the capital gains tax rate, both sides buttressed their positions with misleading statistics.


Corrections
LEAD: A film review of ''Roger and Me'' on Wednesday listed the credits incompletely in some copies.
The editors were Wendey Stanzler and Jennifer Beman.


Some Enchanted 'Saigon'
LEAD: Seems not so long ago that I produced an NBC radio broadcast from Mary Martin's dressing room after the London opening of ''South Pacific.'' That smash hit was an American artistic export based on stories growing out of the American victory in World War II; some enchanted evening.


Head of Indiana Klan Is Held With Gun and Club in Auto
LEAD: The leader of the Indiana Ku Klux Klan was arrested on weapons charges after he was stopped for traffic violations near Poughkeepsie, the police said today.


No Ordinary Tailgating
LEAD: Bill Brennan, a Stamford, Conn., real estate executive, recalls being caught in a traffic jam on the Bear Mountain Bridge while heading for an Army game at West Point in 1970. ''While we sat in our car on the bridge, I looked down at the Hudson River and said to my friend, Dick Merritt, 'Look, Dick, there's no traffic down there,' '' Brennan said.


A.O. Dahlberg, 91, Economist and Inventor
LEAD: Arthur O. Dahlberg, an economist and the inventor of the Parker fountain pen, died early Saturday morning at White Plains Hospital after a long illness.
A resident of Scarsdale, N.Y., he was 91 years old.


Norman F. Smith, Administrative Judge, 64
LEAD: Judge Norman F. Smith, an administrative law judge who was a leading advocate of abortion rights, died of cancer Friday in Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 64 years old and lived in Syracuse.


Bridge
LEAD: The final day of play in the recent NEC Bermuda Bowl world championship in Perth, Australia, featured wild oscillations.
Brazil began with a lead of 54 imps and built it to 140.
The Americans surged back, almost canceling the Brazilian gains but leaving the South American champions with the title.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 23 about a New York State Health Department panel's action on a complaint against two doctors at New York Hospital in the death of an 18-year-old woman was bylined incorrectly in some editions.
It was by Donatella Lorch.


Tax Watch; Family Business In a Legal Tangle
LEAD: FEW provisions of the sweeping overhaul of the nation's tax laws in recent years have prompted as many anguished protests from tax professionals as Section 2036(c), colloquially known as the antifreeze provision.
It is intended to prevent affluent families from escaping gift and estate taxes by using techniques known as estate freezes to transfer family-owned businesses to a younger generation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New Arnell Accounts
LEAD: Arnell/Bickford Marketing announced $2 million worth of new business on Friday.
From Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc., for which it already handles designer eyewear lines, the agency received Levi's sunglasses.
And Fendi, the Italian apparel and accessories company, hired the agency to create advertising for the store it is opening in midtown Manhattan.


South Africans Permit Protests in Homelands
LEAD: Anti-apartheid leaders joined traditional chiefs today to challenge South Africa's black-homeland policies at the funeral of a Xhosa chief here in one of the black homelands, Transkei.


More Hometown Turf for Hartford Courant
LEAD: The Hartford Courant, long the voice of Connecticut's capital city, is now trying to offer hometown coverage - and attract hometown advertising - in 82 towns from Long Island Sound to the Massachusetts border.


McKinsey May Buy Consultants
LEAD: In a sign of the growing importance of information technology and systems-related expertise in general management consulting, McKinsey &amp; Company is seeking to buy the Information Consulting Group, which was created last year by several high-ranking executives from Arthur Andersen and other top accounting firms.


Rapist Hangs Himself in Cell At Maximum-Security Prison
LEAD: An inmate imprisoned for raping a 5-year-old girl and running her over with his car hanged himself in his cell at the Clinton Correctional Facility, state prison officials said over the weekend.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Court Rules Accountant Can Solicit Clients
LEAD: A West Palm Beach accountant won a victory on Thursday when a Circuit Court judge agreed with him that Florida laws that prevent accountants in the state from soliciting business without an invitation or quoting audit fees to prospective clients were unconstitutional and ruled that the bans be lifted.


FIREFIGHTER IS KILLED BY AN F.B.I. AGENT
LEAD: An F.B.I. agent shot and killed an off-duty New York City firefighter yesterday morning after the firefighter apparently threatened another F.B.I. agent with an AK-47 assault rifle, the authorities said.


When News Must Pay Its Way, Expect Trivia
LEAD: For as long as there has been television journalism there has been the TV journalist's predicament, that of doing serious work in a medium that most wants merely to amuse.
But the news divisions at last seem to have found an answer to their abiding dilemma: In a universe that values entertainers more than it values journalists, the journalists are becoming entertainers.


JUDGE UPSETS RULE REQUIRING MINORITY CONSTRUCTION HIRING
LEAD: A judge has struck down a regulation that Mayor Edward I. Koch imposed in 1980 to require contractors to hire ''economically disadvantaged'' trainees for construction projects that are built and financed by New York City.


Storm-Battered Charleston Struggles to Cope With Influx of Supplies


In Nicaragua, the Election Observers Are Coming!
LEAD: As national voter registration began today, Nicaraguans got their first look at what will be a huge international effort to preserve peace and supervise free elections in their war-battered country.


Personal Vendetta Is Seen as the Motive For Bombing of Van
LEAD: A Federal inquiry into the bombing of a van driven by the wife of a Navy captain has shifted the suspected motive from terrorism to a possible personal vendetta, it was reported today.


Insurers With a Niche Favored by an Acquirer
LEAD: David J. Stone, a practitioner of the management buyout, thinks the insurance industry offers opportunities to acquire companies for prices that are not outlandish, and his company, DJS/Inverness, is on the lookout for insurance companies that have a niche in their industry.


Colombians, Weary of the Strain, Are Losing Heart in the Drug War
LEAD: After enduring six weeks of bombings and shootings, many Colombians are tiring of the drug war and suggesting that the Government abandon its campaign against powerful cocaine traffickers.


Manuel Clouthier, Who Sought Mexican Presidency, Dies in Crash
LEAD: Manuel Clouthier, the candidate of the right-of-center National Action Party in the 1988 presidential election, was killed today in an automobile accident in northern Mexico, the highway police reported.
He was 55 years old.


Waking Up to Joy of Morning Bicycling
LEAD: THE Century Road Club is looking for a few brave women and some older men too, equally brave.
The club is a bicycle organization almost a century old that stages races in Central Park on Saturday mornings for the fun of it, and there are some membership openings.


Retracing Hurricane's Path, Jackson Gives Words of Hope
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson swept from South Carolina to the eastern end of the Caribbean over the last four days, backtracking on Hurricane Hugo's path and rekindling his formidable popularity among the poor blacks who were the majority of the storm's victims.


Legal Services, White House Wimps
LEAD: Ronald Reagan was relentlessly hostile to the Legal Services Corporation, which Congress created to provide lawyers for the poor.
The Bush Administration, though apparently not bent on the program's destruction, is letting itself be pushed around by the same narrow-minded obstructionists who helped set poverty law policy during the Reagan years.


Only Light Effect Expected On Stocks and Real Estate
LEAD: Although many Wall Street executives and real estate developers welcomed the House of Representatives' vote on Thursday to cut the capital gains tax rate, few thought the reduction, if passed by the Senate, would have any significant impact on their business or on stock prices.


Club Sweetens Stroke
LEAD: A new technique for weighting a golf club iron is designed to compensate for off-center hits.
Subtle changes occur in the contour of the club head if it strikes a ball outside the sweet spot, its optimal striking surface.
Wilson Sporting Goods Company of River Grove, Ill., recently introduced its Ultra, an iron made to minimize the microscopic twisting that comes from an imperfect stroke.


Scoutmaster Is Held In Sodomizing of Boy
LEAD: A 31-year-old scoutmaster has been charged with sodomy after he was caught having sex with a 13-year-old boy in a Manhattan parking lot, the police said yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-10  Israel is seeking $400 million from the United States to finance construction of housing for Soviet Jewish emigres.
Israeli officials said some of the housing would probably go up in the West Bank.
Page A1


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 1, 1989:  MONDAY  Carolina Fght Corp  Central VT Pub Svc Corp  Dean Foods Co  Nevada Pwr Co  Oxford Inds Inc  Sierra Pac Res  United Indl Corp  Xerox Corp  TUESDAY  CBI Inds Inc  Central ILL Pub Svc Co  Pacific Enterprises


Sports of The Times; Mookie Wilson Is Still a Free Agent
LEAD: MOOKIE WILSON didn't like the sting of alcohol on his eyes three years ago, and he didn't like it again Saturday.
He did, however, love what it represented.


ARGENTINES HONOR A WARLORD OF OLD
LEAD: In a probable prelude to the granting of presidential pardons to military officers for rebellion and political crimes, the remains of the most famous of Argentina's 19th-century provincial warlords were buried in his homeland today.


Two Teams With Something to Prove
LEAD: Now that the Toronto Blue Jays have drawn the short straw, this is what awaits them in the American League playoff that begins Tuesday: perhaps a deeper, better, more focused Oakland Athletics team than the one that ravaged Boston in last season's championship series.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Auto Racing  Senna Wins Spanish Grand Prix: Ayrton Senna of Brazil drove a slick race in his McLaren-Honda to win the Spanish Grand Prix yesterday, keeping alive his hopes of recapturing the Formula One crown.
Senna completed 72 laps of the 2.62-mile Jerez de la Frontera circuit in 1 hour 47 minutes 48.264 seconds.


Creatures Large and Small, Furry and Slimy Are Blessed at Cathedral    It was the fifth annual animal blessing at the cathedral. (The New York Times/Dith Pran)


Review/Music; Trio Plays Standards With Veneer
LEAD: The pianist Steve Kuhn, who played through Sunday night at the Village Vanguard, presents a simple, conventional image to an audience.
He uses a traditional trio - in this case featuring Eddie Gomez on bass and Al Foster on drums - and he plays standards.
The music is broken up into obvious, clean-cut solos and Mr.


3 Sentenced In Bid Fraud
LEAD: A former Navy procurement official was sentenced Friday to six months in a halfway house for giving confidential information on Pentagon contracts to a military consultant.


THE MEDIA BUSINESST: Television; The Networks' 'Opportunity' in Sony Deal
LEAD: A BAD joke in Hollywood last week suggested that Columbia television had started pitching a series to the networks based on the film ''Tora, Tora, Tora.'' That film tells the story of the Pearl Harbor attack from the Japanese point of view.


B.A.T. Loses British Plea
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries has lost an appeal against a decision by British regulatory authorities to give Sir James Goldsmith more time to pursue his hostile takeover bid for the British tobacco-based conglomerate.


ISRAEL ASKING U.S. FOR AID ON HOUSING FOR SOVIET EMIGRES
LEAD: Israel has asked the United States for $400 million in loan guarantees to finance the construction of housing for Soviet Jewish emigres, and Israeli officials said some of the housing would probably be built in the West Bank.


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues for this week is confined to today's auction of three- and six-month Treasury bills.


Mohasco Chief Mixes Furniture and Buyouts
LEAD: Seeking a chief executive who knows the furniture business and can operate in a leveraged buyout environment, the Mohasco Corporation found its man in Robert W. Hatch.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Levine, Huntley Moves
LEAD: Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, a unit of Grey Advertising, restructured its creative department last week, promoting Terry Bonaccolta, Jim Brandhorst, Jim Dragoumis and Jane Pack to executive vice presidents and management directors.
Each will be responsible for a major agency function.


Jets Sputter And Colts Rally, 17-10
LEAD: The Jets brimmed with confidence today.
The offense, fresh from a 40-point performance against Miami, was primed for another good outing against a questionable Colt defense; the defense, despite allowing 33 points last week, vowed to pressure the Colt's stand-in quarterback, Jack Trudeau, and stop the


Potent Form of Heroin Surfaces in California
LEAD: An extremely potent form of heroin has surfaced here, causing dozens of overdoses, one of them fatal, and overwhelming hospitals.


Review/Music; From Gospel to Cabaret
LEAD: So severe is the dearth of distinctive male cabaret singers in New York nowadays that the emergence of a talent as promising as the young baritone Steven Davis is an encouraging sign for the genre.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What has happened shows that we are in a historical period of change, which cannot be reversed and will continue.
I hope that the East German leadership realizes this and will not isolate itself by refusing to change.
Gorbachev is coming and I hope he will convince East Germany that reform lies in its best interests, that reform means more, not less, stability.


G. A. Hirsch Wed To Shay Scrivner
LEAD: Shay Yandell Scrivner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morley Nelson of Boise, Idaho, was married in New York yesterday to George Aaron Hirsch, the publisher of Runner's World magazine.
The Rev.
Dr.
F.
Forrester Church, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.


Beating Called Bias-Related
LEAD: A man was beaten in the East Village on Saturday morning by three men who yelled anti-homosexual slurs, the police said.
The victim, Roger Justice, 32 years old, was attacked from behind with a baseball bat and a pool cue as he walked in front of 440 East 13th Street at 10 A.M., said a police spokesman, Sgt.


Review/Television; The Way a Battered Wife Finally Made Herself Heard
LEAD: There are certain kinds of television movies that give certain television actresses their big break.
One was ''The Burning Bed,'' which enabled Farrah Fawcett to prove conclusively that she was capable of something more than ''Charlie's Angels.'' She played a battered wife in a story based on fact.


Yanks End Dim Year Dimly
LEAD: As the Yankees' dismal season ended yesterday, their off-season planning had already begun.


Childhood Is Not Safe, Congress Study Warns
LEAD: More children than ever are living in the streets or in families shattered by divorce, drugs or poverty, a Congressional study has reported.


Corrections
LEAD: A review on Tuesday about the Japanese film ''Black Rain'' at the New York Film Festival gave an incorrect date for the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.
It was Aug. 6, not June 6, 1945.


Manila Journal; In Death, Marcos Is Pitied and His Return Is Urged
LEAD: In recent months of relative normalcy, thousands of Filipinos have come each day to gawk and wander in the remarkably opulent halls of the Malacanang Palace where Ferdinand E. Marcos ruled for 20 years before his ouster in 1986.


Man Dies and Two Are Hurt In Fire in a Brooklyn House
LEAD: One man was killed and two other persons were injured last night when a fire of undetermined origin destroyed a three-story dwelling at 559 Lafayette Avenue between Bedford and Nostrand Avenues in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.


H.U.D. Ties of 2 Bush Nominees Raise Roadblocks
LEAD: The disclosure of widespread mismanagement and political favoritism at the Department of Housing and Urban Development has placed roadblocks in the Senate confirmation process for two of President Bush's nominees who had ties to the agency.


AIDS Drug Is Seen as Ineffective
LEAD: An unapproved drug popular in underground efforts to fight the AIDS virus since it showed promise in the laboratory is apparently ineffective in the body, a medical journal report says.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Nicaragua Voters Register  International observers were in place as registration began for Nicaragua's February vote.
Page A10.
Tax Debate Doesn't Add Up  In the debate on cutting the capital gains tax rate, both sides buttressed their positions with misleading statistics.
News Analysis, page D1.


Mets' Final Victory Proves Bittersweet
LEAD: The Mets closed today with a 7-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates and a sweep of their final four-game series, and they ended a season of turmoil by taking second place in the National League East, one year after they had won 100 games and the division championship.


John Walker, 64, Episcopal Bishop in Washington
LEAD: The Rev.
John Thomas Walker, the first black Episcopal bishop of Washington and a staunch crusader against racial discrimination at home and abroad, died of heart failure at Georgetown University Hospital on Saturday.
He was 64 years old.


Let Nicaragua Vote Without Our Intervention; In Guatemala, Fear
LEAD: To the Editor:


AN EARLIER JACKIE MASON RACIAL SLUR AGAINST DINKINS IS DISCLOSED
LEAD: Jackie Mason and his use of racially sensitive language continues to trouble the mayoral campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani almost a week after the comedian was forced to withdraw from the campaign for making harsh remarks about blacks and Jews in a newspaper.


Tired Businessmen Get Chance to Play
LEAD: THOMAS MEEHAN is a project manager for the architectural firm of Robert Dwight Nostrand in Farmingdale, L.I.
He sits in rush-hour traffic just as everybody else does, puts in his eight-hour day, and daydreams the way others do on his way home to Seaford, L.I.


Leading Batsmen: Gwynn, Puckett
LEAD: Tony Gwynn overtook Will Clark yesterday to became the first player since Stan Musial to win three consecutive National League batting titles, and Kirby Puckett held on to win his first American League batting crown.


Give the Chancellor the Help He Needs
LEAD: As Dade County Superintendent of Schools, Joseph Fernandez once dismissed an elementary school principal on the spot when he found the school in disarray.
But as Schools Chancellor in New York City, Mr.
Fernandez could not do that because state law gives principals lifetime tenure in their school building.


STEAM BLASTS MAY BE RISING AS MAINS AGE
LEAD: When an underground steam pipe exploded with a thunderous roar in the Gramercy Park section of Manhattan Aug. 19, killing three people, injuring 24 and coating much of the area with asbestos-contaminated mud, New York City officials assumed they were dealing with a phenomenon that happened once in a blue moon.


The Generic Drug Scandal
LEAD: These are bad times for generic drug makers and their regulators.
Three officials of the Food and Drug Administration have pleaded guilty to receiving bribes, and two generic drug companies have admitted to providing false data.
Now, after a new scandal involving defective generic drugs for epilepsy, Representative John Dingell says he's lost confidence in the industry's integrity and the F.D.A.


'Today' Official Goes to 'Channel One'
LEAD: A senior executive of the ''Today'' show has been named executive producer of ''Channel One,'' an advertiser-supported daily news program that is to be presented in junior and senior high schools beginning in March 1990.


College Football; 'Unbelievable' Pitt Rallies From a 31-9 Deficit for a Tie
LEAD: After three periods, West Virginia had the game in hand, 31-9.
But the fourth period belonged to Pitt, 22 points to none.
So the game ended in an unlikely 31-31 tie on Ed Frazier's 42-yard field goal on the final play Saturday night in Morgantown.


More Than 6,000 East Germans Swell Tide of Emigres to the West
LEAD: From early this morning, packed East German trains pulled into this border junction town at three-hour intervals, disgorging exhausted East Germans whose departure had been allowed only the day before through an extraordinary face-saving arrangement reportedly approved by Erich Honecker, the East German leader.


Review/Opera; Hei-Kyung Hong and Richard Leech in 'Boheme'
LEAD: On March 5, 1938, Kirsten Flagstad sang Brunnhilde in ''Die Walkure'' at the Metropolitan Opera after an Isolde the night before.
Caruso sometimes sang three days running, and Eleanor Steber once did ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' and ''Otello'' on the same Saturday.
So let us not make too much of the fact that Hei-Kyung Hong had to sing Mimi in the first ''La Boheme'' of the season at 1:30 P.M.


Giants Reach 4-0 Mark
LEAD: All that talk that the Giants need defensive turnovers to win is a myth they helped create.
What they need is good defense when it counts.
They got enough of that today, kept Herschel Walker from doing too much damage and scored a methodical 30-13 victory over the Dallas Cowboys.


New Stouffer Food Line
LEAD: The Stouffer Foods Corporation, a unit of Nestle S.A., said last week that it had introduced a line of low-calorie and cholesterol-controlled frozen entrees called Right Course.
Stouffer's president, David Jennings, said the company expected first-year sales to exceed $100 million.


A Price War In Japan on Foreign Calls
LEAD: One of the most expensive services in Japan, the land of $70 watermelons, $150 cab rides and camera gear that costs twice as much as in New York, is making international telephone calls.
But this weekend, a price war broke out.


Charlotte Journal; PTL Trial: Even The Devil Showed Up
LEAD: Kenneth Huff was parading around the granite Federal Courthouse here as usual, hollering at the top of his lungs, ''The District Court in Charlotte, North Carolina, is crucifying Christ through Jim Bakker,'' when some onlookers began derisively howling like stray dogs.


More East Germans Sneak Into Embassy in Prague
LEAD: Several hundred East Germans sneaked past the Czechoslovak police today to gain sanctuary at the West German Embassy here, a day after thousands of their countrymen were allowed to leave the compound for West Germany.


Jamaica Handicap To Domasca Dan
LEAD: Domasca Dan struck a blow for the quality of Canadian racing yesterday by coming in from Toronto to score a three-length victory over Garemma and Is It True in the $118,200 Jamaica Handicap at Belmont Park.


Mexican Leader in the U.S. for Talks
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico left for Washington today on his first official visit to the United States, intent on testing Bush Administration pledges to help restore his country's economy while avoiding entanglement in the American Government's new drug control strategy.


Churchill Understood Afternoon Naps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Aid to Eastern Europe: Almost an Afterthought
LEAD: A group of Hungarians, Hungarian-Americans and others gathered for dinner one night last week, with Foreign Minister Gyula Horn, who had traveled from Budapest to the United States to speak at the United Nations and to meet with senior officials in Washington, as the guest of honor.


Business Digest
LEAD:  Companies  McKinsey is seeking the Information Consulting Group, which was created last year by several executives from Arthur Andersen and other accounting firms.
The move is a sign of the growing importance of information technology and systems-related expertise in general management consulting.


Founder Quits At Carlson
LEAD: Curt Carlson on Friday turned over control of one of the nation's largest privately held companies to his son-in-law.
Mr.
Carlson began the travel, restaurant and hotel operation more than 50 years ago from a trading stamp business.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Sept. 21 about promotions in the Soviet Communist Party leadership misstated the birthplace of Yuri D. Maslyukov, who was named a full member of the Politburo.
It is Leninabad, in Tadzhikistan.


More Suspects Are Arrested In Seizure of 20 Tons of Drugs
LEAD: Federal agents have arrested three more people in the biggest drug case on record in this country.


Let Nicaragua Vote Without Our Intervention
LEAD: To the Editor:


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
GENERAL COMMITTEE - 9:15 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Remembering The Woman Who Danced With Bananas
LEAD: When the restaurant Chez Josephine celebrates its third anniversary with a private party tonight, it will honor another anniversary as well.
It was 64 years ago today that Josephine Baker, an entertainer from St.
Louis, opened in Paris at the Theatre des Champs-Elysees in ''La Revue Negre'' and took the town by storm.


Psychiatric Workers Strike in Connecticut
LEAD: More than 70 psychiatric workers at Natchaug Hospital went on strike yesterday in a dispute over wages and work conditions, a hospital official said.


Cure for Hit-And-Run Politics
LEAD: A seamy piece of campaign literature circulated during last month's primary race for Brooklyn District Attorney attempted to link the former special prosecutor Charles Hynes to homosexual groups.
Assemblyman Daniel Feldman, who lost the contest to Mr.
Hynes, denies authorizing the leaflet, which was signed by ''Friends of Dan Feldman.


The Quest for a Commissioner
LEAD: On Oct. 10 in Dallas, the National Football League's 28 owners will again gather in hopes of electing a new commissioner after a seven-month effort filled with of hitches and surprises.


HIGH COURT FACING FIGHT ON ABORTION, PRIVACY AND DEATH
LEAD: With echoes of recent decisions still reverberating through the legal and political system, the Supreme Court returns Monday to a docket that all but guarantees a replay of the divisive constitutional struggles that defined its last term.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ernst &amp; Young Won by Grey
LEAD: Grey Advertising last week became a beneficiary of the consolidation of the accounting industry, winning the advertising business of the newly merged Ernst &amp; Young.
The account was reported in the trade press to be worth $2.5 million, but James A. Taylor, the national director of marketing for Ernst &amp;


Affluent Addicts' Road Back Begins in a Climb Past Denial
LEAD: With the growth of crack addiction in the middle class, treatment specialists have discovered that affluent addicts are more likely to deny their problem at first, and more able to hide addiction's devastating costs.


More Must Be Done on International Parental Child Abduction
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOR FLORIO AND COURTER, CRUCIAL TV BATTLE TURNS NASTY
LEAD: When the candidates for governor of New Jersey began their television advertising two weeks ago, their commercials differed sharply in tone and tenor.


Rams Edge 49ers On Late Field Goal
LEAD: For the Los Angeles Rams, it was a day where so much went right only to fade and become tarnished.
Then, in the waning minutes, the Rams' fortunes turned golden for good.


Rights for Gay Couples in Denmark
LEAD: In what gay rights advocates hailed as the first unions of their kind in the world, six homosexual couples were legally joined today in ''registered partnerships'' that gave them most rights of married heterosexuals, but not the right to adopt or obtain joint custody of a child.


Market Place; Continued Appeal Of Equity Funds
LEAD: SEPTEMBER was not the best month for the stock market, but mutual fund sponsors say they kept taking in cash from the public for their equity funds.
But ''junk bond'' funds, the most popular category of funds for much of the past year, may have had more than a billion dollars flow out.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Firms Change Names
LEAD: Several New York public relations firms have changed names and venues.
Porter/Novelli, a public relations subsidiary of the Omnicom Group, has acquired Jay DeBow &amp; Partners, a small New York public relations firm.
Terms were not disclosed.
The Betsy Nolan Group has changed its name to the Nolan/Lehr Group, after its vice president, Donald Lehr, agreed to buy a controlling interest in the firm.


BENSONHURST ON STAGE: PLOT IS SADLY FAMILIAR, THE PLAYWRIGHT SAYS
LEAD: There were times when he was growing up in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, Frank Pugliese said, when he felt afraid - afraid of the angry young men who hung out at street corners and candy shops getting drunk and picking fights, and afraid that he might become one of them.


Juvenile Book Publishing Becomes the Goose That Lays the Golden Egg
LEAD: Parents and educators often despair that youngsters cannot or will not read, but the younger set is the apple of the book publishing industry's eye.
William Morrow &amp; Company, owned by the Hearst Corporation, announced the week before last that it was adding a fourth division to its existing children's book publishing program.


Issue of Syrian Troops Clouds Talks on Lebanon
LEAD: Lebanese lawmakers clashed today over the presence of Syrian troops in their country and the Lebanese Christian military leader demanded a timetable for their withdrawal before agreeing to peace.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketers Get a Guide For the 1990's
LEAD: A New York advertising agency known for its analyses of consumer trends says marketers had better build bridges to their customers and between each other if they want to survive the 1990's.


James Kaufman Weds Amy Bach
LEAD: Amy Elizabeth Bach, a daughter of Linda J. Bach and Richard J. Bach, both of New Rochelle, N.Y., and James Lobach Kaufman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Kaufman of New Rochelle and New York, were married yesterday at the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Smith, an


School Football; Coach's Son Makes A Name for Himself
LEAD: Once there was a quarterback at East Islip High School with the name Norman Julius Esiason.
He became more famous at the University of Maryland and then with the Cincinnati Bengals under the nickname Boomer, which he got because of the way he kicked inside his mother before he was born.


Review/Television; Tracing the Art of the West, Starting in Greece, in 9 Parts
LEAD: Nothing less than 2,500 years of Western art is the subject of ''Art of the Western World,'' a nine-part series that begins tonight at 9 o'clock on Channel 13 and at 10 o'clock on Channels 21, 49 and 50.
This big American-British-Austrian-Spanish production is as rewarding a survey course as television has given us, filled with images and ideas that linger after each hour ends and may even send people out to museums.


GLEN RIDGE BOARD IS EXONERATED
LEAD: The Glen Ridge Board of Education acted properly in its handling of a sexual attack on a special-education student, according to a report by a retired judge.


Fraud Cost Up at Ferranti
LEAD: Ferranti International P.L.C., the British electronics company, said on Friday that a fraud involving phantom contracts at a United States subsidiary would cost it $:185 million ($299 million), far more than it had estimated.


Review/Theater; No Chance at Bat, In Baseball and in Life
LEAD: It is the premise of Tom Ziegler's ''Home Games'' (which opened last night at the Hudson Guild Theater) that behind Yogi Berra and Elston Howard, the 1955 New York Yankees had a third, reserve catcher, a bush leaguer named Tony Tucker, who spent exactly one year in the majors.
Actually that year, Howard was generally in the outfield and the Yankees had another backup catcher, Charlie Silvera, who was not - by any stretch of the imagination - the basis for


Tina Weis Weds Charles R. Grant
LEAD: Christine Anne Weis, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Joseph F. Weis Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Charles Robert Grant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Grant of Sydney, Australia.
The Rev.
David Donovan officiated at St.
Aidan's Roman Catholic Church in Brookline, Mass.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


A Battle of Wits In 2 Windy Parks
LEAD: THEY are two teams with creative and formidable offenses and with creative and formidable managers who freely call pitchouts, squeeze bunts and the hit-and-run.
And when they open the National League playoff Wednesday night at Wrigley Field, Don Zimmer of the Chicago Cubs and Roger Craig of the San Francisco


Review/Ballet; A Century of Passions, Posters, Toe Shoes and a Wedding Bouquet
LEAD: The passion that Russians feel for ballet is embodied in ''100 Years of Russian Ballet, 1830-1930'' an exhibition from Leningrad that is rich in revelations about the sometimes uneasy history of the Soviet Union's most celebrated art form.


China Calls TV Tale Subversive
LEAD: Television programming has been blamed for many things, but China is perhaps the first country to accuse a program of helping sow the seeds of a counterrevolutionary rebellion.


Boy in Coma After Falling Down Airshaft
LEAD: A 12-year-old Brooklyn boy was in critical condition at Bellevue Hospital last night after a four-story fall down an airshaft Saturday afternoon.


Let Nicaragua Vote Without Our Intervention; Marines Didn't Do It
LEAD: To the Editor:


WARD YEARS: LEAVING A MARK ON POLICE
LEAD: He intimidated people.
He was short on tact, impatient with failure and determined to leave his mark on the largest police department in the country.


Danger of Political Surrogates Is Seen in Mason Controversy
LEAD: Who would have thought two weeks ago that a borscht belt comedian would become a major issue in the New York mayoral race?
Probably no one.


Review/Opera; 'Il Trittico' Substitutes
LEAD: No one who saw Teresa Stratas in her first-night performance of ''Il Trittico'' last Tuesday at the Metropolitan Opera could have been entirely surprised that she canceled the second one Friday night.
The soprano had played Puccini's three one-act operas with manic intensity, and sometimes seemed to be getting through on sheer nerves.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Arizona Commerce Bank, Tucson, named John Reardon senior vice president for marketing.


Why Subsidize Gridlock?
LEAD: A growing crush of commuter traffic threatens the economic vitality and air quality of the nation's cities.
Yet present Federal tax policy actively encourages people to drive to work.
Legislation now pending in the Senate could help erode this perverse tax bias.


Most-Wanted Fugitive Caught in Pennsylvania
LEAD: The F.B.I. captured one of its ten most wanted fugitives today when a television viewer's tip led to the arrest of a New York City man wanted on murder charges.


What's In, What's Not
LEAD: Asking sportswriters and broadcasters what sports should be in the Olympics is like asking letter carriers what letters they should carry.


Clues and Adornment: The Score of 'Intolerance'
LEAD: When Peter Williamson, the film curator at the Museum of Modern Art, got a grant to restore the original version of D. W. Griffith's ''Intolerance,'' he wondered whether the musical score might be any help.
He looked around to find out who had done work on music for silent films and put in a call to Gillian B.


Georgia Woman and Child Die As Tornado Hits Trailer Park
LEAD: A woman and a toddler were killed and 12 people were injured when a tornado destroyed a trailer park and a church in a 10-mile rampage in southern Georgia today.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday  Construction Spending Aug.
Purchasing Managers Index Sept.
Tuesday  New-Home Sales Aug.
Factory Orders Aug.
Wednesday  New-Car Sales Sept.
Thursday  None


Stocks Post Solid Gain in Quarter
LEAD: Over the last three months, the stock market showed surprising strength and resilience, advancing on takeover activity and on encouraging economic data, despite an unstable ''junk bond'' market and expectations of lower corporate profits.


Dunston In Full Stride
LEAD: WHEN all those strangers came to watch in the spring of 1982, leaning on the outside of the chain-link fence where the baseball team at Thomas Jefferson High School played, there was little doubt about the abilities of the 18-year-old they had come to see.


Black Fraternities Thrive, Often on Adversity
LEAD: Black fraternities and sororities, long criticized by other blacks as divisive and elitist, are attracting record numbers of young people, particularly on many predominantly white campuses shaken by racial tension.


Exxon Cleanup Looked Like a Mini D-Day
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mechanical Problems Force 2 Unscheduled Jet Landings
LEAD: A United Airlines jetliner carrying 147 people made an emergency landing yesterday in New Orleans when a hydraulic system failed, and an Eastern Airlines plane made a unscheduled landing in Texas after an engine shut down, the authorities said.


Campaign Matters; Mason's Jokes, Jackson's Photo, Giuliani's Woes
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign demonstrated last week the pitfalls of racial politics.
The campaign's apparent failure to capitalize on race represents what for a politician of any color is the ultimate ineptitude.


Britain Delay Sale of Stock
LEAD: The British Government said on Friday that it would postpone its sale of stock in the electricity industry for up to six months because of the complexity of its plans.


Senator Predicts Defeat for Tax Bill
LEAD: In unusually blunt language, the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, predicted today that he could marshal enough votes to block passage of the House-approved reduction in the capital gains tax rate.


Browns Finally Defeat Broncos
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns had been through all of this against Denver before.
A last-minute drive.
A critical fumble in the closing seconds.


Quietly, McGriff Makes His Mark
LEAD: The bags of mail are stuffed into an adjacent locker, a season's worth of unanswered correspondence.
Fred McGriff, the notoriously quiet first baseman for the Blue Jays, apparently eschews other forms of communication, as well.


'People's China' Celebrates, but Without the People
LEAD: The People's Republic of China celebrated its 40th anniversary today with colorful dances and fireworks, along with such stiff security that ordinary Chinese could not get within a mile of the birthday party in Tiananmen Square for ''People's China.''


Charles Rostov, 74, Retired Import Executive
LEAD: Charles I. Rostov, retired president and chief executive officer of the Trans-Ocean Import Company, a home furnishings importer in Manhattan, died of a heart attack Friday in Budapest, where he was traveling.
He was 74 years old and lived in Greenwich, Conn.


World Stock Markets Gained in 3d Quarter
LEAD: With few exceptions and little variation, stock markets around the world posted strong gains in the third quarter.


A New Flood Swamps Charleston: Help
LEAD: The response to this region's appeal for hurricane assistance is overwhelming the network of warehouses, public buildings, schools and churches that distribute food and other material.


Pizza Delivery Car Hits and Kills a Man
LEAD: A 71-year-old man was killed early yesterday when he was struck by a pizza delivery car, the Suffolk County police said.


Walter O'Meara, 92, Author and Executive
LEAD: Walter O'Meara, a former New York advertising executive and author of 16 books, died of heart disease Friday at his home in Cohassett, Mass.
He was 92 years old.


Irene D. Sann Is Married
LEAD: Irene D. Sann and Hervey M. Johnson, professors of law at Pace University in White Plains, were married yesterday at the Lumberton, N.C., home of the bridegroom's mother, Mary Patterson Johnson.
The Rev.
Samuel B. Shumate, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Johnson is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.


Karin G. Greene, Designer, Marries
LEAD: Karin Goodwin Greene, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Greene Jr. of Zionsville, Pa., and Peter Gerard McCann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. McCann of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., were married yesterday at the Gideon F. Egner Memorial Chapel at Muhlenberg College in Allentown, Pa.
The Rev.
John Mraz, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by the bride's uncle the Rev.


Europe Takes On Auto Pollution
LEAD: With environmental concerns rising and the influence of the European Community growing, the nations of Western Europe have begun to take united action to curb air pollution from automobiles.


Books of The Times; A Book Catalogue as Reference and Revolution
LEAD:  The Reader's Catalogue  An Annotated Selection of More than 40,000 of the Best Books in Print in 208 Categories  Edited by Geoffrey O'Brien, with Stephen Wasserstein and Helen Morris  Illustrated. 1,382 pages.
Jason Epstein, publisher.
Distributed by Random House.
Paper, $24.95.


Fourth 'Quality' Sunday Paper Enters in Britain
LEAD: Are enough British readers of the three established ''quality'' Sunday newspapers so dissatisfied with what they get in The Observer, The Sunday Times and The Sunday Telegraph that they will try something new?


Question Box
LEAD:  Twice a Met


Rise in Rates Seen as Temporary
LEAD: Credit market analysts say that long-term interest rates, which have tested the upper limits of a 7.75 to 8.25 percent range recently, could move higher still in coming weeks.


Dissension on McLaren Team
LEAD: For all its domination of the Formula One championship series the last few years, the McLaren team has been split this year by dissent.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: * Mike Walsh has been named chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather/London.


The Sony Deal Aside, Japan Not Rushing to Buy Up U.S.
LEAD: These are heady days for American practitioners of the takeover game here.
There is the $3.4 billion takeover of Columbia Pictures by the Sony Corporation.
And a number of big corporate breakups in the United States have sent investment bankers skittering all over town trying to peddle multibillion-dollar companies.


Packers Rally to Defeat Falcons, 23-21
LEAD: Chris Jacke, a rookie, kicked a 22-yard field goal with 1 minute 42 seconds left, capping a 17-point fourth-quarter rally today as the Green Bay Packers beat the Atlanta Falcons, 23-21.


China Culture Official Remains in Favor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Australia Arrests Protesters
LEAD: The police arrested more than 200 people today while breaking up the latest in a series of antinuclear protests at an Australian-American military intelligence-gathering base.
Officers said 217 of the 500 protesters were arrested in the base's outer security zone, bringing the arrest total in five days of the protests to 490.


China Celebration Is Muffled in Security


Stake in Harley Held by Group
LEAD: Malcolm I. Glazer, a Rochester businessman, and members of his family, disclosed that they had acquired a 6.24 percent stake in Harley-Davidson Inc. and might seek control of the Milwaukee-based motorcycle manufacturer.


Review/Television; A Tour of the 'Hidden City' Underground
LEAD: ''Hidden City'' takes us uptown, downtown and, mostly, undertown in an exploration of the methods and machines that make possible the improbable, keeping New York running.
The opening hour of the new season of ''Nova'' at 8 o'clock tonight on Channels 13 and 49 and at 9 on Channel 21, shows how seven million people get their electricity and water and get rid of their trash and sewage.


Let Manila Use Its Aid For Police, Quayle Says
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that the Bush Administration was considering asking Congress to let the Philippines use some of its American aid to build up its internal security.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  U.S.
Gains Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert each won a singles match today to lead the United States, the top-seeded team, past Greece in the first round of the Federation Cup in Tokyo.
Evert, who recently retired from Grand Slam competition, needed only 43 minutes to beat Christina Papadaki, 6-0, 6-1.


Violinist Placed on Probation
LEAD: A violinist who has won international acclaim was placed on three years probation today on drug charges.
The violinist, Eugene Fodor, pleaded guilty to breaking and entering but not guilty to the drug charges.
The 39-year-old New York City violinist pleaded guilty to breaking into a Martha's Vineyard motel room, where he was found July 27 with 20 grams of cocaine and a hypodermic needle with a small amount of heroin.


Bears Stay Undefeated as They Beat the Eagles, 27-13


No Need for the Execution Express
LEAD: When Justice William Rehnquist suggested several years ago that death penalty cases be put on a faster track than other criminal appeals, the idea seemed ghoulish and commanded only his vote on the Supreme Court.
But as Chief Justice, he insisted on appointing a committee of judges to study execution delays.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Lockheed Expecting Loss of $35 Million
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that it would take a charge of about $165 million against third-quarter earnings because of cost overruns on two aircraft-development contracts.
The charge will result in a loss of about $35 million in the quarter, the company said.


Review/Comedy; Hope, Burns and a Chair With an Ashtray
LEAD: So the other day this reporter calls up George Burns.
And she asks him if it's true he chases girls, that he drinks four or five martinis a day, that he smokes 15 or 20 cigars. ''Yes,'' he says. ''What does your doctor say?'' she asks. ''My doctor's dead.'' George Burns, thank goodness, is very much alive.


The World of an Addict in Moscow
Georgi Gavrilov's ''Confession: a Chronicle of Alienation'' is a cool, memorably level-headed documentary feature about a young Moscow drug addict named Lesha, who is very sad, lost, gallant and Russian.
''What will be will be,'' the boyish-looking Lesha says at the film's beginning. ''My fate is in God's hands.
I don't have any future, and I don't care.''


Being Nice or Rotten in Writing
LEAD: You might not think in first meeting Cynthia Ozick that savage literary thrusts and volcanic flows of shrewd observation could emerge from the pen - or, as she has put it, from ''the wet substance, ink or blood'' - of this gentle figure of a Jewish mother.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark IV Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
213,200,000
108,800,000
Net inc
b10,200,000
c6,100,000
Share earns
1.02
.57
6mo sales
429,600,000
210,400,000
Net inc
b16,300,000
c13,700,000
Share earns
1.60
1.27


U.S. Securities Prices Are Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed in slow trading yesterday.


Groupe Beaugarte reports earnings for Year to May 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Groupe Beaugarte
Year to May 21
1989
1988
Revenue
7,539,814
6,079,510
Net inc
292,582
515,458
Share earns
.07
.12
The company said its decision to abandon a restaurant project in Montreal resulted in a loss of $133,026 in the latest year.


Soviet Envoy Tells U.S. of Mental Hospital Reform
LEAD: In an unusual move, a senior Soviet Embassy official appeared before a Congressional committee today and said Moscow had created a new independent commission to insure that mental hospitals would not be used to incarcerate political prisoners.


Rotech Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rotech Medical Corp. (OTC)
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,816,341
9,581,727
Net inc
823,495
b998,481
Share earns
.19
-
b-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued and disposed operations of $995,693.


Amplicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amplicon Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,015,000
28,376,000
Net inc
1,401,000
2,680,000
Share earns
.22
.40
Yr rev
137,905,000
95,803,000
Net inc
5,209,000
b9,889,000
Share earns
.81
1.51


Devils Choose Nilsson In the Waiver Draft
LEAD: The Devils selected Kent Nilsson, the Swedish center, in today's National Hockey League waiver draft.


Volcanoes Seen on Triton
LEAD: A CLOSE examination of Voyager 2 photography has revealed the first direct evidence of active volcanoes on Neptune's moon Triton, scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced yesterday.


Cray Cutting Its Computer Work Force
LEAD: Citing advances in manufacturing technology and the switch to a more advanced supercomputer model, Cray Research Inc., said yesterday that it planned to lay off about 400 of its assembly workers, about 7 percent of its 5,400 workers worldwide.


Washington at Work; An Image Polisher Leaves Nevada Neon to Sharpen a 'Beige' White House
LEAD: He is a friend of Wayne Newton.
His clients have included Frank Sinatra and Donald Trump.
He wears well-cut Italian suits, Hermes ties, Bally loafers and a $3,000 Bertolucci watch.
He drives a Mercedes sedan with a cellular phone.


Lure of 300th Victory Keeps Ryan Pitching
LEAD: An opportunity to achieve 300 career pitching victories by picking up just 11 more triumphs in 1990 will lure Nolan Ryan back into a Texas Ranger uniform next season.
This season, the 42-year-old Ryan ran his career strikeout total over the 5,000 mark and became the oldest man to strike out 300 batters in a season.


Drug Figure's Mother Offers Plea
LEAD: The mother of a major drug figure, Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, pleaded guilty yesterday to a reduced Federal charge that could enable her to avoid a prison term.


Two AIDS Cases Traced to Oral Sex
LEAD: The city's Health Department says it has documented two cases in which men have become infected with the AIDS virus through oral sex.


Zenith To Sell PC Subsidiary
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation said today that it would sell its computer business to Groupe Bull, France's largest computer manufacturer, for about $635 million.


ICI Plant to Make Safer Refrigerant
LEAD: ICI Americas Inc., a subsidiary of the British chemical giant Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C., said it would build a plant in Louisiana to make an environmentally safer alternative to ozone-depleting chloroflourocarbons.
Chloroflourocarbons are used as the cooling agent in refrigerators and air-conditioners and in producing plastic foams and pharmaceuticals.


Safety Isn't a Luxury Item
LEAD: If you've never heard of ABS - the acronym for antilock braking system - then, like the vast majority of consumers, you probably have less than $20,000 to spend on a new car.


Polymeric Resources Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polymeric Resources Corp. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
22,727,540
16,864,737
Net inc
420,185
307,225
Share earns
4.03
2.93
The increase in latest year's net income and share earnings was due primarily to the implementation of FASB 96 of about $153,000, or $1.46 a share.


New Data Scheme's Potential and Pitfalls
LEAD: THIS could be the start of something big.


Nations Agree to Extension Of Coffee Pact for 2 Years
LEAD: A two-year extension of the International Coffee Agreement has received the necessary backing of importing and exporting nations, allowing it to take effect without new provisions for price supports, officials said today.


Autoclave Engineers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autoclave Engineers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,414,000
15,727,000
Net inc
1,002,000
b1,186,000
Share earns
.23
.27
Shares outst
4,300,460
4,345,216
b-Included a gain from discontinued operations of $554,000.


Avon to Sell Unit
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said that the Valentino Group would buy back the Valentino fragrance business and properties from Avon's Parfums Stern subsidiary for about $12.3 million.
Avon said Stern has marketed Valentino fragrances worldwide under a license from Valentino Perfumes for the last four years.


Community Psychiatric reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
80,278,000
66,461,000
Net inc
b19,958,000
c17,319,000
Share earns
.43
.38
9mo rev
250,609,000
200,941,000
Net inc
b63,933,000
c53,886,000
Share earns
1.38
1.17


I.B.M. to Cut Work Force
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would offer special payments to people who quit or retire at four locations, a step that is expected to cut 600 to 1,000 jobs.


New Fight in Old West: Farmers vs. Condo City
LEAD: The gentrification of the American West, promoted by some people as the best economic hope for the future of many communities that have fallen on hard times, is meeting stiff resistance in this alpine valley on the western side of the Teton Range.


People
LEAD: *
David Johnson and Rich Martel have been named senior vice presidents of BBDO New York.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Zenith Electronics is leaving the computer business.
In a surprising announcement, the company said it would sell the division to Groupe Bull for about $635 million in an attempt to concentrate on its consumer electronics.  [ Page D1. ]  Zenith is cashing in one of its most valuable chips to bet on the risky new technology of high-definition television, analysts said.


High Court's Support Asked On Yonkers Housing Fines
LEAD: In a case that may determine how much power Federal courts have to enforce desegregation orders, the Bush Administration asked the Supreme Court today to uphold personal fines imposed by a Federal judge last year against four city councilmen from Yonkers.


Andean Culture Found to Be As Old as the Greaty Pyramids
LEAD: ARCHEOLOGISTS working in Peru have unearthed stunning evidence that monumental architecture, complex societies and planned developments first appeared and flowered in the New World between 5,000 and 3,500 years ago - roughly the same period when the great pyramids were built in Egypt and the Sumerian city-states reached their zenith in


Dr. Mary Paduano, 43, Professor of Nursing
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Ann Paduano, professor of nursing at the Lienhard School of Nursing at Pace University, died Sunday after a long illness at Rosary Hill Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
She was 43 years old and lived in White Plains.


Bergen Brunswig reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bergen Brunswig (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
997,841,000
898,970,000
Net inc
10,718,000
7,715,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Shares outst
29,282,000
23,136,000
Yr rev
3,923,169,000
3,486,368,000
Net inc
47,617,000
b34,730,000
Share earns
1.85
1.51
Shares outst
25,797,000
23,003,000


The Turmoil On Madison Ave.; A special report.; Shifts in Marketing Strategy Jolting Advertising Industry
LEAD: After five years of stagnation, the American advertising industry is facing a dim and uncertain future.


HOUSE PANEL VOTES STRICT NEW LIMITS ON CAR POLLUTION
LEAD: A House subcommittee voted unanimously today to tighten automobile tailpipe emission controls, establishing national pollution standards as strict as California's.


Stinkbird Takes a Resemblance Another Step
LEAD: A South American jungle bird nicknamed the stinkbird has a digestive system similar to a cow's, ornithologists in Venuzuela have discovered.


Fund Shortage For Eurotunnel
LEAD: Directors of the effort to build a tunnel under the English Channel said today that they would have to raise more money because of a 40 percent increase in the estimated cost of linking Britain and France by rail in 1993.


Tranzonic Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tranzonic Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
24,771,500
20,408,600
Net inc
1,190,100
1,103,700
Share earns
.33
.30
6mo sales
47,055,100
39,049,900
Net inc
b2,848,900
2,501,100
Share earns
.78
.69


A Big Gamble From Zenith On High-Definition TV
LEAD: In deciding to sell its personal computer business, the Zenith Electronics Corporation is cashing in one of its most valuable chips to bet on the risky new technology of high-definition television, analysts said.


Southern Hospitality Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Hospitality Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,794,000
5,852,249
Net inc
101,688
b376,251
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
5,536,566
4,881,244
b-Net loss


Commonwealth Mortgage of America L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Mortgage of America L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,540,000
27,562,000
Net loss
4,467,000
16,148,000
Yr rev
101,824,000
137,461,000
Net loss
28,439,000
28,935,000


McNeil Apologizes to Coach for Sitting Down
LEAD: Freeman McNeil says he has learned that a football player should not stop to feel sorry for someone he has injured.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dean Foods Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
427,038,000
381,343,000
Net inc
12,823,000
12,262,000
Share earns
.49
.46
Shares outst
26,257,000
26,758,000


Ecumenical Bible in Current English
LEAD: The Revised English Bible, described by a former Archbishop of Canterbury as the ''first truly ecumenical Bible,'' has been published by Oxford and Cambridge University Presses.


British Laborites Abandon Arms Stance
LEAD: The British Labor Party voted today to abandon a commitment to unilateral nuclear disarmament that its leader, Neil Kinnock, blamed for keeping the party out of power for the last 10 years.


Foul Weather Hinders Storm Cleanup Efforts
LEAD: Rain, floods and a tornado dealt new blows today to people trying to rebuild towns devastated by Hurricane Hugo.


Xicor Inc. reports earnings for 12wk to Sept 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xicor Inc. (OTC)
12wk to Sept 10
1989
1988
Revenue
21,223,000
21,547,000
Net inc
863,000
3,824,000
Share earns
.05
.21
Shares outst
18,161,000
18,520,000
36wk rev
65,171,000
62,400,000
Net inc
6,049,000
10,685,000
Share earns
.33
.61
Shares outst
18,271,000
17,584,000


Pope and Runcie See Snag to Reunion
LEAD: Pope John Paul II and the Most Rev.
Robert Runcie, the Archbishop of Canterbury, ended four days of talks today, pledging to reunite their long-divided churches.


Phone Debentures Are Priced at Par
LEAD: The Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia offered $100 million of debentures yesterday through an underwriting syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The 8 3/8 percent debentures, which have a final maturity date of Oct. 1, 2029, carry a ''put,'' at par, or $100, on Oct. 1, 1999.


Braniff Starts Some Flights
LEAD: With a $49 one-way fare to attract passengers, Braniff Inc. resumed about 20 percent of its 256 daily flights.
The carrier was virtually shut last week as it filed its second bankruptcy reorganization in seven years.


Kangaroos Sets Merger
LEAD: Jumping-Jacks Shoes Inc. reached a preliminary agreement last week to merge with Kangaroos U.S.A.
Inc., a privately held shoe company.
The agreement calls for Jumping-Jacks shareholders to own a 20 percent equity stake in the combined operations, with the rest being owned by Kangaroos shareholders.


Higher Benefits for Some Veterans Backed
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved a 4.9 percent cost-of-living increase in benefits today for some 2.5 million disabled veterans and their survivors.


Bensonhurst Slaying Suspect Is Injured in Brooklyn Prison
LEAD: Joseph Fama, the 18-year-old white youth accused of shooting a black teen-ager to death in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, suffered a slight injury under the right eye, apparently at the hands of a guard at the Brooklyn House of Detention last week, authorities said yesterday.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of United States rigs drilling for oil and gas rose last week by 11, to 978, Baker Hughes Inc., the oilfield services company, said yesterday.
A year ago, there were 918 rigs in operation.
The weekly rig count reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil and gas, not those producing oil and gas.


CHINA WARNS U. S. ON INTERFERENCE
LEAD: The Chinese Foreign Minister said yesterday that his country's relations with the United States were ''at a crossroads.'' He said relations could improve if America accepted the premise that China has a different political system that should not be criticized.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the annual animal blessing at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine misidentified the presiding minister.
He was the Right Rev.
Paul Moore Jr., Episcopal Bishop of New York, not Bishop James Parks Morton, Dean of the cathedral.


No Charges in Striker's Death
LEAD: No criminal charges will be filed in the death of a striking Nynex worker who was injured while picketing, the Westchester County District Attorney said today.
The District Attorney, Carl Vergari, said a county grand jury concluded that there was ''no chargeable criminal conduct'' in the death.
Edward Horgan, 34 years old, of Valley Cottage in Rockland County, died after he jumped on a car on Aug.


Peace for Peace
LEAD: Every year about this time a particularly unpleasant piece of nastiness takes place at the United Nations, a ritual of hatred and hypocrisy.


IN A DIZZYING DAY, 2,500 MORE SEEK REFUGE IN PRAGUE
LEAD: More than 2,500 East Germans sought refuge today in the West German Embassy here, hoping to join more than 6,000 other East Germans who were allowed to travel from Czechoslovakia to West Germany over the weekend.
The East Berlin Government demanded that Bonn not allow the latest refugees to remain in the embassy.


The Pioneer In Portables Issues Update
LEAD: THE portable computer arena has been especially busy in recent months, with introductions of machines ranging from the one-pound Poqet and Atari computers to the 17-pound Apple Macintosh Portable.
Last week the Tandy Corporation of Fort Worth, Tex., whose classic Model 100 started the whole lightweight portable industry several years ago, unveiled its next-generation machine, the 1100


Anchor President Quitting In Wake of Reorganization
LEAD: The Anchor Savings Bank said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, William G. Schneider Jr., had notified the bank that he was resigning, Mr.
Schneider, 48, told the bank that a management reorganization in July reduced his duties and, as a result, became an ''event of termination'' under his contract.


Becker Milk Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becker Milk Co.
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
115,281,490
107,138,519
Net inc
1,298,839
1,833,018
Share earns
.75
1.06
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Governor of Puerto Rico Denies Promising a Contract to Wedtech
LEAD: Rafael Hernandez-Colon, the Governor of Puerto Rico, yesterday contradicted the Federal Government's main witness against Representative Robert Garcia.
He said he had ''absolutely not'' promised an island government contract to officials of the Wedtech Corporation after Mr.
Garcia ushered them into the Governor's residence in San Juan in 1985.


New Drug Treatment For Colon Cancer
LEAD: A drug used to deworm farm animals combined with a common cancer drug has been found to save the lives of patients with an advanced type of colon cancer, the National Cancer Institute announced today.


Henderson in the No. 1 Spot Gives Athletics Their Gusto
LEAD: He swung a bat and then sat down, and in the moment that it took Rickey Henderson to look into the sky this afternoon, a crowd had gathered.
But he did not flinch; attention almost seems to soothe him.


Trade Group Names Officers
LEAD: The Association of National Advertisers chose new officers for the coming year.
John E. Ruhaak, the vice president of advertising and promotion at United Airlines, was elected chairman.
He succeeds Joseph J. Doherty, a vice president at the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation.


Careers; Shortage Of Ph.D.'s on Campus Seen
LEAD: EDWARD T. LEWIS, 55 years old, a college president, and a poet by avocation, says that after years of overabundance there is a shortage of Ph.D's. ''We are beginning to see it now in the humanities, along with the usual shortages in engineering, mathematics, computer science and, to a lesser degree, in other sciences,'' he said last week.


Rite Aid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rite Aid Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
768,892,000
676,631,000
Net inc
20,268,000
18,942,000
Share earns
.49
.46
6mo sales
1,523,480,000
1,354,589,000
Net inc
44,637,000
42,572,000
Share earns
1.08
1.03


H.R.A. Chief Resigns Post After 3 Years
LEAD: William J. Grinker announced his resignation yesterday from the New York City Human Resources Administration after three tumultuous years in charge of the agency responsible for serving the city's most troubled and most vulnerable citizens.


Prof. William N. Fairbank, 72, Physicist and Pioneer in Quarks
LEAD: William M. Fairbank, whose work in low-temperature superconductivity for more than three decades involved some of the most difficult and subtle experiments in physics, died of a heart attack Saturday while jogging in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 72 years old.


Confusion on Quinn
LEAD: Although Bob Quinn denied again that he was leaving the Yankees, a source familiar with the situation said yesterday that the general manager was intending to step down at the end of the month to accept a position with another club.


Auto Insurance Rate Rises Halted
LEAD: The California insurance commissioner today barred automobile insurers from raising their rates for six months while the state grapples with how to put into effect a rate-cutting initiative approved by voters last year.


How to Help the Disabled Pay Their Own Way; Ingenuity Will Prevail
LEAD: To the Editor:


Apogee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apogee Enterprises (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
152,208,000
105,490,000
Net inc
b3,937,000
3,757,000
Share earns
.29
.28
6mo sales
282,279,000
197,526,000
Net inc
b6,747,000
6,174,000
Share earns
.50
.46


Beirut's Truce: Anxiety Takes Terror's Place
LEAD: After the shells and the rockets, it is uncertainty that is causing agony for most Lebanese.


Chess
LEAD: What is the difference between a detective story and a gambit?
One is a whodunit, and the other a who's going to do it.
Each one thrives on suspense.


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for 13wk to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hipotronics Inc. (AMEX)
13wk to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
6,606,527
5,268,400
Net inc
764,969
555,972
Share earns
.37
.27
39wk sales
19,362,626
15,800,695
Net inc
2,250,751
1,611,291
Share earns
1.09
.79


Sifting Through What Little the Battles Have Left
Two years after the end of the First World War, on the former battlefields of France, there is still grim business at hand.
And business it is: as the nightmare of war recedes, it has been replaced by bustling, impromptu forms of industry that call for their own curious brand of sang-froid.
Those who have undertaken, quite literally, to sift through the rubble do so with patience, fussiness, occasional opportunism, gallows humor and most of the same bureaucratic instincts they might bring to other, less catastrophe-laden lines of work.
It is the only way of bringing the horror to heel.
In the setting near Verdun where Bertrand Tavernier's ''Life and Nothing But'' takes place, the first stages of recovery have produced a constant hum of activity.
Soldiers are everywhere, an international group searching methodically for the dead and resting in the temporary barracks and restaurants that have sprung up to accommodate them.
Relatives of the missing, guided by desperate optimism and not really expecting anything but the worst, have also arrived upon the scene.
All are united by a deliberately short-sighted pragmatism that almost succeeds in making tragedy matter of fact.


Talking Business with Sikes of the F.C.C.; Communication Challenges Seen
LEAD: Alfred C. Sikes was sworn in as chairman of the Federal Communications Commission in August, succeeding Dennis R. Patrick, a Reagan appointee who was a champion of deregulation.
Mr.
Sikes, who is 49 years old, had been administrator of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, the communications policy arm of the Commerce


Johnson Is Certain Mets Will Dismiss Him
LEAD: Davey Johnson was back home in Florida yesterday, convinced that he was about to be dismissed as manager of the Mets and replaced by Bud Harrelson, and agitated that the management of the Mets had left him dangling in public with two years remaining on his contract.


INSIDE
LEAD: Rulings on Safety In the Workplace  The Supreme Court declined to block prosecution of a company accused of endangering workers.
Page A17.


PVC Container Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PVC Container Corp. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
28,935,361
30,275,099
Net inc
407,245
b714,831
Share earns
.07
.11
b-Included a $330,000, or 5 cents a share, adjustment due to a reduction in the company's deferred income tax liability complying with the requirements of FASB No.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Anthony M. Franco Inc., Detroit, a public relations firm, named Claire K. Coleman senior vice president in its New York office.


Conquering the Wishbone Behind a Small Force
LEAD: People hear about this elusive little Air Force Academy quarterback named Dee Dowis, whose statistics have turned him into a Heisman Trophy candidate, and the same questions always arise.


From Vacant Lots to Safe Havens for Children
LEAD: In city neighborhoods where fearful children have grown accustomed to playing on rooftops, five new playgrounds have sprouted like tiny islands of green in a desolate gray sea.


Memorial for Giamatti
LEAD: Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the president of Yale University, heads the list of speakers at a memorial service Friday honoring A. Bartlett Giamatti, the former president of Yale who was the commissioner of baseball when he died of a heart attack Sept. 1 at the age of 51.


The Editorial Notebook; Don't Fiddle With the Fed; It's the Politicians Who Need Discipline
LEAD: The Federal Reserve System's independence constantly frustrates idealistic populists, economic monetarists and Presidents uncomfortable with the ambiguity of its powers.


Bears (4-0) Put Crunch On Eagles
LEAD: More than 10 months later, for too much of a cool, clear night, the Philadelphia Eagles were still in a fog at Soldier Field.


How the Blue Jays and the A's Line Up  Toronto Blue Jays  Catchers(average, home runs, r.b.i.)  12Ernie Whitt (.262, 11, 53)  Last remaining player from the Blue Jays' 1976 expansion draft. Left-handed bat makes him the likely starter against Oakland, despite 9-for-57 slump (.158) at finish.  10Pat Borders (.257, 1, 3)  Will serve primarily as Whitt's backup, although he took part in 94 games, had a good season and finished with a small flourish.  Infielders(average, home runs, r.b.i.)  19Fred McGriff 1b (.269, 36, 92)  Season dragged at the end: no home runs since Sept. 4, a 10-for-73 slide. Still, he won the American League home run title and drew 44 walks in the last 42 games. Switched spots in the order with George Bell, batting third to see better pitches to hit.  2Nelson Liriano 2b (.263, 5, 53)  A switch-hitter who will probably start against right-handers. He has a good glove and exceptional speed.  4Manny Lee 2b (.266, 3, 34)  Usually plays against left-handed pitching. He batted .266 from both sides of plate and swung a strong bat in September.  17Kelly Gruber 3b (.290, 18, 73)  His second full season as the regular third baseman. He hit a career-best 18 home runs, tying Bell for second on the club.  1Tony Fernandez ss, (.257, 11, 64)  Defense was typically spectacular: six errors at short in 140 games. Headed for fourth Gold Glove, but also a threat with the bat (a career-high 11 homers) and speed (22 for 28 stolen bases).  Outfielders(average, home runs, r.b.i.)  3Mookie Wilson rf (.298, 2, 17)  Mets couldn't use him, but Blue Jays began to surge when he arrived in July trade. Hit .205 in New York, then close to .300 for Toronto. Gave team an emotional lift.  15Lloyd Moseby cf (.221, 11, 43)  Best years are behind him, but he still helped win Friday's game against Baltimore. Moved into the leadoff spot in the order recently. Team-leading 24 steals.  54Junior Felix lf (.258, 9, 46)  Good glove in right, but he had only four r.b.i. in the final 48 games and only four extra-base hits in the last 38.  Designated Hitter(average, home runs, r.b.i.)  11George Bell (.297, 18, 104)  Bad right elbow took him out of left field and into the d.h. role. Likely to stay there for the post-season. Had 100-plus r.b.i. for the third time in the last four years and 22-game hitting streak in August, the longest in the American League.  Starting Pitchers(record, e.r.a.)  37Dave Stieb rh (17-8, 3.35)  Led the club in victories. Pitched two one-hitters and one two-hitter, and took a perfect game into the ninth against the Yankees in August. Opposing batters hit .219 against him.  30Todd Stottlemyre rh (7-7, 3.88)  Good genes, son of former pitcher Mel. Matured into a fine pitcher after realizing he could not overpower hitters. Demoted earlier in the season to minors, but team won 9 of his last 11 starts.  22Jimmy Key lh (13-14, 3.88)  Had


Head of Trustees Resigns at SUNY
LEAD: The chairman of the board of trustees of the State University of New York said yesterday that he was resigning after 11 years because it was time for someone with ''new ideas.''


Simon Gluckman, 81, Accountant, Is Dead
LEAD: Simon Gluckman, an accountant and an executive, died of cardiac arrest Friday at Benedectine Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla., and Woodstock, N.Y.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Agrees to Rule on Use of Political Patronage
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether political patronage in hiring, promotion and transfers of government employees is constitutional.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about Augustus A. Busch Jr., brewer and owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals, referred incorrectly to one of his marriages.
At the death of his first wife, the former Marie Church, in 1930, the couple were still married; they did not divorce.


Panama Opposition Figures Are Arrested and Questioned
LEAD: Ricardo Arias Calderon, a prominent opposition leader, and eight companions were detained over the weekend for 20 hours and questioned about their efforts to deprive the Government of funds, the Panamanian military announced today.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The economy is sinking further each month.
If we do not stop this process, there will be no Soviet power.
It will be the end of perestroika.''  -Leonid I. Abalkin, a Deputy Prime Minister of the Soviet Union.  [ A1:1. ]


U.S. Cool to Housing Soviet Emigres in West Bank
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that while it wanted to help Israel with the cost of resettling Soviet Jewish emigres, it did not want to do anything to encourage or subsidize the construction of housing in the West Bank.


.251 Hitter Talking Baseball
LEAD: What with all the horrors that cross his desk on any given day, the President of the United States is not terribly disturbed by talk of young people staying up late to watch World Series games.


Review/Music; D'Leon's Energy and Salsa
LEAD: The band leader and bassist Oscar D'Leon brought his large orchestra into S.O.B.'s on Friday night for a typically exciting set.
Mr.
D'Leon is one of salsa's most energetic entertainers, and by mixing tightly and cleverly arranged material with his own nonstop dancing and fooling around, he packed the dance floor.


Epsilon Data Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epsilon Data Management Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,812,000
12,315,000
Net loss
847,000
b250,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
2,902,000
3,045,000
b-Net income


Huynh Tan Phat, Vietcong Aide And Hanoi Official, Is Dead at 76
LEAD: Huynh Tan Phat, a leader of the Vietcong during the Indochina war and later a senior official in the Hanoi Government, died Saturday in Ho Chi Minh City.
He was 76 years old.


Eleanor Brown-Sheve, Medical Director, 64
LEAD: Eleanor Upton Brown-Shev, medical director for disability at A.T.&amp;T.
Communications Systems, died of a heart attack Sept. 16 while on a tour in Vienna.
She was 64 years old and had residences in Chatham, Mass., and Sausalito, Calif.


Gorbachev Calls for a Strike Ban, Saying Economy Is Near Collapse
LEAD: Warning that political unrest has brought the Soviet economy to the brink of collapse, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev called today for a 15-month ban on strikes and proposed other emergency powers to halt disruptions in industry and transport.


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 8
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marriott Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 8
1989
1988
Sales
1,930,000,000
1,670,000,000
Net inc
63,000,000
58,000,000
Share earns
.56
.50
36wk sales
5,603,000,000
5,004,000,000
Net inc
176,000,000
167,000,000
Share earns
1.56
1.39


Divi Hotels N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Divi Hotels N.V.  (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1989
1988
Revenue
34,197,000
29,028,000
Net inc
172,000
6,930,000
Share earns
.03
1.34
Yr rev
111,713,000
85,372,000
Net loss
11,455,000
b4,057,000
Share earns
-
.81
Shares outst
5,019,000
5,384,000


Salvadoran Leader, at U.N., Says He'll Propose Cease-Fire to Rebels
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador gave his personal backing today to peace negotiations with rebel forces arranged in Mexico City last month.


Steinberg Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steinberg Inc.
Year to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
4,452,904,000
4,584,685,000
Net inc
b59,226,000
c17,011,000
Share earns
2.40
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $4,027,000, or 19 cents a share.
c-Net loss and after an extraordinary loss of $4,099,000.


Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
453,357,000
373,114,000
Net inc
13,006,000
b6,173,000
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
117,291,000
111,996,000
6mo rev
804,458,000
783,625,000
Net inc
15,009,000
b10,501,000
Share earns
.10
.07
Shares outst
116,934,000
111,544,000


California Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Energy (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
18,034,000
4,053,000
Net inc
5,325,000
761,000
Share earns
.21
.03
Shares outst
25,005,000
23,537,000
9mo rev
37,024,000
8,990,000
Net inc
9,534,000
b372,000
Share earns
.38
-
Shares outst
24,904,000
18,915,000


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-13  More East Germans sought refuge in Bonn's embassy in Prague.
East Berlin demanded that Bonn not allow the more than 2,500 refugees to remain in the embassy.
Page A1  Moscow called for a ban on strikes for 15 months and proposed other powers to halt disruptions in industry and transport, which officials said has put the economy near collapse.


Court Refuses to Hear Occupational Safety Appeal
LEAD: The Supreme Court, turning down an appeal in one of the most closely watched business cases on its docket, refused today to intervene in an Illinois prosecution of a Chicago manufacturer accused of exposing employees to toxic chemicals.


Acid Rain and Fertilization Linked to Greenhouse Effect
LEAD: NITROGEN deposited in the soil by acid rain and as agricultural fertilizer may be promoting an atmospheric buildup of methane gas, a major contributor to the greenhouse effect, a new study suggests.


Working-Class Families Losing Middle-Class Dreams
LEAD: Gilbert and Debra Matthews enter every penny of his subway motorman's salary on the giant lined sketch pad that serves as their budget, only to find they keep coming up short.


Sun Coast Plastics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Coast Plastics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,158,000
14,702,000
Net inc
429,000
160,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Yr rev
57,875,000
35,575,000
Net loss
158,000
b133,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
14,925,332
14,660,930


Quality Food Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quality Food Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
85,305,000
53,645,000
Net inc
b3,440,000
1,719,000
Share earns
.36
.18
9mo sales
220,956,000
152,755,000
Net inc
b8,726,000
4,506,000
Share earns
.91
.47


Oakland Journal; 'Subway Series' Where Car Is King?
LEAD: In the control room of the Bay Area Rapid Transit system here, red and green lights blink and flicker, marking the progress of 45 trains moving whisper-soft along 71.5 miles of track.


Lake Champlain in Rapid Decline, Experts Say
LEAD: Lake Champlain is declining more rapidly than scientists had realized and is in desperate need of Federal assistance to slow the process, experts said here today at a symposium.


Bridge
LEAD: Defenders occasionally have the opportunity for the dunce-or-hero play.
In the diagramed example from the NEC Venice Trophy contest in Perth, Australia, last month it was a dunce-or-heroine option, since it was the world women's team championship.


MBIA Buying All of Stock In Bond Investors Guaranty
LEAD: Reflecting narrowing profit margins in the municipal bond insurance business, MBIA Inc., the industry's largest company, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy all the common stock in the Bond Investors Guaranty Insurance Company, the fourth largest, for $275 million in cash.


Commtron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commtron Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
128,394,000
121,721,000
Net inc
1,733,000
897,000
Share earns
.17
.09
Shares outst
10,167,698
10,035,907
Yr sales
549,974,000
475,076,000
Net inc
7,904,000
3,739,000
Share earns
.78
.37
Shares outst
10,105,757
10,016,409


Parcells Offers Praise for Giants' Attitude
LEAD: With a fourth of the season gone and the Giants' record now at four victories and no defeats, Bill Parcells made a team assessment today that balanced promise and caution.


Presbyterian Hospital in Union Pact
LEAD: In a departure from negotiations involving most of the New York City area's private hospitals, the Presbyterian Hospital reached a tentative agreement yesterday with a union representing its health-care workers.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Banker's Gray for Spring


Children at Risk Must Be Saved Very Young
LEAD: To the Editor:


City Playgrounds Sprout in 'Lots for Tots'


Mylan Cites Drug For Rise in Stock
LEAD: Mylan Laboratories Inc., whose stock price has risen more than 20 percent in the last week, said its shares could be gaining because of the positive response to the anti-Parkinson's disease drug, Eldepryl.
The drug is sold by Somerset Pharmaceuticals, which is jointly held by Mylan and the Bolar Pharmaceuticals Company.


Non-Socialists Forming Government in Norway
LEAD: Three moderate non-Socialist political parties agreed today to form a coalition government.
But with fewer seats in Parliament than the Socialist Labor Party, which they would replace, their prospects for maintaining power are widely viewed here as doubtful.


Motorola to Cut 2,500 Workers
LEAD: Motorola Inc. said it would reduce its 105,000-employee work force by 2,500, or 2.4 percent, and take a pretax charge of about $43 million in the third quarter to cover the cost of the voluntary severance program.
The company said the cut of salaried employees would be made mostly from its United States operations and would be effective immediately.


L.A. Gear Inc. reports earnings for Sales
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L.A. Gear Inc. (NYSE)
Sales
215,049,000
76,132,000
Net inc
22,022,000
8,699,000
Share earns
1.21
.50
9mo sales
450,729,000
159,852,000
Net inc
43,440,000
15,775,000
Share earns
2.47
.93
All share earnings adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split effective Sept.


Raleigh, N.C., Paper Closing
LEAD: The Raleigh Times, the evening sister paper in North Carolina's capital to the morning News and Observer, is ceasing publication on Nov. 30 after 110 years.


S.E.C. Sues Ex-Broker
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that it had charged a former broker for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company with stealing $500,000 from customers and using part of it to pay gambling debts.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 31 about ''Days of Rage,'' a documentary about the uprisings in the Israeli-occupied territories, referred incorrectly to financial backing of The Journal of Palestine Studies.
In a letter to The Times, Philip Mattar, executive director of the Institute for Palestine Studies, said the journal is underwritten solely by the institute and by Kuwait University, receiving no money from the Palestine Liberation Organization.


On Horse Racing; Facts and Bits to Boggle the Mind
LEAD: Here's a frightening thought: Imagine the clutter you would see if you looked inside a horseplayer's memory.


Cott Beverages reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cott Beverages
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
14,948,000
9,625,000
Net inc
528,000
701,000
Share earns
.17
.22
6mo sales
22,676,000
16,093,000
Net inc
853,000
1,101,000
Share earns
.27
.34
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Stocks Climb Broadly as Dow Rises 20.90
LEAD: Stocks reversed an early downtrend yesterday to register a solid and broad advance, but trading was slow.


Earnings Increase At the WCRS Group
LEAD: The WCRS Group P.L.C. said yesterday that its earnings more than doubled from the previous fiscal year.
The British advertising and marketing conglomerate reported pretax profits of $:38.1 million, or about $61.3 million.
Its earnings per share increased by 28 percent, to 29.91 pence, or 48 cents.


Forcible Conversion Is Alien to Buddhism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Is Coaxing Mr. Shamir Enough?
LEAD: The Bush Administration appears to be prodding Israel toward a dialogue with Palestinians by careful private squeezing and minimum public pressure.
That policy probably won't bring Prime Minister Shamir and his Likud coalition to the table.
But given Likud's central role in any negotiations, gentle persuasion is a sensible first step.


Cal-Star Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal-Star Financial Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,300,000
768,000
Net inc
288,000
35,000
Share earns
.33
.06
9mo rev
6,600,000
1,900,000
Net inc
136,000
12,000
Share earns
.15
.01


Victoria Creations Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Creations Inc. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
56,877,000
57,717,000
Net loss
2,705,000
1,386,000


Italian Areas Giving Giuliani a Strong Push
LEAD: The line of march for the Columbus Day parade up Fifth Avenue this Friday appears to be the reverse of where New York City's mayoral candidates stand with Italian-American voters.


The Wartime Spirit
LEAD: The Bush-Bennett ''war on drugs'' is not only underfinanced and misdirected toward predictably ineffective law enforcement rather than needed treatment.
Like any other war, it's sure to produce a dangerous wartime mentality that ''anything goes'' in pursuit of victory.


Satellite Information Systems Co. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Satellite Information Systems Co. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,405,240
2,244,422
Net inc
237,908
327,646
Share earns
.09
.12


Offstage Gains on Debt; As Bush Faces Harsh Criticism by Bankers, Some Countries Are Earnestly Negotiating
LEAD: While President Bush and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady have worked publicly in recent days to rebut criticism of the Administration's strategy for reducing third world debt, offstage developments demonstrate that important progress on debt is indeed being made.
In meetings at the


Clarus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarus Corp.
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
62,128,000
68,098,000
Net loss
523,000
b495,000
Share earns
-
.15
9mo sales
199,764,000
197,920,000
Net loss
808,000
b2,390,000
Share earns
-
.72
b-Net income


Amos Peaslee Jr., 66, a Mayor and Lawyer
LEAD: Amos J. Peaslee Jr., a lawyer and the Mayor of East Greenwich, N.J., died Friday at his home in Clarksboro, N.J.
He was 66 years old and had suffered a heart attack in April that left him in a coma.


Oldsmobile Offers Free Plane Tickets
LEAD: The Oldsmobile division of the General Motors Corporation said it was offering buyers of 1989 or 1990 Cutlass Supremes two free round-trip tickets on Delta Air Lines to anywhere in the continental United States or to Bermuda or Nassau, the Bahamas.


For Spring, a Soft, Romantic Turn
LEAD: The first spring styles emerging from Seventh Avenue design rooms have a soft, gentle air with a new fit that makes them kinder to the body. ''Romantic'' is the umbrella word that designers use when explaining their approach to the new season.


Slowdown Is Found Continuing
LEAD: The National Association of Purchasing Managers' index of economic activity showed a continuing slowing in the manufacturing sector in September.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AMR Corp., Dallas, acquired six Airbus Industries jets and options for six more, giving its American Airlines unit firm orders for 248 jets with options for 302 more.


Riser Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riser Foods Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 1
1989
1988
Sales
248,841,000
-
Net loss
b5,278,000
-
Yr sales
1,083,130,000
-
Net loss
b12,728,000
-
b-After an extraordinary non-recurring charge of $5,706,000 for settlement of litigation and associated legal fees for the quarter and year.


USX Is Planning to Sell Texas Oil Unit Reserves
LEAD: The USX Corporation, the giant steel and energy company, said yesterday that it planned to sell the reserves of its Texas Oil and Gas Corporation subsidiary.


Harold R. Fatzer Retired Judge, 79
LEAD: Harold R. Fatzer, former Chief Justice of the Kansas Supreme Court shot himself to death at his home on Saturday.
He was 79 years old.


Wisconsin Toy Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Toy Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
13,154,000
11,846,000
Net inc
387,000
632,000
Share earns
.08
.14
6mo sales
22,853,000
21,279,000
Net inc
320,000
1,141,000
Share earns
.07
.25


Risk to Fetus Ruled as Barring Women From Jobs
LEAD: If a factory job poses a potential risk to an unborn child, an employer may bar all fertile women from those jobs even if they are not pregnant or say they have no intention of getting pregnant, the Federal appeals court here has ruled.


How a Hormone Limits Appetite Is Discovered
LEAD: RESEARCHERS have identified how a hormone triggers the brain to tell the body when to stop eating, and they have discovered two chemicals that block the hormone's action.


14 U.S. Athletes Selected for Tests
LEAD: Fourteen American track and field athletes have been selected at random for the start this week of a new program of drug testing by The Athletics Congress.


Boston Bank Is Projecting Large Loss
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation said yesterday that it would report a loss of about $125 million for the third quarter after raising its reserves by $370 million to cover problem real estate loans and difficulties it had with a large loan to a heavily indebted company.


Rubicon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubicon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,065,000
459,000
Net loss
2,927,000
917,000
Yr rev
9,576,000
2,855,000
Net loss
2,630,000
2,366,000


Gains Seen By Chairman Of Northwest
LEAD: Alfred A. Checchi, who led the buyout team that won control of NWA Inc., left no doubt today that he would be involved in managing the company on a continuing basis and that he was in for the long term.


Addenda
LEAD: * McDermott Kilsby &amp; Co. has moved to 104 Fifth Avenue.


Stanley S. Joseloff, 82, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Stanley S. Joseloff, a radio and advertising executive, died of leukemia Sunday in Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven.
He was 82 years old and lived in Branford, Conn.


The Proper Time to Tell Doctors What Will Be Expected of Them
LEAD: SEVERAL leaders in medical education and health care say the risks and responsibilities of becoming a physician should be explained clearly to students before they enter medical school, not during training as is now customary.


Potomac Electric Power Co reports earnings for 12mo to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potomac Electric Power Co (NYSE)
12mo to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,366,520,000
1,336,739,000
Net inc
205,981,000
204,672,000
Share earns
2.08
2.07
Shares outst
94,519,000
94,448,000


Drug-Cartel Aide, Arrested, Is Now in a Colombian Jail
LEAD: An associate of the leaders of the Medellin cartel, one of Colombia's two main cocaine trafficking organizations, was jailed here today after being captured over the weekend in Ecuador.


How to Help the Disabled Pay Their Own Way; Facilities at Theater
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stock Fraud Indictment
LEAD: A man believe to have helped to mastermind one of the biggest international stock frauds was indicted today in Geneva, the Swiss news agency, ATS, reported.


Firefighter Believed He Was Watched
LEAD: The off-duty New York City firefighter who was shot and killed Sunday morning by a Federal agent apparently believed he was being investigated by the F.B.I., the authorities said yesterday.


Acklands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acklands Ltd.
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
113,307,000
110,968,000
Net loss
401,000
b358,000
Share earns
-
.08
6mo sales
221,933,000
220,357,000
Net loss
1,769,000
b1,279,000
Share earns
-
.26


Salute to Orioles
LEAD: The city of Baltimore gave the Orioles a parade through a rainy downtown yesterday and then about 1,200 fans gathered at the Inner Harbor's Festival Hall to salute the team.


Market Place; The Minuses of Prime-Plus Funds
LEAD: A new investment product that has attracted billions of dollars from investors has sparked a widening controversy and has even prompted an investigation by the securities industry.


Prices of Land Higher in Japan
LEAD: The cost of land rose nationwide in Japan, the National Land Agency reported today, but prices in Tokyo's residential areas fell for the first time since the Government began keeping records in 1975.


Cheney Meets With His Soviet Counterpart


DEALS
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CHICAGO (AL) - Purchased the contract of John Davis, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Jerry Hairston, designated hitter, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
MILWAUKEE (AL) - Named Larry Haney pitching coach.
Reassigned Tony Muser, hitting coach, to minor league instructor and scout.


McAdoo Steals Show
LEAD: Some 13,000 fans of Messaggero Roma of the Italian basketball league jammed the Palaeur Arena in Rome on Sunday night to greet two young players from the United States, Danny Ferry and Brian Shaw, who were expected to make a triumphant home-court debut.


I.B.M. Vice President Heads Rolm Venture
LEAD: The Rolm Company officially began operations yesterday as a joint venture of the International Business Machines Corporation and Siemens A.G. of West Germany, with H. Mitchell Watson Jr. at the helm.


How to Help the Disabled Pay Their Own Way
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hudson General reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson General (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
116,486,000
117,124,000
Net loss
b13,033,000
c310,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $10,042,000.
c-Net income and after a loss from discontinued operations of $2,129,000.


Leader Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leader Manufacturing
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,480,738
784,276
Net inc
b128,457
cd252,605
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
2,347,474
1,816,453
Net loss
b182,298
d523,934
b-Included extraordinary credits of $97,517, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and $126,152, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Mubarak Sees Bush and Cautions Israel on Rejecting Egyptian Plan
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt met President Bush today and said afterward that the Israeli Government would make ''a grave mistake'' if it failed to open discussions with Palestinians based on his latest suggestions.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
26,256,057
18,718,168
Net inc
3,224,286
2,613,197
Share earns
.34
.28
6mo rev
50,621,261
37,405,185
Net inc
6,144,485
5,230,295
Share earns
.65
.55


Our Towns; Camaraderie Changes a Y Into a Home
LEAD: When the evenings begin to grow chilly it is time for Mrs.
K to pick up a pack of turkey wings at the market and cook a pot of soup.
Then all the women boarding at the Y.W.C.A. are invited to come down the hall with their bowls to 202.


Walsh an Adept Fill-In, But Cowboys Still Fail
LEAD: When Jerry Jones, the Dallas Cowboys' owner, spent more than $15 million signing Troy Aikman and Steve Walsh, he explained the high cost of the two rookie quarterbacks this way: ''This may be my first year in the National Football League, but I do know that quarterbacks are a premium.
You never have enough good ones.


Review/Recital; Norwegian Seeks Extremes For the Cello
LEAD: Truls Mork, a cellist from Norway, seems drawn to music that allows him to move between the expressive extremes to which his instrument is best suited.
In the Grieg Sonata (Op. 36), for instance - the high point of his Saturday evening program at Weill Recital Hall - Mr.
Mork and his pianist, Juhani Lagerspetz, played with unbridled energy.


Yugoslav Inflation Soars
LEAD: Yugoslavia's annual inflation rate increased to 1,181 percent in September.
The Bureau of Statistics said inflation had increased by a monthly record of 287.2 percentage points, compared with 893.8 percent in August.
In September 1988, the inflation rate was 217 percent.


Sana Journal; With A Dagger in Its Belt, Yemen Is a State of Mind
LEAD: A Yemeni magazine editor pointed at the handle of the curved dagger thrust into his woven silk waistband and explained its origin by way of a gesture depicting the single horn of a rhinoceros.


Texas Court Rules Rich-Poor Gap In State School Spending Is Illegal
LEAD: The Texas Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the state's system for financing public schools is unconstitutional because of ''glaring disparities'' between what rich and poor school districts spend on education.


Designing a Plane for the Leap of Space (and Back)
LEAD: SCIENTISTS and engineers are making rapid progress in developing technologies needed to build a 17,000-mile-an-hour ''space plane'' that could escape earth's gravity and circle the globe in 90 minutes.
In an unusual cooperative effort directed by the Defense Department and NASA, scientists and engineers from leading aerospace companies are beginning to overcome daunting problems like finding exotic materials that can withstand temperatures of 3,000 degrees


Campaign Trail; The Cardinal Disapproves Of 'Evasion'
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, is protesting vigorously that he has no favorites in this year's mayoral race.
He even refused to make joint appearances with his good friend and co-author, Mayor Edward I. Koch, during the Democratic primary campaign.


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Dairy Queen (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
74,317,231
71,818,437
Net inc
8,338,071
7,694,971
Share earns
.89
.80
9mo rev
200,040,177
191,247,559
Net inc
18,845,901
16,529,644
Share earns
2.00
1.71


Video Superstores reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Superstores
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,382,301
5,742,025
Net inc
910,252
598,620
Share earns
.09
.05
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Former Reagan Aide for H.U.D. Denies Pushing Housing Projects
LEAD: A former White House aide in the Reagan Administration insisted today that he had not directed the Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide assistance to housing projects that were politically desirable.


Scottish &amp; York Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scottish &amp; York Holdings Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
29,300,000
30,200,000
Net inc
b2,790,000
1,610,000
Share earns
.09
.04
6mo rev
61,600,000
60,600,000
Net inc
b4,410,000
3,200,000
Share earns
.12
.08


Tokyo Chief Asks a Reappraisal
LEAD: In his first major policy speech as Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu sounded today much like Japan's critics, declaring that the time had come to lower domestic prices, halt a growing disparity between rich and poor, and stop ''concentrating single-mindedly on economic efficiency.''


A New Chapter in the Life of Story
LEAD: Story, the literary magazine that helped to discover such writers as William Saroyan, Truman Capote, J. D. Salinger and Carson McCullers in the 1930's and 40's, will be reborn this month, two decades after its demise.


Savings Agency Allocates $8 Billion for 5 Institutions
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency created by Congress to clean up the savings and loan industry, set aside almost $8 billion on Friday for five severely troubled savings institutions under its control, its officials said today.


Those High-Flying Orioles
LEAD: On April 29, 1988, after the Baltimore Orioles lost their 21st straight game en route to the worst record in baseball, we offered three words of comfort: Remember the Mets.
In 1969, a mere two years after finishing last for the sixth straight time, the Mets won their division, the pennant and the World


Mubarak Cautions Israel on Rejecting His Plan


Jaco Electronics reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jaco Electronics (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
62,577,899
53,734,685
Net inc
1,141,249
b1,732,033
Share earns
.78
1.19
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $571,000, or 39 cents a share.


Ford Prices Raised 4.9%
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company's 1990 model cars will cost an average of 4.9 percent more than comparably equipped 1989 vehicles, the company announced.
Ford said nearly half of the increase came because of Government-required passive safety devices like driver-side air bags or automatic seat belts.
The General Motors Corporation has announced a 3.4 percent average price increase, and the Chrysler Corporation, which will announce its prices within two weeks, has estimated its increase will be about 5 percent.


Mideast Peace: Bridge vs. Wedge
LEAD: Strange how in the Middle East making peace looks so similar to waging political war.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,893,000,000
1,894,000,000
Net inc
94,000,000
c120,000,000
Share earns
.91
.75
Shares outst
99,679,381
156,336,391
9mo rev
5,711,000,000
5,544,000,000
Net inc
b327,000,000
b25,000,000
Share earns
3.10
.11
Shares outst
102,323,430
155,964,311


Consumer Trust Steady
LEAD: Consumer confidence in the American economy was steady in September, after dropping sharply in August, the Conference Board said yesterday in a survey that suggested a recession was unlikely for the immediate future.
The business research group's Consumer Confidence Index totaled 115.4 in September, the same as the previous month.


Our Deposit Insurance Would Startle New Deal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stock Link By Nintendo
LEAD: Fidelity Investments, a Boston-based private investment mangement company, and the Nintendo Company of Japan, the world's largest video game manufacturer, said yesterday that they would team up to develop, produce and market a home trading system for financial services.


To Get His Museum, Opening in '92
LEAD: More than 700 paintings by Andy Warhol, as well as drawings, prints, photographs, sculptures, films and videotapes, will form the core collection of a museum devoted entirely to the artist's work, to open in 1992 in his hometown, Pittsburgh.


Acting S.E.C. Chairman
LEAD: President Bush today named Edward H. Fleischman, a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission since 1986, to be acting head of the panel.
Mr.
Fleischman, 57 years old, a former New York lawyer, will head the S.E.C. while the Senate considers the President's appointment of Richard C. Breeden, a White House aide, as permanent chairman.


Man Held in Crashes And Machete Attack
LEAD: A 39-year-old attacked a woman with a machete yesterday and hit two pedestrians with his car before slamming into a police station house, the police said.
The police said the man, Sergio Vega of 1535 Walton Avenue, the Bronx, was drugged, apparently on cocaine.


Girl's Mother Doubted Assault Report, Study Says
LEAD: School officials delayed informing the police of reports of a sexual assault against a retarded 17-year-old by a group of athletes because her parents declined to file a criminal complaint, a Board of Education report said today.


Kellogg Expects Lower Earnings
LEAD: The Kellogg Company said it expects its third-quarter earnings to be lower than in the corresponding period last year because of increasing competition for ready-to-eat oat bran cereal.
The announcement caused a sharp fall today in the company's stock, which lost $2.25 to close at $71.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.


By Design; Illusions of Youth
LEAD: There is a good reason so many heads of gray hair become blond.
Or why hair styles that stop at the chin line are better than those that fall to the shoulder.
These two are just a few of the illusionary tricks that trim time off a woman's age.


Cara Operations Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cara Operations Ltd.
Qtr to Sept 17
1989
1988
Sales
179,783,948
164,553,412
Net inc
10,551,000
8,617,000
Share earns
.28
.23
6mo sales
342,059,140
311,996,776
Net inc
16,482,000
13,427,000
Share earns
.43
.37


2 Unions Suing Texas Air
LEAD: The Air Line Pilots Association and the International Association of Machinists have filed a lawsuit against the Texas Air Corporation, its Eastern and Continental Airlines subsidiaries, two corporate officers and its largest shareholder.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.08
8.50
8.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.87
7.90
7.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.92
7.87
7.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.34
8.35
8.74
30-YR.


Immucor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,753,827
2,357,331
Net inc
444,934
277,136
Share earns
.12
.07
Shares outst
3,821,582
4,067,869


Books of The Times; World War II Los Angeles, as a Boy Sees It
LEAD:  The Year of the Zinc Penny  By Rick DeMarinis  174 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


A Modest Proposal For Presidential Visits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Refusal to Arbitrate Leaves City Opera Talks Stalled
LEAD: Negotiations in the strike by the New York City Opera's musicians remained at a standstill yesterday, despite a proposal by the company's chief negotiator that the dispute be submitted to binding arbitration.


Heavy Reading
LEAD: The weight of medical knowledge is increasing, but not as fast as it once was, a new study has found.


How to Help the Disabled Pay Their Own Way; Protects Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,735,000
16,107,000
Net inc
b93,000
c1,972,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
95,468,000
106,624,000
Net inc
b659,000
c1,122,000
Share earns
.13
-


Biology of Brain May Hold Key For Gamblers
LEAD: THE psychological forces that propel so many chronic gamblers to ruin marriages, lose jobs and even turn to crime may spring from a biological need for risk and excitement, a new study has found.


Steel-Import Curb Voted
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved President Bush's request for a two-and-a-half-year extension of arrangments with other steel-producing nations to restrict their exports to the United States to help the recovery of the domestic steel industry.


PMG Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PMG Financial
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
672,675
925,814
Net loss
b361,847
380,482
b-After a loss of $225,000 from discontinued operations.
The company recently changed its name from Peter Miller Apparel Group Inc.


Nevada Goldfields reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nevada Goldfields
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,096,000
21,444,000
Net loss
14,998,000
b2,871,000
Share earns
-
.29
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $191,000, or 2 cents a share.
The company said the 1989 loss included a non-recurring writedown of $8.2 million and depreciation, depletion and amortization of $7.6 million.


Univar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Univar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
353,931,000
339,419,000
Net inc
5,655,000
6,042,000
Share earns
.64
.69
Shares outst
8,876,764
8,796,814
6mo sales
713,549,000
663,392,000
Net inc
10,370,000
10,112,000
Share earns
1.17
1.15
Shares outst
8,864,234
8,778,951


Houghton Mifflin Will Buy Gollancz, British Publisher
LEAD: The Houghton Mifflin Company, one of the few remaining independent American book publishers, announced yesterday that it intends to purchase Victor Gollancz, a 60-year-old privately held British publishing house.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Visa Applicants Deluge Embassy in Moscow
LEAD: People lined up for blocks outside the American Embassy here today and snapped up more than 30,000 visa applications as new emigration rules went into effect.


Construction Spending Up For August
LEAD: The Government said today that construction spending had made its biggest monthly advance of the year in August.
The gain was in Government and nonresidential building, while single-family housing continued to sag.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
120,864,000
93,581,000
Net inc
4,185,000
2,669,000
Share earns
1.05
.65
Shares outst
3,993,613
4,344,170
9mo sales
311,020,000
262,803,000
Net inc
9,053,000
8,087,000
Share earns
2.27
1.86


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Billiards  Q. Is the Earth really as smooth as a billiard ball?
A. ''On average, certainly yes,'' said John O'Keefe of the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md.


Reaching Individual Consumers
LEAD: Giving voice to a contemporary trend in advertising, the chairman of the largest American-owned ad agency told marketing executives today that the most important factor affecting their businesses was ''a mass movement to individuality.''


Checkrobot Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkrobot Inc. (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,165,600
23,200
Net loss
b4,112,400
4,556,900
Shares outst
6,125,700
4,634,500
b-Included a loss from unconsolidated affiliate of $184,400.


Farmer Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farmer Brothers (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
50,856,984
47,291,222
Net inc
4,321,545
306,080
Share earns
2.24
.16
Yr sales
198,708,878
189,474,322
Net inc
14,548,735
11,248,677
Share earns
7.55
5.84


Blaming Others for Collapse of PTL, Bakker Completes Testimony
LEAD: Jim Bakker finished a day and a half of testimony at his fraud and conspiracy trial today by blaming his fellow evangelist Jerry Falwell, who took over the Bakker ministry, for its collapse.


Witold Rowicki, 75, Polish Conductor, Dies
LEAD: Witold Rowicki, who founded the Warsaw National Philharmonic Orchestra and was its conductor for nearly 25 years, died on Sunday, the official Polish press agency reported today.
He was 75 years old.


A Divorce Settlement Forces Out Founder
LEAD: As part of a divorce settlement, George E. Johnson, chairman and founder of the Johnson Products Company, resigned yesterday and transferred control of the company to his former wife, Joan B. Johnson, the company's board announced.
Their son, Eric G. Johnson, was named chief executive.


U.S. Cites New York In Sludge Dumping
LEAD: A Federal complaint has been issued against New York City for spilling sewage sludge into the East River.
The complaint, seeking $100,000 in civil penalties, was announced yesterday by the Environmental Protection Agency, which said the city dumped 328,000 gallons of sludge into the river on Sept 22.


Groups to Consider Proposals to N.C.A.A.
LEAD: With three months remaining before the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention, the N.C.A.A.'s Presidents' Commission will meet in Kansas City beginning today to approve legislation it will propose to the convention.


Coelho to Join Banking Firm
LEAD: Tony Coelho, the former United States Representative from California who resigned in June amid accusations of financial impropriety, said today that he was becoming a partner at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, an investment banking firm.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in Business Day on Thursday about fines paid by two banks to the Federal Reserve Board for improper recording of deposits reversed the amounts.
The National Bank of Greece paid a $125,000 fine.


Dollar Up in Quiet Trading Despite Central Bank Sales
LEAD: The dollar rose in quiet trading yesterday, resisting continued selling by central banks.
Gold prices were mixed. ''Trading was dominated by profit taking, with central bank intervention less effective,'' said Ronald Holzer, a currency broker with the Harris Trust and Savings Bank.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Sept. 25 about a rally of 10,000 Ukrainians in Kiev mistranslated the banner shown.
It called, in Ukrainian and Yiddish, for official restoration of ethnic and regional languages.


Japanese Get Music Stake
LEAD: A Japanese media group will pay about $150 million to buy a stake of just over 25 percent in the London-based Virgin Music Group, the world's sixth-largest record company, Virgin's managing director, Ken Berry, said today.


Conservative Picked for Kenya
LEAD: President Bush today announced his intention to nominate a conservative journalist, Smith Hempstone Jr., to be Ambassador to Kenya.
Mr.
Hempstone, 60 years old, a former executive editor of The Washington Times, wrote a syndicated column for that newspaper until his retirement a month ago.
In the 1960's, he worked as a foreign correspondent in Africa and Latin America for The Chicago Daily News.


Jean Grambs, Teacher And Author, 70, Dies
LEAD: Jean Grambs, a professor of human development at the College of Education at the University of Maryland at College Park until her retirement last year, died after suffering a heart attack Saturday at her home in College Park.
She was 70 years old.


Leona B. Hill, Advertising Executive, 79
LEAD: Leona Bowman Hill, an advertising executive and founder of The Fashion Newsletter, died of pancreatic cancer yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Robert Felheim, 85, Ex-Brokerage Partner
LEAD: Robert J. Felheim, a retired partner of Neuberger &amp; Berman, a brokerage and money-management concern, died Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Singer Island, Fla.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safety-Kleen Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Revenue
110,454,000
97,440,000
Net inc
10,082,000
9,689,000
Share earns
.30
.29
9mo rev
321,778,000
281,465,000
Net inc
30,581,000
27,618,000
Share earns
.91
.83


INDIAN'S LIBEL CASE NEARING DECISION
LEAD: After two weeks of complicated, cryptic and sometimes obscure testimony, a jury here is preparing to decide whether the journalist Seymour M. Hersh libeled a former Prime Minister of India, Morarji Desai, when he described him as a paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency.


Bulls Sign King, Their Top Choice
LEAD: Stacey King, a No. 1 draft choice who is expected to provide more inside scoring and rebounding to complement Michael Jordan's outside play, signed a contract with the Chicago Bulls yesterday.
No terms were disclosed.
King is the first of the top six choices drafted last spring to come to terms.


McGillion Named Top Police Deputy
LEAD: Alice T. McGillion, the New York City Police Department's chief spokeswoman, was named yesterday to the No. 2 police post, first deputy commissioner, making her the highest-ranking woman ever in the department.


SCI Television In Loan Default
LEAD: SCI Television Inc. said yesterday that as expected it had defaulted on a $153 million principal payment that it owes a group of bank lenders, led by the Bankers Trust Company, and would also have to skip interest payments due Oct. 15 on two ''junk bond'' issues.


Eastern Environmental Servces Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Environmental Servces Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,559,969
3,712,094
Net inc
300,931
311,613
Yr rev
18,798,224
12,456,855
Net inc
1,057,046
1,583,427
Share earns
.25
.38
The share earnings for the latest quarter and year-ago quarter were not available.


Dotronix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dotronix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,010,745
10,303,772
Net loss
388,482
b116,949
Share earns
-
.03
Yr rev
31,796,808
40,830,744
Net loss
573,606
b1,508,598
Share earns
-
.48
Shares outst
3,242,000
3,126,000


Bank of Boston Stock Falls $2.625
LEAD: The stock of the Bank of Boston Corporation fell sharply yesterday after the bank made a large addition to reserves, and action by regulators fueled worries that the bank may have more problems.
The shares fell $2.625, to $24, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Arafat, in Japan, Says P.L.O Would Talk to Israel Through Mubarak But Mr. Arafat stopped short of endorsing Mr. Mubarak's 10-point peace plan and said that the Egyptian President's proposals were just ''inquiries'' to which Israel had yet to respond. (Agence France-Presse)


Official Named At Ann Taylor
LEAD: Gerald H. Blum has been named to the new posts of vice chairman and director of marketing and merchandise direction of Ann Taylor, the fashion chain of 144 stores, effective Feb. 1, 1990.
Mr.
Blum will report directly to Joseph E. Brooks, chairman and chief executive of Ann Taylor.


Julian Miller, 85, Ex-Actuary and a Hiker
LEAD: Julian Miller, a retired actuary who became an environmentalist, died of cancer Thursday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Teaneck.


Gingrich Asks Caution In an Inquiry on Frank
LEAD: Representative Newt Gingrich, the second-ranking Republican in the House, said today that the House needs to proceed cautiously as it investigates the questions of judgment and personal behavior that are raised by the case of Representative Barney Frank.


U.S. Had Indications Coup Would Be Attempted
LEAD: American officials said today that the United States had some advance warning of the coup attempt in Panama, but they maintained that the Bush Administration had provided no direct assistance to the rebels.


Stock of Ferranti Plunges
LEAD: Already reeling from an apparent fraud at its United States unit that has cost almost $300 million, the British military contractor Ferranti today lost about a third of its market value when its shares resumed trading on the London Stock Exchange.


Foyt Hurt Seriously
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, a four-time winner of the Indianapolis 500, was listed in serious condition with neck pain at Charlotte Memorial Hospital in Concord, N.C., yesterday after he crashed into a wall at Charlotte Motor Speedway during a practice session for the Nascar All-Pro Auto Parts 500 Sunday.


Dow at Record 2,754.56 After Advancing 40.84
LEAD: The stock market climbed to another historic high yesterday as investors focused on the underlying strength of several blue-chip issues, a firm bond market and a strong United States dollar.


New-Home Sales Slip 0.4% After Surge in July
LEAD: New-home sales fell four-tenths of 1 percent in August but remained above 750,000 for the second consecutive month, as buyers took advantage of lower interest rates, the Government reported today.


Four Hospitals Break Ranks And Set Pacts
LEAD: With a strike deadline hours away, four New York City area hospitals, including Beth Israel Medical Center, broke ranks with industry negotiators and reached separate union agreements late last night, officials involved in the negotiations said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


Four Seasons Is Designated A Landmark
LEAD: The Seagram Building on Park Avenue and the Four Seasons restaurant within it -which have long been seen as pinnacles of the cool, sleek, International style of architecture that dominated American cities after World War II - became official New York City landmarks yesterday.


Bristol-Squibb Merger Is Set
LEAD: Shareholders of the Bristol-Myers Company and the Squibb Corporation approved their companies' $11.5 billion merger, creating the world's second-largest pharmaceutical company.
The merger takes effect


Book Notes
LEAD:  Big-Money Deals


Breakup Plan For N.T.T.
LEAD: A Government report said breaking up the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation would provide a more competitive and efficient telephone industry in Japan.
N.T.T., which had been state-owned, became a private company in 1985.


Books of The Times; Art and Money Tug-of-War For 'Huxley in Hollywood'
LEAD:  Huxley in Hollywood  By David King Dunaway  Illustrated. 458 pages.
A Bessie Book/ Harper &amp; Row. $24.95.


Photon Technology Intl reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photon Technology Intl (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,100,000
1,300,000
Net loss
100,000
727,000
Yr sales
4,100,000
1,058,000
Net loss
887,000
2,300,000
Results for all periods adjusted to reflect the sale of the company's German subsidiary, which was sold late last year as part of the company's restructuring program to improve its overall financial condition.


Housing Authorities Deserve Scrutiny
LEAD: To the Editor:


Frankly Nice to China
LEAD: China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, told the United Nations that relations with the U.S. were ''at a crossroads,'' but could improve if America stopped criticizing China.


Pancontinental Oil reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pancontinental Oil
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,600,000
9,400,000
Net inc
75,452
45,585
Share earns
.01
.01
Share earnings are fully diluted.
Results are in Canadian funds.


PTL FRAUD CASE GOES TO THE JURY
LEAD: Jim Bakker was described by prosecutors as a con man and by his defense lawyers as a victim of Government interference today at his trial on conspiracy and fraud charges.


U.S. Officer Quits Hyundai
LEAD: Hyundai Motor America, which is struggling to find the right strategy after its initial success dimmed, said yesterday that Greg Warner, its senior American executive, had resigned effective Friday.


Are There Limits to What a Necktie Symbolizes and Celebrates?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Harley Maintains It's Not for Sale
LEAD: Harley-Davidson Inc., the Milwaukee motorcycle company, said it is not for sale.
Harley's announcement came a day after Malcolm I. Glazer, a Rochester businessman, disclosed he had acquired a 6.24 percent stake in the company for more than $17 million and indicated that he might seek control of the company.


This Country Needs a Chancellor of the Exchequer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lehndorff Canadian Properies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lehndorff Canadian Properies
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,285,534
1,071,690
Net inc
164,659
236,007
Share earns
.07
.10
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Willis M. Tate, 77, Ex-President of S.M.U.
LEAD: Willis M. Tate, who was president of Southern Methodist University for nearly 20 years, died Sunday, apparently from a heart attack, while on a trip to Colorado.
He was 77 years old and lived in Dallas.


Grower's Commute: Scardsdale to France
LEAD: WHEN Stephen Schecter looks out over his vineyards here, he recalls his childhood in Queens, shakes his head in disbelief and says, ''When my father talked about red or white, he meant horseradish.''


Deals
LEAD:  Hockey


British-United Plan Stirs Antitrust Doubts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Heekin Can Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heekin Can Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 10
1989
1988
Sales
88,524,000
77,474,000
Net inc
b4,565,000
2,462,000
Share earns
1.40
.76
9mo sales
232,280,000
187,263,000
Net inc
b8,752,000
6,274,000
Share earns
2.69
1.93


McMillan Reflects Jets' Frustration
LEAD: Erik McMillan punctuated the end of a bad day at the office for the Jets by angrily flinging his helmet today.


International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Thoroughbred Breeders Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,535,881
25,109,080
Net loss
2,041,536
1,805,082
Yr rev
96,263,968
98,492,886
Net loss
9,556,685
12,495,202


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketers Study Start Of a Network
LEAD: A new television network, created and programmed by the nation's largest marketing companies, is one of several ideas marketers are studying to combat rising network television costs and declining audience shares, a top advertising executive said today.


Drexel Consolidation
LEAD: In response to a dropoff in the number of the firm's employees, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has decided to consolidate its New York operations into its main headquarters on Broad Street, the firm said yesterday.
Drexel currently occupies 1.5 million square feet of office space in four downtown locations in New York, of which 400,000 will be vacated in a year and a half.


Script Systems Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Script Systems Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,738,958
2,797,413
Net inc
306,887
b977,682
Share earns
.13
-
Shares outst
2,426,636
2,299,341
b-Net loss


Jetborne International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jetborne International (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,745,263
5,290,841
Net inc
180,126
324,610
Share earns
.04
.07
Shares outst
4,985,319
4,877,000


Details Given On Columbia
LEAD: Peter Guber and Jon Peters, the co-chairmen of the Guber Peters Entertainment Company, would each receive an annual salary of $2.75 million plus bonuses and equity if they are hired by the Sony Corporation to run Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc.
Sony has agreed to acquire


Are There Limits to What a Necktie Symbolizes and Celebrates?
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Sudler &amp; Hennessey Provides Hospice Spots
LEAD: Sudler &amp; Hennessey, a subsidiary of Young &amp; Rubicam, has decided that the best way to face death is matter of factly.
That is the tone of a campaign developed by the agency as a pro bono project for the National Hospice Organization.
The organization is a nationwide association of hospices, which provide services to terminally ill patients.


114 'Right Names' Attract 1,000
LEAD: EVERYONE with signing privileges at Mortimer's was there.
So were others who would dearly love to lunch at a window table in Glenn Bernbaum's exclusive Upper East Side bistro.
Well, that can be arranged, as Mr.
Bernbaum was telling a woman whose name means nothing to the gossip columnists: ''Give me $25,000 for the AIDS Care Center and you'll get a good table, I assure you.


Minority Students Walk Out Over a Teacher's Remarks
LEAD: Hundreds of black and Hispanic students, incensed by a history teacher's remark that they deemed racist, walked out of classes in a Brooklyn high school yesterday morning, smashing display cabinets and forcing the school to close early, the police and school officials said.


Market Place; Banking 'Frenzy' Seizes California
LEAD: STOCKS of independent California banks that have previously gone without much notice are being bid up.
The recent acquisition of four banks anticipates a shift in California state law that will allow banks in other states to enter California banking, beginning Jan. 1, 1991, either through acquisition or by opening offices, if that bank's home state has a reciprocal law.


Capital Gains Break - Wrong!
LEAD: Last Thursday the House approved a two-year cut in the tax rate on capital gains - increases in the value of stocks, bonds and real estate - to less than 20 percent.
The decision was wrong.
Profoundly wrong.
It's now up to the Senate to preserve some semblance of conscience and reason, and reverse the


Bridge
LEAD: Good players who want to become even better will have a rare opportunity later this month.
One of the country's top player-theorists, Marty Bergen, will give a free lecture at 6 P.M. at the Manhattan Club, 23 West 73rd Street.
His subject will be competitive bidding, on which he has written extensively.


Poland Orders Investigation Into Crimes of 40's and 50's
LEAD: Poland's new Government ordered an investigation today into crimes committed during the era of hard-line Communist rule in the 1940's and 1950's.


Sun Microsystems Sees Gain
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. said today that it expected a small operating profit in the quarter that ended last Saturday.


Once Again, A Survivor; Ruthlessness Keeps Noriega in Command
LEAD: Over the last two years, two American Administrations have elevated the leader of Panama, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, to the top of the list of world figures they wanted to see removed from action.
Only Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya came as close to getting under Washington's political skin.


'Everything's on Hold' for 1199 Clerk
LEAD: Tina Sasser, a single mother of two, earns $17,000 a year as an admitting clerk at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She joined the last strike, five years ago, and she is prepared to walk out again.
But as the deadline loomed, she found it hard to think about anything but her bills.


Altai Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altai Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,300,000
1,057,000
Net inc
b19,000
c10,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
1,936,000
2,271,000
Yr rev
4,741,000
4,477,000
Net inc
b1,190,000
c501,000
Share earns
.57
.22
Shares outst
2,080,000
2,297,000


...And Another Windsor
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Florida Bars Licenses To Reduce Dropout Toll
LEAD: Florida has joined the growing list of states that withhold driver's licenses from high school dropouts.


Japan Acts On Apple And Canon
LEAD: In a rare crackdown on high prices, Government investigators here searched the offices of Apple Computer Japan and a unit of Canon Inc. today, seeking evidence that importers selling Macintosh computers at deep discounts are being driven out of the market.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Best Products Co., Richmond, a discount retail company, named Stewart M. Kasen president and chief operating officer.


Correction Officials Fined Over Abortions
LEAD: A senior official of New York City's Department of Correction has resigned and four others have been penalized in an investigation into charges that the department had told pregnant correction officers to have abortions or resign.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addendum
LEAD: *
Tracy-Locke Inc., a part of the Omnicom Group, has signed an associate agreement with Ornelas &amp; Associates, a Hispanic advertising brand marketing agency in Dallas.


Colorado Is Top Team in Times's Ranking
LEAD: In its first ranking of college football teams this season, The New York Times's computer has put Colorado on top.


Less Prenatal Care Urged For Most Healthy Women
LEAD: In a major shift in policy, a Federal panel of experts has recommended that less prenatal care be provided to the 1.6 million pregnant women whose fetuses are at no apparent risk of health problems and that more be given to women whose fetuses are at risk.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The economy is flat on its back.
You cannot get screws or nails.
There are no bananas, and when there are, they're the ones the monkeys wouldn't eat.''  - A 32-year-old construction worker fleeing East Germany.  [ A12:2. ]


American List Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American List Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,667,539
1,412,784
Net inc
625,919
b574,989
Share earns
.23
.20
6mo rev
3,572,157
2,971,547
Net inc
1,433,620
b1,151,072
Share earns
.52
.41


Don't Gamble on Jersey Politics
LEAD: When New Jersey embarked in 1978 on the dubious course of using casino gambling to spur urban redevelopment, it wisely erected a legal wall between the gaming industry and politics.
Now the casino king Donald Trump calls for tearing down the barrier.
He couldn't be more wrong.


Your Car Is Calling
LEAD: Urban Americans often arm their cars with piercing alarms that go off when a thief intrudes.
In New York the alarms seem to blare mostly in the middle of the night, and it's not clear that they discourage perpetrators nearly as much as they disturb the peace.


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lazare Kaplan International (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,219,000
15,860,000
Net inc
b855,000
b101,000
Share earns
.27
.03
b-Included extraordinary credits of $279,000, or 9 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $30,000, or 1 cent a share, for the year-earlier period.


Godollo Journal; How to Disarm Hungary (Hamburgers? Tennis?)
LEAD: A large American flag covered a window by the entrance to the House of Culture in this college town 20 miles northeast of Budapest.
Pinned to it was a photograph of a boyish-looking man with a bow tie, whose smile has become familiar throughout Hungary.


Phoenix American Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix American Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,936,000
8,051,000
Net inc
50,000
1,267,000
Share earns
.01
.20
Shares outst
5,554,505
6,462,147
Yr rev
28,631,000
26,870,000
Net inc
4,134,000
3,344,000
Share earns
.70
.52
Shares outst
5,934,382
6,478,612


From Tinker To Pafko To Sandberg
LEAD: rrThe day the sky fell was June 15, 1951. I remember as though it were yesterday.


Palestinian Militants Urge Wider Revolt
LEAD: The underground leadership of the Palestinian revolt in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip sought today to broaden the protest, calling for a five-day general strike and ''rebellion'' in the streets.


Tell Us How Much Charter Reform Will Cost
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ramsay Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ramsay Health Care (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,769,000
35,232,000
Net inc
b1,646,000
c1,474,000
Share earns
.11
.11
Yr rev
147,663,000
135,902,000
Net inc
b3,721,000
cd22,729,000
Share earns
.26
-


Little Independence For Baltic Nations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets Say Farewell to Carter and Hernandez and to an Era
LEAD: The Mets closed one era and two careers yesterday when they said farewell to their 35-year-old co-captains, Gary Carter and Keith Hernandez, and sent them into the free-agent market with thanks and blessings.


French Weapons Trade
LEAD: The French Defense Ministry said Monday that the value of export orders booked by French weapons manufacturers had increased by 30 percent last year, to $6 billion.
The ministry said 53 percent of the orders were for aeronautical equipment, 36 percent for land-based equipment and 11 percent for naval equipment.


5 Million Pounds of Butter Melted in Warehouse Blaze
LEAD: Firefighters sloshed through five inches of melted butter Monday in battling a warehouse fire that burned out of control for nearly 21 hours.


U.S. Loses Key Player
LEAD: Hugo Perez, the star midfielder of the United States national soccer team, tore a groin muscle in a match last Friday and will miss this Sunday's World Cup qualifying match in Guatemala.
Perez, 25 years old, was born in El Salvador and is considered the top American player.


Overwork Led to Spill, Tanker Captain Says
LEAD: The captain whose tanker spilled 289,000 gallons of oil off Newport in June said today that he had gone 36 hours with little sleep, had no lookout and was overworked and distracted at the time of the accident.


Bundling Campaign Money: Giuliani Is the Big Beneficiary
LEAD: Thirty-two intermediaries representing the last vestiges of big money in the New York City mayoral election have funneled $685,000 into Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign in the last four months, making him the biggest single beneficiary of a process known as bundling.


U.S. Created Coup Conditions, Panamanian Asserts at U.N.
LEAD: The President of the Panamanian Government, who is loyal to General Manuel Antonio Noriega, blamed the United States today for creating conditions that led to the coup attempt in his country.


Japan Gets Import Plea
LEAD: A group of Southeast Asian countries today urged Japan to buy more of their products, dismantle trade barriers and spread technological expertise around the region.
The Association of South East Asian Nations, which consists of Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Brunei and Indonesia, said Tokyo had an important role in insuring political stability in the region, but it also had to fulfill its promise to help poorer countries develop.


S.E.C. Shuns Role In B.A.T. Takeover
LEAD: The staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission has concluded that the commission had no power to regulate Sir James Goldsmith's bid for B.A.T.
Industries, Richard Breeden, the candidate for S.E.C. chairman, said.
Mr.
Breeden's outlined the staff's position in a 108-page response to questions from the Senate Banking Committee, which is considering his nomination.


Lessons
LEAD: President Bush may or may not be able to create a ''kinder, gentler'' nation, but he has already created a kinder, gentler Federal education policy.


Mack Sentenced
LEAD: Kevin Mack, a Cleveland Browns running back who was selected for the National Football League Pro Bowl in 1985 and 1987, was sentenced yesterday to six months in prison after pleading guilty to having used cocaine.
Judge Richard McMonagle, of Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court in Cleveland, sentenced Mack to the Mansfield Reformatory, a Cuyahoga County assistant prosecutor, Frank


Prices of Treasury Issues Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose in lethargic trading yesterday, helped by a rise in the dollar in overseas markets.
The move in the dollar prompted some overseas buying, but dealers in New York said most domestic customers showed little interest once trading shifted to the United States.


Dollar Rises as Intervention By Central Banks Slackens
LEAD: The dollar rose against most major currencies yesterday despite continued dollar-selling by central banks.
Gold prices declined.
News that the Government of Panama might have been overthrown in a coup also gave the dollar a slight kick, currency traders said.
United States Government officials later reported that the coup had failed.


DVI Financial Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DVI Financial Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,701,019
15,349,611
Net inc
540,160
401,287
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
3,075,173
3,012,096


Graziano Recuperating
LEAD: Rocky Graziano, former world middleweight champion, was reported in stable condition and resting comfortably yesterday in Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan after collapsing at his home on Sunday.(AP)


SOVIET AIM UPHELD BY SHEVARDNADZE
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze ended his annual trip to the United Nations General Assembly yesterday and flew off to visit Nicaragua.
And he left Americans to ponder a history lesson.


Results Plus
LEAD:  TENNIS  Evert Helps Defeat Greece: Chris Evert, playing in her last Federation Cup, needed only 43 minutes yesterday to help the United States beat Greece, 3-0, in the first round of the women's tournament in Tokyo.
Evert, 34 years old, who announced last month that she was retiring from major tournaments, beat Christina Papadaki, 6-0, 6-1.


Harold W. Conroy, 82, A Corporate Lawyer
LEAD: Harold William Conroy, a lawyer specializing in corporate law, died of a disease of the cartilage on Saturday at his home in Southhold, L.I.
He was 82 years old.


Abie Nathan Jailed for Meeting Arafat
LEAD: A magistrates' court here sentenced Abie Nathan, one of Israel's best-known peace campaigners, to six months in prison today for meeting with Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Armstrong Suitors Request Meeting
LEAD: The Belzberg family of Canada, which is considering a hostile takeover of Armstrong World Industries, has asked the company's board for a special stockholder meeting.
Lancaster-based Armstrong, which manufactures interior furnishings, said it was examining the request.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airgas Inc., Radnor, Pa., a maker of gases, completed the sale of its Jackson Products Inc. unit to Jackson Acquisition Corp. for $70 million.


Giuliani's Wife Walks a Delicate Line in His Campaign
LEAD: When Rudolph W. Giuliani announced his candidacy for mayor last spring, his wife, Donna Hanover, had more than just the typical political spouse's concerns.
As a co-anchor for WPIX-TV news in New York City, she had to promise to take no role in the campaign to keep her job.


Berenice Abbott: Still Feisty and Eager at 91
LEAD: Berenice Abbott, the dean of American photographers and one who has always inveighed against visual prettification, lives in a lovely house nestled beside a tree-lined lake in this remote swath of central Maine, But Miss Abbott, who is 91 years old, shrugs off any suggestion of contradiction between the picture-postcard setting of her present life and her feisty days in the 1920's and 30's.


Dynamics Research Corp reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynamics Research Corp (OTC)
12wks to Sept 9
1989
1988
Revenue
19,710,000
20,200,000
Net inc
668,000
953,000
Share earns
.13
.19
Shares outst
5,044,230
5,039,930
36wk rev
59,571,000
62,617,000
Net inc
1,882,000
2,306,000
Share earns
.37
.46
Shares outst
5,044,230
5,036,892


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; R. J. Reynolds Settles
LEAD: The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company agreed yesterday not to misrepresent the results of a study linking smoking and heart disease in the tobacco company's future advertisements, settling a false advertising claim brought by the Federal Trade Commission.
The F.T.C. said a Reynolds ad falsely contended that the study had proved smoking was not as hazardous as commonly believed.


Reviews/Dance; Gina Gibney's 'In Pieces' at Choreospace
LEAD: Stage setting and choreography were inseparably united in Gina Gibney's ''In the Village,'' one of the works that formed part of ''In Pieces,'' the program she offered Friday night at the Nikolais/Louis Choreospace.


Ex-Kidder Executive Joins Japanese Firm
LEAD: Nine months after internal upheaval at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company resulted in his departure from the firm, Max C. Chapman Jr. will head another American securities operation, Nomura Holding America Inc., a division of Nomura Securities International.


Detroit's Mayor Settles Suit Over Paternity of 6-Year-Old
LEAD: Mayor Coleman A. Young has agreed to pay $11,700 a year and create a $150,000 education trust for a 6-year-old boy to settle a paternity suit.


Arbor Drugs reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arbor Drugs (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
78,015,000
63,876,000
Net inc
2,474,000
1,728,000
Share earns
.26
.18
Shares outst
9,519,000
9,514,000
Yr sales
300,198,000
246,514,000
Net inc
9,168,000
6,658,000
Share earns
.96
.70
Shares outst
9,515,000
9,514,000


Alfin Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alfin Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,250,000
4,356,000
Net loss
b691,000
c20,000
Shares outst
6,742,419
6,699,134
Yr sales
19,426,000
19,539,000
Net inc
b191,000
1,458,000
Share earns
.03
.22
Shares outst
6,719,107
6,703,883


Reverse Half-Windsor . . .
LEAD: To The Living Section:


MGM Grand Expands Plans for Hotel-Park
LEAD: Expanding on earlier plans, MGM Grand Inc. said today that it would spend nearly $700 million to build a movie theme park and 5,000-room hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.


Europe Reaches TV Compromise; U.S. Officials Fear Protectionism
LEAD: After months of debate, the European Community adopted a compromise plan of nonbinding rules today that urge European television stations to devote a majority of their air time to shows made in Europe.


Making the Ordinary Extraordinary Lifts A's
LEAD: A slide to break up a double play.
A well-timed bunt.
Aggressive base-running and not merely stolen bases.
A pitcher finding his rhythm in the middle of a game.


William Hurt and Ex-Dancer Were Never Married, a Judge Rules
LEAD: Sandra Jennings was never the common-law wife of William Hurt and is not entitled to a share of the actor's income, a judge ruled yesterday.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 29
Sept. 22
Sept. 30
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily#6.9#7.3#6.8
Distillate production, daily#2.9#3.0#2.8
Gasoline stocks#223.7#219.2#221.5
Distillate stocks#122.9#122.8#129.8
Crude imports, daily#6.4#5.6#5.7
Product imports, daily#1.8#1.8#2.0
Crude stocks#333.3#331.6#324.2
Crude production, daily#7.5#7.5#7.9
Refinery utilization (%)#89.0#89.3#85.0


Rangers Won't Keep Dionne
LEAD: Marcel Dionne, having just completed morning practice, took off his skates, showered, talked with reporters and headed for his car.
He switched on the radio and heard that the Mets had declined to offer contracts to Gary Carter and Keith Hernandez.


Review/Theater; Kelly McGillis Stars In 'Twelfth Night'
LEAD: Though there are movie stars who regard classic roles as a careerlong mission instead of a one-shot summer vacation - Kevin Kline and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio among them -New York audiences have lately seen too many Hollywood visitors treat Shakespeare like a cheap tart.
These are the stars who milk the Bard for all the self-serving publicity he's worth during rehearsal, then turn their backs on him by self-indulgently goofing their way through his plays in performance.


Kemp Seeks Broad Changes To Curb Abuses in Housing
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp today announced a series of proposals to ''clear the decks'' at his scandal-ridden department by eliminating virtually all discretionary spending in Federal housing programs.


Hospitals See Services Continuing
LEAD: Private hospitals in New York City said yesterday that services would not be greatly affected in the event of a strike today by members of Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Workers union.


Marjorie C. Vietor
LEAD: Marjorie C. Vietor, an organizer of the Red Cross Blood Donor Service in Manhattan in World War II, died in her sleep on Sept. 21 at Lawrence (Mass.) General Hospital.
She was 97 years old and moved in 1984 to Needham, Mass., from Woodbury, Conn., where she had lived for many years.


Assembling A Charity Event, Piece by Piece
LEAD: GLENN BERNBAUM, owner of Mortimer's Restaurant, gave a party last night.
He had 75th Street between Lexington and Third Avenues cleared, put up six contiguous tents and charged 1,000 guests $250 each to sip donated champagne and nibble chili con carne in pastry shells.
He called his party Fete de Famille IV.


Florio Runs With Method to His Meekness
LEAD: Representative James J. Florio, a candidate once derided as stiff if not robotic, is campaigning for governor these days with the fluid ease and growing self-confidence of a man who feels he is finally in synch with his times.


At Last, an Honest Work Station Race
LEAD: Comparisons of the speed of the fastest computer work stations have frequently relied on inflated claims and even a bit of trickery.


Braniff Resumess Some of Its Flights
LEAD: With a $49 one-way fare to attract passengers, Braniff Inc. resumed about 20 percent of its 256 daily flights.
The carrier was virtually shut last week as it filed its second bankruptcy reorganization in seven years.


Colombian High Court Upholds Extradition of Drug Ring Suspects
LEAD: The Supreme Court upheld today the legality of President Virgilio Barco Vargas's decree allowing extradition of suspected drug traffickers to the United States, giving support to his campaign against the cocaine cartels.


Tucker Holding Co reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tucker Holding Co
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
881,985
2,395,061
6mo net loss
1,882,000
2,395,061
The company said the 1989 loss is primarily attributable to the $1,501,000 provision for loan losses recorded by the Tucker State Bank of Jacksonville.


White House Sees 'New Thinking' by Pretoria
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that economic sanctions had helped stimulate ''new thinking'' in South Africa's white power structure and urged Pretoria to begin to dismantle apartheid swiftly.


Shelly Associates Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelly Associates Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,426,694
4,788,830
Net loss
13,942
b166,108
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Intervoice Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,105,981
2,616,762
Net inc
2,101,351
457,532
Share earns
.50
.13
Shares outst
4,183,156
3,331,945
6mo rev
12,103,500
4,680,248
Net inc
3,226,460
799,665
Share earns
.78
.24
Shares outst
4,126,219
3,329,329


Deloitte Affiliate Rejects Merger
LEAD: The British affiliate of Deloitte, Haskins &amp; Sells said it had refused to join the accounting firm's planned merger with Touche Ross.
The International Accounting Bulletin reported that the Deloitte affiliate would instead join Coopers &amp; Lybrand, a union that would create the largest accounting practice in


Intermetrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermetrics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,648,000
12,270,000
Net inc
562,000
665,000
Share earns
.16
.19
Shares outst
3,585,000
3,489,000
6mo rev
23,252,000
25,070,000
Net inc
1,157,000
1,364,000
Share earns
.32
.39
Shares outst
3,578,000
3,479,000


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE provenance of the Italian cooking term ''alla Francese,'' or in the French style, has never been clear.
Some have postulated that a French chef who worked in Italy was responsible for the term, or perhaps the technique in question seemed typically French rather than Italian.


Still No Decision on Johnson
LEAD: Frank Cashen, the general manager of the Mets, said yesterday that he had almost reached a decision on Davey Johnson's future as manager.


Cholesterol Matters, But How Much?
LEAD: ''MY friends are saying: 'Oh, thank heavens.
I don't have to worry about that any more.' ''


Marcos Followers Win A Hearing Over Burial
LEAD: The Philippine Supreme Court agreed today to hear a request to overturn a Government ban on the return of the body of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos for burial here.


This Country Needs a Chancellor of the Exchequer; Back to Silver and Gold
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hillenbrand Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillenbrand Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Revenue
274,633,000
229,089,000
Net inc
16,192,000
14,889,000
Share earns
.44
.40
9mo rev
829,563,000
687,873,000
Net inc
54,723,000
52,328.000
Share earns
1.47
1.39


Brazil Stance on Coffee Pact Drops Prices to 14-Year Low
LEAD: World coffee prices fell sharply yesterday after Brazil, the leading producer, said it saw no chance of reviving an international agreement to support prices.


Acclaim Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acclaim Entertainment
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
24,973,000
14,278,000
Net inc
3,082,000
2,086,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Yr sales
69,077,000
39,348,000
Net inc
9,137,000
4,705,000
Share earns
.54
.29
Shares outst
17,060,370
16,339,976


Out Of the Suitcase
LEAD: I saw Tip O'Neill come out of a suitcase the other night.
That's right: the large man who used to be Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Out of a suitcase.
Sure it was on television.
You don't think a man that big is going to pop out of a suitcase live, right in your own living room, do you?


President of Bergdorf Is Leaving for Gucci Job
LEAD: Dawn Mello, the president and the creative force at Bergdorf Goodman, will leave on Oct. 15 to join Gucci, where she will direct the worldwide corporate image and product development activities of the 60-store specialty leather and accessories concern, with offices in both Milan, Italy, and in New


A's Maintain Their Poise And Take Lead Over Jays
LEAD: In the late afternoons, when he would sit at his locker and dream aloud, Rickey Henderson would talk about the thing he wanted most in his career.
He could see himself right there, smack in the middle of the post-season at Yankee Stadium, and the mere thought would sometimes make him smile.


U.S. KNEW OF PLOT
LEAD: Dissident Panamanian officers tried to overthrow Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today but failed when troops loyal to the Panamanian leader recaptured a central military headquarters the rebels had seized.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Up
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were generally higher in the week that ended yesterday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.05
9.08
8.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.87
7.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.86
7.92
7.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.78
8.34
8.76
30-YR.


U.S. Tells East Germany: Reform or Lose Citizens
LEAD: The Bush Administration publicly called on East Germany today to undertake political and economic reforms as a way to halt the flood of its citizens to the West.


New York, in Move to Bar AIDS, Puts New Limits on Sperm Banks
LEAD: Trying to guard against any transmission of the AIDS virus through sperm banks, the New York State Health Department has drawn up new rules requiring donors to undergo at least two AIDS tests before their sperm is used.


Nobel Prize Winner Asked to Head Rockefeller U.
LEAD: Dr.
David Baltimore, a Nobel laureate who has figured in a dispute over questions of possible fraud in a research paper that he helped write, has been offered the presidency of Rockefeller University, the university said yesterday.


Avantek Inc reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avantek Inc (OTC)
12wks to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
38,605,000
27,004,000
Net loss
1,400,000
3,685,000
36wk sales
110,901,000
91,141,000
Net loss
4,913,000
b17,912,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,605,000.


About New York; Lessons of Life, At the Wet End Of a Fishing Line
LEAD: Sunday morning was one of those rare occasions when time stands still and the world doesn't seem like such a bad place after all.
Golden sun, a gentle breeze and birds heading south for no obvious reason.
A day to go fishing.


Real Estate; In Midtown South, Space Eases a Bit
LEAD: THE effects of New York City's glut of office space and the economic slowdown may be catching up with the midtown south office district.


Struggle Within the Military Appears to Be a Major Cause
LEAD: A bitter power struggle between rebellious junior officers and older members of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's inner circle appears to have been a major catalyst in the fighting that erupted in Panama yesterday, experts on Panamanian military affairs say.


Bionaire Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bionaire Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,835,000
6,390,000
Net loss
365,000
384,000
6mo sales
10,491,000
10,404,000
Net loss
1,134,000
5,552,000
The company was formerly called Biotech Electronics Ltd.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Trump Shuttle Introduces Ads
LEAD: The Trump Shuttle introduced its advertising campaign yesterday and Donald J. Trump was nowhere to be seen.


Unocal to Cut Its Operations
LEAD: The Unocal Corporation said today that it planned to withdraw from several regions of Washington and Oregon, where it operates 233 Unocal 76 service stations.


The Other Washington Bridge Starts $33 Million Repair Job
LEAD: A $33 million project to repair the 100-year-old Washington Bridge between upper Manhattan and the Bronx began yesterday with a symbolic ground-breaking ceremony.


MEXICAN-U.S. PACT REACHED ON TRADE AND INVESTMENTS
LEAD: In the latest sign of closer ties between the United States and Mexico, Presidents Bush and Carlos Salinas de Gortari signed an agreement today intended to enlarge trade and investment between the two nations.


Sikes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sikes Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,838,000
33,625,000
Net inc
2,519,000
2,362,000
Share earns
.28
.26
6mo rev
71,297,000
66,112,000
Net inc
4,988,000
4,469,000
Share earns
.56
.50


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: RECENT articles and studies have raised concerns over whether the use of plastic wrap and commercial plastic containers in the microwave oven pose safety problems.
Although the risk has not been determined, cooks can use several techniques at home to avoid problems altogether.


A House Plan to Raise S.E.C. Budget
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission may be allowed to raise fees and increase its budget if a little-noticed provision in the House of Representative's budget reconciliation bill becomes law.


Senators in a Rush to Declare A Bigger War Against Drugs
LEAD: In a boisterous Senate session, Republican as well as Democratic senators came forward tonight with a host of amendments to remold President Bush's anti-drug strategy into a bigger, bolder plan.


Tridont Health Care reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tridont Health Care
Year to March 31
1989
1988
Revenue
39,400,000
27,000,000
Net loss
31,100,000
b2,400,000
Share earns
-
.40
b-Net income  The company said the latest year loss included a charge for unusual items of $26.1 million.


At Begetarian Meal, Wine and Curiosity
LEAD: THE future of wine is in food.
This is not the ranting of some dedicated teetotaler but the opinion of Jim Fetzer, president of Fetzer Vineyards in Redwood Valley, Calif.


New Savings Board Chief
LEAD: Daniel P. Kearney, a Boston mortgage finance specialist, was named president and chief executive of the Resolution Trust Corporation Oversight Board, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady announced today.


Hinderliter Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hinderliter Industries (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,455,000
10,146,000
Net inc
475,000
b3,266,000
b-Net loss


ICN Biomedicals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICN Biomedicals Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
13,543,000
13,036,000
Net inc
b1,868,000
c1,491,000
Share earns
.18
.14
Shares outst
10,666,000
10,579,000
9mo sales
40,628,000
37,580,000
Net inc
b4,353,000
c3,464,000
Share earns
.41
.33
Shares outst
10,665,000
10,499,000


'The Great One'
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Historic Shift Seen in School Finance
LEAD: The ruling by the Texas Supreme Court Monday that the state's system for financing public schools is unconstitutional because of ''glaring disparities'' between rich and poor school districts shows not only that the struggle over school financing is being reheated but also that the terms of the struggle are changing.


Marcus Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marcus Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 17
1989
1988
Revenue
46,884,000
44,903,000
Net inc
4,145,000
4,065,000
Share earns
.54
.53


Devils' High Hopes Are Dotted With New Faces
LEAD: The Devils have been guilty in the past of overrating their personnel and aiming too high, but this year the high expectations may be justified.


The Reverse Windsor
LEAD: To The Living Section:


ENFORCEMENT LAX, U.S. AUDITORS SAY
LEAD: The internal inspectors of three Federal agencies told Congress today about serious weaknesses in the agencies' enforcement of Federal law.


Sampling Rheingau's Rieslings
LEAD: Fourteen members of the Association of Charta Estates, an organization spearheading the new emphasis on dry rieslings by West German winegrowers, came to New York last month to offer a glimpse of their 1988 rieslings, a highly rated vintage.


Magellan Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magellan Petroleum Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,612,949
10,961,250
Net loss
173,926
b109,783
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
23,631,678
19,505,512
b-Net income and after an extraordinary tax benefit of $88,956 realized from utilization of the carryforwards of prior-year losses.


Route to Tyson-Holyfield Is Still Not Clear
LEAD: By the timetable of Don King, Mike Tyson's promoter, a Tyson-Evander Holyfield match will not happen until late 1990 or early 1991.


United Merchants &amp; Manufacurers Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Merchants &amp; Manufacurers Inc (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
499,507,000
646,313,000
Net loss
b23,985,000
c37,046,000
Shares outst
9,101,000
9,106,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $2,264,000, or 25 cents a share, from the extinguishment of debt.


The Larger Issues Behind the CBS News Case
LEAD: Behind The New York Post's recent charges that CBS News broadcast misrepresented films of the war in Afghanistan are larger questions about the methods and ethical standards of television news and the vulnerability of news broadcasts - and news viewers - to having drama passed off as reality.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  'Killin' Time'


LIMITED BAN VOTED ON SOVIET STRIKES
LEAD: The Soviet legislature today approved an immediate ban on strikes in important industries, and took the first steps toward approval of a more sweeping and permanent law regulating labor disputes.


His Father's Invention
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Custody Case Heard in Egypt
LEAD: An American woman was told today that she would have to wait another month before an Egyptian court would rule on the disputed custody of her two children.
The court met in closed session to hear competing pleas from Barbara Mezo, who lives in Brooklyn, and her Egyptian mother-in-law for custody of 7-year-old Mohammed and 4-year-old Leila.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Pacers Add a Guard
LEAD: Looking for a quick guard, the Indiana Pacers yesterday signed the 6-foot Rickey Green, an 11-year veteran who spent most of his career with the Utah Jazz.
Green, 35 years old, was taken from Utah in the 1988 expansion draft by the Charlotte Hornets.
He was waived by Charlotte in February, and played the rest of the season with the Milwaukee Bucks.


Title Matchup in March
LEAD: Julio Cesar Chavez of Mexico will meet Meldrick Taylor, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist, on March 17 in a title matchup of two undefeated fighters.
The fight, for Chavez's World Boxing Council superlightweight crown and Taylor's International Boxing Federation junior welterweight title, will be at the Las Vegas Hilton Hotel.


Graphic Scanning Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graphic Scanning Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,206,000
22,731,000
Net loss
b9,260,000
d14,371,000
Shares outst
32,312,000
33,084,000
9mo rev
89,902,000
89,897,000
Net loss
b25,547,000
cd47,978,000
Share earns
-
1.31
Shares outst
32,653,000
38,824,000


INSIDE
LEAD:  Choice for Rockefeller U.  Dr.
David Baltimore, a Nobel laureate who has figured in a controversy over possible scientific fraud, has been offered the presidency of Rockefeller University.
Page A18.
A's Top Blue Jays in Opener  Oakland used strong hitting, pitching and base-running to win the first game of the American League playoffs from Toronto, 7-3.


Spy's Wife Appeals to Israel To Ask Bush to Free Couple
LEAD: Anne Pollard, whose husband was convicted of spying for Israel and is serving a life sentence in an American prison, has asked Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to intervene with President Bush on the American couple's behalf.


Union and Hospitals Bargain in New York
LEAD: Negotiators for many private hospitals in New York City and the union representing 50,000 hospital workers bargained into the early morning hours to avert a strike, but remained far apart at 1 A.M.
Several hospitals facing serious fiscal problems reached separate agreements with the union.
Articles, page B1 and B2.


Polls Find U.S. and Pennsylvania Share Divisions About Abortion
LEAD: In Pennsylvania, where legislators introduced a package of sweeping anti-abortion measures yesterday, people are as deeply divided over the abortion issue as are other Americans.


F.D.A. Approves a Backup Therapy for Severe Schizophrenia
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration approved a drug treatment for severe schizophrenia today but said that because it has serious side effects it should be used only on patients who fail to respond to conventional therapy.


Minority Hiring by Yale Is Criticized in Study
LEAD: Yale lags behind leading colleges and universities in recruiting and retaining minority professors and has to respond swiftly and boldly to avoid an intolerable situation, a university committee has urged.


First Federal of Alabama reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Alabama
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
3,650,334
b321,752
Share earns
-
.35
Yr net loss
3,918,665
b740,737
Share earns
-
.81
b-Net income


Shellfish Harvesting Is Prohibited On Coast Damaged by Hurricane
LEAD: Shellfish harvesting off South Carolina was banned today, and warnings were issued against swimming in ocean water and rivers choked with untreated sewage because of Hurricane Hugo.


Compumat Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compumat Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
25,188,943
14,191,422
Net inc
b198,740
186,774
Share earns
.10
.10
9mo sales
67,519,880
41,191,422
Net inc
b638,822
531,313
Share earns
.33
.39
Shares outst
1,941,124
1,364,164


Film Festival; 'Yaaba' Explores Humans and Frailties
LEAD: The utter simplicity of ''Yaaba,'' set against flat, barren plains in an African village made of mud and straw and acted by a barefoot, nonprofessional cast, bespeaks great sophistication.
The director Idrissa Ouedraogo, of Burkina Faso (formerly Upper Volta) shapes this spare and resonant drama with perfect control.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  Rebels attempted a coup in Panama but failed when troops loyal to General Noriega recaptured a central military headquarters that the rebels had seized.
Page A1


Sony's Columbia Deal Is Criticized in Japan
LEAD: For more than a decade, the Sony Corporation has prided itself on being the most internationalized of Japan's businesses, and perhaps the most adept at the politics of running one of America's most widely known consumer electronics company from a Tokyo headquarters.


Aztar Sweetens 'Junk' Offer To Attract Wary Investors
LEAD: Two weeks after the sharpest sell-off in its short history, the ''junk bond'' market continues to show signs of skittishness.
Yesterday, investment bankers for the Aztar Corporation, the successor company to the Ramada Corporation, postponed and restructured the company's $400 million offering of new securities.


Joseph W. Allen, Engineer, 96
LEAD: Joseph William Allen, an electrical engineer, inventor and pioneer in the field of aviation engineering, died Monday at the Morristown (N.J.) Medical Center of injuries sustained in a recent fall at his home in Whippany, N.J.
He was 96 years old.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howell Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
15,782,075
12,854,455
Net inc
577,346
636,874
Share earns
.64
.61
Yr sales
65,075,247
52,952,327
Net inc
3,442,613
3,969,073
Share earns
3.57
3.79


Crazy Eddie to Liquidate, Ending Move to Reorganize
LEAD: The saga of Crazy Eddie Inc., the consumer electronics retailer known for its boisterous advertising, appears to have ended today.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sept. 21 about journalists who spoke before a special House panel on news coverage of Congress misidentified Tom Oliphant of The Boston Globe.
He is a columnist, not a correspondent.


Moose Call Of Canada Angers Hunters
LEAD: Here in far northern Maine, where the United States-Canada border cuts a straight line through the privately owned forest and areas are numbered, not named, a rite of fall that pits Americans against Canadians will soon begin.


New York Acquisition By McCaw
LEAD: Opening a new front in its battle for the Lin Broadcasting Corporation, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had signed an agreement to acquire Metromedia Inc.'s stake in the New York cellular market for $1.9 billion.


Boeing Machinists Reject Wage Package
LEAD: Perhaps no company in America has been so successful in surviving the manufacturing downturn of the 1980's as the Boeing Company, but its current prosperity has made it a prime target for organized labor's attempts to make up for years of stagnant wages and other concessions.


Maynard Jackson Is Elected Mayor of Atlanta in Landslide
LEAD: Former Mayor Maynard Jackson of Atlanta reclaimed his old job in a landslide victory tonight, while a Democratic State Senator and a Republican political aide advanced to a Congressional runoff in Mississippi.


Shell Is First Black Coach in N.F.L. Since 20's
LEAD: Art Shell, an outstanding offensive tackle for 15 years who was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame two months ago, yesterday became the first black head coach in the National Football League since the league began to gain recognition more than 60 years ago.


Macyro Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Macyro Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
14,828,398
10,128,857
Net loss
60,886
b214,870
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income  Results are in Canadian funds.


Montpelier, Vt.
LEAD: BUTTERNUTS played an important role in Harry Morse Sr.'s boyhood. ''Trying to crack 'em is how I learned to use cuss words,'' said Mr.
Morse, a retired dairy farmer who, with his sons, runs Morse Farms, a produce stand and gift shop on Montpelier's outskirts.


Rebels Assail Salvadoran's Cease-Fire Plan
LEAD: Leaders of El Salvador's leftist guerrilla movement today dismissed the cease-fire proposal made by President Alfredo Cristiani at the United Nations General Assembly on Monday as an insincere political maneuver intended to supplant the negotiations recently begun between the two sides.


Senate Unit Approves I.R.A. Plan
LEAD: The Senate Finance Committee approved early today a Democratic plan that would restore tax deductions for contributions to individual retirement accounts for all taxpayers, after a Republican measure to reduce the capital gains tax rate for individual and corporate taxpayers lost on a tie vote.


Gypsy Protesters Driven From a Nazi Camp
LEAD: Gypsies who had occupied a former concentration camp for a month to dramatize their campaign to remain in West Germany were driven out by the police this week in an action that highlighted a troubling aspect of West Germany's immigration policies.


Bellwether Exploration Co reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bellwether Exploration Co (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,911,551
2,798,798
Net inc
416,121
226,260
Share earns
.02
.01
The company said the increases in earnings and reserves are primarily due to the acquisition of Winchester Energy Inc.


A Cheaper Road to Solar Power: It's Done With Mirrors
LEAD: For years the quest for economical solar power has centered on photovoltaic cells that turn sunlight directly into electricity.
The cost of the cells is so high, however, that their use has been limited.


Unpredictable Series For Giants and Cubs
LEAD: The scoreboard atop the center-field bleachers at Wrigley Field, filled all summer with the names of cities and inning-by-inning results, was a green blank except for two teams beneath the word NATIONAL: San Fran and Cubs.


House Bars Deletion of Broadcast Fairness Rule From Budget Bill
LEAD: The House today kept alive a move to require broadcasters to air opposing views on controversial issues.


Deans and Presidents Fear Education Takes 2d Place
LEAD: A survey of college and university presidents and deans has found that 86 percent of those polled believe that the financial rewards of intercollegiate athletics are interfering with the educational mission of schools in the United States.
The survey was done by U.S.
News and World Report magazine.


How the Cubs and the Giants Line Up
LEAD:  Catchers(average, home runs, r.b.i.)  7Joe Girardi (.248, 1, 14)  Became the starting catcher when Damon Berryhill developed a sore arm.
Berryhill is still hurt, Girardi is still catching.
Strong arm, caught 20 of 55 base-stealers.  1Rick Wrona (.283, 2, 14)  Delivered key hits, as did Girardi.


House Passes Compromise On Federal Arts Financing
LEAD: The House today approved restrictions on Federal aid for ''obscene'' art, a compromise that replaced even stricter limitations favored by Senator Jesse Helms.


More and More, Kindergarten Means a Full Day
LEAD: Responding to the needs of working parents and to increased evidence that 5-year-old children can handle a longer school day, schools all over the country are switching from half-day to full-day kindergarten.


Factory Orders Advanced 2.9% in August
LEAD: Orders to American factories for manufactured goods rose 2.9 percent in August, the Government said today.
But analysts said a one-month increase from automobile orders belied weakness in the industrial sector.


Arthur J. Keeffe, 86, a Law Professor, Dies
LEAD: Arthur J. Keeffe, a law professor and columnist on legal matters, died of congestive heart failure Monday while recuperating from surgery at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 86 years old and lived in Washington.


FCA International reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FCA International
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
73,832,347
79,883,549
Net loss
2,804,802
b1,512,111
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income  The latest year's loss included a $1.4 million write-down of investment in Continental Bank of Canada shares.


Year's Best Honored
LEAD: Steffi Graf of West Germany, who won the tennis grand slam in 1988, and Janet Evans, who won three Olympic gold medals in swimming for the United States that year, were honored last night in Manhattan as Sportswomen of the Year for 1988 by the Women's Sports Foundation.
Graf was named Professional Sportswoman of the Year.


A Football Milestone


Help the Horses
LEAD: Mayor Koch has a chance - his last - to go down in history as the Mayor who liberated New York City's carriage horses.
He can do that by signing a measure that has already passed the City Council by a vote of 31 to 3.
It would protect carriage horses from having to work when it is very hot, very cold, very humid or for more than eight hours at a stretch.


A.T.&amp;T.-Pyramid Computer Venture
LEAD: The Pyramid Technology Corporation, a minicomputer manufacturer based in Mountain View, Calif., entered a strategic partnership agreement with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company to develop a new generation of high-performance computer systems.


Leaving Behind a Land of Shortages, but Also Friends and Relatives
LEAD: A 30-year-old worker in a heating plant near Leipzig said his rickety Trabant automobile, carrying his wife and two children, crept across the border from East Germany to Czechoslovakia at 3:45 P.M. today, one of the last before East Berlin closed itself off from the last country to which its citizens could travel with relative freedom.


C.I.A. to Avoid Secret Role in Nicaragua Vote
LEAD: Under pressure from Congress, the Bush Administration has for the first time stated that the Central Intelligence Agency will not engage in any secret activities to influence the outcome of the Nicaraguan elections scheduled for February, members of Congress and Administration officials said today.


Taxes and Environment Affect a New Jersey Race
LEAD: The 19th Assembly District, once the home of giant industries along the Raritan River that provided work for generations of immigrants, has become a prime battleground in the State Assembly races this year.


There Can Be a Clean Air Bill
LEAD: Poll after poll has shown that Americans want cleaner air and will pay for it.
Year after year, a Congress paralyzed by sloth and industry pressure has refused to grant that wish.
On Monday, however, a House subcommittee agreed to stringent new controls on automobile pollution.
That agreement doesn't end the legislative struggle.


June Guicharnaud, 67, Translator and Editor
LEAD: June Guicharnaud, a translator and editor, died of cancer on Sunday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived in New Haven.


The Persels Reverse
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Reviews/Dance; Faces of Japan, Starting at Creation
LEAD: What the program said would happen Thursday night was one thing.
What actually did happen at the City Center Theater was something else entirely.


Stuart Hall Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stuart Hall Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
31,632,247
24,605,370
Net inc
b544,456
516,680
Share earns
.18
.18
Shares outst
2,979,754
2,855,966
9mo sales
80,365,828
59,763,502
Net inc
b2,037,986
1,644,869
Share earns
.69
.58
Shares outst
2,947,646
2,855,966


David Geiger, Engineer, 54, Dies
LEAD: David H. Geiger, an engineer who invented an air-supported fabric roof system used for almost half the domed stadiums in the world, died, apparently of cardiac arrest, Sunday at the Lotte Hotel in Seoul, South Korea, where he was traveling on business.
He was 54 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.


Modern Guitarist Feels Tug of Past
LEAD: ''The commercialization of the early-instruments movement has led to the most incredibly exaggerated claims for what early instruments are, and what they do,'' the guitarist David Starobin said the other day. ''Basically, they're instruments.
They respond to the player, and you have good early-instrument performances and bad ones, just like with modern instruments.


William F. Turner, 53, an Interior Designer
LEAD: William F. Turner, an interior designer and a management consultant, died Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old.
Mr.
Turner died of pneumonia, Kenneth L. Wyse, a former business associate, said.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Sells Paris Complex
LEAD: The Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corporation sold a planned Paris office complex to a Japanese investor group for $600 million.
The buyer is a group of international investors led by Kowa Real Estate, a subsidiary of the Industrial Bank of Japan.


Two Flyers Are Back
LEAD: The Philadelphia Flyers reacquired Pete Peeters, a goaltender, and Keith Acton, a forward, from the Winnipeg Jets yesterday, only five days after they had been traded to Winnipeg for future considerations.


Xplor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xplor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
453,000
580,000
Net loss
70,000
b37,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
1,005,000
1,207,000
Net loss
19,000
b66,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


With Every Course, an Opinion
LEAD: AS might be expected, Andy Rooney, the curmudgeon whose commentaries on CBS News's ''60 Minutes'' assail everything from manners to mufflers, has strong opinions on food and dining.
At a recent dinner in a restaurant near his weekend home in upstate New York, he served forth more than a few of them, including these:


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Talking, and Tasting, Wine


Economic Scene; Airline Leverage: Who Loses?
LEAD: CAUGHT off guard by the airline industry's frenzied financial restructuring, Washington is scrambling to put on the brakes.
Last week Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner succeeded in putting pressure on Northwest Airlines to rewrite its leveraged buyout agreement with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, halving KLM's equity stake and denying the foreign carrier a place on its board.


CML Group Inc reports earnings for 12mo to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CML Group Inc (NYSE)
12mo to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
234,598,000
181,381,000
Net loss
b31,897,000
c11,551,000
Share earns
-
1.77
Shares outst
6,487,289
6,544,445
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $16,937,000, and a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $9,426,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Roger Rowe has been named senior vice president and associate creative director of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


REFUGEES IN PRAGUE TO LEAVE FOR WEST
LEAD: In an attempt to stop an exodus of its citizens that had turned chaotic, East Germany said Tuesday that it would allow refugees already in Czechoslovakia to head west.
Then it closed its borders.


Tyco Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
549,347,000
432,580,000
Net inc
28,508,000
21,286,000
Share earns
.70
.59
Shares outst
40,950,000
36,185,000


Hospital Staffing Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Staffing Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,654,263
3,739,167
Net inc
385,504
209,392
Share earns
.12
.02
Shares outst
3,215,053
3,150,000
9mo rev
18,239,749
9,738,170
Net inc
1,322,919
501,728
Share earns
.42
.16
Shares outst
3,186,578
3,150,000


Teleprobe Systems Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teleprobe Systems Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,287,000
4,817,000
Net loss
880,000
b2,003,000
Share earns
-
.50
b-Net income


Custom Shop Knot
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Boat Hits Pipeline in Gulf; 3 Are Killed and 7 Missing
LEAD: A 160-foot fishing boat struck a gas pipeline in the Gulf of Mexico, setting off an explosion that killed three people and injured at least four, the Coast Guard said.
At least seven people were missing. ''It was just a boom and big ball of fire went up into the air about 300 feet,'' said Allen Willett, a helicopter pilot who takes drilling crews to rigs.


Docugraphix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Docugraphix Inc
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Revenue
314,533
-
Net loss
66,113
209,918
The company said there was no revenue in the year-ago period.


Ex-Biaggi Aide Is U.S. Witness In Garcia Trial
LEAD: Bernard G. Ehrlich, who was convicted of racketeering with former Representative Mario Biaggi in the Wedtech scandal, testified yesterday that Representative Robert Garcia told him in 1985 that he admired the way Mr.
Biaggi had become wealthy.


Flow General Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flow General Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
31,039,000
36,774,000
Net loss
b15,588,000
c2,178,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
8,854,000
8,849,000
Yr rev
129,258,000
134,790,000
Net loss
b18,645,000
c5,453,000
Share earns
-
.61
Shares outst
8,856,000
8,848,000


Gillette Challenge to the Disposables
LEAD: Razor makers have always scratched their chins over what men want.
Do they want platinum chromium coatings on their blades?
Razors that open like missile silos?
Or maybe blades in high-tech injector cartridges?


Austin, Tex.
LEAD: IN Texas, where many believe that if you can't drive up to or through something, it isn't worth the effort in the first place, an Austin company has come up with one more reason to keep the seat belts fastened.


Meret Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meret Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,726,549
1,428,604
Net inc
b48,234
c1,341,956
Shares outst
12,229,281
7,740,936
Yr rev
10,348,782
9,446,655
Net inc
b353,388
c2,851,519
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
9,305,732
7,740,936


The Jensen
LEAD: To The Living Section:


A Grand (Slam) Opening for Clark and Giants
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants brought the act to 75-year-old Wrigley Field and shattered the Chicago Cubs tonight, 11-3, to win the opening game of the playoff for the National League pennant.
And most of the shattering was done by the power tandem of Will Clark and Kevin Mitchell.


Milton Goldman, Vice President Of Theatrical Agency, Dies at 75
LEAD: Milton Goldman, a prominent theatrical agent, died of heart failure in his sleep yesterday in Manhattan in his Sutton Place home.
He was 75 years old.


Vehicle Sales Rose 8.7% in Late September
LEAD: Late-September sales of North American-made cars and light trucks rose 8.7 percent, the companies reported today, but for the 12-month model year ended Sept. 30, domestic and overseas auto makers reported a 1.9 percent drop in the daily selling rate.
Dealers sold 48,669 vehicles a day in the 1989 model year, compared with 49,603 a year earlier.


The Cubs, a Tavern, A Goat and the Hex
LEAD: As Sam Sianis sat in his place of work, a white cloth apron tied around his waist as he spoke near the counter where cheeseburgers were being served, his easy smile suggested that he is too kind a man to inform a giddy city that its baseball team is doomed.


Graham Chapman, 48, Comedy Troupe Founder
LEAD: Graham Chapman, a Cambridge-educated physician who decided to specialize in comedy and who helped to found Monty Python's Flying Circus, died of throat cancer yesterday at a hospital near his home in England.
He was 48 years old.


GREATER U.N. ROLE URGED BY SOVIETS
LEAD: The Soviet Union outlined a set of proposals today that are intended to give the United Nations a greater role in preventing conflicts, including the creation of a chain of ''war risk reduction centers'' around the world.


Man Guilty in Accident That Killed Officer
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was found guilty of criminally negligent homicide yesterday in the fatal shooting of a police officer by a sergeant last year.


Tyson Gets Extension
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the heavyweight boxing champion, will be allowed to perform a community-service sentence for speeding after the original 60-day deadline date.
Judge Stephen Safranko agreed yesterday in Albany to let Tyson conduct three youth clinics on Monday, two days after the deadline set Aug. 7 by the judge.


Short Brothers To Bombardier
LEAD: The British Government signed over the state-owned aircraft and guided missile maker Short Brothers P.L.C. to Bombardier, a Canadian company.
Bombardier, which makes subway rolling stock and small passenger jets, paid $:30 million, or $48 million, for Short Brothers.
The Government gave the Montreal company $:780 million, or $1.25 billion, to assist in the takeover.


DCNY Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,621,236
2,385,967
9mo net loss
707,934
b1,211,973
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income


Reeling Lions to Be Fed to Quakers
LEAD: There is no light at the end of any tunnel for Columbia.


LEBANESE MUSLIMS ASSAIL SAUDI TALKS
LEAD: Vowing to continue fighting, a coalition of Muslim and Druse Lebanese militias today strongly criticized the Arab League's efforts to mediate a peaceful settlement to the 14-year Lebanese civil war.


Wolf Financial Group reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolf Financial Group (OTC)
12mo to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
30,291,539
6,346,482
Net inc
b1,865,812
c2,490,614
Share earns
.29
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $160,000, or 2 cents a share, from utilization of capital loss carryforward.


STRAINED U.S. TIES REPORTED IN CHINA
LEAD: A secret analysis prepared for the Chinese leadership says that China's relationship with the United States has deteriorated sharply and will continue to be rocked by new conflicts, but that President Bush is quietly trying to limit the damage.


Physicians Don't Welcome New York State Health Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Racial Tensions in New York Blamed for School Disruption
LEAD: A student disturbance at Eastern District High School in Brooklyn on Tuesday was an isolated incident, provoked by what students believed was a white teacher's racist remarks and fueled by a perception that their complaints about the teacher were being ignored, students and staff members said yesterday.


Dennis McGee Is Dead; Cajun Fiddler Was 96
LEAD: Dennis McGee, a fiddler who performed on some of the earliest recordings of Cajun music, died on Tuesday.
He was 96 years old and lived in Eunice.


East and West Converge in Hong Kong Orchestra
LEAD: When a local music producer released a recording of Brahms's ''Hungarian Dances'' by the symphony orchestra that is based in this city, he marketed it as the work of a fictitious group, the Sinfonia Hungarica, because, he said, ''the international world didn't want to know about Hungarian dances made by the Hong Kong Philharmonic.


How Other Countries Handle Capital Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gooden Undergoes Further Tests
LEAD: Dwight Gooden acknowledged last night that he had undergone an extra medical scan last week to determine the nature of a mass of tissue in his right shoulder, near the torn muscle that disabled him for 10 weeks this season.
But the scan showed no tumor in the area, and the Mets' surgeon, Dr.
James C.


Mortgage Bonds At Jersey Utility
LEAD: The Atlantic City Electric Company offered $135 million of 30-year first mortgage bonds at competitive bid.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you're going to risk American lives, it's the President's view that you do so on your own timetable.
You do so based on your own plans, at a time of maximum opportunity and advantage.
You don't do so on the basis of someone else's plans and in response to rapidly changing circumstances.''


For 'Ferryshaw,' Fast Break Into Italian Sports Culture
LEAD: It is half an hour before the opening tipoff, and the leather-lung crowd at the Palaeur is already in a lather, screaming for victory, blood and heaven knows what else at unchartable decibel levels.


Physicians Don't Welcome New York State Health Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hampton Has Surgery
LEAD: Dan Hampton, a Chicago Bears defensive tackle, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left knee yesterday and will be out for at least six weeks.
The Bears placed Hampton on the injured reserve list. (AP)


CBS News Head Denies Fakery Charges
LEAD: Responding to allegations that CBS broadcast faked combat films during the war in Afghanistan in the mid-1980's, David W. Burke, the president of CBS News, said yesterday that the charges ''are simply not true.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze's speech in New York on Monday night misidentified the group he addressed.


HOUSE ACTS TO KILL '88 MEDICARE PLAN OF EXTRA BENEFITS
LEAD: Barely a year after Congress enacted expanded health benefits for older Americans, the House of Representatives voted today to repeal the program and the taxes and premiums that pay for it.


East-Bloc Is Said to Cut Managua Aid
LEAD: Two weeks after the State Department asserted that the Soviet bloc had increased arms shipments to Nicaragua, American intelligence officials have concluded that shipments have instead declined by about 20 percent this year, Administration officials said today.


U S West To Acquire Bond Insurer
LEAD: U S West Inc., the regional Bell telephone company serving the Rocky Mountain states, announced plans yesterday to more than double its investments in financial services businesses by acquiring Financial Security Assurance Holdings Ltd., the largest insurer of corporate bonds.


10-Year Notes By Finance Group
LEAD: TransAmerica Finance Group Inc. yesterday offered $100 million worth of 10-year notes.


U.S. CONSIDERED AID TO PANAMA REBELS
LEAD: The White House considered military support for the Panamanian uprising but ruled it out because it was uneasy with the rebel leadership, fearful of a trap and uncertain whether Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega had been captured, Administration officials said today.


Businesses Are Urged to Work With Schools
LEAD: Top personnel executives, educators and New York City officials agreed yesterday that businesses must work more closely with public schools and expand their own training programs to cope with an acute and worsening shortage of qualified workers.


Koch Mulls Professorship At N.Y.U.
LEAD: In the first inkling of what his life might be like after he leaves office in January, Mayor Edward I. Koch is discussing with New York University the possibility of becoming a professor.


A City Built for Rock 'n' Roll
LEAD: ''Most architects design a building and then leave it,'' said the London architect Mark Fisher. ''We take a barren jock-style stadium and transform it into a fantasy environment.''


Baltics Report
LEAD: This weekend the congress of the Latvian Popular Front will meet to assert its intent to bring about a fully independent nation.
No more veiled talk about ''economic sovereignty'' or confederation with the Soviet Union - the magic word is independence, the state of nationhood stolen from the Latvians 50 years ago in a pact between Stalin and Hitler.


Audiovox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
73,909,000
78,766,000
Net inc
339,000
195,000
Share earns
.04
.02
9mo sales
212,143,000
239,525,000
Net loss
1,060,000
b2,045,000
Share earns
-
.23


Dean Chamberlin, 82, Ex-Time Inc. Executive
LEAD: Dean Chamberlin, a retired Time Inc. executive, died of cancer on Tuesday in a nursing home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 82 years old and lived in Sarasota.


G.O.P. Senators Threaten Fight Over Gains Tax
LEAD: Senate Republicans threatened today to bring the Senate to a halt if Democrats invoked parliamentary rules to prevent the full Senate from voting on a proposal to reduce the capital gains tax rate.


Home Improvement
LEAD: MOST storm and screen doors are equipped with mechanisms to assure automatic closing and to protect the door from opening too wide or being blown open by wind.
Although these door closers seldom break, they need regular lubrication to keep operating smoothly and occasional adjustment to compensate for internal wear.


Joel S. Mitchell, 90, Ex-Corporation Chief
LEAD: Joel Stephenson Mitchell, the former chief executive of Standard Brands Inc., died Monday at his home in Lake Wales, Fla.
He was 90 years old.


Fuentes In a TV Film, On Life And Himself
LEAD: With his don't-bother-me sunglasses and flowing white scarf, looking like a high roller in a Fellini film, the Mexican author and critic Carlos Fuentes thrusts and parries his way through ''The Journey of Carlos Fuentes: Crossing Borders,'' to be shown nationally tonight on many public-television stations.


Close to Home
LEAD: ''THERE is an Arts and Crafts carpet to die for, and the most fantastic quilt I've ever seen.
You've got to go.''


Washington at Work; After Gaining a Hard-Won Stature, D'Amato Battles to Keep Hold of It
LEAD: This was supposed to have been the year that Alfonse M. D'Amato transformed himself from an ugly duckling into a swan.


USA Network Film Deal
LEAD: Cable television's USA Network said Tuesday that it had bought cable TV rights to 26 recent motion pictures, including the hits ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' and ''Three Men and a Baby,'' in a multimillion-dollar deal.
USA, which bought the package from Touchstone Pictures, said it would start broadcasting the films next May.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hospital Strike Averted In New York City Area  After a night of frenzied bargaining, negotiators for 44 private hospitals and nursing homes in the New York City area and their employees reached agreement on a three-year contract, narrowly averting a strike by thousands of workers.
Page B1.


Critic's Notebook; Richard Chamberlain Returns to His Stethoscope
LEAD: The world of medicine is understandably experiencing anxiety palpitations these days.
Soaring costs, malpractice suits, often frustrating efforts to cope with such crises as AIDS, drug addiction and increasingly indigent patients: the headlines are not comforting.
Significant public protests are spreading to Government agencies and pharmaceutical companies.


Photocomm Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photocomm Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,240,000
1,633,000
Net inc
-
b51,000
Yr rev
7,387,000
5,980,000
Net loss
500,000
304,000
Shares outst
6,650,000
5,000,000
b-Net loss  The latest fourth quarter net income was break-even.


Longest Trial Nears a Close
LEAD: Prosecution and defense attorneys rested their cases today in the McMartin preschool molestation trial, which, now in its third year, is the longest criminal proceeding in American history.
Closing arguments are to begin next week, and Judge William Pounders of Superior Court said he expected the case to go to the jury by Nov.


Esselte Seeking Office Supply Unit
LEAD: Esselte A.B. of Sweden said it was negotiating to buy the remaining 22 percent stake it does not own in its Esselte Business Systems Inc. unit, an office supply company in Garden City, L.I.
The company, which did not make a formal bid, said it would pay about $40 a share for Esselte Business.
The stock of Esselte Business jumped $5.125 yesterday, to $43, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Drug Boss Tells Of Giving Order To Kill 'My Girl'
LEAD: Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, an admitted major drug dealer, testified at his secret pleading last week that he had ordered his former girlfriend killed because she stole money from him and then ''spent it on a dude,'' according to court papers unsealed yesterday.


Ford Is Recalling 70,000 Cars
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has recalled about 70,000 1988 Ford Taurus, Mercury Sable and Lincoln Continental cars to repair a potential power-steering problem.
Ford announced the recall Tuesday, saying it would replace a power-steering pump pulley on cars with 3.8-liter engines.
The pulleys could come off, causing a loss of power steering, the company said.


Linear Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,985,000
5,450,000
Net inc
775,000
705,000
Share earns
.21
.19
9mo sales
17,021,000
16,629,000
Net inc
1,990,000
2,817,000
Share earns
.51
.73


CALIFORNIA WINS SEX BIAS PAY CASE
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled today that the State of California had not deliberately underpaid thousands of women in state jobs held predominantly by women.
The ruling dealt an apparently decisive blow to the largest lawsuit concerning this issue in the country.


Racist Remarks Provoked Disturbance at Brooklyn High School, Students Say


Varity to Pay $70 Million Less for K-H
LEAD: The Varity Corporation said today that it would pay $70 million less for the K-H Corporation, an auto parts maker in Detroit, than the $650 million it had agreed to spend last May.


Jewish Figure in Belgium Is Killed; Police Investigate Political Motive
LEAD: The leader of Belgium's principal Jewish organization was shot Tuesday in a hospital parking lot and died early today.
The police said they were investigating whether it was an anti-Semitic or political act.


Meggett Performance Spurs Giants' Success
LEAD: The Giants will carry a 4-0 record and a two-game division lead into their game Sunday against the Eagles in Philadelphia.
One unexpected reason for that early-season success is Dave Meggett, an undersized, small-college rookie who keeps finding new ways to help the Giants win.


The Exodus, the Bloc, the Ripple Effect
LEAD: As thousands of East Germans boarded trains tonight for their passage to the West, there were growing signs that the continuing exodus from East Germany was severely shaking the Governments in Prague as well as East Berlin.


California Journal; U.S.A.'s Culinary Rule: Hot Dogs Yes, Dogs No
LEAD: Few issues so profoundly divide the multifarious cultural and religious groups that have multiplied on the West Coast in recent years as the relative gastronomic merits of the world's fauna.


Bundesbank Is Expected to Raise Rates Today
LEAD: Economists and foreign currency dealers here are predicting West Germany's central bank will raise its key interest rates by at least one-half of a percentage point on Thursday.
Such a move would follow concerted efforts by the Group of Seven industrial nations to hold the dollar at its current levels or force it lower.


Boeing Strike Halts Work on $80 Billion in Planes
LEAD: The people who weld, rivet and fasten together airplanes for the Boeing Company, the maker of nearly 60 percent of the world's commercial jets, went on strike today, virtually shutting down production of $80 billion worth of aircraft.


Henderson's Sparks Help Burn the Jays
LEAD: In the second game, as in the first, the little things won for the powerful Oakland Athletics.
But this time they stemmed almost entirely from the person of Rickey Henderson.


Farm Co-op Income Up
LEAD: The Agriculture Department said today that the net income of farm cooperatives last year rose to nearly $1.7 billion, continuing a rebound from the sharp declines of the mid-1980's.
Combined business volume of cooperatives in 1988 was reported at $66.3 billion, up 10.3 percent from $60.2 billion in 1987.


Dionne Won't Retire
LEAD: Marcel Dionne, the veteran center who was told Tuesday that he would not play for the Rangers this season, has no plans to retire and intends to collect his $595,000 salary for the final year of his contract, his agent said yesterday.


East Germans Line Emigre Routes, Some in Hope of Their Own Exit
LEAD: Thousands of East Germans flocked to stations and junctions along the railroad line taking their compatriots from Prague to West Germany today in hopes of sneaking aboard.
Conditions became so hectic that the police had to clear the Dresden terminal by force and the doors of trains were sealed from the outside to block them.


Thrifts Bailout Law Has Regulatory Teeth
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.N. REFUGEE CHIEF CHIDED BY ENVOYS
LEAD: The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is under fire from senior associates and diplomats who deal with the agency.


Cheyenne Software reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheyenne Software (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
36,545,000
15,478,000
Net loss
351,000
1,183,000
Shares outst
9,655,064
9,111,564
Yr rev
99,223,000
57,167,000
Net loss
2,118,000
2,513,000
Shares outst
9,338,000
9,111,000


Coffee Prices Plunge Again; Sugar Ends Sharply Higher
LEAD: World coffee prices sank to new 14-year lows yesterday amid deepening pessimism about the prospects for a return to the price-support measures abandoned by the International Coffee Organization in July.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winn-Dixie Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 20
1989
1988
Sales
2,169,619,000
2,029,182,000
Net inc
25,052,000
20,206,000
Share earns
.63
.50
Shares outst
39,860,092
40,034,778


Physicians Don't Welcome New York State Health Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mining Trash Heap for Answers to Riddles
LEAD: A team of archeologists, microbiolgists and chemists has begun mining the riches of the vast Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island, and for them it is the little things of life that count:


Conversion Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conversion Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
946,428
2,635,169
Net inc
281,116
b2,270,003
Share earns
.12
.97
9mo rev
1,623,784
3,543,884
Net inc
945,235
b2,440,258
Share earns
.40
1.05


Bridge
LEAD: The bridge players of Australia, and particularly those in Perth, can look back with pleasure and pride on the world team championships last month.
The Bermuda Bowl and the Venice Trophy were successfully staged, thanks to an army of volunteers working behind the scenes.
Heading the organizing team were Keith McNeil and John Scudder, president and secretary of the Australian Bridge Federation, and Joe Greenfield, the


Player Gets Asylum
LEAD: Aleksandr Mogilny, who defected from the Soviet Union's national team to join the Buffalo Sabres last May, has been granted political asylum in the United States.
The approval of his asylum petition by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service means he will now be able to apply for a visa to travel in Canada.


Treasuries Inch Down in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds inched lower in slow, featureless trading yesterday.


Second Death Sentence Voted in Connecticut
LEAD: For only the second time since the early 70's, a Connecticut jury has voted to send a man to death row.
But defense lawyers said the circumstances of the verdict, announced Tuesday night in Waterbury, were as unusual as the ruling itself and would form the basis of an appeal.


Consolidated Fibres Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Fibres Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
31,271,000
106,481,000
Net inc
144,000
b41,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss and after an extraordinary credit of $2,396,000, or $1.21 a share.
The company said the extraordinary credit represents the dividend from the company's Canadian paper processing unit prior to the company's contribution of the unit to a joint venture, U.S.


Pacific Telecom
LEAD: Anchorage voters rejected a bid by Pacific Telecom Inc. to buy the largest city-owned telephone utility in the United States, unofficial municipal election results showed.
Pacific Telecom Inc., a unit of Pacificorp, offered $412 million for Anchorage Telephone Utility, which serves business and residential customers in Alaska's largest city.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Columbus Day parade, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 86th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 11:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.


A's Arms and Legs Win Again
LEAD: The headache that belonged to Jose Canseco when the morning broke now belongs to the Toronto Blue Jays.


Clark Earns Admiration From Beaten Opposition
LEAD: Mark Grace, Chicgo's first baseman, spoke admiringly of the hitting exhibition San Francisco's first baseman displayed tonight. ''It was his night tonight,'' Grace said.
Grace's manager chose to disagree. ''He didn't have a night,'' Don Zimmer said. ''He had a week.''


Secretariat, Racing Legend And Fans' Favorite, Is Dead
LEAD: The flags in the infield at Belmont Park were flying at full staff yesterday because tradition says not to lower them for the death of a horse.
One fan, who spoke for many, disagreed.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-21


Jury Suggests Death Penalty For the 'Night Stalker' Killer
LEAD: A Superior Court jury recommended today that Richard Ramirez, a 29-year-old drifter convicted last month as the ''Night Stalker'' responsible for at least 13 murders, be sentenced to the gas chamber.


Account of Plot: Close Call for Noriega
LEAD: Conspirators who tried to overthrow Gen.
Antonio Manuel Noriega on Tuesday planned to trap him in his office and turn him over to United States authorities, a businessman with close ties to the Panamanian armed forces said today.


Advisers Whoop Their Approval of New Museum
LEAD: In a preview tour of the new Children's Museum of Manhattan, several members of an advisory committee kicked bottle caps around an empty gallery, peeled back the brown paper covering the wall-to-wall carpet and chased each other around a cluster of their colleagues being interviewed for television.


Goldsmith Loses Round
LEAD: The investor Sir James Goldsmith lost another round today in his attempt to block state regulators from reviewing his $21.1 billion bid for B.A.T.
Industries, the British parent of the insurer Farmers Group Inc. and several United States retailers.
Federal District Judge John A. Nordberg refused to block the Illinois insurance director's review of the hostile bid, a Farmers spokesman, Jeffrey Beyer, said.


I. Magnin Addition
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company said it plans to convert seven Bullock's Wilshire specialty stores into I. Magnin stores next February.
The two chains have been operating under the same divisional management since their acquisition last year.
The larger Bullock's department store chain is not affected by the change.


Canadian Rock, at 4 Billion Years, Is Called Oldest
LEAD: Researchers have unearthed the oldest rocks ever discovered, chunks of granite in remote northern Canada that are nearly four billion years old, the National Science Foundation announced today.


Arnold Ehrlich, 66, Editor of Magazines
LEAD: Arnold Ehrlich, deputy editor of Town &amp; Country magazine and a former editor in chief of Publishers Weekly, died of lung cancer Tuesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Lillian Vernon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lillian Vernon Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
26,686,000
19,679,000
Net inc
541,000
b761,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
6,175,000
6,156,000
6mo rev
56,149,000
45,566,000
Net inc
1,831,000
253,000
Share earns
.30
.04
Shares outst
6,172,000
6,156,000


Concern Sets Repayment
LEAD: RW Technology Inc. has agreed to repay more than 600 investors who the Securities and Exchange Commission says were defrauded when the company sold stock at inflated prices.


Pop Radio Corp reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pop Radio Corp
12mo to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
17,498,240
5,191,731
Net inc
1,183,467
b2,683,885
Share earns
.42
-
Shares outst
2,815,732
1,504,566
b-Net loss


Funds Win in Stocks, Not Bonds
LEAD: The three best-performing mutual funds in the third quarter benefited from owning big blocks of airline stocks involved in takeovers and substantial stakes in Fannie Mae, Nike and a handful of Japanese insurance companies, according to a survey released yesterday.


Crate &amp; Barrel's Foray Into Furniture
LEAD: For more than two decades, Crate &amp; Barrel has built a dedicated following as a stylish but inexpensive merchandiser of glassware, kitchen utensils and accessories suitable for finishing a young adult's first real apartment.
Patrons affectionately spoof the company's European-style products by giving a French pronunciation to its name: krah-TAY &amp; bar-E


Europe to Aid Disney Park
LEAD: In a bid to reap some of the profits from Europe's growing leisure business, the European Community's financing arm said today that it was backing the huge EuroDisneyland theme park near Paris.


Rescuing Businesses Is Now a Big Business
LEAD: Frank J. Zolfo is in a business that booms when others do not.
The head of an accounting firm devoted to troubled businesses and their investors, he has thrived on the explosion in demand for services like his own.


Strike Averted As Hospitals Reach Accord
LEAD: After a night of frenzied bargaining, negotiators for most of the New York City area's private hospitals reached a contract agreement yesterday, narrowly averting a strike by thousands of their workers.


Goals of Fed Called Fulfilled
LEAD: Martha R. Seger, a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, said yesterday that the central bank had achieved a hoped-for ''soft landing'' in the nation's economy and that inflation was not a significant threat.


Merc Names New President
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange named a former commodity-trading enforcement official, R. Patrick Thompson, as its new president yesterday.


Drug Inquiry Continues
LEAD: Senior officials of The Athletics Congress voted yesterday to invesitgate any accusations of drug use in track and field in the United States that occurred within the previous six years.


Books of The Times; A Self-Portrait of Nabokov, From His Letters
LEAD:  Vladimir Nabokov  Selected Letters, 1940-1977  Edited by Dmitri Nabokov and Matthew J. Bruccoli  Illustrated. 582 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $29.95.


Youth Bitter Over Ban On Driving by Dropouts
LEAD: A teen-age father who is fighting a state law that bars high-school dropouts from driving before age 18 says such laws are probably a good idea, but there must be room for exceptions.


Shift in Fight On Air Rules
LEAD: The Congressional compromise reached this week on automobile emissions is one of the most significant indications of how far American industry has been forced to retreat from unbending opposition to tougher Federal clean air laws.


Dollar Is Mixed as Traders Await Move by Bundesbank
LEAD: The dollar was mixed against major currencies in fairly quiet trading yesterday with traders cautious ahead of today's meeting of West Germany's central bank.


Democrat Wins in Mississippi
LEAD: In a Mississippi Congressional district that has been Republican for nearly 17 years, a Democrat placed first in a special election Tuesday, earning a spot in a runoff on Oct. 17.


Review/Dance; Noh and Kyogen Specialties By Companies From Tokyo
LEAD: Two companies from Tokyo offered a sampling of classic Japanese theater on Tuesday night at the Lila Acheson Wallace Theater of the Japan Society.
The Kita Noh Theater, which traces itself back to a theater school founded in the 16th century, appeared in two examples of the refined theatrical form called Noh.


New Conran's President To Lead U.S. Expansion
LEAD: Conran's, a home-furnishings chain, is planning an expansion in the United States over three years with an altered name, Conran's Habitat, and a new president, Ray Brunner.


Campaign Trail; Police Union Puts Off Mayoral Endorsement
LEAD: The Patrolmen's Benevolent Association put off endorsing a mayoral candidate yesterday, prolonging the battle between David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani for the blessing of the city's most influential law-enforcement union.


Philadelphia Electric Sells $175 Million Bond Offering
LEAD: The Philadelphia Electric Company yesterday offered $175 million of first and refunding mortgage bonds at competitive bid.


Plan to Let Builder Buy Part of 61st St. Is Blocked
LEAD: Facing almost certain rejection by the New York City Planning Commission, the developers of a proposed luxury apartment tower on Amsterdam Avenue yesterday withdrew their request to buy part of West 61st Street to gain extra development rights for their skyscraper.


The New York City Election, 1989: CAMPAIGN OBSERVATIONS; Tough Politics or Race Baiting?
LEAD: The political rhetoric emanating from Rudolph Giuliani's mayoral campaign has become so dissonant and contentious that it calls for sorting out.
Right after the primary election, Mr.
Giuliani began to focus attention on David Dinkins's ties to Jesse Jackson.
That brought the issue of race to the center of this campaign, and raised questions about whether Mr.


Fama Bail Appeal Denied
LEAD: An appeals panel refused yesterday to set bail for Joseph Fama, the teen-ager accused of shooting Yusuf K. Hawkins in the Besonhurst section of Brooklyn on Aug. 23.
The five judges of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court said in a unanimous ruling that defense lawyers offered no compelling reasons to overrule two judges who had refused to set bail.





Siliconix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Siliconix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 10
1989
1988
Sales
27,191,000
30,034,000
Net loss
5,052,000
b378,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
13,357,000
12,847,000
9mo sales
83,201,000
89,069,000
Net loss
16,996,000
bc2,203,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
13,338,000
12,566,000


Sensible Restraint on Panama
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Panama's military strongman for the last six years, had his closest call yet on Tuesday.
While rival elements of his Panamanian Defense Forces shot it out, more than 10,000 U.S. military personnel stood minutes away, on full alert, but apparently ordered to stay out of the fight.


I.R.A. Kills Man, Calling Him A Protestant Militia Trooper
LEAD: Two gunmen fatally wounded a man several yards from a primary school in north Belfast today, and the Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for the attack.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robbins &amp; Myers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,786,000
24,053,000
Net inc
1,393,000
695,000
Share earns
.55
.29
Yr sales
106,052,000
97,625,000
Net inc
4,202,000
3,112,000
Share earns
1.73
1.31


Student Seized With Gun at High School in Bronx
LEAD: A student at Herbert H. Lehman High School in the Bronx was arrested yesterday after menacing two school officials with a loaded .357-magnum revolver in the school's hallways, the police said.


Shuttle Date Is Confirmed
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration today confirmed Oct. 12 as the launching date for the space shuttle Atlantis, which is scheduled to carry aloft a nuclear-powered probe for man's closest look at Jupiter.
Federal District Judge Oliver Gasch will hear arguments in Washington next Tuesday on a legal challenge in which a coalition of anti-nuclear groups has asked to postpone the flight until the risks associated with launching the probe are made clear.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Farmers Group Inc., Los Angeles, a unit of B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., named William H. Braddock executive vice president and H. J. Browning senior vice president and chief information officer.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iona Appliances
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,598,485
3,810,441
Net inc
755,206
20,706
Share earns
.24
.01
Results are in Canadian funds.


I.B.M. Head Is Optimistic
LEAD: The chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation, John F. Akers, said today that the recent forecasts of lower-than-expected third-quarter profits at the computer company did not reflect doubts about its long-term growth.


From Tiffany, Jewels of a Different Kind
LEAD: Walking into the Renwick Gallery right now is like walking into a rainbow: a visitor is enveloped in the glowing colors of a lush exhibition of the masterworks of Louis Comfort Tiffany, which opened Friday.
Many of the 65 objects on display, including windows, lamps, glassware and jewelry, come from private collections and have never before been on public view.


Calendar: Gardens and Other Fall Sights
LEAD: Nine Days of Flowers, Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.; 516-922-9207 (weekends, 516-922-9201).


The Silver And Black Head Coach
LEAD: Ken Stabler had suddenly been leveled by one of the Browns' pass-rushers.
John Madden hurried onto the field in Cleveland that day in 1977 to check the health of his quarterback, and then the Oakland Raiders' coach began hollering angrily at the perpetrator.
After a few words, the Browns' pass-rusher took a few ominous steps toward Madden until Art Shell, the Raiders' huge All-Pro offensive tackle, spoke up.


Michael Choukas, 87, a Propaganda Expert
LEAD: Michael Eugene Choukas, an expert on the uses of propaganda who taught sociology at Dartmouth College for 30 years, died Monday at the Hanover Terrace Health Care Facility in New Hampshire.
He was 87 years old and lived in Portsmouth, N.H.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Adjusting a Drain Stopper  Q.The ''pop up'' stopper in our bathtub drain barely opens, so water drains very slowly when the lever is flipped to the ''drain'' position.
With my fingers, I can lift the stopper about 1/4 inch.
What adjustment can I make to make the stopper open higher and thus provide a larger opening?


Review/Music; Ruhrworks, a Mixed Series Of Works From Germany
LEAD: Goethe House and the Ruhr Cultural Foundation are presenting Ruhrworks, a series that will run through January, focusing on what appears to be a thriving arts world in West Germany's industrial region.
The festival includes music, dance, art and photography exhibitions, films and lectures, with events set in performing spaces, libraries and churches all over New York


Two Arab Guerrillas Slain by Israeli Patrol
LEAD: Two Palestinian guerrillas were shot and killed late Tuesday night by Israeli soldiers on a routine patrol in the self-declared Israeli security zone just a few hundred feet from the northern border, an Israeli Army spokesman said today.


The Editorial Notebook; America's Japan Problem
LEAD: Akio Morita, co-founder of the consumer electronics giant Sony, is widely known in the United States.
He is admired as an astoundingly successful entrepreneur, and he represents the perseverance and ingenuity with which Japan has re-created its industrial vigor.
As a mark of that strength, his company last week made a $3.4 billion offer for Columbia


New Jersey Seizes School District In Jersey City, Citing Total Failure
LEAD: New Jersey seized control of Jersey City's troubled public schools today, saying ''total educational failure'' in the state's second-largest city had deprived its 28,000 students of their constitutional right to a ''thorough and efficient education.''


Cadence to Buy Gateway Design
LEAD: Cadence Design Systems Inc. agreed to buy the Gateway Design Automation Corporation of Lowell, Mass., for stock valued at more than $72 million.
Cadence, a growing supplier of software for the design of integrated circuits, reported sales of $67.1 million last year.


Many Elderly Fear Loss of Program That Helps Pays Cost of Long Illness
LEAD: As the House voted to kill a program intended to protect the elderly from ruinous medical bills, residents of several retirement homes here continued to express the fears that inspired the plan in the first place.


Amstar Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amstar Corp
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
284,119,000
260,451,000
Net inc
b38,063,000
c5,733,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $42,268,000.
c-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $9,160,000.


Blood Cells Linked to Smokers' Lung Illness
LEAD: Doctors have found that tiny cells called neutrophils tend to collect in the lungs of active smokers, and are then free to slowly destroy the lungs.


Cuomo Says Drug Unit Encouraged Fraud
LEAD: The agency that administers drug abuse programs in New York has been so eager to expand treatment in the state that it has spent money haphazardly and encouraged fraud, a report released today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's office said.


Planning Renovation? Better Keep It Simple
LEAD: PART of the pleasure of owning a home is the freedom to do it over.
But given today's soft residential real-estate market, anyone contemplating a home-improvement project - and an eventual sale - had best proceed with caution.
With housing prices soft, what buyers are looking for now is ''the architectural equivalent of the basic black dress: adaptable, subtle and always correct,'' said Frederick Peters, an executive vice president with Albert Ashforth &amp; Company in


Private Adoptions Aided By Expanding Network
LEAD: Couples who circumvent public and private agencies to adopt a baby independently have become part of an increasingly self-protective institution with its own advocacy groups, its own protocol and its own lawyers.


Bulova Seeking to Take The Watch Beyond Time
LEAD: The Bulova Corporation has a new face, indeed a variety of new faces -15 original one-inch-square geometric designs by Victor Vasarely, the French painter who is known as the father of ''Op Art.''


New England Bank in Pledge
LEAD: The Bank of New England said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with Federal banking regulators after the end of the second quarter promising to strengthen its real estate lending procedures.


Lebanese Hijacker Given a 30-Year Sentence
LEAD: A Lebanese hijacker who was lured into American custody two years ago was sentenced today to 30 years in prison for the seizure of a Jordanian airliner in Beirut with two Americans aboard.


Corrections
LEAD: The caption of an Associated Press picture in Business Day on Tuesday about the sale of the Zenith Electronics Corporation's computer business to Groupe Bull misidentified a Bull executive.
He was Michel Bloch, executive vice president for strategy and planning, not Francis Lorentz, the chairman.


Lottery Redone to Aid Weak Teams
LEAD: The National Basketball Association's board of governors, meeting in Manhattan yesterday, unanimously adopted an adjustment to the draft lottery that will give teams with the worst records a better chance of getting one of the three top choices.


MAYNARD JACKSON WINS IN ATLANTA
LEAD: Maynard H. Jackson rode through downtown Atlanta Tuesday in an Election Day motorcade that resembled an inaugural procession more than a last-minute campaign appearance.


Elizabeth Murrell-Fax, A Social Worker, 66
LEAD: Elizabeth V. Murrell-Fax, a social worker and former director of the Forest Neighborhood House in the South Bronx, died of cancer Tuesday in La Guardia Hospital in Queens.
She was 78 years old and lived in Queens.


How the House Voted on Move to Kill Medicare Expansion
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 360 to 66 by which the House of Representatives today voted to repeal the Medicare program insuring against financial catastrophe from high medical bills.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote to repeal the program.
Voting ''yes'' were 196 Democrats and 164 Republicans.
Voting ''no'' were 56 Democrats and 10 Republicans.


Stolen Cartoon Art Is Found In an Office on Park Avenue
LEAD: Westchester County officials have recovered 44 more pieces of cartoon art that were stolen from the Museum of Cartoon Art in Rye, an assistant district attorney said today.


Peugeot Talks Canceled
LEAD: Efforts to settle a month-old strike at France's biggest car maker, Peugeot, suffered a setback today when workers refused to end a sit-in at their plant and the management canceled talks.
Union sources said the strikers voted, 434 to 283, against ending the 10-day occupation of a foundry at the company's Mulhouse plant in eastern France.


Dylan Thomas's Light
LEAD: To the Editor:


Testing Time for 2 Devils
LEAD: Of all the buildings in the National Hockey League, the Spectrum in Philadelphia has been the most hostile place for Soviet hockey players.


Skinner Backs Preview Of Airline Takeovers
LEAD: Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner said today that it would be more effective for his department to review airline takeovers in advance, as would be required by proposed legislation, than retroactively, as it did recently in the case of Northwest Airlines.


Seidman Admission On Bailout
LEAD: A top Federal regulator confirmed today what private economists had been saying for some time: The $50 billion that Congress approved in August to liquidate and sell off hundreds of ailing savings and loan associations over three years could be inadequate to cover the losses at the institutions.


Corrections
LEAD: The ranking of Division I college soccer teams of Sports Pages yesterday was incorrect.
The teams listed were those of the Soccer America poll, not those of the Intercollegiate Soccer Association of America.
The correct poll appears today on page B26.


Egypt Reportedly Lists 12 Palestinians for Talks
LEAD: Egypt, backed by the P.L.O., has put forward the names of 12 Palestinians to sit at the negotiating table in peace talks between Palestinians and Israelis, Palestinians here said today.


Review/Ballet; Gregory and Bujones Are Guests in 'Giselle'
LEAD: Guest artists - Cynthia Gregory, Fernando Bujones, Leslie Carothers and Marin Boieru - brought special excitement to the production of ''Giselle'' that Connecticut Ballet Theater danced tonight at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College here.
At the same time, they fitted harmoniously into the action.


Panel Backs S.E.C. Choice
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, President Bush's nominee to head the Securities and Exchange Commission, was unanimously recommended today by the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee.


Banponce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banponce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,816,000
4,681,000
Per share
1.01
.81
9mo net inc
15,889,000
15,089,000
Per share
2.76
2.62


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Navratilova Bounces Back: Martina Navratilova lost the first three games but bounced back to beat Tine Scheuer-Larsen of Denmark, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday and clinch a quarterfinal berth for the top-seeded United States in the Federation Cup women's tournament in Tokyo.
The American team swept past Denmark, 3-0.


Bucks Hire Lee Rose
LEAD: Lee Rose, who was an assistant coach with the Nets last season, yesterday was named director of player personnel for the Milwaukee Bucks.
The 52-year-old Rose, who also spent two years as an assistant with San Antonio and 19 years as a college head coach, will replace Bob Zuffelato, who left the Bucks to become an assistant with the Minnesota Timberwolves.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Gates/FA Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gates/FA Distributing
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
36,375,000
15,475,000
Net inc
275,000
b832,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
98,625,000
57,023,000
Net inc
1,000
b1,145,000
b-Net loss


Microsoft Expects Higher Revenues
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation said it expects to report revenues of about $235 million for the quarter ended Sept. 30, an increase of about 34 percent above the $176 million it reported for the comparable period a year ago.
The company said it would release complete earnings information on Oct. 17.
Frank Gaudette,


Oil and Gas Outlook Mixed
LEAD: At least a third of the leading oil and gas companies plan to spend more on exploration and production this year, but most forecast a drop in prices and activity in 1990, an industry report said Tuesday.


As Hospital Agreement Is Reached, A Strong Union and Leader Emerge
LEAD: The contract agreement with the hospital workers' union is as much a political victory for the union and its young president, Dennis Rivera, as it is a triumph at the bargaining table.


Helen of Troy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
31,977,000
24,084,000
Net inc
3,400,000
2,440,000
Share earns
.62
.52
Shares outst
5,470,618
5,341,604
6mo sales
55,265,000
42,852,000
Net inc
5,327,000
3,734,000
Share earns
.97
.83
Shares outst
5,486,977
5,333,478


Audit at H.U.D. Finds Other Grant Problems
LEAD: A draft audit at the Department of Housing and Urban Development has identified yet another low-income Federal housing program that was marred by mismanagement and potential favoritism involving politically well-connected consultants and developers.


Campaign Matters; Talk of Slurs Enters 'Air War' In New Jersey
LEAD: Question: What evidence do prosecutors and political opponents have to prove that Representative James F. Florio, the Democrat running for governor, is linked to the Mafia?
Answer: None.
Question: Then are Republicans trying to smear a candidate as mob-tainted because he has an Italian last name?


U.S. SUES 4 CITIES ON TOXIC WASTES
LEAD: The Justice Department today filed lawsuits against Detroit, Phoenix, San Antonio and El Paso, charging failure to control industrial discharges of toxic wastes into their sewage treatment systems.


Fine-Tuning Treatment for High Blood Pressure
LEAD: Physicians treating high blood pressure say there is now such an abundance of effective medications that they can often fine-tune the choice of drug to the particular health needs of a patient.


Mets Talk with Johnson
LEAD: The Mets said today that Frank Cashen had finally reached Davey Johnson by telephone and opened a dialogue that would decide whether Johnson returned as manager next year.
They denied again in the strongest terms that the decision had been made.


When Work Means Bring the Kids
LEAD: It is 10 P.M. and the lights are low.
The toys, the high chairs, the diapers, the bottles, the crayons and the face paint have been stored for the night.
Danny Ross, 3 years old, Ryan Moulton, 5, and Ryan's brother Jake, 3, are relaxing on canvas cots watching ''Sesame Street'' on videotape.
Kristyna Jaquin, 2, is sound asleep beside them.


Senate Debates Bill Outlawing Flag Burning
LEAD: The Senate tonight stopped just short of passing a statute outlawing flag burning, legislation that many Democrats hoped would defuse the drive for a constitutional amendment to protect the flag.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: A FRIEND recently recalled how, when she was 11 years old, her parents told her she would spend the sixth grade in a class for gifted children instead of continuing at her old elementary school.
They expected their daughter, who had always been at the top of her class and who was generally bored with her schoolwork, to be elated.


The Savimbi Smear
LEAD: If you can't win a political argument on the merits, attack your opponent as a Communist.
It is an old Washington tactic.
But I have not seen it used as crudely in years as it has just been by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.65
9.05
8.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.77
7.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.88
7.86
7.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.78
8.76
30-YR.


Mine Workers Request Ties With A.F.L.-C.I.O.
LEAD: The United Mine Workers of America, which broke ranks with labor's umbrella organizations more than four decades ago, today requested affiliation with the A.F.L.-C.I.O.


South Carolina Begins Rebuilding Storm-Swept Beach Dunes
LEAD: With the highest tides in a decade threatening coastal communities already flooded by Hurricane Hugo, South Carolina began scraping beaches with bulldozers today to rebuild 65 miles of protective sand dunes washed away by the storm.


Overlooked Natives Amid the Exotica
LEAD: A COUPLE of years ago a friend in the nursery business sent me several perennials - two daisies and an aster - he had just imported from West Germany and wished to test for winter-hardiness in various regions of the United States.
These three not only got through the winter splendidly but also proved to be indispensable for the late-season garden.


Athens Journal; The Papandreou Affair: Did He Stoop to Snoop?
LEAD: In a nation that thrives on intrigue, the stories now seeping out of the Secret Service headquarters here are being consumed as avidly as honey cakes at a Greek wedding.


Review/Music; The Prism Saxophone Quartet, With 2 Composers
LEAD: The saxophone has been with us for nearly 150 years, and there have been ensembles of saxophonists for nearly all that time.
Yet, the repertory for saxophone quartet is surprisingly small, a problem many of today's ensembles sidestep by transcribing works written for other instruments.


Dow Up 16.53, to New Peak, Paced by I.B.M.
LEAD: Led by the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday, the Dow Jones industrial average rose to yet another historic high.


U.S., IN DRUG DRIVE, TO REGULATE SHIFT OF FUNDS ABROAD
LEAD: In an attempt to halt the extensive laundering of drug profits earned illegally in this country and sent abroad, the Bush Administration has decided to regulate international money transfers by American banks, the Treasury Department announced today.


A Connaught Victor Is Seen
LEAD: Institut Merieux S.A. of France emerged today as the apparent victor in a takeover battle for the Canadian biotechnology concern Connaught Biosciences Inc. after a rival team - Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and the Chiron Corporation -bowed out of the bidding.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif., a research and engineering company on military space systems, was awarded a $415.3 million increase in a Defense Department contract for engineering and technical support for the Air Force and other agencies in the 1990 fiscal year.


Bridge-Crossing and Other Explorations
LEAD: New York City's history and future, its buildings and its parks will be celebrated in a series of tours, exhibitions and lectures in the five boroughs this month.


Classics of Heating and Cooking
LEAD: ''STOVE Mania,'' David Erickson calls his passion.
After buying an 1876 wood-burning parlor stove for himself 12 years ago, the 38-year-old Mr.
Erickson became so enraptured that he left his job as a teacher in Boston and set up Erickson's Antique Stoves in a Victorian railroad depot in Littleton, Mass.


Use Force Against Noriega
LEAD: For nearly two years, the United States has been locked into confrontation with Gen.
Manuel Noriega.
Panama's dictator was indicted by two U.S. grand juries and dismissed by Panama's President in early 1988.
He is intensely unpopular in Panama, where his party lost the recent elections 3 to 1, and throughout Latin


Students Clash With Police; Zimbabwe University Closes
LEAD: Zimbabwe's only university was closed today after thousands of students protesting the arrests of two student leaders clashed with hundreds of riot policemen.


Presidents Want to Curb Pressures
LEAD: In a move designed to reduce time demands on college athletes, the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Presidents' Commission today decided to recommend a measure that would all but eliminate spring practice in football, shorten the basketball season by a month and reduce the number of basketball games by three.


Milton M. Rosenbloom, Copyright Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Milton M. Rosenbloom, a copyright lawyer, died of a heart attack Monday at the Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Teaneck, N.J.


High Plains Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* High Plains Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,066,926
b5,965,014
Share earns
-
.49
b-Net income


Review/Theater; Cocteau Repertory in Wilde's 'Earnest'
LEAD: There are few more enjoyable evenings in the theater than to accompany those Oscar Wilde dandies John Worthing and Algernon Moncrieff as they pursue, both in town and the country, love and earnestness.
In ''The Importance of Being Earnest,'' which is being presented by the Jean Cocteau Repertory company, Wilde uses his epigrams like a rapier, slashing his way through Mayfair drawing rooms and Hertfordshire gardens and leaving the cloak of hypocrisy that covered Victorian manners in tatters of laughter.


Sharedata Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sharedata Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,902,436
1,842,592
Net loss
286,154
b182,571
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
6,639,264
4,351,594
Yr sales
10,478,050
7,243,866
Net inc
960,493
1,198,174
Share earns
.18
.30
Shares outst
5,386,551
4,000,081


Greyhound Plans More Cuts in Fares
LEAD: Greyhound Lines Inc. said yesterday that it would cut bus fares for the third time this year in an attempt to woo back travelers disgruntled by rising air fares and weary of driving.


Solitron Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitron Devices (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,148,000
9,539,000
Net inc
228,000
b552,000
Share earns
.05
.13
6mo sales
18,668,000
19,882,000
Net loss
738,000
bc1,155,000
Share earns
-
.26


Market Place; Money Managers Keeping Pace
LEAD: THE nation's independent money managers slightly outperformed the overall stock market over the last 12 months, but trailed the market just a bit for the first three quarters of this year, according to statistics released yesterday.


Review/Dance; Graham Reinvents Her 'American Document'
LEAD: The truths the Founding Fathers held self-evident were anything but that in 1938 when European Fascism claimed the future for itself - and Martha Graham was impelled to create ''American Document,'' an experimental work that used the Declaration of Independence and the Emancipation Proclamation among its spoken texts.


An Unloved Loner and How He Is Used, in 'Mr. Hire'
When the body of a young woman is found lying in a thicket in a Paris suburb, murdered, it appears, by a holdup man who panicked, the police inspector first checks out Mr.
Hire (Michel Blanc), mostly because nobody likes him.
Mr.
Hire once served a six-month sentence for indecent exposure.
He also changed his name to Hire from Hirevitch, but neither fact would seem to justify the policeman's interest in him as a robbery-murder suspect.
The only excuse is profound suspicion of someone alien.


Selling Assets For Air Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rebuilding Begins For Youthful Islanders
LEAD: In five years, the Islanders dropped from the elite of the National Hockey League to the third-best team in a three-team market.


Personal Health
LEAD: Every day 20 million Americans take pills to lower their blood pressure.
And if some physicians had their way, most of the remaining 38 million Americans who have high blood pressure would be similarly medicated, taking one or more pills every day for the rest of their lives to ward off strokes, heart attacks and kidney disease.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 26 about a debate between candidates for governor of New Jersey misstated the site in some copies.
It was Monmouth College.


Navy Punishes Four for Iowa's Deficiencies
LEAD: The Navy said today that mild punishment had been administered to the captain of the battleship Iowa, two of his subordinate officers and a master chief petty officer for training and safety deficiencies uncovered in the investigation of the gun turret explosion that took 47 lives.


Death Toll Spurring Spanish Draft Resistance
LEAD: When the grim figures are announced each year, the Spanish Defense Ministry invariably tries to blame bad driving and personal problems for the large number of young Spaniards who die or commit suicide while doing military service.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The Administration will regulate international money transfers by U.S. banks, the Treasury said, in an attempt to curb the laundering of drug profits.
The Government will open a financial crimes center next month in Virginia to supply information on money laundering to several Federal agencies.


Yields Post Modest Rise
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report rose modestly during the week ended yesterday.


Enzon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enzon Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
200,000
202,000
Net inc
294,000
b1,556,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
12,350,000
10,829,000
Yr rev
2,656,000
309,000
Net loss
5,032,000
4,424,000
Shares outst
11,417,000
10,753,000


Bush Is Pressing for Angolan Cease-Fire
LEAD: President Bush tried today to revive a faltering cease-fire in Angola as the Administration stepped up its efforts to bring about direct negotiations between the Angolan Government and rebel forces armed by the United States.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,371,331
12,698,326
Per share
.72
.64
9mo net inc
40,956,276
34,646,527
Per share
2.05
1.74


Boston to Pay 1,500 Families To Settle Housing Bias Case
LEAD: The city has agreed to pay about 1,500 families up to $3,000 each to settle a housing discrimination suit.


Schools in Need of Help, Parents Say
LEAD: As they waited for their children this afternoon outside 80-year old Public School 33, most parents praised the school but expressed their approval of New Jersey's taking control of this city's school system.


Horace G. Alexander, A Quaker Writer, 100
LEAD: Horace G. Alexander, a teacher and writer who headed the British Quaker relief effort in India, died Saturday of a gastrointestinal illness at Crosslands, a Quaker retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 100 years old.


Profit Hopes Found Dimmer
LEAD: Executives' expectations for higher sales and profits in the coming months have dropped to the lowest levels in five years, according to a national survey released yesterday.


Mason Takes Stock After the Storm
LEAD: ''When it first started, I thought, 'Maybe I could get wiped out, here.' I thought it could definitely end my career.''


B-1 Makes Desperate Touchdown After Part of Landing Gear Fails
LEAD: A B-1 bomber made an emergency landing at Edwards Air Force Base in the California desert today after an increasingly desperate 12-hour flight in which the crew struggled unsuccessfully to lower the landing gear in the plane's nose.


Israel Foreign Debt Dips
LEAD: Israel's foreign debts totaled $24.1 billion at the end of June, down $900 million from the March figure, a Bank of Israel spokesman said today.
He said 90 percent of the decrease was because of repayments by the Government and private sector, while the rest was a result of the dollar's rise in the second quarter.


Review/Television; A Brooklyn Neighborhood Conquered by Crack
LEAD: Tonight at 11:30, Channel 2 gets closer to the drug scene than many viewers may find comfortable.
Mike Taibbi, the reporter, spent weeks in a neighborhood in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, which had 3,200 arrests in a recent 90-day period.
Smoking crack and shooting heroin are apparently the main activities for many residents.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Less AIDS From Blood Transfusions
LEAD: The odds of getting an AIDS infection from a typical blood transfusion were just 1 in 28,000 two years ago, and the risk is dropping by more than 30 percent a year as fewer AIDS carriers donate blood, a study says.


Trains To Be Cut In Canada
LEAD: The Canadian Government said today that it would cut passenger train service by more than 50 percent nationwide, touching off bitter protests in a country that was stitched together by railroads in the 19th century and where trains and the people who ride them are the stuff of national folklore.


Corrections
LEAD: The Economic Scene column in Business Day yesterday misstated part of a consent agreement between the Department of Transportation and Wings Holdings, the new owner of Northwest Airlines.
Under its terms, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines will retain a seat on Northwest's board, not relinquish it.
But that director must abstain from decisions involving ''sensitive competitive and international aviation matters.


White House Adds $200 Million to Polish Aid Plan
LEAD: Under pressure from Democratic lawmakers to respond more aggressively to the changes in Eastern Europe, the White House announced today that President Bush would ask Congress for an additional $200 million in economic aid for Poland.


SAILOR CONVICTED ON SPYING CHARGES
LEAD: A sailor stationed aboard a United States aircraft carrier in Japan has been sentenced to 35 years in prison for spying, a Navy spokesman said today.


Mexico Will Press Drug War, But Without Any U.S. Troops
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico told a joint session of Congress today that his nation intends ''to eradicate drug trafficking at its very roots.''


Glamis Gold Ltd reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glamis Gold Ltd
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,052,000
13,637,000
Net loss
5,214,000
b1,036,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income  Revenue represents revenue from gold production.


Gervin Wants to Return
LEAD: After pleading no contest to a driving while intoxicated charge, George Gervin, the former San Antonio Spurs star, says he hoped to make a National Basketball Association comeback this year.
Gervin was sentenced to 45 days in jail Tuesday.
But County Court-at-Law Judge Tony Ferro placed him on probation for one year, meaning Gervin will not have to serve jail time.


News Media Misapply Poll Results
LEAD: To the Editor:


As the Army Chief, Pinochet Won't Retreat
LEAD: The tears that Gen.
Augusto Pinochet shed at a recent ceremony served as a powerful reminder of the uncertain future facing the man who has reigned over Chile bigger than life for 16 years.


E. J. Osmanczyk, Journalist, 76
LEAD: Edmund Jan Osmanczyk, a Polish journalist, independent legislator and compiler of encyclopedias on international affairs, died Tuesday in Warsaw, where he lived.
He was 76 years old and had been suffering from heart disease.


Voter Registration Climbing for Mayoral Election
LEAD: The number of registered voters in New York City is at its highest in at least 10 years, and the figure is likely to grow in the next week, the final registration period before the Nov. 7 mayoral election.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Y.&amp;R. Expects Indictment For 1981 Deal With Jamaica
LEAD: The Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency said late yesterday that it would soon be indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges that it participated in bribing Jamaican officials to obtain the Jamaica Tourist Board's advertising account in 1981.
The agency, based in New York, said several of its employees might be indicted as well.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Polonia Request Denied
LEAD: A request by Luis Polonia, the Yankee outfielder, to be transferred from the Milwaukee House of Correction to the Dane County Jail in Madison, Wis., has been denied because of overcrowding, Franklin Lotter, superintendent of the House of Correction, said yesterday in Milwaukee.


Eagles Struggling But Giants Are Wary
LEAD: The Giants are 4-0 and lead their division by two games.
The Eagles are 2-2 and are playing erratically and have many key injuries.


Brooks Bros. Chief to Retire
LEAD: Brooks Brothers, the New York-based apparel retailer, said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, Frank T. Reilly, would retire at the end of the year.


President to Undergo Surgery To Remove Cyst on a Finger
LEAD: The White House said today that President Bush would undergo a minor operation Friday to remove a cyst from the middle finger of his right hand.


Weirton Steel Sells Notes Due in 1999
LEAD: The Weirton Steel Corporation, which was bought by its employees a few years ago, is offering $300 million in senior notes due 1999 through Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Metropolitan Baedeker; Cape May: Easy City to Tour, With Bird Watching Close By
LEAD: Cape May is a New Jersey shore town, but one that is a cut different from most others.
It is at the state's southeastern tip, which is actually south of the Mason-Dixon Line.
Nevertheless, its charm is not in its Southern ties, but in its Victorian ones - its fidelity to the buildings and parks that have given the place its distinctive look.


Colombian Vote Due on Drug Extraditions
LEAD: The Government announced today that it would let the voters decide if suspected drug traffickers wanted in the United States should be extradited.


Law Schools Seeking to Limit Students' Part-Time Work
LEAD: Using letters and moral persuasion, law school deans in the nation's largest metropolitan areas are urging law firms to discourage students from spending too much time in part-time jobs at their firms.


Safe! Mets Decide to Let Johnson Keep His Job
LEAD: The Mets put an end to weeks of speculation and indecision tonight when they announced that Davey Johnson would return as manager next year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about a memorial service for A. Bartlett Giamatti misidentified Dr.
Leon E. Rosenberg, one of the people scheduled to speak.
He is the dean of the Yale School of Medicine.
The service is scheduled for 4 P.M. today at Woolsey Hall on the Yale campus.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Management Association, a management training organization, said its board had named Dr.
Thomas R. Horton chairman and chief executive, and David Fagiano president.


Brighter Ways to Dress Up the Leg
LEAD: Small shops selling an array of quirky as well as conventional hosiery have been moving leg wear from the obscurity of the lingerie department to the neon-lighted prominence of storefront windows.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL; Hornets and Heat Sign Their Top Picks
LEAD: J.R.
Reid, the Charlotte Hornets' first-round draft pick, has been signed to a multiyear contract.
The announcement yesterday came only hours before the Miami Heat signed its No. 1 draft choice, Glen Rice, the forward who led Michigan to the national championship last season.


Books of The Times; A V.S. Pritchett Collection of Characters
LEAD:  A Careless Widow and Other Stories  By V. S. Pritchett  164 pages.
Random House. $16.95.


Sea Containers
LEAD: Sea Containers Ltd. said that by the end of the month, it would make public a ''recommended alternative'' to the hostile tender offer by Temple Holdings P.L.C. that would involve significant asset sales.
The company said it would announce the plan regardless of the outcome of various legal actions taken regarding the Temple bid and despite any further action taken by Temple.


Ex-Senator and a Nixon Cabinet Member Asked Help From H.U.D.
LEAD: Documents released today by the Department of Housing and Urban Development add to the list of prominent Republicans known to have sought help from former Secretary Samuel R. Pierce and other senior H.U.D. officials.


Panama Opposition Figures Seized in Crackdown
LEAD: Armed men attacked opposition party headquarters tonight hours after Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega called for a crackdown on his opponents and urged Government employees to root out traitors in their ranks.


Business Digest
LEAD:  Companies


Wendolin J. Nauss Jr., Lawyer, 69
LEAD: Wendolin John Nauss Jr., a lawyer in Manhattan for 40 years and a partner in the firm of Seward &amp; Kissel, died of a heart attack Wednesday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.


14 Tons of Cocaine Are Seized in Texas and at Sea
LEAD: More than 14 tons of cocaine were seized Wednesday in two raids, one on a house near the Mexican border and the other on a Panamanian vessel at sea, Federal narcotics agents said.


Review/Cabaret; A Jeff Harnar Evening Of Comden and Green
LEAD: Early in ''Carried Away,'' his breathlessly paced evening of songs with lyrics by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, Jeff Harnar observes that throughout their long-running collaboration, the team kept writing songs for their favorite character, New York City.
These remarks introduce ''Lonely Town,'' a memorable ballad with music by Leonard Bernstein that has one of Comden and Green's finest lyrics.


Crash Puts New Focus On Cockpit Experience
LEAD: The crash of a USAir 737 at La Guardia Airport last month has sharpened Federal and industry scrutiny of pairing relatively inexperienced pilots in the same cockpit.
Also receiving more attention is the customary taking of turns at the controls.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  The Indian Shenhai


Conference Chiefs Back Shorter Athletic Schedules
LEAD: Most college conference commissioners said this afternoon that they agreed with the spirit of the dramatic legislation proposed by a National Collegiate Athletic Association panel, legislation intended to reduce the time pressures faced by college athletes.


ISRAELIS POSTPONE PEACE PLAN MOVE
LEAD: Israel's divided inner Cabinet postponed a decision today on Egypt's proposal for direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations intended to unlock stalemated Middle East peace efforts.


Film Festival; 'Sweetie,' a Wry Comedy By New Australian Director


POOR MANAGEMENT CITED AT A-PLANT
LEAD: The Energy Department said yesterday that bad management had contributed heavily to the extensive environmental problems at its Rocky Flats plant, an aging complex near Denver that makes plutonium triggers for nuclear bombs.


Sour German Birthday; Humiliation of Exodus to WEst Overwhelms East Berlin's Celebration of First 40 Years
LEAD: If it was not that his compatriots were fleeing his land through every crack they could find or create, the 40th anniversary of East Germany might have been a crowning moment for Erich Honecker.


Report Says Soviet Cuts Would Delay Attack
LEAD: Moscow will be incapable of a surprise attack on the West by 1991 if it makes the cuts in conventional forces promised by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the International Institute for Strategic Studies said today.


First Executive Stake Is Sought
LEAD: Rosewood Financial Partners said it had filed for Federal antitrust clearance to raise its stake in the First Executive Corporation to 49.9 percent from 9.95 percent.
Rosewood is controlled by the Caroline Hunt trust, benefiting members of the Hunt family of Texas.
First Executive is a Los Angeles-based life insurance comapny.


Review/Art; The Pottery of George Ohr At American Craft Museum
LEAD: The times have almost caught up with George Ohr, the turn-of-the-century American potter who always knew that he was a genius and that the pots he produced were unprecedented as both art and craft.
The exhibition of 91 examples of Ohr's work that has just opened at the American Craft Museum could be larger and more complete.


Results Plus
LEAD:  GOLF  Three Tied for Lead: Lanny Wadkins posted an early eight-under-par 62 yesterday and then watched Mark Wiebe and Tom Sieckmann match it in the first round of the Texas Open at the Oak Hills Country Club in San Antonio.
The trio, all seeking their first title of 1989, held a one-shot lead over Dan Forsman.


Metro Datelines; 4 Bodies Found in Vacant Lots
LEAD: The bodies of four Hispanic men who were bludgeoned to death have been found since July 31 inside bags in vacant lots in Queens, the police said yesterday.
Investigators said they were baffled by the killings and had identified only one of the victims.


PARTY IN HUNGARY SEEKING TO REBUILD
LEAD: As the Communist Party gathers its shrinking forces for a Congress opening Friday, the party's chief of ideology propaganda said the leadership's expectations were modest.


Pop/Jazz; New York as Grand Ole Opry Country
LEAD: COUNTRY music, which all too frequently skirts New York while making its way around the rest of America, is invading Manhattan for more than three weeks, starting tonight.


Group Lowers Offer for American Medical
LEAD: The investor group set to acquire American Medical International Inc. for about $2 billion, plus $1.4 billion in assumed debt, canceled its agreement today and submitted a new proposal worth at least $260 million less in cash.


A's Phillips: Clear Head, Dirty Uniform
LEAD: In one corner of the clubhouse, far from where Rickey Henderson and Carney Lansford were addressing masses of microphones, Tony Phillips stood in front of his locker trying to explain what it is he does for the Oakland Athletics.
But his uniform said it better.


Cover-Up and Privacy in Nixon vs. ABC
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flames Top Wings 10-7
LEAD: The Soviet star Sergei Makarov scored a goal in his National Hockey League debut and Jiri Hrdina and Joe Nieuwendyk each scored twice as the Calgary Flames opened defense of the Stanley Cup by hanging on for a 10-7 victory over the Detroit Red Wings tonight Makarov, part of the first influx of Soviets into the N.H.L., also had two assists as the Flames, who won the Stanley


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Faces and Le Cirque


Retail Sales Up, but Durables Lag
LEAD: The nation's biggest retailers yesterday reported generally strong sales in September, but the lag in big-ticket, household durable goods continued to hurt results, particularly at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and Montgomery Ward &amp; Company.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Audit Bureau Examines Coupons in Magazines
LEAD: Reflecting concern about the possibility of coupon fraud, the Audit Bureau of Circulations said this week that it would begin studying the coupon-handling practices of magazines.
In a pilot project, TV Guide will be the first magazine to submit to the examination, which checks the printing, storage, handling and distribution of coupons.


Film Festival; Postwar 'Sadness' In Taiwan
LEAD: The most dramatic and affecting moment in Hou Hsiao-hsien's ''City of Sadness'' has the calm of a still photograph.
The camera lingers on a young Taiwanese named Lin Wen-ching as he stares from a prison window toward the place where his cellmates -also political prisoners of the Nationalist Chinese - have just been taken.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  From Africa and Asia


New Faces and a New Attitude for Nets
LEAD: If the Nets do not improve this season, it will not be because they were afraid to make changes.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We kept looking for something from the defense and couldn't find anything.
The only thing I believed about his testimony was that when he started out, he was earnest.''  - Ricky Hills, foreman of the jury that convicted Jim Bakker.  [ A1:4. ]


For Boeing Strikers, Walkout Is Welcome Respite
LEAD: Across the street from the cavernous building where the Boeing Company builds 747 jets is an old cafe called the Overtime Inn.


Estonia Suspends Part of Disputed Vote Law
LEAD: The Estonian legislature voted today to suspend a clause in its new election law requiring that voters in local elections fulfill a residency requirement.


TV Weekend; A Love Affair and a Complication on ABC
LEAD: As a made-for-television movie, ''I Love You Perfect'' has the virtue of not being entirely predictable.
In fact, for long stretches, it is downright puzzling.
That's one way, apparently, of grabbing a viewer's attention, which is what ABC will be attempting this Sunday night at 9 o'clock.


Massachusetts Speaker Holds Off Insurance Ban
LEAD: The Massachusetts House voted Wednesday to delay for a year the key provision of the state's universal health insurance law after turning back an attempt to repeal it.


Courter Gets A New Look At Jersey And Himself
LEAD: Whether riding shotgun in the front seat of his Mercury Grand Marquis, sprinting through the air in a rented helicopter, or just listening to his opponent's latest attack against him, Representative Jim Courter says he is learning new things about New Jersey, about politics and about himself.


Dinkins's Road to City Hall Goes by California
LEAD: David N. Dinkins has campaigned in the last two weeks in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn, the Fordham neighborhood of the Bronx and New Dorp, Staten Island.
Within the next two weeks, his quest for City Hall will take him to Beverly Hills, Georgetown and the Loop.


Officials Split Over Options
LEAD: Senior officials of the nation's four options exchanges squared off today in testimony to a House finance subcommittee over a plan to allow options to be traded on more than one exchange.


Bach's Mass
LEAD: The German Bach specialist Helmuth Rilling will conduct the New York Philharmonic in a performance of Bach's Mass in B minor this afternoon at 2 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The choir will be Mr.
Rilling's own Gachinger Kantorei, a resident ensemble at his International Bach Academy in Stuttgart.
The soloists are Sylvia McNair, a soprano; Marjana Lipovsek, mezzo-soprano; Howard Crook, a tenor and Mark Pedrotti, a bass.


Icahn Increases Stake in USX to 13.06%
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn has increased his stake in the USX Corporation and plans to acquire more of its stock, according to documents filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Human Resources, Still Reeling
LEAD: William Grinker, head of New York City's Human Resources Administration, once called his post ''the toughest job that one could imagine.'' Now he is resigning after three years in that job.
While he deserves credit for a few successes, his agency remains swamped by the waves of social problems generated by the housing shortage, crack, AI


Peter R. Lessler, 41, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: Peter Rodney Lessler, a lawyer and senior vice president for planning and acquisitions at Dun &amp; Bradstreet, died, apparently of a heart attack, on Wednesday at St.
Clare's Hospital and Health Center in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.


Lowyd Ballantyne, 65, A Plastic Surgeon, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Lowyd W. R. Ballantyne Jr., a retired plastic surgeon, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at North Carolina Memorial Hospital in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 65 years old and lived in Chapel Hill.


Protesters Seize Embassy in San Salvador
LEAD: Twenty relatives of political prisoners and ''disappeared'' people stormed the Costa Rican Embassy and seized 19 hostages today to protest against the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador.


Dining Out Guide: Lincoln Center Area
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Andiamo!  ** (Nov. 18, 1988), 1991 Broadway, near 67th Street (362-3315) - Andiamo!, two blocks north of Lincoln Center, is set in a lofty space with striking, large abstract paintings and constructions.


8,000 Jubilant East Germans Arrive in the West


Some of Noriega's Top Advisers Are Seen Among Coup's Plotters
LEAD: Among the rebellious officers who took part in the violent coup attempt against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega were some of his close advisers, including two officers directly responsible for protecting the Panamanian leader from such a betrayal, diplomats and officials here said today.


On Stage
LEAD:  A Pinter Double Bill


Paterno Is Rolling Up His Sleeves and Cuffs
LEAD: Penn State had its first losing record in more than half a century came last year and it bothered Joe Paterno, the university's revered coach, as much as any rabid alumnus.


Auctions
LEAD:  Newman's Cars


British Steel Move
LEAD: British Steel P.L.C. said it would acquire the family-owned C. Walker &amp; Sons Ltd. for $:330 million, or about $529 million.
Walker, which processes steel, is British Steel's largest customer.
The company has 3,400 employees at more than 50 locations in Britain and Ireland.
For British Steel, it would be the first significant acquisition since its shares were sold to the public in 1988.


Turgeon and Terreri Lead Devils to Opening Victory
LEAD: The Devils came up with such an inspiring performance in their season opener tonight at the Spectrum that it overshadowed the National Hockey League debuts of New Jersey's two Soviet defensemen, Vyacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov.


Stocks End Day Mixed; Dow Up 2.47
LEAD: Stocks ended narrowly mixed yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average rose modestly to yet another high.


Mabel Staupers, 99, Leader for Nurses, Dies
LEAD: Mabel K. Staupers, a nurse who spent her career encouraging black women in the health-care profession, died of pneumonia Saturday at her home in Washington.
She was 99 years old.


New Chief Takes over Schools for Jersey City
LEAD: In her first remarks Wednesday as the state's new Superintendent of the Jersey City school system, Elena J. Scambio complained about ''filthy'' walls at central headquarters.


Sports People: BOXING; Good Works by Tyson
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, left his training camp in Las Vegas, Nev., yesterday for Albany to perform court-ordered community service stemming from speeding violations earlier this year, Don King, the fighter's promoter, said.
Tyson has been training for several weeks for his Nov. 18 title defense against Razor Ruddock in Edmonton, Alberta.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
8.65
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.79
7.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.81
7.88
7.53
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.17
8.29
8.75
30-YR.


B. Altman Sale Is Accelerated
LEAD: The L. J. Hooker Corporation, the Australian developer in Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings in the United States, said yesterday that it would accelerate the sale of its seven B. Altman department stores because of its inability to provide financing to revamp and modernize the stores.
The 114-year-old B.


Johnson and Lewis Meet in a New Venue
LEAD: Ben Johnson and Carl Lewis faced each other today for the first time in more than a year, this time in the unlikely setting of a committee hearing room on Capitol Hill.


Dr. Robert Tuby, 82, Orthopedic Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Robert Tuby, a retired orthopedic surgeon, died of a heart attack Saturday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 82 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.


Soviets Said to Double Cambodia Aid
LEAD: The Soviet Union has sharply increased its military aid to the Cambodian Government in Phnom Penh this year, roughly doubling deliveries of arms and ammunition over 1988 levels, Asian diplomats and Cambodian rebel leaders say.


Bush's Report Card
LEAD: Most state governors approved of their ''summit conference'' with President Bush because it focused attention on the nation's troubled education system, and because Washington and the states agreed to set national performance standards - to be measured by a sort of ''report card'' on every state and the Federal


Child Dies as Mother Forces 2 to Plunge
LEAD: A 32-year-old Queens woman whose home life had been unraveling herded her five children into her clothes-strewn bedroom yesterday and forced two of them out the window of the 10th-floor apartment before rescuers burst in, officials said.
The woman's 7-year-old daughter died after plunging to the ground, and a 3-year-old son was critically injured.


Van Is Hope for Bronx 'Throwaways'
LEAD: The young prostitutes rush to the van like children gathering around an ice cream truck on a hot day. ''Hey, man,'' they call. ''Where are the condoms?
Give me some condoms.'' The van belongs to Project Street Beat, a program of Planned Parenthood of New York City, and the teen-agers it attracts work the harshest streets of the South Bronx, in decaying neighborhoods rife with drug abuse, unwanted pregnancy and AI


Sports People: COLLEGE BASKETBALL; Video Firm Sues Pitino
LEAD: Rick Pitino, the University of Kentucky's new basketball coach, has been sued by Dick Regan Productions, which has charged the former Knick coach with breach of contract regarding video and television production agreements.
The $5 million suit was filed in New York State Supreme Court yesterday.


Sysco Offers $330 Million In Liquid Yield Option Notes
LEAD: The Sysco Corporation, which is engaged in food distribution and service systems, yesterday priced $330 million in liquid yield option notes due 2004 through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


American Air Gets Trump Bid Of $7.5 Billion
LEAD: Donald J. Trump yesterday offered to buy the nation's largest airline, American Airlines, with a $7.5 billion offer for the AMR Corporation, its owner.


Sandstrom a Key Man in Rangers' Blueprint
LEAD: In the hours before a game, Tomas Sandstrom can be found in the basement of Madison Square Garden, his stick laying across a work table.
With a gas torch, a saw and a bit of imagination, Sandstrom will labor over the stick for half an hour, subtly shaping it to his specifications.


Antiques at the Armory
LEAD: More than 110 dealers will display paintings, rugs, toys, jewelry, quilts, linen and other items at the New York Armory Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street.
Hours are noon to 6 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission is $7.
Information: 861-3358.


Judge Refuses to Block Shoreham Agreement
LEAD: A judge refused today to block a pact to tear down the Shoreham, L.I., nuclear power plant.


St. John's Inaugurates a President


Biin Seeks Buyer For Technology
LEAD: Biin, a venture between the Intel Corporation and Siemens A.G. of West Germany, said it was seeking a buyer for its computer technology.
Formed in June 1988, Biin was developing a computer that would use multiple processors for highly specialized applications, where the possibility of system failures must be minimized.


Nursing Home Fire Kills at Least 11 in Norfolk
LEAD: A fire broke out in a 160-bed nursing home Thursday night, killing at least 11 people and sending dozens to hospitals, the authorities said.


Above All, Boeing Wants to Slow Wage Increases
LEAD: Because it is struggling to fill a huge backlog of orders for commercial airliners, the Boeing Company did not want a strike and was surprised when production workers rejected management's wage proposals and walked out, company executives said yesterday.


Sports People: AUTO RACING; Injured Foyt Improving
LEAD: A. J. Foyt's condition was upgraded to good yesterday and he was moved from the intensive care unit to a private room at Charlotte Memorial Hospital in North Carolina.


Dora Friedman, 77, an Aide in Government
LEAD: Dora Zucker Friedman, an aide to government officeholders and an advocate for West Side tenant groups, died in her sleep, apparently of natural causes, Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 77 years old.


Restaurants
LEAD: When the Hong Kong-based Peninsula Hotel chain took over the Hotel Maxim's de Paris on Fifth Avenue at 55th Street last year, it inherited a somewhat prissy Old World French dining room called Adrienne that, despite its quality food, never really caught on among New Yorkers.
Diners in New York City still need compelling reasons to enter a hotel restaurant for a meal, especially one without a separate street entrance.


G.M. Sets Chrysler Venture
LEAD: In a move that underscores a long-term change in the auto industry, the General Motors Corporation announced yesterday that for the first time it would establish a joint venture with its smaller competitor, the Chrysler Corporation, to make manual transmissions and other components.


Ogden Merger Pact Is Set With ERC
LEAD: The Ogden Corporation entered into an agreement with ERC International Inc., under which Ogden would acquire ERC in a stock exchange of 0.406 Ogden common share for each outstanding ERC common share.
ERC's shares soared 30.7 percent on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday after the announcement.
They closed at $12.25, up $2.875, while


Celebrating Victoriana In Its Gingerbread Kingdom
LEAD: THE joke about this very commercialized but still charming seaside resort is that it has more Victorian structures than there were actual Victorians.
Victoriana is a veritable industry here; it's alive and spreading in houses, hotels, bed and breakfasts, guest houses, churches, restaurants and even the Cape May Point Lighthouse that stands between the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware


Numbers Anyone?
LEAD: How important is the use of numbers in everyday life?
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art counts the ways with the free exhibition ''Numbers,'' which will run through Oct. 26 at the college's Arthur A. Houghton Jr.
Gallery and Lubalim Study Center, Third Avenue and Seventh Street.


Dalai Lama Wins the Nobel Peace Prize
LEAD: The Dalai Lama, the exiled religious and political leader of Tibet, was named the 1989 winner of the Nobel Peace Prize today in recognition of his nonviolent campaign over nearly 40 years to end China's domination of his homeland.


Freight Access Program for New York City Remains Essential
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cubs Rebound Early and Often to Even the Series
LEAD: They used to call the Cubs a lot of things when Rick Reuschel pitched here, many of them uncomplimentary.
But those are distant if unpleasant memories now, at the end of a season that will be remembered here for the achievements of the Boys of Zimmer.


Metro Datelines; Witness in Mob Trial Found Slain in Bronx
LEAD: A prosecution witness who testified against three reputed mobsters in the killing of a New York City police detective - and then recanted -was found shot dead in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.


Bakker Is Convicted on All Counts; First Felon Among TV Evangelists
LEAD: Jim Bakker, who built a multimillion-dollar religious empire on an image of wholesome values and religious faith, was convicted today on all 24 fraud and conspiracy counts he faced in Federal court here.


Review/Art; At a Show Featuring Prints, The Subject Is Ambition
LEAD: ''Projects and Portfolios,'' the Brooklyn Museum's 25th National Print Exhibition, which opens today, is not like most other surveys.
It does not present a dizzying number of unrelated works by as many artists.
It does not merely celebrate the momentarily chic, nor does it lack a point of view.


Metro Datelines; Cook Faces Charges In Woman's Death
LEAD: A short-order cook accused of dismembering his roommate's body and boiling it was indicted yesterday on murder charges.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Review/Film; Tom Selleck as a Police Pawn, in 'Innocent Man'
LEAD: Really, it's no less likely than waking up to find oneself metamorphosed into a giant cockroach.
Jimmie Rainwood (Tom Selleck), a nice, solid citizen with a chirpy wife (Laila Robins) and an airline job, is minding his own business one day when he chances to take a shower.
Moments later, he is drying his hair when the police burst in, mistake the hair dryer for a gun, shoot Jimmie, discover their mistake and then arrest him on a trumped-up drug charge.


Goldsmith Plans New B.A.T. Offer
LEAD: Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French financier, said he intended to make a new bid for B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. once his Hoylake Investments Ltd. received approval from insurance commissioners in nine states.
Hoylake's $21 billion bid was allowed to lapse by the British Takeover Panel, partly because of regulatory delays involving the Farmers Group, B.A.T.


FLAG-BURNING BAN IS VOTED BY SENATE
LEAD: The Senate today approved legislation intended to outlaw flag burning and other forms of flag defacement, setting the stage for a battle later this month over a proposed constitutional amendment to accomplish the same purpose.


Petit Sent To Quebec
LEAD: The Rangers, in what they called General Manager Neil Smith's first trade of significant magnitude, yesterday sent Michel Petit to the Nordiques for Randy Moller.


Review/Music; Congo's Beat Lifts a Crowd To Its Feet and the Floor
LEAD: Loketo, one of the premier soukous groups now based in Paris, came to S.O.B.'s on Wednesday night and did what it does best: packed the dance floor.


The Drug Boat
LEAD: Mario Cuomo is a good man to talk to for a fresh supply of an essential weapon in the war against drugs - stubbornness.


Lodestar Discloses ADC Capital Plan
LEAD: The Lodestar Group disclosed that it had proposed a recapitalization plan to ADC Telecommunications Inc. that would have given its shareholders a special dividend of $16 a share in cash and $2 in senior subordinated debt.
Lodestar valued its plan at $22 to $24 a share, or about $316 million, because A


Repellant May Not Combat Lyme Disease
LEAD: Precautions like insect repellant ''may not be practical'' to protect people against tick-borne Lyme disease, Federal health officials said today.


House Endorses Tax Credits And Grants for Child Care
LEAD: The House today endorsed a greatly expanded government role in assisting parents with child care.


Democracy in Chile May Prove Elusive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peru Police Kill 2 Guerrillas
LEAD: The police killed two suspected Maoist guerrillas in Lima today after one of them tossed a grenade at a passing police car, the authorities said.
A man and woman were painting slogans favoring Shining Path guerrillas when the man threw the grenade, the police said.
The police also said a bomb exploded beneath a car on Wednesday in the northern city of


Youth in Central Park Rampage to Aid Prosecutors
LEAD: One of the teen-agers involved in a wilding rampage in Central Park last April has agreed to cooperate with prosecutors and possibly testify against six other youths in the case.


Rams Not Too Excited About Their 4-0 Start
LEAD: You get the feeling here - once again - that the Los Angeles Rams are going places, big places.
Last Sunday they topped the glitzy San Francisco 49ers at Candlestick Park, 13-12, in the final seconds, championship-caliber fashion.
The Rams now have a dangerous passing attack to complement their longtime running ways.


Washington Talk; The Monument to '88 Lives in Politics of '89
LEAD: A year ago, many politicians and analysts said the 1988 Presidential campaign would have little to do with governing, little to do with the issues and problems that would shape the years that followed.
To the Democrats' despair and the Republicans' delight, they were wrong.
If you seek the monument of the 1988 campaign, look around.


South Africa Has Changed Little in 130 Years
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fairs and Festivals
LEAD:  Today  WHOLE LIFE EXPO FOR BODY, MIND AND SPIRIT, Penta Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street.
Workshops, books and tapes.
Today, noon to 10 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 10 P.M., and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Daily admission, $17; a three-day pass is $33.
Information; 481-8700.
CRAFTS SHOW, 42d Street, along Bryant Park, between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; N.A.S.D. Hires Messner Vetere
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers awarded its advertising account yesterday to Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer.
The N.A.S.D., a self-regulatory organization for the securities industry, is best known for running Nasdaq, the computerized trading system for the over-the-counter market.


Gramercy Park's Refugees Long for Home
LEAD: For the last five weeks, Esther W. Levin and her cat, Amor, have been guests at the Gramercy Park Hotel, courtesy of Consolidated Edison.
The utility pays for the room, for food, even for the new pink robe Mrs.
Levin wears as she waits for someone to tell her she can go home.


Freight Access Program for New York city Remains Essential; Switch to Night Shift
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times; Millions, Still Unregistered
LEAD: The Board of Elections reports that the number of registered voters in New York City is now at its highest in a decade.
But that still leaves at least two million New Yorkers eligible to vote but not registered.


White House to Study Handling of Panama Crisis
LEAD: The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, today ordered a review of the Administration's reaction to the attempted coup in Panama in the aftermath of what senior White House officials acknowledge was an ineffective response to the attempted overthrow of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.  ''We did not do it perfectly,'' one of the highest officials at the White House said.


All-Comedy HBO Channel
LEAD: Home Box Office Inc. said this week that it would begin its Comedy Channel on Nov. 15 on cable systems with about six million subscribers.


Columbus Day Holiday
LEAD: Columbus Day will be observed on Monday, but the Columbus Day parade in Manhattan will be held today.
Because of the parade, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 86th Streets will be closed from 11:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Here are holiday schedules for Monday.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.


Islanders Give Chase But Minnesota Wins
LEAD: Trailing by four goals early in the third period, the Islanders rallied but lost, 6-5, to the Minnesota North Stars tonight at the Metropolitan Sports Center in the season opener for both teams.


BUSH AIDES ADMIT A U.S. ROLE IN COUP, AND BAD HANDLING
LEAD: Senior Administration officials said today that the American military had played a greater role in the Panamanian uprising than it had previously acknowledged.


Review/Theater; Laurie Anderson, All Alone in America
LEAD: In Laurie Anderson's performance piece ''Empty Places,'' the song that goes the furthest in distilling its mood and summing up its themes is a witty new ballad called ''Hiawatha.''


Futures Bill Is Introduced
LEAD: Vowing to reform the nation's futures markets ''once and for all,'' the chairman and ranking minority member of the Senate Agriculture Committee introduced legislation today intended to strengthen Federal regulation of the markets.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  PARADING FOR COLUMBUS


Easy Goer Closing In on a 3-Year-Old Season Worthy of Secretariat
LEAD: Even as the racing world mourns the death of Secretariat, it will turn its attention tomorrow to the colt who is on the verge of completing the most impressive 3-year-old campaign since Secretariat's 1973 Triple Crown season.


Growth in Ireland Seen
LEAD: Ireland is expected to have sustained economic growth in the next five years with inflation less than 4 percent, according to a survey of 13 leading economists published today.
The poll of the economists from leading banks and stockbroking firms forecasts that gross national product will grow by 4.9 percent in 1989, 4 percent in 1990 and 3.5 percent from 1991 to 1993.


Metro Datelines; Workers Strike At Nursing Home
LEAD: More than 300 members of the hospital workers' union staged a wildcat strike yesterday at a nursing home in Washington Heights.


Sports People: BASEBALL; Robinson Staying
LEAD: Frank Robinson, the leading candidate for American League manager of the year, has agreed to return as the Baltimore Orioles' manager in 1990.
His coaching staff has also been asked back.
Robinson's relationship with the players apparently had much to do with the decision.
The Evening Sun, the Baltimore newspaper, yesterday quoted Barbara Robinson, the manager's wife, as having said: ''He wouldn't leave those guys.


Market Place; Some Pessimism About Dividends
LEAD: IN this long-lasting bull market, hundreds of companies have either raised their payouts or initiated special dividends, or both.
But now, Arnold Kaufman, editor of Standard &amp; Poor's Outlook, an investment advisory newsletter, says the dividend boom has begun what might be a long decline.


England a Honda Headquarters Site
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company of Japan will set up its European headquarters in Reading in southern England, the auto maker said.
The wholly owned Honda Motor Europe will start operating next April.
The headquarters operation will create 100 jobs, and it will control production, sales, services, marketing, distribution and management in


Secret to Success: Retire Will Clark
LEAD: If the Chicago Cubs viewed their six-run outburst in the first inning tonight as a positive sign, it was nothing compared with the good omen they encountered in the fifth inning: They actually retired Will Clark.


JUDGES CHALLENGE REHNQUIST'S ROLE ON DEATH PENALTY
LEAD: Fourteen of the country's most senior Federal judges have written a highly unusual letter that challenges Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's authority as a spokesman for the Federal judiciary on the death penalty.


Metro Datelines; Suspect Convicted In Officer's Slaying
LEAD: An accused drug dealer was convicted yesterday of murdering a housing officer who was shot to death when he walked into the middle of a dispute while searching for a missing child.


Review/Guitar; David Starobin in Works By Sor, Spohr and Giuliani
LEAD: An interesting, if narrow, account of Western culture could be written through the history of its musical instruments.
As populations grew, as technologies developed, as economic forces had their impact, old instruments evolved to meet new social needs.
That was popularly and reverently known as progress.


Kansas City Paper Merger
LEAD: The Kansas City Star and The Kansas City Times, journalistic institutions in Missouri for more than a century, will merge sometime next year into a single morning newspaper to be called The Kansas City Star, the papers' publisher announced yesterday.


Florida Court Rules Against Abortion Curbs
LEAD: In a case that advocates of abortion rights hope could serve as a model elsewhere in the nation, the Florida Supreme Court yesterday relied on its state Constitution to strike down a law restricting abortions.


Modular Housing With a Difference
LEAD: Factory-built modular construction normally allows a home to be produced more quickly and at a lower cost than one constructed on the site, but a major drawback has been the difficulty of incorporating custom changes requested by buyers, especially for higher-priced new houses.


Non-OPEC Oil Talks
LEAD: Officials of oil-producing nations that do not belong to OPEC began a two-day meeting today, and delegates said the matter of export cuts was not on the official agenda.


Topics of The Times; A Touchdown Combination
LEAD: For some years there have been black assistant coaches in the National Football League with the potential to be head coaches.
But there hasn't been an owner with the courage to give one a shot at the top job.
Now Al Davis, the general manager and principal owner of the Oakland Raiders, has made Art


Air Market Rule Change Is Proposed
LEAD: In a significant policy change meant to spur competition in world aviation, the Transportation Department today proposed to open additional American cities to foreign airlines.


Pope Urges Ukrainian Church Legalization
LEAD: Two months before his first meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, Pope John Paul II urged the Soviet authorities today to grant immediate legal status to the long-suppressed Ukrainian Catholic Church.


Two on Staten Island Killed In Collision of Bus and Car
LEAD: Two people were killed when a New York City Transit Authority bus and a car collided yesterday afternoon and rolled up onto a sidewalk in Staten Island, the police said.


OPEC-Europe Talks
LEAD: OPEC and the European Community took the first step today toward closer cooperation between the oil-producing nations and their European consumers.
Subroto, Secretary General of the 13-nation Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, met with officials of the trading bloc in the first high-level contact.


Bache Draws A Censure From S.E.C.
LEAD: Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. was censured yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission for numerous violations of securities laws governing accounting procedures and operational controls.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, to McCaffrey &amp; McCall, with an undisclosed budget.


LAW: At the Bar; In defense of ambulance chasing: Will more competition keep lawyers' fees down?
LEAD: No stereotype of lawyers is more common or more unflattering than that of pin-striped locusts descending on tragedies in quest of clients long before the smoke has cleared or the black box has been found.





Banks Warned on Mexico
LEAD: A senior Treasury official said today that if the debt agreement between Mexico and its commercial banks did not work out, it would have to be renegotiated and the banks would have to settle for less advantageous terms.


Soviet Purchases
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought 100,000 metric tons of soybean meal and an additional 200,000 tons of corn for delivery in 1989-90, under a long-term supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said Wednesday.
The meal and corn were in addition to an order for 2 million tons of corn announced Tuesday.


Jackson to Be Host of a Weekly TV Program
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson announced yesterday that he plans to be the host of a weekly television program beginning next fall.


Abortion Protester Jailed After Objecting to Fine
LEAD: The leader of an anti-abortion group was jailed today after refusing to pay a $1,000 fine imposed for his part in a protest during the Democratic National Convention.


How to Slow the East German Exodus
LEAD: East Germans keep heading west.
And Bush Administration officials now say they would like the flow of refugees to slow, but that it's up to East Germany to do so by reforming itself economically and politically.
Preferring East Germans to stay home sounds harsh, but it's sound policy.
And only a country worth living in, not a socialist workhouse, will keep them there.


Sports People: PRO FOOTBALL; Surgery Idles a Saint
LEAD: Reuben Mayes, the tailback for the Saints who twice was selected for the Pro Bowl, will have surgery next week on his right Achilles' tendon and will be out the rest of the season, the club announced yesterday in New Orleans.
Mayes first felt pain in the heel July 25, the day after he ran a long run in training camp in La Crosse, Wis.


Coming Soon: His Own Story
LEAD: The autobiography of the Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize yesterday, will be published simultaneously in the United States and Britain next year.
Its tentative title is ''Freedom in Exile: The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama.''


Hudson Valley Festivals With a Backdrop by Nature
LEAD: The fall festival season arrives this weekend in and around the Hudson Valley with a series of country fairs featuring apples, pumpkins, cider, antiques, country cooking and music, with the scenery showing the first signs of autumnal colors.


New Pfizer Drug
LEAD: Pfizer Inc. has introduced Procardia XL, a once-a-day version of its Procardia drug that has been used to treat angina since 1982.
Procardia XL received Federal approval last month to treat angina and hypertension.
The drug is a potential $500 million product that will stop generic rivals as patients switch from Pfizer's Procardia drug, analysts said.


3-Year Talks Pay Off For Chief of Pyramid
LEAD: Shortly after joining the Pyramid Technology Corporation as chairman, president and chief executive three years ago, Richard H. Lussier began conversations with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company about possible collaborations.
This week, the two companies said they would jointly develop a new series of minicomputer systems.


National Education Is Expecting Loss
LEAD: The National Education Corporation said it expected to report a loss in the third quarter of about $6 million.
The education training company, based in Irvine, Calif., attributed the expected loss to disappointing revenues at its Applied Learning division, a computer training concern.
The company said its fourth-quarter revenues at Applied


Penny Stock Fraud Case
LEAD: Three men, including the owner and president of the Monarch Funding Corporation of New York, have been charged with racketeering in connection with a penny stock fraud scheme that law-enforcement officials say cost customers around the world more than $10 million.


Jubilant East Germans Cross to West in Sealed Trains
LEAD: Some 8,000 weary but jubilant East Germans, who had besieged the West German Embassy in Prague since Monday, arrived here aboard sealed trains today after being officially expelled from their homeland.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 469 money market mutual funds decreased by $429.3 million, to $348.94 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


Court Upholds a Ban On Animal Sacrifices
LEAD: A Federal district judge today upheld Hialeah's prohibition on animal sacrifices, saying the Constitution protects only a religion's beliefs, not its practices.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air and Water Technologies Inc. said it would acquire Falcon Associates Inc., an asbestos abatement company, in a $25 million stock swap.


Dinkins's Front-Runner Plan: Try to Avoid Overexposure
LEAD: Nearly midway between the primary and the general election, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic mayoral nominee, has largely adopted the classic campaign stance of a front-runner -carefully avoiding overexposure while doing whatever he can to help his Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, self-destruct.


Review/Dance; Graham on the Mystery of Existence
LEAD: Martha Graham, speaking of her work, has said she does not want to be understood but to be felt.
Her dances, in fact, are at their best when they are at their most mysterious.


The Tax Follies, Cont'd.
LEAD: Nothing was too slippery for the Senate Finance Committee as it struggled to polish off the fiscal 1990 tax bill this week.
Industrious committee members dredged up a little favor for the tuxedo-rental business, a great big one for grain interests and so many others that literally no one knew what they'd done when they finally finished at 2:15 Thursday morning.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Pfeiffer as Export


Cedric Thompson, Episcopal Deacon, 62
LEAD: The Rev.
Cedric Fitz-Oswald Thompson, a Perpetual Deacon in the Espicopal Diocese of Newark and the assistant at Christ Church in East Orange, N.J., died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Orange, N.J.
He was 62 years old.


News Summary
LEAD:  The role of the U.S. military in the Panamanian uprising was greater than what the Administration has been acknowledging, the White House said, also indicating that the Administration performed badly.
Page A1  Conspirators in the attempted coup included some of Gen.
Noriega's close advisers, said diplomats.


Hostage Shot in Classroom
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy armed with a shotgun and a handgun took a high school drama class hostage today and shot one student in the face before being talked into surrendering, the police said.
The wounded student was in fair condition.
The youth, armed with a 12-gauge shotgun and a semiautomatic handgun, entered the class of 35 students at Loara High School, 30 miles southeast of Los Angeles, and shot the youth, then ordered the teacher out of the room, Lieut.


Dalai Lama Wins Nobel Peace Prize


Review/Art; An In-Depth Exhibition Of a Japanese Master
LEAD: ''The Paintings of Jakuchu, Master Artist of Japan'' at the Asia Society is the first major American retrospective devoted to a single Japanese master.
This is the kind of show that a number of American institutions involved with theme, group or masterpiece shows of Asian art are now committed to doing.


Corrections
LEAD: The calendar of cultural events in the New Jersey Weekly on Sunday listed an incorrect date for the performance of ''The Incredible Merlin Magic Show'' at the West Orange High School.
The performance will be on Oct. 14, not tomorrow.


Man in the News; Prophet of the Middle Way
LEAD: A fundamental tenet of Buddhism is that the path to salvation runs between the extremes of self-denial and self-indulgence.
Therein lies a hint of the path by which the Dalai Lama, spiritual and temporal leader of Tibetan Buddhists, eventually hopes to return from exile.


Victor Feingold, Lawyer, 77
LEAD: Victor Feingold, a lawyer who was general counsel to the Distillery, Wine and Allied Workers International Union, died Monday while recuperating from heart surgery at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 77 years old.


Knicks Stable as Training Camp Starts
LEAD: For the first time in many years, the Knicks had an uneventful off season and will have all their players under contract and ready to go today when they open their first training camp under Stu Jackson at the State University in Purchase, N.Y.


Europe Lifts Key Rates, But the Dollar Still Rises
LEAD: In a coordinated effort to weaken the buoyant dollar, the West Germans and other European countries increased key interest rates today, but the dollar closed higher anyway.


For Children
LEAD:  For Children  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES,'' an opera by Judy Spencer, 1 and 3 P.M.
Saturdays through Nov. 18, at Hartley House Theater, 413 West 46th Street.
Tickets: $6.
Information: 666-1716.  ''ROCKET AND FRIENDS,'' a show by the Puppet Company, 1 and 3 P.M.


150,000 Israelis in Petition Ask U.S. to Free Anne Pollard
LEAD: Nearly 150,000 Israelis petitioned President Bush today to free the wife of Jonathan Pollard, the convicted spy, from prison on humanitarian grounds.


Tough-Talking Boss Revived AMR
LEAD: Robert L. Crandall, a hard-driving boss who took over a money-losing American Airlines in 1980 and turned it into a highly profitable and highly regarded line, wants to run his own show and would not be happy working for someone else, analysts say.


Angolan Rebel to Return to Cease-Fire Talks
LEAD: The Angolan rebel leader bowed to American pressure today and said he was prepared to return to cease-fire talks under the mediation of President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire.


On Radio, Beethoven Isn't About to Roll Over; Ratings Are, in Fact, Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Radio, Beethoven Isn't About to Roll Over
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Film; 'Old Gringo,' Fuentes Tale, Stars Peck, Fonda and Smits
LEAD: Harriet Winslow: a prim, sexually repressed schoolteacher fleeing the deprivations of her past.
Tomas Arroyo: a handsome, smoldering young general in Pancho Villa's revolutionary Mexican army.
The old gringo: an American writer, renowned for his crusading journalism and scathing wit, who has elected to cut all ties with his home and family.


Our Towns; Making Toasts To a Victory Over Garbage
LEAD: It was a pleasant event at the Penfield Beach Pavilion, the kind some like to call casually elegant.
There were a hundred guests or so, and the afternoon sun glinted on the sand and the water outside and streamed in through the ceiling-high windows.
There was crab and cold roast beef and breast of turkey and bottles of chardonnay on the long buffet.


Airport Train Resumes Service
LEAD: The express train to Kennedy International Airport resumes this morning after a suspension in service of more than a month because of a steam-pipe explosion, the Transit Authority said yesterday.
The service between 57th Street and the Avenue of the Americas and Howard Beach, Queens, resumes at 6:03 A.M., the agency said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Early Retirements Hurt University in Connecticut
LEAD: In the English department at Central Connecticut State University, there is an air of quiet desperation: no secretaries remain to type a syllabus or organize a professor's life.


Record on Borrowing Can Help Trump's Bid
LEAD: Donald J. Trump brings a strong staff and a solid record of repaying bank debts to his $7.1 billion bid for the AMR Corporation, but he suffers from an image as a corporate raider who may not be seriously interested in completing a transaction.


Film Festival;; 'Sweetie,' a Wry Comedy By New Australian Director
After directing only four shorts, Jane Campion, a 34-year-old New Zealand-born director, makes a spectacular feature-film debut with ''Sweetie,'' a movie quite unlike any other you're likely to see until the next Campion comes along.
Among other things, it's a love (and hate) story about two sisters who, put together, might make one presentable personality.
''Sweetie'' looks like a small movie, and in every measurable way it is, but it possesses remarkable strength and tenacity.
It is funny, though one doesn't often laugh at it, and sad, without ever asking for tears.
Instead, it demands that it be taken on its own spare terms without regard to the sentimental conventions of other movies.
At its best, it is audaciously unreasonable.


U.S. Cautions Europe On Protectionist Moves
LEAD: The Bush Administration warned today that it might have to re-examine its support for European Community efforts to forge a single market by the end of 1992 if Europeans continued taking actions that discriminated against the United States.
Officials cited a recent television directive calling for majority European content in programming and policies that favor European computer chips.


Harry A. LaBurt, 91, Ex-Chief of Creedmoor
LEAD: Harry A. LaBurt, a doctor and former director of Creedmoor State Hospital in Queens for 26 years, died on Monday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., after being struck by a car.
He was 91 years old and lived in Bellerose, Queens.


Workers Purchase LTV Bar Division
LEAD: Employees of the steel-bar division of the LTV Steel Corporation voted to buy the division in the largest employee buyout by members of the United Steelworkers of America.
The new company will be called Republic Engineered Steels.
LTV Steel is part of the LTV Corporation, the Dallas-based steel and energy company that has been in bankruptcy since in 1986.


Private Space Rocket Is Destroyed in Blastoff
LEAD: The nation's efforts to develop a private space launching industry suffered a setback today when the first commercially designed and financed rocket failed at blastoff and burst into flames.


Prices of Notes and Bonds Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose in fairly active trading yesterday, pushed higher by a jump in the dollar, which rose despite a bigger-than-anticipated increase in European interest rates.


New York State To Aid Children Of Drug Addicts
LEAD: New York State would shift responsibility for treating the growing number of children born to drug-addicted parents from the Family Court system to the State Health Department under a bill being drafted in Albany.


Law Firms Tighten Belt on Recruiting Students
LEAD: Law students who are packing suitcases for job interviews at firms around the country are likely to find only an interview, not an all-expenses-paid vacation.
Troubled by the escalating costs of recruitment, law firms are putting limits on accommodations and expenses for prospective associates.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: Dorothy D. Giannone and Thomas K. Handy have been named senior vice presidents of Young &amp; Rubicam/ New York.


Review/Film; Outlaws Looting and Living for Illegal Passions
LEAD: ''Drugstore Cowboy,'' Gus Van Sant Jr.'s glum, absorbing film about a clan of heroin addicts who travel around the Pacific Northwest Looting pharmacies of their supplies the way Bonnie and Clyde cleaned out banks, gives Matt Dillon the role of his career.


What's Next After Mex And Kid?
LEAD: They were never Redford and Newman, sharing a hideaway and a lady friend and a quip and a final hail of Bolivian bullets, the way Butch and Sundance did.


Nairobi Journal; In a Land of the Censor, a Bold Magazine Endures
LEAD: After the second issue of Gitobu Imanyara's monthly magazine appeared on the newsstands, with a bold title about human rights and a chilling graphic of barbed wire splashed across the cover, some friends in the security forces got in touch with the editor.
Not a good idea, they warned.
Dangerous copy, they said.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Senate Passes a Flag Bill  The Senate approved legislation to outlaw desecration of the American flag, setting the stage for a battle later this month over a proposed constitutional amendment to accomplish the same purpose.
Page A13.
A Boost for Foreign Airlines  In a reversal of policy, the Transportation Department proposed rules that would allow foreign companies to fly into many cities in the United States, so long as they do not compete with existing service.


U.S. Announces Grants for Trials of AIDS Drugs
LEAD: The Federal Government announced its first grants yesterday for community trials of experimental AIDS drugs: $9 million for 18 projects in 14 cities.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball  BALTIMORE (AL) - Announced that Frank Robinson, manager, had agreed to return for the 1990 season.
ST.
LOUIS (NL) - Announced that Steve Braun, minor league hitting coach, had been promoted to the major league club for 1990 and that Rich Hacker, Dave Ricketts, Jim Riggleman, Mike Roarke and Red Schoendienst, coaches, would be invited back for 1990.


Precious Metal Prices Fall After Late Surge in Dollar
LEAD: Prices of precious metals futures slumped yesterday in a disappointed reaction to the dollar's late surge in value against other leading currencies.
Energy futures retreated, coffee futures fell again and grains and soybeans were mixed.
Livestock and meat futures were also mixed.


A Deal Offered on Tax Bill
LEAD: Senate Republicans said tonight that they might be willing to strike a deal with Democrats to keep certain spending and tax measures, including their proposed reduction in the capital gains tax rate, out of a pending deficit reduction package.


SENATORS SEEKING TO SALVAGE PART OF MEDICARE LAW
LEAD: One day after the House voted to repeal the program of expanded health insurance benefits for older Americans, Senate leaders today made a last-ditch effort to salvage part of it.


Raiders and Jets Just Aren't What They Used to Be
LEAD: The Jets' woeful running game, which is averaging 3.7 yards a carry, will finally meet its defensive equal Monday night when the Raiders come into Giants Stadium with a new head coach who, unfortunately for Los Angeles, doesn't play defense.


Sports People: MARATHON; New York City Entrant
LEAD: Pat Petersen, the top American finisher in the event in 1984 and 1985, has entered this year's New York City Marathon, which will be held Nov. 5.
Petersen was seventh in the London Marathon last April in 2 hours 10 minutes 4 seconds, the best time by an American since 1983.


In New York, Topsy-Turvy Justice
LEAD: In Supreme Court in Brooklyn, a defendant was recently convicted of first-degree assault for having intentionally and horribly disfigured a man by dousing him with gasoline and setting him on fire.
At the same time, in an adjacent courtroom, two young men were convicted of first-degree robbery for having stolen money at knifepoint from a cab driver, whom they left shaken but unhurt.


Federal Investigation Begins Into Fishing Boat Explosion
LEAD: A team of Federal investigators today began work to determine the cause of an explosion touched off when a fishing boat struck a submerged pipeline.


Dinkins Raises Triple What Giuliani Does in Campaign Funds
LEAD: Continuing to outstrip his opponent in raising funds, David N. Dinkins collected three times as much as Rudolph W. Giuliani in the latest filing period, according to financial reports released yesterday by the candidates.


Marina Woroniecka Viets, War Hero, 61
LEAD: Marina Woroniecka Viets, who won the Polish Army's highest military decoration as a 17-year-old in the Warsaw uprising in World War II, died of lymphoma Sept. 25 at Loudoun Memorial Hospital in Leesburg, Va.
She was 61 years old and lived in Middleburg, Va.


Scandals Bring Hard Times For Nation's TV Evangelists
LEAD: The ethical and financial problems of the nation's television evangelists have cost them contributions and followers.


BMW Price Cuts
LEAD: BMW of North America Inc. said it would lower its 1990 car prices on certain American models by as much as 9.3 percent.
The company said it was lowering the price of its 1990 model 735i to $49,000, from $54,000 in 1989.
The smallest price decrease, 4.9 percent, will be on the 535i model, which will sell in 1990 for $41,500.


Review/Art; 31 Years of Color and Shape In a Kenneth Noland Show
LEAD: There was a time in the 1960's when it seemed that the whole of painting would go Kenneth Noland's way.
What more did we need than those limpid, weightless and perfectly sprung constructions?
There seemed at that time to be no emotional need that could not be satisfied by the chevron, the diamond, the irregularly shaped canvas and, as of 1967, the long, narrow, horizontal striped images that stretched out forever.


Koop to Be Featured In NBC Health Specials
LEAD: The entertainment division of NBC has commissioned five hourlong health specials from MacNeil/Lehrer Productions, the network announced yesterday.
The series, which is to feature Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General of the United States, will address such issues as AIDS, the escalating cost of health care, and care for the elderly, the network said.


Economic Scene; Dollar Anxiety At White House
LEAD: THE Bush Administration, concerned about the rising dollar, appears to have ended its ''benign neglect'' for the time being and is working with other governments to push the currency down.


Giamatti Remembered at Yale University


Protesters End Takeover Of Embassy in San Salvador
LEAD: Leftist protesters ended a takeover of the Costa Rican Embassy today, releasing the 12 hostages they had held for a day to protest the rightist Government of President Alfredo Cristiani.


Irving Newman, 74, a Hat Manufacturer
LEAD: Irving Newman, a retired hat manufacturer who served as a neighborhood aide to three New York City mayors, died of a heart attack Thursday at Edward White Hospital in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Tampa, Fla.


Devils Are Changing for Lemieux
LEAD: Despite the success the Devils had with the 20 players they used in Philadelphia on opening night, look for changes in the lineup for the home opener Saturday night.


Biggio Convicted
LEAD: Craig Biggio, the rookie starting catcher for the Houston Astros, was convicted in Houston yesterday of driving while intoxicated.
He was placed on two years' probation, fined $350 and ordered to perform 50 hours of community service. (AP)


Foyt Leaves Hospital
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, the 54-year-old driver who bruised his neck and chest Tuesday when he crashed into a wall during a stock-car practice session at Charlotte (N.C.) Motor Speedway, was released from Charlotte Memorial Hospital yesterday and left for his home in Houston.


Review/Theater; David and Bathsheba Retold From Different Viewpoint
LEAD: Lounging in a bathrobe and speaking conversationally, the actress Mary Shultz recalls the story of David and Bathsheba.
She tells it as her own story, as the victim of a king who seduced her and had her husband killed.
As she explains in David Greenspan's ''II Samuel ll, Etc.'' (at Home for Contemporary Theater and Art), she was a woman completely without choice.


Giuliani Reports $200,000 Loan From the G.O.P.
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani has borrowed $200,000 from the Republican State Committee to pay for television commercials, according to his latest financial report filed yesterday with the city Campaign Finance Board.


Drinking Keeps Its Grip on Suburban Teen-Agers
LEAD: While cocaine has dominated public concern about drug use, alcohol remains the drug of choice among suburban teen-agers, like those in Westchester County.


Perils After Hurricane Strikes Are Stressed in Federal Study
LEAD: Downed power lines after a hurricane are more likely to kill than the fierce winds and sea surges from such storms, according to a Federal study of Hurricane Hugo's thrust across Puerto Rico last month.


Walker Rejects Vikings
LEAD: Now that Kevin Mack, their chief running back, has been sentenced to six months in jail after pleading guilty to a drug-abuse charge, the Cleveland Browns are in the market for a quality runner.
They would take someone like Herschel Walker of the Dallas Cowboys, the All-Pro whom they admit to having made inquiries about.


Robert Ashmore, 85, Former Congressman
LEAD: Robert T. Ashmore, a former member of the House of Representatives from South Carolina, died Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Greenville, S.C., where he lived.
He had undergone open heart surgery last summer and was suffering from pneumonia and kidney failure.
He was 85 years old.


2 Swiss With Red Cross Are Abducted in Lebanon
LEAD: Two Swiss serving with the International Committee of the Red Cross were kidnapped today by gunmen in the southern port city of Sidon, the police said.


Federal Negotiator Joins City Opera Strike Talks
LEAD: Negotiations continued yesterday in an effort to break the deadlock between the New York City Opera and its orchestra, which struck the company on Sept. 13.


Medicare Winners, and Losers
LEAD: Congress's decision to drastically cut back on valuable benefits of the 1988 catastrophic-health insurance program generated cheers from the well-to-do elderly who opposed the law.
They didn't want to pay the surtax that finances it.
But curtailing the program also means that millions will lose.
In the wake of the defeat, those losers deserve attention.


Books of The Times; Inside Japan, but Always an Outsider
LEAD:  Japan  In the Land of the Brokenhearted  By Michael Shapiro  245 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.


GORBACHEV LENDS HONECKER A HAND
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union arrived in East Berlin today to offer the East German Communists a measured show of solidarity and to declare that Moscow would not interfere in East Germany's problems.


Dawson Struggling, but Keeps Swinging
LEAD: Before the second game of the National League pennant playoff with the San Francisco Giants, someone asked Andre Dawson if it was correct that he was the father figure to the younger players in the Chicago Cubs' clubhouse.


How Senators Voted on Three Medicare Benefit Measures
LEAD: The Senate took three votes today on changes in the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act, which has been under attack by many elderly citizens over a surtax that helps pay for expanded health insurance benefits for the 33 million beneficiaries.
Following are the roll-call tallies by which the Senate concluded it wanted to save only some of the new benefits and kill the surtax.


Computer Virus Cure May Be Worse Than Disease
LEAD: Ever since a rogue program created by a graduate student jammed a nationwide computer network last year, the rapid spread of such disruptive software, known as viruses, has caused growing alarm among computer users.
Now, to fight fire with fire, some companies, individuals and even a Government research laboratory are crafting a new breed of what have been called anti-viruses to hunt down intruders.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Banister Continental Ltd., Edmonton, Alberta, a pipeline, civil, marine and industrial construction company, said a joint venture in which its Foundation Co. of Canada Ltd. unit has a 45 percent interest had won a $100 million (Canadian) contract from Marathon Realty Co. for the construction of a waterfront project in Vancouver, British Columbia.


Resilient Dollar Up Slightly Despite Efforts to Rein It In
LEAD: The dollar rose slightly yesterday, despite efforts once again by the United States and its economic allies to rein the currency in.


Iowa Farmers Are Unearthing Clues to Jetliner's Fatal Crash
LEAD: Farmers harvesting their crops are turning up pieces of a jetliner's metal that could help investigators determine what caused a United Airlines DC-10 to crash at Sioux City in July.
General Electric has paid $4,700 to five farmers whose harvests turned up such parts.


Soviets Buy More Corn
LEAD: Private exporting companies have sold an additional 400,000 metric tons of American corn to the Soviet Union for delivery in 1989-90 under a long-term supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said Thursday.
The corn sale was the third this week to the Soviet Union.
It has orders totaling 2.6 million tons of corn and 100,000 tons of soybean meal.


Ms. Suitt Is Wed To Michael E. Yip
LEAD: Halley E. Suitt, an account executive for Mead Data Central, a New York computer data-base service, was married yesterday to Michael E. Yip, the production manager at Lear Levin Productions, a television commercial concern in New York, at the Rye (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Vance Pollay officiated.


Coffee Prices Slump Again; Corn and Soybeans Also Off
LEAD: Coffee futures prices sank for the fourth straight day yesterday, hitting 14-year lows after a meeting of the world's biggest coffee producers and consumers ended with no price-support agreement.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a Florida Supreme Court decision striking down an abortion law incorrectly reported that the teen-ager who was the subject of the case had obtained her father's permission to have an abortion.


Koch Urges Diplomat To Defect From China
LEAD: Closing out the dozen years in which he guided New York City's independent and home-brewed foreign policy, Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday issued one of those communiques for which his tenure was renowned.


Can't Someone Reduce The Mad Din of Sirens?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patricia K. Kirlin, A Reporter, Weds
LEAD: Patricia K. Kirlin, a reporter and researcher at Time magazine in New York, was married yesterday in Exton, Pa., to Robert A. Santella Jr., a financial planner at the Price Waterhouse accounting firm in New York.
The Rev.
James Flynn officiated at St.
Mary's Chapel of SS.
Philip and James Roman Catholic Church.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  U.S.
Gains Semifinals: The top-seeded United States team will meet Czechoslovakia and Spain will face Australia today in the semifinals of the Federation Cup tournament in Tokyo.
The United States beat eighth-seeded Austria, 3-0, and No. 3 Czechoslovakia defeated fifth-seeded West Germany, 2-1, yesterday in the quarterfinals.(AP)


Colombia Justice Aide Backs Drug Extradition
LEAD: Colombia's new Justice Minister was quoted today as saying that he favors the extradition of drug-trafficking suspects to the United States.


Bulgarian Change Barely Plods Along
LEAD: Although it may be the Soviet Union's most faithful ally in Eastern Europe, Bulgaria has fallen out of its familiar lockstep with Moscow on the question of democratic change for its nine million people.


Bush, Under Fire, Defends Role in Panama Crisis
LEAD: President Bush today defended his decision not to allow American military forces to bolster a coup attempt in Panama on Tuesday against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega. ''I think the record will show that there was never a chance to have him handed over to us,'' the President said of the Panamanian leader.


Patents; Teeth in a Puncher Shaped Like Molars
LEAD: Simple inventions are not always simple.
Witness Robert G. Merrick's Personal Punch, a finger-sized device that punches holes in calling cards so they can be put on a Rolodex.


Frederic de Hoffmann, 65, Dies; Physicist and Salk Institute Chief
LEAD: Frederic de Hoffmann, a nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project, helped develop the hydrogen bomb and later directed the Salk Institute for Biological Studies for 18 years, died of complications of AIDS Wednesday in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 65 years old.


MGM/UA Awaits Deposit by Qintex
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company said the Qintex Group of Australia, which has agreed to acquire MGM/UA for $1.45 billion, was late delivering a $50 million deposit.
The announcement creates new uncertainty about Qintex's ability to raise money for the deal.
According to the purchase agreement, MGM/UA, a motion picture producer and distributor, was supposed to receive a nonrefundable $50 million letter of credit from Qintex on Sept.


INSURING CONDOS N HURRICAN ZONES
LEAD: Owners of condominium units in the Southeast and the Caribbean were among those hit hard by Hurricane Hugo.
The total damage to insured property came to a record $4.5 billion, and the storm's devastation holds an important insurance lesson for condominium owners in coastal areas.


Ashland Pays Iran
LEAD: Ashland Oil Inc. said it had paid the National Iranian Oil Company $325 million and would charge the payment against results for the year ended Sept. 30.
The payment was made under an agreement announced last month that settled all disputes and litigation between the two companies, Ashland said.
The Iranian company had been seeking $768 million because an Ashland unit had refused to pay for crude oil in 1979.


Grown Too Large, Full AIDS Quilt Is Displayed for the Last Time


Lawyer Tries To Thwart Bush Cousin
LEAD: Judge John M. Walker Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan is perhaps best known for his most recent role: the cool-headed handling of Leona Helmsley's tax-fraud trial last summer.
But he is also President Bush's first cousin, and the President's nominee to fill one of the 13 judgeships on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, the


Plutonium Hazard Found at Nuclear Arms Plant
LEAD: Enough plutonium to cause an accidental nuclear reaction escaped unnoticed into an air duct at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant, according to an independent study of the plant released yesterday.
The report said such a reaction could have occurred under certain circumstances.


A Last-Minute Check Before Columbus Day Parade


Deficit Expected By Daisy Systems
LEAD: The Daisy Systems Corporation, a maker of computer-aided engineering systems, said it would report an operating loss for the fourth quarter ended Sept. 30, as revenues fell substantially below the third quarter's $44.9 million.
The company said, ''These results, together with the absence of additional financing, have caused a significant liquidity problem.


Duke Is Looking Smart in Football, Too
LEAD: The winning tradition dates to another generation.
In a region where college sports are an abiding passion, the team often plays before a half-empty home stadium.
Any on-field success is overshadowed by the accomplishments and popularity of the school's basketball squad.
This year, the program is budgeted to lose $1.8 million.


SENATE TRIMS BACK MEDICARE ADDITION AND KILLS SURTAX
LEAD: Spurning the lead of the House, the Senate tonight voted against repealing a program providing expanded health benefits to 33 million Medicare beneficiaries.
It then voted unanimously to scale back the plan significantly and eliminate the surtax that finances it.


Henderson Catalytic Even as the A's Lose
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays finally found a way tonight to live with Rickey Henderson: outscore him.


Panama Fiasco: The Helms Version
LEAD: Following is an adaptation of a statement made Thursday night in the Senate by Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina.
Many of the assertions below are disputed by the White House.


Beethoven Series Opens Wednesday at 92d St. Y
LEAD: The violinist Young Uck Kim and the pianist Peter Serkin will perform the complete Beethoven violin sonatas on three consecutive Wednesday evenings starting next week at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.


Phony Reform for Congressional Mail
LEAD: Roused by the ethics scandal that drove House Speaker Jim Wright from office, Congressional leaders of both parties vowed ethics and campaign reforms.
But the House failed an important test last week when it reneged on a pledge to impose stringent curbs on lawmakers' free mailing privileges.


Fed Left Rates Unchanged At August Policy Meeting
LEAD: Policy makers at the Federal Reserve decided to leave interest rates unchanged in late August, after a period earlier in the summer when they were nudging rates lower, according to minutes of the meeting released today.


Cashen's Vote on Manager Decisive
LEAD: The Mets acknowledged yesterday that Davey Johnson had kept his job as manager of the team on a split vote that embroiled senior officials of the club.
But they said the deciding vote had been cast by Frank Cashen, the general manager, after he consulted the owners and informed Johnson that ''some things have to change.


Your Money; No Consolation After a Disaster
LEAD: In the weeks after a disaster like Hurricane Hugo, thousands of people discover that their insurance is not all it should be or all that they thought it was.
But those consoled by the thought that they can, at least, deduct losses on their tax returns are likely to be in for further unpleasant surprises, warns Janice M.


Tiresome News Dept.
LEAD: Enough is enough in this Deep Throat business.
A few days ago a rumor spread like fire through a straw rick that Deep Throat, world's most famous news source, was none other than Alexander Haig.


John Daniel Cronin, Broker, 86
LEAD: John Daniel Cronin, a former partner of Eastman Dillon Union Securities in Manhattan, died of congestive heart failure Wednesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in Summit.


Fignon Drug Results
LEAD: Laurent Fignon, the French cyclist who won the 1983 and 1984 Tour de France races, tested positive for a banned stimulant after a race in the Netherlands, the French Federation of Cycling said yesterday.


Ralph Henderson, 90, Reader's Digest Editor
LEAD: Ralph Ernest Henderson, the creator and first editor in chief of The Reader's Digest Condensed Books, died yesterday in Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mt.
Kisco, N.Y., after a long illness.
He was 90 years old and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y., and South Kent, Conn.


About New York; Restoring Some Magic To Brooklyn
LEAD: Will Morton 8th blew into town from Colorado about three weeks ago to give Brooklyn back a piece of its own lost magic.
He came to restore the carousel in Prospect Park.


Wolf Camp Is 3 Short
LEAD: When the Minnesota Timberwolves, a new franchise in the National Basketball Association, opened training camp in Bloomington, Minn., yesterday, their three selections in the expansion draft - the team's probable starting front court - failed to appear because of contract disputes.


U.S. Journalist Cleared of Libel Charge by Indian
LEAD: A jury in Chicago ruled yesterday that Seymour M. Hersh, the investigative journalist, did not libel former Prime Minister Morarji Desai of India when he described him as a paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency.


Large Centers For Addicts To Be Urged
LEAD: A panel appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to draft New York State's anti-drug strategy will propose creating treatment ''campuses'' to provide care for more than 1,000 addicts each, officials said yesterday.


Parading for Columbus, And Stumping for Votes
LEAD: Candidates for Mayor of New York joined the Columbus Day parade up Fifth Avenue yesterday, vying for votes from Italian-Americans and other spectators at a celebration that fell this year neither on the official holiday nor on the anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America, but in the middle of a working day.


Pay Equity for Women's Jobs Finds Success Outside Courts
LEAD: The campaign for pay equity for women, considered innovative legal theory 10 years ago, is sputtering in court but flourishing at the bargaining table, bringing multimillion-dollar pay upgrades for many jobs.


Patents; Alternator Said to Offer More Power
LEAD: At one time, the automobile alternator did not have to do much more than generate electricity for the starter motor and the lights.
Then came air-conditioning, 100-watt stereo systems and power for everything, even antennas.
Ten years ago, alternators rarely generated more than 50 amperes of current.


U.S. JOBLESS RATE EDGES UP TO 5.2%
LEAD: Factory employment took its biggest drop in nearly seven years in September as the nation's unemployment rate edged up one-tenth of a percentage point, to 5.2 percent, the Labor Department reported today.


Review/Television; Walter Cronkite Narrates 'Can't Afford to Grow Old'
LEAD: ''Can't Afford to Grow Old'' gets at the heart of a heartbreaking reality.
Elderly people, afflicted with Alzheimer's disease or the effects of strokes or other lingering disabilities, must exhaust their life's savings as well as the energies and emotions of their husbands, wives and children before the


When the Mowing Stops
LEAD: To be sure that your power mower starts trouble-free next spring, store it properly this fall.
The Briggs &amp; Stratton Corporation in Milwaukee, makers of engines for outdoor equipment, advises taking these five steps:


Patents; Creating New Tomatoes In Test Tube Procedure
LEAD: In their pursuit of better tomatoes, researchers at the DNA Plant Technology Corporation in Cinnaminson, N.J., have patented a method for breeding them.


F.T.C. Clears Ford On Jaguar Stake
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has received clearance from the United States Federal Trade Commission to buy up to 15 percent of Jaguar P.L.C., a spokesman for Ford's British unit said.
Jaguar shares closed $1 higher today, at $11.77, on London's Stock Exchange.
Volume was a heavy 13 million shares.
It was not immediately clear whether Ford had purchased any Jaguar shares today.


16,000 Detained in Peru
LEAD: The police detained about 16,000 people in a search this week for a television executive kidnapped by gunmen thought to be leftist guerrillas, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry said today.
All but 4,000 were released after questioning, the spokesman said.
The executive, Hector Delgado Parker, who is a former adviser to President Alan Garcia, was abducted on Wednesday.


Queens Mother Denies Guilt In Pushing 2 From Window
LEAD: The mother charged with pushing two of her children from a window of their 10th-floor Queens apartment pleaded not guilty yesterday to murdering one child and attempting to murder another.


CYST IS REMOVED FROM BUSH'S HAND
LEAD: In an operation that the White House termed ''entirely successful,'' President Bush underwent a 25-minute procedure this afternoon to remove a cyst from the middle finger of his right hand.


Panama Opposition Chief in Refuge in Vatican Mission
LEAD: The leader of Panama's democratic opposition has taken refuge in the Vatican diplomatic mission here, diplomats and supporters said today.


An Elegy to Balanchine, The Choreographer of Lives
''Dancing for Mr.
B: Six Balanchine Ballerinas'' is as graceful, taut and fiercely controlled as the dancers who are its subjects.
In the opening scene, Darci Kistler - at 25 years of age the youngest of them - recalls that as an adolescent she read that Balanchine selected a perfume for each of his dancers. ''I thought it was wonderful that there was a man who cared that much,'' she says, setting the tone for Anne Belle's and Deborah Dickson's documentary.
This is not a study of the great choreographer and the guiding spirit behind the New York City Ballet, but a portrait of women who feel privileged to have been shaped by him.
Balanchine formed everything from the trajectory of their careers to the elongation of the leg muscles that helped create his dancers' characteristic lithe bodies.
And though he died in 1983, at the age of 79, he hovers over this film like some omnipotent ghost, still choreographing his dancers' responses, still hindering any impulse to chafe against his control.


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: 1.
These jubilant East Germans reached their destination after a circuitous journey from Prague.
What detour did they take and why was it necessary?


No Decision Made on New York Income Tax Cut
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It cannot be Communist, and it cannot be simply a social democratic party.
We should seek a synthesis to be created from the coming together of social democratic and Communist traditions, values and practices.''  - Rezso Nyers, president of the Hungarian Communist Party.  [ 1:3. ]


Why the Vatican Kept Silent on Nazi Atrocities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kevin Albin Wed To Bette Chabot
LEAD: Elizabeth A. Chabot, the advertising manager at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, and Kevin P. Albin, the president of Albin Adventures, a New York video concern, were married yesterday in Toledo, Spain.
The Rev.
Honorato Ibanes officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of San Juan de los Reyes.


The Genius Factor in The Playoffs
LEAD: Geniuses in baseball lead short, bumpy lives.
Take Don Zimmer, the manager of the Cubs.
One day he is acclaimed the Einstein of the Diamond, the next day he is hailed as one of the seven or eight dumbest people on the face of the earth, and the following day, why, back to genius status again.
It's the kind of uneasy existence that can drive a good man to chewing tobacco, which


Conscience and Law in Yonkers
LEAD: Four members of the Yonkers City Council voted last year to defy the city's agreement to obey a court order remedying 40 years of deliberate housing segregation.
They were heavily fined, and have now approached the United States Supreme Court with the argument that a Federal court may not order them to vote a certain way ''at the price of their conscience.


AMR Likely to Rely on Stake for Workers
LEAD: The AMR Corporation's most likely response to a $7.5 billion takeover bid by Donald J. Trump would be to move about a fifth of its stock into an employee stock ownership plan, investment bankers and lawyers said yesterday.


Louisiana Lawyers Move to Revive Invalidated Law Banning Abortions
LEAD: Louisiana lawyers went to Federal court here today to try to revive an old Louisiana law banning all abortions.


Two Burmese Hijack Plane, Then Surrender
LEAD: Two Burmese students who hijacked an airliner to dramatize human rights abuses in their homeland surrendered to the Thai security forces Saturday after a nine-hour standoff.


Indian Oboe Music
LEAD: Ustad Bismillah Khan will perform music for the shenhai, an Indian oboe, at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, at 8 o'clock tonight.
Tickets are $15 to $40.
Information: 206-1050.


Greenwich Politely Bored at Miners
LEAD: Downtown Greenwich Avenue lies not far from the brambly back-country and the estates that have made this town famous.
Like Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills or Worth Avenue in Palm Beach, it's a pricey promenade of boutiques and bistros, where shoppers can walk their Bichons and snack on brioche.


U.S. and States Trade Shots In Battle Over Air-Fare Ads
LEAD: The Federal Government may soon approve airline advertising practices that many state officials and consumer advocates say are deceptive or misleading.


To Be Young and in China: A Colloquy
LEAD: The poem seemed to express an individual yearning, a personal agony only tenuously related to the pro-democracy slogans recently heard in China.
But Wuer Kaixi, the 21-year-old exiled student leader who read his short verse at a public meeting in lower Manhattan on Wednesday night, said it reflected the inner life of the student uprising, its wellsprings in alienation and thwarted idealism.


Review/Music; Helmuth Rilling's Philharmonic Debut
LEAD: Bach's Mass in B minor is one of Western music's peaks - some would say the highest.
It is also a mountain of contradictions and anomalies.
Except at the beginning, it is not in B minor but mostly in D major.
It was composed, not as one work, but as four separate ones, each with its own title page.


Miss Landshof Marries John J. Fath
LEAD: N. Elizabeth Landshof and John J. Fath were married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
J.
Seymour Flinn performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Daniel Brady, a Roman Catholic priest.


CAMPAIGN STOP: Douglaston-Little Neck, Queens; Amid a Sea of Democrats, Hope for Giuliani
LEAD: The Douglaston and Little Neck sections of Queens look and sound more like New England villages than New York City neighborhoods.


Judgments of Barney Frank Are Premature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answers to Quiz
LEAD: 1.
East Germans who had taken refuge in Prague were required to return to East Germany before going on to West Germany.
The device enabled East Berlin to contend that the refugees had first come home, as it had repeatedly demanded of them.


80 Arrested in a Los Angeles AIDS Protest
LEAD: Police wearing surgical masks and rubber gloves today arrested 80 demonstrators who blocked the entrance to a Federal office building to protest AIDS drug policies.


Blue Jays Rally Against Henderson and A's
LEAD: Stalled in their drive for a first pennant, the Toronto Blue Jays began to put their fortunes into reverse tonight with a come-from-behind 7-3 victory over the Oakland Athletics that was achieved in their trademark manner, with the top on.


Frederick Wiseman's 'Near Death'
A half-dozen young medical professionals gather around the bed of an old woman, a stroke victim who cannot speak and can communicate only by means of the faintest movements.
They want to discuss the possibility of removing her breathing tube and the machine to which it is connected.
Does she understand what the consequences of this may be?
Is she prepared for the worst?
Is she worried about the way her death may affect her devoted husband?
The woman attempts to answer this barrage of difficult questions by weakly signaling yes or no, but she is soon exhausted.
She indicates that she would like the conversation to stop.


Dinkins's '86 Letter to Pierce Helped Save Housing Funds
LEAD: A 1986 letter from Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan to Samuel R. Pierce, then the Federal Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, helped New York City retain $8 million in Federal housing money that it might otherwise have lost.


Kemp Promises Action to House Homeless
LEAD: On the eve of a planned march of tens of thousands of people demonstrating for decent and affordable housing, the Bush Administration promised today ''to win this war against poverty, homelessness and despair.''


Arnold Shaw, 80; Wrote Many Books On Popular Music
LEAD: Arnold Shaw, a writer about popular music and the founder of the Popular Music Research Center at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, died of cancer on Sept. 26 at his home in Las Vegas.
He was 80 years old.


Good Game, but You Can't Watch
LEAD: There will be no bowl games or live network television appearances this season for Oklahoma and Oklahoma State, two Big Eight Conference powerhouses put on probation last winter by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for numerous recruiting violations.


Borrowing Rate Up 6% For August
LEAD: Americans took out $3.48 billion more in consumer debt than they retired in August, the Government reported today.


Transactions
LEAD:  Basketball


Key Hungarian Communist Urges More Open Party and Ties to West
LEAD: One of the four top leaders of the Hungarian Communist Party told his comrades at a party congress today that they had to change their basic orientation.


Jackson Expecting 'Top Echelon' Knick Season
LEAD: After a spirited two-hour workout by the Knicks today, Stu Jackson's first workout as a head coach, the National Basketball Association's youngest coach was asked the obvious question:


Plan to Restrict Carriage Horses Vetoed by Koch
LEAD: A law barring horse-drawn carriages from most of midtown Manhattan was vetoed yesterday by Mayor Edward I. Koch, who said the legislation ''goes too far.''


Trump Has Some Wall St. Believers
LEAD: Although Donald J. Trump arouses considerable skepticism among Wall Street stock traders, a minority is starting to take seriously his offer to buy the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, for $7.5 billion in cash.


3Com Stock Purchase Seen
LEAD: The 3Com Corporation said today that Digital Communications Associates Inc. intends to purchase 3Com common stock valued in excess of $15 million, but less than 15 percent of the company's outstanding shares.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1989
LEAD:  The Economy


Suspect in Deaths of Elderly
LEAD: Olian Small, 36 years old, has been charged with attempting a murder last April by tying a knot in the oxygen tube of Helen Ada Potter, an 81-year-old patient at a nursing home where he worked.
She died four days later, the authorities said, and Mr.
Small was arrested Wednesday evening after he was indicted.


Poland Details Economic Change
LEAD: Poland's new Government announced detailed plans today to convert the country to a market economy, warning of tight money, bankruptcy and unemployment along the way but promising to soften the pain with unemployment benefits.


Bridge
LEAD: There are times in bidding when good becomes bad, and vice versa.
An example of the latter occurs when a player who has passed originally has a fit with the opening bidder.
A jump shift in a new suit normally conveys that message: a player should not jump simply because his hand was almost worth an opening.


Venezuelan Debt Payment
LEAD: Venezuela has brought its public sector debt up to date by paying more than $900 million in overdue interest to foreign banks, paving the way for talks on a refinancing plan, a spokesman for the Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday.


With Puck Bouncing Their Way, Rangers Win Season Opener
LEAD: When it was over tonight, the Rangers, in near unanimous humility, smiled and talked about luck and what it was like to enjoy some after all.
They had beaten the Jets, 4-1, to open the season, and their locker room was full of quiet laughter.


C.F.T.C. Bars Restitution Bid
LEAD: Federal futures regulators voted down a proposal today that would have allowed them to force dishonest brokers and traders to pay restitution to the customers they had cheated.


Ad Agency Indicted in Bribe Case
LEAD: In the first criminal indictment of an advertising agency under Federal racketeering laws, Young &amp; Rubicam was charged yesterday with bribing Jamaican officials with almost $1 million to obtain the Jamaica Tourist Board's advertising account in 1981.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.81
9.00
8.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.59
7.76
7.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.81
7.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.06
8.17
8.59
30-YR.


Jane Austen's Siblings
LEAD: To the Editor:


LaRouche Conviction Challenged in Appeal
LEAD: The tax and mail fraud conspiracy conviction of Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. was challenged today in a Federal appellate court as resulting from a rush prosecution that violated his right to due process.


Judge Orders Crowded Jail to Release 173 Suspects
LEAD: Authorities began freeing 173 criminal suspects from the overcrowded Essex County Jail today under a Federal judge's novel order using taxpayers' funds as bail money.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Sports Pages on Thursday about university presidents asking for limitations on college sports misidentified the co-sponsor of a bill that would require all colleges to disclose graduation rates for athletes.
Representative Ed Towns, Democrat of Brooklyn, was the co-sponsor with Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New


Air Force Releases Photograph of Crippled B-1 Bomber


Defendant Acquitted of Rape; 'She Asked for It,' Juror Says
LEAD: Members of a jury here say they acquitted a man of rape because the woman's clothing suggested she had ''asked for it.''


Dow Up 11.96, to 2,785.52, on Job Data
LEAD: Buoyed by an unexpected increase in unemployment for September and a sharp decline in factory jobs, blue-chip stocks rose to another record yesterday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Detectors, No Sprinklers  The nursing home fire that killed nine people in Norfolk, Va., was started by a cigarette or match that ignited a foam mattress, the fire chief said.


Five Exchanges Weighing Move To Jersey City
LEAD: The five commodity exchanges in New York, outgrowing their space in the World Trade Center, are considering moving to Jersey City and are talking to municipal officials on both sides of the Hudson River to see which could provide a better package of tax breaks and other inducements.


Offer Is Begun For Lionel Corp.
LEAD: Robert Toussie, the New York investor, began a hostile $145 million tender offer for the Lionel Corporation, the toy retailer that reorganized and emerged from bankruptcy in 1985.
Robert I. Toussie L.P. said it had begun an offer of $8 a share in cash for up to 11.9 million of Lionel's common shares.


Child Is Killed in Car Accident
LEAD: A 15-month-old Brooklyn boy died last night from injuries suffered when his father backed over him with the family car, the police said.
The child, Joseph Mandel, was apparently playing in the driveway of his home at 736 East Third Street in the Borough Park section.
His father, Samson, did not see him as he was backing his 1977 Pontiac station wagon out of the driveway, a police spokesman, Sgt.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Flavor of Dried Herbs
LEAD: With the arrival of autumn, the herb garden begins to lose life, and many cooks rely on dried herbs from now until spring.
The flavor of some dried herbs is more intense, so they should be substituted in smaller quantities.
Other dried herbs lose much of their character.
Basil, chervil, coriander leaves and parsley are much better fresh than dried.


U.S. Sees Israeli Stance as Temporary
LEAD: Administration officials said today that they view the Israeli Cabinet's rejection of an Egyptian invitation for talks with Palestinians in Cairo as a temporary setback and are moving ahead with efforts to organize such a dialogue.


We Need Many More Computer Scientists
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Harsh Lessons of Retailing
LEAD: Nine store chains, including some of the most glittering names in American retailing, have been put up for sale in recent months in what is proving to be a powerful lesson on what can happen when companies with high expectations enter a volatile industry on the verge of a slowdown.


Deal May Bring Permanent Cut In the Gains Tax
LEAD: With the blessing of President Bush, the Senate tonight worked toward a deal that may well give Mr.
Bush the permanent reduction in the capital gains tax that he promised in the 1988 campaign.


Two Personal Essays
LEAD: The personal essay is a dangerous form, prone to banality or overreaching.
Fred Marx's ''Dreams From China'' and Ralph Arlyck's ''Current Events,'' the first-person films that will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 6:30, show traces of both problems.
They are extremely sincere but slight films, not cogent enough to deal with the huge subjects they tackle, and not formally innovative enough to make up for that lack of substance.


Miss Donahue Wed to C. R. C. Kingzett
LEAD: Madeleine Anne Donahue, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore P. Donahue of New York, Litchfield, Conn., and Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Christopher Richard Colin Kingzett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kingzett of London and Cirencester, Gloucestershire, England.
The Rev.
Richard Foley officiated at the Farm Street Roman Catholic Church in London.


ISRAELIS REJECT CAIRO'S PROPOSAL ON MIDEAST TALKS
LEAD: The Israeli Government today rejected an Egyptian proposal to convene preliminary Palestinian-Israeli talks in Cairo as a way of breaking the deadlock in stalled efforts toward peace.


Patents; Self-Cleaning Hot Tub
LEAD: Murray Altman, owner of a Jacuzzi manufacturing company in Sylmar, Calif., has patented a self-cleaning hot tub.
The tub contains a perforated tube that can spray water down the sides.
Controlled by a microprocessor, which starts a cleaning cycle after the tub has been drained, the tube first sprays cold water for 30 seconds, then sprays water containing a mixture of detergent, disinfectant and anti-spotting agents for 75 seconds.


Holiday On Monday
LEAD: Columbus Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office at 33d St. and Eighth Ave. open.
Banks: Option to close.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Traffic Safety
LEAD: Busy parents with busy children too often live life on a treadmill.
The children need to be transported between home and school and after-school programs in a seemingly never-ending cycle of daily activities that often compete with the parents' own obligations.


Nursing Home Blaze in Which 9 Died Is Believed Due to a Careless Smoker (Associated Press)
LEAD: A fire that killed 9 people at a nursing home here and sent nearly 100 to the hospital was caused by a discarded match or cigarette that ignited a rubber mattress, Norfolk's Fire Chief said today.


U.N. Condemns Israel's Tactics in Arab Revolt
LEAD: The General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to condemn Israel for its repression of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories.


Civil Rights Panel Rebukes Its Chairman
LEAD: The United States Civil Rights Commission today rebuked its chairman for deciding to appear at a symposium on homosexuality sponsored by an evangelical Christian group.


The Hospital Pact Sets No Pattern
LEAD: The new contract settlement negotiated between New York City hospitals and the hospital workers' union is costly to the industry, but fair to the workers.
It provides 7.5 percent increases in each of the first two years and 5 percent in the third, with a $500 cash bonus to each worker in 1991.
That's a generous wage package, so generous that the leaders of the city's municipal unions will inevitably try to use it as the model for their negotiations with City Hall next year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in SportsMonday on the success of the Oakland Athletics this season omitted one of the teams on which four pitchers won at least 20 games each in the same season.
The Chicago White Sox accomplished it in 1920.


Why the Vatican Kept Silent on Nazi Atrocities; The Failure to Act
LEAD: To the Editor:


Easy Goer Tries for 5th
LEAD: Easy Goer will try for his fifth successive Grade I stakes victory, and make his final start of the year in New York, in the $1 million Jockey Club Gold Cup today at Belmont Park.


Big Wilson Dies at 65; Ex-NBC Disk Jockey
LEAD: Malcolm John Wilson Jr., a radio personality known as Big Wilson, died after a heart attack Thursday at a hotel in Selma, N.C.
He had observed his 65th birthday this week and was touring the country with his wife, Jody.


Lord Einstein Paying WPP $7 Million
LEAD: Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners, an advertising agency founded by American executives rebelling against their British parent company, the WPP Group P.L.C., agreed yesterday to pay $7 million to WPP.


'Mighty Casey' Opera
LEAD: The American Chamber Opera Company will present ''The Mighty Casey,'' an opera by William Schuman based on the poem by E. L. Thayer, at 8 o'clock tonight at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
The fully staged production is to be conducted by Douglas Anderson.
Tickets are $15.
Information: 781-0857.


Michael Williams, 74, Cardiologist in Harlem
LEAD: Dr.
Michael D. Williams, a cardiologist who practiced in Harlem for more than 40 years, died of complications of heart disease yesterday at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Medical Center.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Harsud Journal; Water, Water Everywhere? Many Now Say 'No!'
LEAD: Here in the remote Narmada River valley, in hamlets that most Indians have never heard of, a new and growing national environmental movement has drawn its battle line against large-scale development in India.


News Summary
LEAD:  International 2-5  Israel rejected an Egyptian proposal to convene preliminary Palestinian-Israeli talks in Cairo as a way of breaking the deadlock on peace efforts.
Labor Party officials criticized the rejection.
Page 1  The U.S. called Israel's rejection of talks with Palestinians only a temporary setback.


Questions Are Raised About Thornburgh's Travels
LEAD: Two months after Justice Department budget officials limited official travel to conventions, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and five aides flew to a Bar Association convention in Honolulu in August aboard an otherwise empty Government Boeing 727.


Plane Crash Kills 4 Aboard
LEAD: A single-engine plane, buffeted by turbulent air, crashed short of the runway at Palm Springs Regional Airport Thursday evening, killing all four people on board.
The identities of the victims were not made known.
The Federal Aviation Administration and the Riverside County coroner are investigating.


Sony Donates $3 Million
LEAD: The Sony Corporation of Japan has donated $3 million to the University of Illinois to endow a research and teaching position in electrical and computer engineering.
The grant is Sony's largest single gift to a American academic institution.
The position is to be named in honor of John Bardeen, an Illinois faculty member.


Bonds Soar on Signs of Weaker Economy
LEAD: Prices of Treasury and corporate securities soared and yields fell yesterday as the Government's latest employment data indicated a further weakening of the economy.
Unemployment rose by one-tenth of 1 percent, to 5.2 percent of the labor force in September, and there was a decline in factory jobs in a broad range of industries.


On Eve of East German Anniversary, Gorbachev Shows Some Support


McNeil, Calming Down, Says He Will Be Ready
LEAD: It has rarely happened before in professional football or any other big league sport: a player accidentally injures another and is so despondent that he is unable to continue in the game.


Boeing and McDonnell Get Taiwan Jet Order
LEAD: Evergreen Airways, a new international carrier based in Taiwan, has signed deals with two American jet manufacturers to buy as many as 26 jets worth more than $3.2 billion, the manufacturers said today.


Manhattan Water Main Break Leaves Commuters Stranded


First Things First
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York's Ships
LEAD: ''New York-Built Ships,'' an exhibition on the history of shipbuilding in Manhattan, will be on view through Jan. 2 at the South Street Seaport Museum, 213 Water Street.
Models, carvings, paintings, photographs and other items from various museum collections are included in the show, which focuses on the city's prominence as an international shipbuilding center in the first half of the 19th century.


Windows
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unfinished Business With Canada
LEAD: Nine months after the United States-Canada free-trade agreement began chipping away at tariffs and trade barriers, trade relations between the world's two busiest trading partners have slipped once again to their accustomed place on the policy makers' back burner.


The Heat Is On; Fuel-Saving Pointers
LEAD: During the heating season, which began last week and runs through May 31, New York City requires that indoor temperatures in multifamily buildings always be at least 55 degrees and that when outside temperatures drop below 55, indoor readings must be at least 68 between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Sept. 17 about Seoul misidentified a building on the grounds of the 14th-century Kyongbok Palace.
It was the Korean National Folklore Museum, which was built in 1972, not the palace itself.


6 Payment-Free Months; Hard Sell for a Soft Market
LEAD: Say you've built a development that people like and can afford, but because the market is soft and they are having trouble selling their current homes, they can't afford to buy one of yours.
What can you do?
A Rockland County developer believes he has solved the problem: He is offering to meet a buyer's mortgage payments - up to $2,000 a month for half a year - once that buyer moves in.


Where the Season Shines Brightest; Cezanne, Dali, Giulio Romano
LEAD: FALL is in many ways the best time to go to Europe for major exhibitions.
Unmotivated visitors are fewer.
The hotels are less full, likewise, though it is a good idea to watch out for the trade fairs, conventions and other municipal promotions that begin in late September.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Senators Cite Progress In Tax Discussions
Republicans and Democrats in the Senate report progress in bargaining over a date to vote on reduction of the capital gains tax.
Both sides were seeking tactical advantages and avoiding a filibuster.
Page 28.
Strength Despite Scandal
By some measures, religious broadcasting is more powerful now than before Jim Bakker's resignation from the PTL Ministry.


Thruway to Use Drug Patrols in Westchester
LEAD: In a move intended partly to stem the growing flow of drugs to upstate New York, the state police are about to begin a program to apprehend drug-impaired drivers along the Westchester County stretches of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway system.


Keen-Witted Geese: Can They Read, Too?
LEAD: Dave Pelland's engaging piece on geese and their ''smarts'' (''There's No Way to Outwit the Geese,'' Opinion page, Sept. 3) reminded me of my experience when I lived in Fort Collins, Colo., some years ago.


Monetary Awards Can Soothe the Pain
LEAD: A wrongful death case under New York law is treated differently from a similar case under Connecticut law and from the way cases are treated in other states.


A Global Sailor Turns Inward
LEAD: It has been two years since Tania Aebi, a New York City teen-ager, sailed around the world in a 26-foot sailboat, alone except during an 80-mile stretch off American Samoa when she took an acquaintance onboard.


Miss Galvin Wed To R. S. Smith Jr.
LEAD: Jeanne M. Galvin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Galvin of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, was married yesterday to Richard S. Smith Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Smith of West Hartford, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph Nagle officiated at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Forest Hills.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-23, 32


Speculation Is Not Gambling
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


REFERENCE
LEAD:  THE FOSSIL BOOK: A Record of Prehistoric Life.
By Carroll Lane Fenton and Mildred Adams Fenton.
Revised and expanded by Patricia Vickers Rich, Thomas Hewitt Rich and Mildred Adams Fenton. (Doubleday, $40.) ''Many a paleontologist has lived a long and useful life without seeing fossil flagellates, ciliates, or even radiolarians,'' write the authors of ''The Fossil Book.


Review/Pop; Twangy Laments by Oslin
LEAD: In one of her best recent songs, ''Didn't Expect It to Go Down This Way,'' the country singer and songwriter K. T. Oslin laments being overworked, overweight, undesired and alone. ''I knew life would be hard, but I didn't know how hard,'' she declares. ''How in the world did I end up lonely?''


Army Stunned by Duke
LEAD: Clarkston Hines caught three touchdown passes and Randy Cuthbert ran for 147 yards and two more scores today as Duke held off Army by 35-29.


CLOBBERING HER EX
LEAD:  AFTER YOU'VE GONE  By Alice Adams.  229 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Men's Transitional Coats: Light, Warm and Stylish
LEAD: Blustery, unpredictable fall weather calls for a transition coat, something between an overcoat and a raincoat.
Such a garment should take a man from a rainy train platform in the morning to a sunny lunchtime walk to a chill, dark evening after working late.
Preferably, of course, in style.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl Wins Final: Ivan Lendl overcame problems with his first serve yesterday and defeated Miroslav Mecir of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 4-6, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4, to win the Stuttgart tournament in West Germany.
The match took 3 hours 14 minutes.
Lendl, the world's top-ranked player, broke Mecir twice to win the first set, then started missing his first serves.


Dinner With Bunny
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater; Two Aunts, One Husband, a Niece and Complications
LEAD: When Mia Dillon, wearing a voluminous dress, makes her first entrance in ''The Aunts,'' it is immediately clear to everyone in the theater that her character is supposed to be pregnant - to everyone, that is, except the other characters on stage.
For unexplained reasons, the young woman's two aunts are oblivious to her condition.


NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY
LEAD:  THE STATUE WITHIN: An Autobiography, by Francois Jacob.
Translated by Franklin Philip. (Basic Books, $10.95.) In helping to discover how cells turn their genes on and off, generating the proper proteins, Francois Jacob learned that science was a ''constant dialogue between imagination and experiment that allowed one to form an increasingly fine-grained conception of what is called reality.


Penn Has to Rally to Beat Columbia
LEAD: With the weight of 49 losses in Columbia's last 51 games resting on its shoulders, the Lions' defense lined up for a fourth-down play yesterday with the ball inches from its goal line and less than two minutes remaining in the game.
If Columbia could hold, it would mean a victory over Penn, an Ivy League co-champion last year.


Former Indian Leader To Press Libel Action
LEAD: Former Prime Minister Moraji Desai will continue pursuing legal action against the author of a book that says Mr.
Desai was a paid informer for the Central Intelligence Agency, his son said today.


Noriega's Party Proposes Laws to Punish Dissent
LEAD: The political party controlled by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has proposed a sweeping set of 16 laws aimed at identifying and punishing Panamanians who do not actively support his military rule.


Brigid Flanigan, Developer, Weds
LEAD: Brigid Snow Flanigan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Flanigan of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
David James Lezak, the son of Sidney and Dr.
Muriel Lezak of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Richard Valantasis, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Is There Life After 'M*A*S*H'?
LEAD: LARRY GELBART IS SIT-ting in a Manhattan rehearsal studio, watching some actors run through a scene from his new play, ''Mastergate,'' and he's laughing.


Taylor Adds Thoughtfulness to List of Football Skills
LEAD: He may be the most gifted player in the history of pro football: big, fast, intense, incredibly quick, incredibly explosive.
He may be the best outside linebacker ever, and his pass-rushing skills have redefined the position.


In the West, The Verdict on Soviet Psychiatry Is Still Out
LEAD: DURING the last two years, the Soviet Union has carried out changes in the practice of psychiatry, hoping to persuade the World Psychiatric Association to allow it to rejoin the organization.
It left the group in 1983 to avoid almost certain expulsion because of charges that political and religious dissidents were being confined in mental hospitals.


Devils Manage A Tie
LEAD: The coaches and front-office personnel of the Devils wore red carnations tonight for the team's eighth opener in New Jersey.
The Devils were, in effect, half-wilted at the end.


Perlman Heads Lineup of Orchestral Openings
LEAD: THIS will be another week of beginnings, with the Eastern Connecticut Symphony Orchestra opening its season on Thursday and Orchestra New England and the Greater Bridgeport, Greenwich and Waterbury Symphonies opening theirs on Saturday.


Thousands March on Capitol to Protest Shortage of Affordable Housing


STAMPS
LEAD: In the days before income taxes - yes, there was such a time - the United States Government raised money through a wide range of excise taxes and collected the money by selling revenue stamps.
Just as postage stamps show payment for a government service, so revenue stamps show payment for a tax.


Parents Versus Intolerance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Despite Wet Year, Harvest Pleases Wine Growers
LEAD: THE 1989 grape harvest is under way on the North and South Forks and in Nassau County, and the aroma of fermentation drenches the air around wineries as the must from chardonnay, merlot and other grapes churns and froths in stainless-steel tanks and oak barrels.


Panel Discussion; Preservation And Growth
LEAD: With the mayoral election, changes in the new York City charter and a wave of commercial development under way in Manhattan, many experts are questioning whether the city has struck a proper balance beetween economic development, construction and historic preservation.
Do architects, builders and neighborhood advocates share a vision of the urban environment?


Turning the Living Room Into an Intimate Concert Hall
LEAD: AN unusual music organization in the county has begun its eighth season of fall concerts.
This group does not advertise and receives virtually no municipal aid, yet the total for its audiences this year is expected to be more than 1,500, and its concerts sell out quickly.


Douglas Bateson And Miss Johnson Exchange Vows
LEAD: Marcia Belle Johnson, a vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, and Douglas Farrar Bateson, a vice president of J. P. Morgan Securities, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
James Episcopal Church in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Hays H. Rockwell officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Brenda


Ribbon Speakers Have The Virtue of Clarity
LEAD: Perhaps it is the ultimately fantastic notion of an inanimate object making music.
Perhaps it is the challenge of constructing a device that imitates all musical instruments and any human voice.
At any rate, there is something about loudspeakers that stirs the engineering mind and results in a perennial parade of novel and frequently offbeat designs.


Even Gorbachev's Friends Want a Little Order
LEAD: WHEN the Soviet parliament decided last week to ban strikes in key industries, it was just a modest display of what liberal commentators here call ''the strong hand syndrome'' - the yearning for something to control the disorders Mikhail S. Gorbachev has loosed in the land.
More draconian proposals are in store, as the country sweats out the unnerving side effects of a little liberty.


When the Rent's Late, but Culture Beckons, Ingenuity Saves the Day
LEAD: Robin D. Chaplik concedes that she is a cheap date.
Her idea of a good time is hearing the New York Philharmonic at 9 o'clock on a Thursday morning.
Or, after ushering people to their seats, slipping into the back of a theater to see a hit play.


Princeton Routs Brown
LEAD: Judd Garrett rushed for 209 yards and scored three touchdowns today as Princeton routed Brown, 38-15, handing the Bruins a school-record 13th loss in a row.


SELLING TRUE GRIT
LEAD: THERE ARE MANY PEOPLE in Robert Comstock, and all of them want out.
Right this minute.


Campus Life: Tufts; Policy Suspended Amid Controversy Over Free Speech
LEAD: Citing widespread disagreement on campus, Tufts University last week suspended indefinitely a new policy that many students said interfered with their right to free speech.


MORE THAN DADDY'S LITTLE EDITOR
LEAD:  SARA COLERIDGE, A VICTORIAN DAUGHTER  Her Life and Essays.
By Bradford Keyes Mudge.
Illustrated. 287 pp.
New Haven:  Yale University Press. $30.


Pitching Problems Dim Giants' Hopes
LEAD: Uncertainty concerning Rick Reuschel and Don Robinson cast a shadow over the Giants' hopes even before they were to resume play tonight in the National League playoff against the Cubs.


When the Untouchables Are Retouched
LEAD: They're the movies' equivalent of national historic places: 25 classic American films of cultural or esthetic significance to be preserved in trust as part of a National Film Registry overseen by the Librarian of Congress.
The films - 50 more titles will be added to the list over the next two years - were chosen last month by the Librarian and the National Preservation Board, comprising representatives of the film industry and related endeavors.


Friendship Can Be Earned at the Expense of Miss Manners
LEAD: YESTERDAY, while going through a stack of outdated newspapers, I ran across an etiquette column in which Miss Manners castigated insensitive clods who would drop in unannounced, likening them to boorish know-nothings, unversed in the subtleties of proper social behavior.


A Completist Turns His Piano Talent To a Piano Legend
LEAD: Gunnar Johansen is not one of the headliners, but he is a highly respected pianist whose lack of public appearance has been a matter of choice.
In 1939 he was named artist-in-residence at the University of Wisconsin, the first musician in any American university to be so honored.
He settled in.
In his home he installed a battery of the most up-to-date recording equipment, and instead of giving concerts he made a series of records that has put most of his contemporaries to shame.


HOME OWNERSHIP FOUND TO DECLINE
LEAD: Home ownership declined in the 1980's for the first time since World War II, Senator Lloyd Bentsen said today, citing high prices and high interest rates.


George Bellinger Weds Ms. Prestwidge
LEAD: Barbara E. Prestwidge and George M. Bellinger were married yesterday at the First Baptist Church in Stratford, Conn., by the Rev.
Dr.
W.
O.
Johnson, a Baptist minister, and the Rev.
Sandra A. Wilson, an Episcopal priest.
The bride is the daughter of the late Gladys T. Prestwidge of Baltimore.
Her husband is a son of the late Mr.


The Saving Grace of Chicken Livers
LEAD: THERE are two ways to buy chicken livers.
The expedient method is to purchase the necessary quantity from the butcher or supermarket.
The other way is to collect them from the whole chickens you buy, freezing them until you have enough for a recipe.


Food; Apple Polishing
LEAD: BLACK GILLIFLOWER, WHITE WINTER PEARMAIN, Esopus Spitzenburg, St.
Edmund's Pippin . . . the names of these old apples trip off my tongue with pleasure.
Now affectionately called antique apples, many of the varieties that were grown before the Civil War are being revived.
Alas, they are not as beautiful as their names; the fruit is small, irregular - all right, it must be said - just plain quirky.


In a New Haven Garage, Neon Art Glows
LEAD: ''THIS garage is the inside of my brain,'' said Mundy Hepburn, gliding his arm through the air.
Standing in the bed of a Chevy pickup, his frame backlighted by one of his neon sculptures, ''The Wave,'' he described with reverence the ''mystical beauty'' of neon.


Donna A. DeBernardo Weds John Marino Jr.
LEAD: Donna A. DeBernardo, the Staten Island regional representative for Governor Mario M. Cuomo, was married yesterday to John A. Marino Jr., the chairman of the New York State Democratic Party.
The Rev.
Rocco Famiglietti performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Richmondtown, S.I.


Hypocrisy Is Not Free
LEAD: Watching TV pictures of East Germans being shoved out of the U.S.
Embassy in East Berlin while they flocked into the West German Embassy in Prague, a young American here was distressed.


Directing 101: George Abbott on What Works
LEAD: George Abbott believes a director wastes his time in rehearsal when he talks endlessly to an actor about who his mother was, what did she want, what does he want and why it has led him up to this moment when he asks for the salt.
Instead he prefers that the director get on with it and tell the actor, ''C'mon, Johnny, just pass the salt.


Foul-Smelling Landfill in Harrison brings Recrimination, but Not Removal
LEAD: AS trees in the rest of Westchester begin to display their fall colors, the trees on Kenilworth Lane here remain leafless, their stark limbs an eerie black.
The swimming pools and tennis courts once shaded by the trees are empty, and the gardens under them sprout shriveled zucchini and brown string beans.


Terri Siegel Marries
LEAD: Last evening in the Grand Ballroom at the Plaza in New York, Terri Aileen Siegel, the daughter of Marilyn Siegel of Long Beach, L.I., and Irving Siegel of Kings Point, L.I., was married to Dr.
Jed Craig Kaminetsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Kaminetsky of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Friedman officiated.


Waiting Till Next Year
LEAD: With the season finished for New York Mets players, it was up to Mets management to serve up one final cliffhanger last week.
It began with a lot of front-office grumbling about the team's disappointing second-place finish this year, and soon the whole world just knew Davey Johnson was finished as manager.


A Sympathy Card on East Germany's Birthday
LEAD: THE Berlin Wall can play curious tricks on the eyes, and the sight of Mikhail S. Gorbachev soothingly professing solidarity with his East German comrades sometimes seemed an Eastern replay of President Bush's effort last spring to give a public hug to Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Mr.
Bush had just patched up a falling-out with Bonn over short-range nuclear missiles, and soon he was on a Rhine barge chugging beer with Mr.


Ms. Braun Weds A Fellow Lawyer
LEAD: Tracey Elizabeth Braun and Christopher Clark McIsaac were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in West Tisbury, Mass., in a ceremony performed by the Rev.
James Martin.
The bride is the daughter of Howard William Braun of St.
Michael's, Md., and Mrs.
Richard Roberts Spillman of Berwyn, Pa.


WHAT THE BUTLER SAW
LEAD:  THE REMAINS OF THE DAY  By Kazuo Ishiguro.  tr,br1245 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


JUST TWO WOMEN
LEAD: As an Amerian sociologist who studied in South Africa and practiced medicine there for 15 years, I can bear witness to the veracity of Jean Hey's observations in her article ''Just Two Women'' (Hers, Sept. 10).
Interpersonal tolerance generally does overshadow the ''stench of South Africa's oppressive politics.


Brand-Name Bargains for Columbus Day
LEAD: The Columbus Day sales that are under way signal the traditional start of the fall merchandise markdowns.
This year, some experts say, a shake-up in the retailing business may give shoppers new opportunities to save money, especially on clothing.


Jonathan Marvel Weds Quina Fonseca
LEAD: Quina Fonseca, a daughter of Elizabeth K. Fonseca of New York, East Hampton, L.I., and Venice and of Gonzalo Fonseca of New York and Seravezza, Italy, was married yesterday to Jonathan Jova Marvel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Marvel of San Juan, P.R., and Bear Island, Me.
The Rev.
Thomas Pike, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the East Hampton home of the bride's grandmother Alice M.


Old Things, Old Friends
LEAD: IT is happening all the time, the breaking up and closing of the parental home.
For everyone it is a painful experience.
And for me, it certainly was that.
But it also brought about a change in the way I see myself.


What to see and hear as the season opens in Europe
LEAD:  Theater  In Britain, theaters include:  Aldwych, Aldwych, London WC2B 4DF; telephone: 836 6404 or 0641.
Barbican Theater, Barbican Center, London EC2Y 8BQ; 638 8891.
Phoenix, Charing Cross Road, London WC2H 0JP; 836 2294.
Piccadilly, Denman Street, London WIV 8DY; 867 1118.
Royal National Theater: Olivier Theater, Lyttelton Theater, Cottesloe Theater, South Bank Centre, London SE1 9PX; 928 2252.


Trimming the Fat From School Costs
LEAD: As a parent of three school-age children, I read with trepidation Irving Gerber's Opinion article.
Too often I've heard the when-I-was-young-I-walked-five-miles-to-school-and-sat-in-a-class-of-45 refrain as a response to our requests for better student services and smaller class sizes.
While districts may be top-heavy with administrators, budget cuts go right to the children.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: Ruben Sierra doesn't walk enough.
What else can you say about a man who led the American League in runs batted in (119), total bases (344) and slugging percentage (.541) while finishing third in runs scored (101), eighth in doubles (35), first in triples (14), sixth in homers (29) and tenth in average (.304)?


The Time Lag Between Freezer and Microwave
LEAD: THOMAS WOLFE said, speaking of writers, that there were putter-inners and taker-outers.
I am, like Wolfe, a putter-inner, and our freezer would resemble one of Wolfe's overstuffed novels if my wife, like a Maxwell Perkins, were not a taker-outer.


Outdoors; Coalition Fights Dam to Save Salmon
LEAD: Resistance to the hydroelectric dam known as the Basin Mills project, on the Penobscot River in Maine, continues to gain momentum.


Children From India Are Said To Be Used in Camel Races
LEAD: The Indian authorities say they have uncovered child-smuggling gangs that send children as young as 5 years old to Persian Gulf countries to be used as human sirens in camel races.


Sarah Copeman Weds Robert Gould
LEAD: Sarah Caroline Copeman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Copeman of Tarvin, Cheshire, England, was married yesterday to Robert Rose Gould, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Gould 3d of Suffern, N.Y., and Prouts Neck, Me.
The Rev.
Alan Backhouse officiated at St.
Andrew's Anglican Church in Tarvin.


LIKUD SEES THREAT TO COALITION RULE
LEAD: The Likud party accused its Labor coalition partner today of seeking to bring down the Israeli Government over Egypt's newest Middle East peace proposal.


Mary N. Tobias Marries
LEAD: Mary Norwood Tobias, an interior designer in New York, and Richard Edward Miller, a vice president in Philadelpia of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, were married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Church in Columbia, S.C.
The Rev.
Mark P. Geary, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated.


Ms. Buetti Weds Andrew Levinson
LEAD: Karen Marie Buetti and Andrew Robert Levinson were married last evening at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., by Judge Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The bride is a daughter of Marie Buetti of Bay Shore, L.I., and Robert E. Buetti of Boca Raton, Fla.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr.


An Allowance For Wit and Human Foible
LEAD: Four days ago the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden unceremoniously passed its 15th anniversary.
The circular building, resembling a giant doughnut, has always seemed an oddity amid the neo-Classical and Modernist boxes lining Washington's National Mall.
But whatever might be said against the architect Gordon Bunshaft's design - and curators struggling to hang paintings on curved walls have had things to say over the years - his conception underscored one essential characteristic of the museum.


Children Who Set Fires Prompt a Conference
LEAD: EVERY three weeks, on average, firemen in some Westchester community are called to extinquish a blaze caused by children.
While about half of those fires result from the curiosity of children playing with matches, psychologists say the other half are the work of young arsonists, bent on deliberate, intentional and repeated destruction.


Reviews/Theater; 'Wonderful Town' Revived In Slightly Updated Version
LEAD: Has New York ever been so innocent a place as the grimy but effervescent city depicted in the 1953 musical ''Wonderful Town''?
That question pertains crucially to the Equity Library Theater's revival of the show, in which the director Adrienne Weiss has unwisely cast members of the ensemble as homeless people and punks in the street scenes.


FICTION
LEAD:  HERE ARE YOU DYING TONIGHT?
By Michel Deon.
Translated by Julian Evans. (Atlantic Monthly, $16.95.) The death of the protagonist in too many modern novels leaves the reader merely eager to move on to the next book, but by the time Stanislas Beren departs from Michel Deon's ''Where Are You Dying Tonight?


'Touched by an Angel': Other Views
LEAD: I was shocked and dismayed by a patronizing Opinion page piece, ''Touched by an Angel,'' on Aug. 27.


America Tackles The Pesticide Crisis
LEAD: JIM KNUTZON IS SITTING IN THE restaurant of the Hilton Hotel in Pleas-anton, Calif., near Oakland, solemnly regarding the plate of swordfish smothered in sauteed vegetables just set before him.
With his head bowed, he delivers what might be construed as a modern-day meditation.
Knutzon, a former pesticide salesman who now advises farmers on pesticide alternatives, expresses the hope that people across America will soon be able to sit down to meals that are free of toxic pesticide residues.


Beauty; UPS AND DOWNS
LEAD: MISS AMERICA CONTESTANTS wear them with bathing suits.
Playboy Playmates wear them with little else.
The Rockettes kick up a storm in them.
And Barbie's slender plastic feet are permanently poised to be slipped into them.
They, of course, are high heels: instruments of torture, symbols of sexuality and fodder for fetishists.


Campus Life; What Students Think: Racism Is a Big Issue
LEAD: Incidenls like a mock slave auction at the University of Wisconsin at Madison and the broadcast of racial slurs on a University of Michigan radio station have made race relations a top issue on college campuses nationwide, interviews with about 300 students at 20 universities show.


Of Cats and Frogs and Lessons
LEAD: Huzzahs to Maggie McCool for not losing her ''cool'' about repercussions on her distaste of brutifying biology.


CRIME
LEAD: In their relentless quest for a decent apartment in Manhattan, New Yorkers sometimes resort to UNORTHODOX PRACTICES (Pocket Books, Paper, $3.50), an apt title for this hilarious first mystery by Marissa Piesman, co-author of ''The Yuppie Handbook'' and, more to the point, a practicing real estate attorney.


THE A.C.L.U.'S POLICIES
LEAD: There are many things wrong with the American Civil Liberties Union, and Jeffrey T. Leeds has pointed to some of them, as well as to what is right about its policies (''The A.C.L.U. - Impeccable Judgments or Tainted Policies?'' Sept. 10).
But its chief weakness, as I see it, is its insistence that a general principle, whether it deals with free speech or due process, should be applied to all cases - without regard for the consequences.


Senators See Some Progress On Cut in Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: White House negotiators and the Senate Republican leadership bargained with Senate Democrats today, seeking a firm date for a vote that could give President Bush a permanent cut in the capital gains tax.


CAMPUSES COPING WITH A DRUGS OATH
LEAD: Six months after the Department of Education began requiring college students receiving financial aid to sign oaths that the money would not be used to buy drugs, many university officials say they have no plans to enforce compliance with the oath.


GIFT-WRAP DESIGNER
LEAD: Anne-Stuart Hamilton thinks of herself as a dresser of gifts.


Miss Spitler Wed To B. G. Arpajian
LEAD: Anne Marie Spitler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee W. Spitler of Brick, N.J., was married yesterday in New York to Brian George Arpajian, the son of Kurken G. Arpajian of Philadelphia and Helga M. Reiber of Lake Oswego, Ore.
The Rev.
Robert Verrigni performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in St.
Patrick's


On the Road, Radio Echoes The Landscape
LEAD: One of the pleasures of driving long distances through America - a pleasure that this bus- and subway-bound New Yorker gets to experience all too infrequently - is the rediscovery of popular music on the car radio.


Where the Season Shines Brightest; 'Miss Saigon' is hottest London ticket
LEAD: IN London, a new play by David Hare and a stage adaptation by Anthony Burgess of his novel ''A Clockwork Orange,'' along with Brecht, Wilde and lashings of Shakespeare.
In Paris, Peter Brook's production of a satiric fantasy about a Messianic visit to South Africa, plus Moliere galore.
In Berlin, Molnar set to music, and the world premiere of a play by the late Thomas Bernhard.


Iran Hangs 31 Traffickers
LEAD: Iran hanged 31 people for drug smuggling today in a continuing crackdown that has sent over 800 traffickers to the gallows this year, the Teheran radio said.
Ten of them, including a woman, were executed at Qasr prison in Teheran for distributing opium and heroin and for possessing firearms.


A Helping Hand on Reverse Mortgages
LEAD: A pilot program run by the Federal Housing Administration that could spur the use of reverse mortgages is just now getting under way around the country.


TAKING OFF THE WHITE GLOVES
LEAD: Anyone who compares the quirky first issue of Vanity Fair - which included the Garcia Marquez novella ''Chronicle of a Death Foretold'' - with the glossy vapidity now on the newsstand can only mourn the loss of a potentially great magazine.
What happened to that first vision?


Congress Passes Bill Curbing Art Financing
LEAD: The Senate approved and sent to President Bush today a bill that calls for denying Federal money for art deemed obscene, the first time Congress has placed a limitation on arts grants because of content.


Sports of The Times; This Hot Dog's Smothered in Onions, Too
LEAD: The rules were different when Ernie Whitt broke into baseball in 1972, or at least that's the way it seems to him today.


Do Not Shush Voice of the Fan
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Parks Are Becoming Dumping Grounds
LEAD: AS landfills reach capacity and dumping costs soar, parks and forests in New Jersey are increasingly becoming the retiring grounds of old refrigerators, tires and other solid wastes, officials say.


Dr. Watkis Marries
LEAD: Dr.
Patricia Ann Watkis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Clinton J. Watkis of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Charles Dale May, a son of Clevon May and Maereatha May of Kansas City, Mo.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gardner C. Taylor officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Dr.
Jeremiah Wright, at the Concord Baptist Church of Christ in Brooklyn.


Forgotten Harvest
LEAD: It is harvest time for squirrels in the city, and the other morning one of them was out foraging acorns in Washington Square Park.
With an acorn in its jaws, it dug a little hole in the turf, pushed the acorn in, patted dirt over it and then brushed some grass over the spot as if to conceal it.
It did the same with the second acorn and was working on a third when a pair of poodles came along and chased it up a tree.


Sharon L. Bullock Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Sharon Laure Bullock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford J. Bullock of Buffalo, Minn., was married yesterday to Joshua D. Libresco, the son of Dr.
Emile Libresco of Greens Farms, Conn., and the late Iris Adams Libresco.
The Rev.
Timothy Power officiated at the Pax Christi Roman Catholic Church in Eden Prairie, Minn.


Is Political Humor Politic?
LEAD: Do we need political humor?
I usually answer that question with the smart-alecky response, ''I certainly do - I have bills to pay.'' The humorist Tom Lehrer gave up his practice years ago with the proclamation that political satire died the moment Henry Kissinger received the Nobel Peace Prize, and my endeavors as a satirist are often threatened by the verbatim statements of public figures.


Miss Richards, Teacher, Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Glazier Richards, an English teacher at the Brearley School, was married yesterday to Mitchell Ira Francis, a mathematics teacher at the Horace Mann School.
The Rev.
Francis B. Creamer Jr., an Episcopal priest and a cousin of the bride, and Rabbi Abraham Weisman officiated at the Lotos Club in New


From Blue Jeans to French Fries, Vendors Diversify
LEAD: The drive for convenience may soon make microwave dinners, videotapes and french fries standard fare in vending machines.
The developments stem from the desire of several new companies to cash in on the vending craze.
And to keep sales from growing stale, several existing companies have moved upscale.


The Power of Concentration
LEAD: FRESH WINDS FROM CANADA tore at the psychologist's face, bringing tears to his eyes, as he strolled along Lake Michigan with the Chicago skyline back over his shoulders and talked about that most prized of human experiences - pure enjoyment.
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi is a man obsessed by happiness.
For more than two decades, most recently as a professor of psychology and education at the University of


UNNECESSARY SURGERY
LEAD: As I read James Barron's article ''Unnecessary Surgery'' (April 16), I wondered whether my initial reaction qualified me for a Hostile Persons Award from Daniel Goleman, author of ''Agreeableness vs.
Anger,'' appearing in the same issue.
The problem is far more complex than Mr.
Barron allows.
Neither medical nor surgical management is an exact science.


Warrior Comeback
LEAD: Five times he was a National Basketball Association All-Star and once he was voted the league's comeback player of the year.
Now Marques Johnson is attempting another comeback that he hopes will lead to a starting role, if not an All-Star one, with the Golden State Warriors.
The 6-foot-7-inch Johnson, an unrestricted free agent, signed a one-year contract with the


Queens Girl, 10, Is Shot in Head By Stray Bullet
LEAD: There was a crimson bloodstain the size of a quarter yesterday on the asphalt in front of the Friendly bodega near the Redfern Houses in Far Rockaway, Queens.
An orange police tape twisted in the sea breeze, and teen-age boys whispered about the shooting Friday night of a young girl caught in the path of a bullet fired by a youth as he argued with other youths over a game of dice.


Loose or Broken Banisters
LEAD: Bannisters, or staircase posts and railings, are as much a safety feature as they are a decorative element.
This makes repairing loose or broken bannisters important, but also somewhat complicated, because fasteners are usually hidden.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  London Christmas  Question: We will be in London Dec. 24, 25 and 26 this year.
We have heard that historical sites and stores are closed.
Please advise as to what do at that time. - P. W. G., Baldwin Harbor, L.I.
Answer: Most stores, museums and historical sites are closed Dec. 25 and 26, Boxing Day.


Glen Cove Law Would Bar Gatherings of Illegal Aliens
LEAD: UNTIL last month, Albert Mejia was one of more than 100 men, mostly undocumented Salvadoran refugees, who congregated every morning in front of Carmen's Deli in Glen Cove, waiting there for the landscaping trucks to come by and hoping to get a job for the day.


Nancy Jane Lavin Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Carson Lavin of Needham and Duxbury, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Jane Lavin to Daniel Austin Scheerer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Durand Scheerer Jr. of Essex Fells, N.J., and East Hampton, L.I.
They are to be married this month.


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS (Residential in millions of dollars)
Aug. 89
Aug. 89
Change
New York
130.9
144.7
-10%
New Jersey
235.9
402.3 $-41%
Connecticut
131.8
202.7
-35%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
*4*MORTAGE INTEREST RATES (Average)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


Memory Repair
LEAD: THE 68-YEAR-OLD CON-gressman was frantic.
Long proud of his ability to remember the names, the children's names and even the birthdays of important constituents, he now made embarrassing mistakes.
His memory clearly wasn't what it used to be.
Devastated, he sought help at a memory clinic near Washington.


Southern Cal Prevails Over Washington, 24-16
LEAD: Todd Marinovich threw for one touchdown and ran for another today to lead Southern California to a 24-16 victory over slumping Washington in a Pacific-10 Conference game.


Versatile Chicken Dish Has a Role for the Season's Apples
LEAD: Apple- and ginger-flavored chicken with noodles is a dish of great versatility.


Ad Doldrums
LEAD: To the Editor:


Venture Capital Loses Its Vigor
LEAD: An air of serenity pervades 3000 Sand Hill Road, a campus-like cluster of office buildings that is the venture capital business's equivalent of Wall Street.
More than 20 venture firms in plush offices here plot their next investments in Silicon Valley, a few miles to the south, hoping to pick the next Apple Computer or Genentech.


Rating Coverage Of the Open
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


REFERENCE
LEAD:  TOTAL BASEBALL.
Edited by John Thorn and Pete Palmer with David Reuther. (Warner, $49.95.) Baseball is the game of numbers.
Its order and its complexities have invited, even demanded, statistics for more than a century. ''Total Baseball'' is one of the best baseball statistics books ever.
It uses the traditional statistics, accumulated though painstaking research (Ty Cobb had 4,190 hits, not 4,191), as well as new ones: the so-called sabermetrics popularized by Bill James and by John Thorn and Pete Palmer in their book, ''The Hidden Game of


Joe, 35, 5'11'', SWM, seeks trvl prtnr; share
LEAD: EARLIER this year, the Practical Traveler discussed some ways to circumvent the distasteful single supplement, the extra charge a traveler must often pay to occupy a room alone at a hotel or on a tour.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:  Food by Phone


On Language; Talk of the Town
LEAD: IN 1928, WHEN THE IVO-ry Soap slogan ''It Floats'' was being drilled into the American consciousness, The New Yorker magazine ran a cartoon by Gluyas Williams of a bunch of harried executives and hair-pulling copywriters running around a pool; it was captioned ''The day a cake of soap sank at Procter &amp; Gamble's.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  CONTEMPORARY BALLET


Miss Eplett Wed To Sean E. Reilly
LEAD: Jennifer Marie Eplett, a daughter of Mary Jane Coughlin Eplett of Lexington, Mass., and Dr.
James Douglas Eplett of Nashua, N.H., was wed yesterday to Sean Eugene Reilly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin Patrick Reilly of Baton Rouge, La.
Msgr.
John Keilty and the Rev.
Margaret Gunness, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.


Greeks to Vote Again as Rules Seem to Change
LEAD: After being battered by scandals, electioneering and parliamentary inquiries, Greeks are wearily preparing for new elections, wondering whether the past year of turmoil has changed the country's traditional political rules.


Not Just Another Remarkably Beautiful Face
LEAD: Michelle Pfeiffer, with the pale blue eyes that pierce with love or rage or humor as easily as they are wounded, hovers on the brink of the big breakthrough.
Given the right role in the right film, Ms.
Pfeiffer, who also happens to be a blithe comedienne, will soon become a star in her own right.


Plans for Ecology Center Outlined
LEAD: FOR a quarter of a century, Robert Boyle has been fighting a dump.
Last week, the president of the Hudson River Fishermen's Association predicted that his old foe would become the ''Harvard of dumps'' as part of a new educational and research center proposed for the Hudson River site.


CHESS
LEAD: Is there a formula for winning against the world's greatest chess computer, Deep Thought?


The Hospital Workers Are The Envy of Labor Now
LEAD: WITH a sophisticated strategy that even its opponents agree was carried out to near perfection, New York City's major health-care workers' union gained a victory last week that many experts say provides the nation's labor movement with a badly needed ray of hope.


Births and Immigration Squeeze California Classroom Space
LEAD: School districts in California are facing a classroom shortage because the student population is growing more rapidly than expected and the state cannot meet the demand for new schools.


Having No Sense of Direction Is Neither Here Nor There
LEAD: I HAVE a terrible sense of direction.
Having lived in Westchester County now for nearly 13 years I go by rote to most of my accustomed destinations: the supermarkets, library, mall, even to New York City.
I have, I suppose, more or less memorized my way to these places, but this accomplishment was slow and painstaking in coming.


Scandals Aside, TV Preachers Thrive
LEAD: While Jim Bakker ponders the possiblity of prison, Mother Mary Angelica sits at Our Lady of the Angels monastery in Birmingham, Ala., planning to broadcast to the world.


Lebanese Peace Talks Stall Over Syrians
LEAD: A peace conference in the Saudi city of Taif was deadlocked today over a timetable for the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon.


Lisa Klein Weds Michael O. Boldt
LEAD: Lisa K. Klein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart E. Klein of Washington Depot, Conn., and Amagansett, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael O. Boldt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Brien Boldt of Englewood, N.J.


The Dalai Lama Has Ideas for Neuroscience
LEAD: FOR the Dalai Lama, the Nobel Peace Prize, which he won last week, might be taken as a tribute to his longstanding assurance that between even the most polar extremes there is common ground.
As the exiled religious and political leader of Chinese-dominated Tibet, he has sought a political middle way, an autonomous state within


Revival in Darien of ''Kiss Me, Kate''
LEAD: FOR decades, musical-comedy aficionados have waited for a first-class revival of ''Kiss Me, Kate.'' The Darien Dinner Theater is having its way with the 1948 classic of Cole Porter and Bella and Samuel Spewack, with a little help from Shakespeare, but we're still waiting.


Louise M. Quick, A Lawyer, Is Wed To L. B. Spann Jr.
LEAD: Louise Mabel Quick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Roland Quick of Morristown, N.J., and Edgartown, Mass., was married yesterday to Lewis Brown Spann Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spann of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by the Revs.
Thomas Sheffield and George White in the chapel of the Presbyterian Church in


Arts and Crafts Born of an Antimachine Ethic
LEAD: What is a Morris chair?
Which came first - the spindle-back designs of Gustav Stickley or those of Frank Lloyd Wright?
How affordable were Arts and Crafts furnishings originally?


Party Chief in the Ukraine Offers a Lighter Touch
LEAD: The new chief of the Communist Party in the Ukraine has offered to curb the official harassment of his republic's growing nationalist movement and to begin a period of cooperation, provided the nationalists do not advocate secession from the Soviet Union.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Chances are that there has never been a survey on this subject, and this oversight could be for a number of reasons.
The principal one might be that the answers would be ''Who cares?'' It is perfectly true that this is not something that will change the world.
In point of fact, most people have never even thought about it.


A LOVE AFFAIR WITH WALKING
LEAD: I was enjoying Harrison E. Salisbury's ''A Love Affair With Walking'' (April 16) until I came upon his derisive comments on Los Angeles, a place he says ''no one of right mind'' would consider walking in.
I invite Mr.
Salisbury to walk among the hipsters who crowd Melrose Avenue, the Orthodox Jews who patronize the kosher shops on Fairfax Avenue and the culturally minded standing in line for the latest exhibit at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.


BRAWLING OVER HARRODS
LEAD: SOME PEOPLE LOVE IT, OTHERS HATE IT, BUT FEW would dispute that Harrods is the world's most famous department store.
Its size, its style, its history and mystique combine to place Harrods in a class apart.
By night, the hulking Edwardian emporium, with its terra cotta exterior illuminated by 11,000 lights, resembles some giant ocean liner beached, oddly but proudly, in the midst of London's Knightsbridge district.


Campus Life: New Hampshire; Can Whistles Help to Prevent Campus Rape?
LEAD: Issuing so-called rape whistles to all women at the University of New Hampshire is among the strategies being considered by school officials in the wake of two sexual attacks on campus since the fall term began last month.
Rape-awareness strategies using whistles are already in place at Harvard and the College of William and Mary in


Into the Woods: Junk Cars and Old Stoves
LEAD: A HIKER in the woods accustomed to rounding a corner and coming upon a deer or other wild animal is just as likely these days to confront a rusting Ford or a rotting La-Z-Boy.
Across the state, many of the remaining unspoiled areas are fast becoming spoiled by the illegal dumping of automobiles, tire, furniture and major appliances.


A 3d Hero As Giants Edge Cubs
LEAD: It was not Kevin Mitchell who delivered the Giants to their moment of triumph tonight.
It was not Will Clark.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: James Howard Kunstler's article ''A Killing in Maine'' (Sept. 10) was sad and chilling.
Mr.
Kunstler focused largely on the sociological aspects and the very unusual legal process of this case; however, there were important and interesting questions about the dynamics of the shooting itself that were not fully explained.


Martin Knorr, 83, Ex-Queens State Senator
LEAD: Martin J. Knorr, a Republican-Conservative who served in the New York State Senate for 23 years, died of congestive heart failure yesterday at his daughter's home in Long Beach, L.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Little Neck, L.I.


Hit the Free Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flames Surge Past Islanders
LEAD: Paul Ranheim, Joey Mullen and Gary Roberts scored goals in a 2-minute-16-second span late in the third period to break open a close game tonight as the Calgary Flames kept the Islanders winless at the Olympic Saddledome with a 6-3 victory.


Suit Over Rights of Psychiatric Patients Is Resolved
LEAD: A LAWSUIT has been settled restoring some privileges to 22 criminally insane patients at Connecticut Valley Hospital in Middletown, state officials and lawyers said last week.


Bush and Panama: Chance Lost, Perhaps to Hesitancy
LEAD: A senior European diplomat, preparing to leave Washington for another capital, had this to say last week about President Bush's performance in the realm of foreign policy during his first eight months in office: ''He's been reasonably deft, and he's been extremely lucky.'' After the failed coup in


Miss Donahue, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: At the Church of Our Savior in New York, Mary Lee Donahue, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Floyd Joseph Donahue of Westfield and Mantoloking, N.J., was married yesterday to William Herron Trousdale, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer B. Trousdale of St.
Paul.
Msgr.
Thomas A. Kleissler performed the Roman Catholic ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


An Off-Duty Officer Is Shot in a Fight in the Bronx
LEAD: A police officer was critically wounded yesterday in an early-morning fight in the South Bronx with a man who, the police said, wrestled the officer's service revolver from him, shot him in the forehead and fled.


Favorite for Olympic Job Once Had It
LEAD: A panel of United States Olympic Committee officials will interview the last of six finalists for the job of executive director tomorrow.
The leading candidate is a man who had the job two years ago and quit after 17 days.


Heeeere's Jesse
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson may have found the ideal interim occupation for a once and future Presidential candidate -being host of a television talk show.
Mr.
Jackson, who sought the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1984 and 1988 and is considered likely to run again in 1992, said last week that the debut of his hourlong weekly show, ''Voices of America With Jesse Jackson,'' was planned for fall 1990.


Minister Found Slain In Manhattan Home
LEAD: An 83-year-old Pentecostal minister was found stabbed to death in his Upper West Side apartment yesterday afternoon and the police have charged his roommate in the slaying.


Mutilating the World
LEAD: To the Editor:


Apple Circus Goes Western
LEAD: The Big Apple Circus celebrates the Wild West, from Oct. 26 to Jan 7 in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
The show includes feats on the trapeze and on horseback, calf-roping, gun-slinging and whip-cracking.
Tickets are $40 to $10.
Information: 391-0767.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


A 'Tough Cookie' Makes Nets Debut
LEAD: Last season, for the first time in 32 years, Bill Fitch did not coach basketball.
He played golf.
He traveled.
He read books.
He spent more time with his friends.


Soviets Urge Stronger Role for World Court
LEAD: In what it calls a move to strengthen international law, the Soviet Union has called for a treaty that would oblige signing countries to submit drawn-out disputes to the International Court of Justice in The Hague for binding arbitration.


John B. Layton, 60's Chief of Capital Police
LEAD: John B. Layton, police chief of Washington in a turbulent five years of strained race relations and rising crime in the 1960's, died of a pulmonary embolism Thursday at Washington Adventist Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Washington.


Pamela A. Block Is Wed To John Bentley Works
LEAD: Pamela Anne Block and John Bentley Works were married yesterday by the Rev.
Robert Kaye at St.
Gregory's Episcopal Church in Boca Raton, Fla.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Dorothy Block of Boca Raton and the late Alan J. Block.
Her husband, 24, is a son of Edwin Works of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Barbara L.


Democrats Claim Success in Drug Policy
LEAD: With the Senate's approval of an ambitious anti-drug bill, Democratic leaders say they succeeded in defining significant differences with President Bush in the war against drugs.


Charlene Kulick Marries
LEAD: Charlene Kulick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Kulick of Dupont, Pa., and Andrew Jay Pal, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Pal of New York, were married yesterday at St.
Juliana's Church in Rock Lake, Pa.
The Rev.
Bernard Shepulski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Pal, 26 years old, is a litigation associate in the Washington office of the Chicago law firm of Kirkland &amp; Ellis.


Baseball Helps U.S. Look Back
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Special Today: The Good Health Magazine/ Magazine Part 2
LEAD: America's farmers are growing safer foods, using toxin-free sprays and other new techniques.
By Susan Gilbert.


REFERENCE
LEAD:  THE JOYS OF YINGLISH.
By Leo Rosten. (McGraw-Hill, $29.95.) Your strict lexicographer may question whether there is a real need for ''The Joys of Yinglish,'' the newest opus - one is tempted to say eppes - from the prolific Leo Rosten.
Mr.
Rosten's earlier lexicons, ''The Joys of Yiddish'' and ''Hooray for Yiddish,'' covered Mom-and-Pop Yiddish.


Review/Jazz; Judy Carmichael and Piano
LEAD: Judy Carmichael's gradual shift from clubs to concert halls as settings for her jazz piano performances has led her to expand what once were merely announcements of her selections to explanations of style, composers and performers.


Alexander Mauro, 68; Invented a Pacemaker
LEAD: Alexander Mauro, a professor of biophysics at Rockefeller University, died of cancer Friday at New York Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.


WHAT LOLA GOT
LEAD:  KISS IN THE HOTEL JOSEPH CONRAD  And Other Stories.
By Howard Norman.  158 pp.
New York:  Summit Books. $18.95.


IT'S A BEAR MARKET FOR STOCK ANALYSTS
LEAD: A few months ago, David Musket gave up a promising career as a securities analyst at the Wall Street powerhouse of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company to try his hand at the risky business of managing other people's money.


Fixed-Rate Mortgages Make a Comeback
LEAD: AFTER an erratic six-month decline that brought mortgage rates down more than a percentage point since last spring, much of the nation is experiencing a minirevival of demand for home loans, most of it in plain vanilla fixed-rate financing.


October's Two New Golden Hitters
LEAD: When the leaves turn golden, some hitters do too.
Reggie Jackson, Mickey Mantle and Babe Ruth always understood that baseball in October is different.
The stage is bigger.
The audience is bigger.
And for better or for worse, the microscope is bigger.


Playoff's Sorcerer and Star
LEAD: To the Oakland Athletics, who brought him to the big leagues in 1979, Rickey Henderson was a rare mixture of speed and strength, a man who stole 100 bases in his first full season and 130 two years later.


Killings by New York Police Drop, Bucking Trend
LEAD: Police killings of citizens in New York City dropped sharply under Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, bucking a national trend, a survey has found.


In the Region Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Cheshire, Conn. ... $208,000  567 Woodpond Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old raised ranch; large closets, w/w carpeting, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,047.
Lyme, Conn. ... $535,000  33 Joshuatown Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 200-year-old colonial; close to river and cove, etached studio/office, 3.4 acres; taxes $2,158.


A Trump Target: American Airlines
LEAD: Donald J. Trump offered $7.5 billion for AMR, the parent of American Airlines.
The company is expected to reject the $120-a-share bid.
It was not clear whether Mr.
Trump would pursue a hostile takeover against AMR's chairman, Robert L. Crandall, one of the most fiercely independent executives in the airline business.


Tainted Hand Of Criticism?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bastille Opera Manager
LEAD: Georges-Francois Hirsch, the general director of the Theatre des Champs-Elysees in Paris, has been named general administrator of the Opera Bastille, the administrative council of the opera has announced.
Mr.
Hirsch, whose nomination was proposed by Pierre Berge, the council's president, is to take over the post immediately, but will remain as head of the Champ-Elysees theater until the end of the 1989-90 season.


Loose or Broken Banisters
LEAD: Bannisters, or staircase posts and railings, are as much a safety feature as they are a decorative element.
This makes repairing loose or broken bannisters important, but also somewhat complicated, because fasteners are usually hidden.


Rethinking the Convenience Store
LEAD: For convenience stores, these should be the golden years.
First, supermarkets all but killed off corner groceries.
Then the supermarkets themselves consolidated into sprawling, remote megastores.
The convenience store chains, the field wide open, eagerly expanded across the nation.


Streetscapes: 17th Street Off Union Square; 10 Houses With Collective Charm
LEAD: IT is hard to pinpoint exactly what is special about the old houses on the south side of East 17th Street between Union Square and Irving Place.
The individual buildings are not outstanding and most are a bit neglected, even shabby.


There's a Small Hotel; Paris: Comfort and good coffee
LEAD: CHOOSING a hotel in Paris is like choosing a restaurant: there are a great many options.
One of the great charms of Paris is the abundance of hotels, of every size and price category.
There are generally one or two hotels on every block, as much a part of the scenery as the charcuterie, or the boulangerie, or the corner bistro.


FASHION DESIGNER
LEAD: ''When designers start out, they tend to work too hard to make a statement,'' Randy Kemper said. ''I tend to go for clothes that look elegant and sleek and have as few seams as they need to make them work.''


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD: Bayport ... $153,000  357 Second Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; basement, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Carle Place ... $158,500  217 Raff Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $1,500.
Elmont ... $157,000  271 Norfield Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,200.


Searching for Incentives To Entice Polluters
LEAD: As Congress last week discussed the renewal of the Clean Air Act, it wrestled with expanded use of an unusual concept in pollution control: letting industries buy and sell the right to emit pollutants, with companies deciding among themselves how to share the work that the Government wants done.
Under President Bush's proposal, this flexibility would extend to automobiles.


Mental Training Urged for All
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Powerful Tale of Struggle
LEAD: SHEILA is the generic name for domestic workers in South Africa, and Thursday is their traditional day off.
On that day, the women come together for songs and prayer - and for the healing of the spirit.


There's a Small Hotel; Rome: Charm and efficiency
LEAD: THE hotel scene in Rome used to be simple.
If you wanted luxury and pampering, you paid a lot of money and, in most cases, you got them; if charm and atmosphere counted more than recapturing abroad all the comforts of home, you could find that too (and at a price that was affordable), and if you just wanted a clean place to spend a night, which you never expected to come back to again, that too was an uncomplicated affair.


Familiarity Breeds Mayhem
LEAD: I HAVE been living about a dozen years on Long Island and almost every day when I read the papers somebody is murdered by somebody else, a friend, a neighbor, often a close relative.


Mood and Mist in Portugal
LEAD: ROBERT SOUTHEY, the early-19th-century Poet Laureate of England, was forever haunted by a memory of his youth. ''If I had Aladdin's lamp, the genius should transport me, my household and my books to Cintra. . . .
Cintra, the most blessed spot in the habitable globe, will almost bring tears to my eyes.


A TV Gamble Hedges Its Bets
LEAD: Rick Kaplan, the executive producer of ''Prime Time Live,'' the highly conspicuous new ABC News program starring Sam Donaldson and Diane Sawyer, has been wearing a soft cast on his right arm to protect a chronically sore elbow.
He did not injure the arm trying to pat himself on the back.
Though confident about the long-term future of his program, which has been given a two-year commitment from the network, and proud of most of its work so far, Mr.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: James A. Schlueter 'Smoking Is a Form of Suicide'
LEAD: MOST cigarette smokers quit on their own, but a third of them seek help from programs like the Stop Smoking Clinic at the Institute for Better Health in New Haven.
James A. Schlueter, the executive director of the institute, a nonprofit health information service, says the best programs combine several approaches with follow-up support for struggling ex-smokers.


SHOE MERCHANTS
LEAD: Sam and Libby Edelman fell in love at a 1979 shoe fair.
He was there as a salesman for his father's business, she as footwear fashion editor for Seventeen magazine.
Now they own Sam &amp; Libby California, which offers a popular line of leather flats.


REALITY TRIP IN AFRICA
LEAD:  MAASAI DAYSBy Cheryl Bentsen.
Illustrated. 286 pp.
New York:  Summit Books. $19.95.


For Airline Industry and Public, Tars Signal a Major Change
LEAD: Takeover fever has gripped the airline industry, bringing major changes in ownership, giving employees new power and attracting outsiders with new visions of how carriers should be run.


Debit Cards Spur Spending But Are Still Scarce
LEAD: What do the Napa County Jail in northern California, Coca-Cola's headquarters in Atlanta and the United States Mint in Denver all have in common?


Afghanistan Waits for East-West Compromise
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:  Working Girl  1988.
CBS/Fox Home Video. $89.98. 1 hour, 53 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Offering its heroine one of the best opportunities for wish fulfillment this side of ''Cinderella,'' Mike Nichols's film ''derives a lot of its charm from the performance of Melanie Griffith, the baby-voiced bombshell who gives Tess an unbeatable mixture of street smarts, business sense and sex appeal.


Aimee R. Clark Weds Engineer
LEAD: Aimee Ruthanna Clark and Matthew Charles Peterson were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
James the Less in Scarsdale, N.Y., in a ceremony performed by the Rev.
Dr.
Robert S. MacLennan, a Presbyterian minister.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Merrell Mays Clark of Scarsdale and Mr.


Families Learn to Save Their History
LEAD: Sushan Chin gave life-saving lessons at the McBurney Y.M.C.A. yesterday.


Bush Gets Bill on Timber Sales
LEAD: The Senate sent to President Bush today legislation that would allow sales of timber from Federal forests in the Northwest while protecting the habitat of the spotted owl.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The family room in our house is directly above the basement.
In warm weather, this room has a musty odor, especially when the humidity is high.
We use a dehumidifier and ventilate the room, but it has not helped much.
We had the carpet shampooed, and this relieved the problem temporarily.
How can we get rid of the odor?


Players Cashing In Before Playoffs End
LEAD: Last winter, Scott Sanderson was convinced the Chicago Cubs were certain he would not make the team this year.


Prospects
LEAD:  Zenith's Computer Logoff


Tracy Lee Weds Graduate Student
LEAD: Tracy Helen Lee, the daughter of Marjorie Tracy Lee of Washington and San Francisco, and Robert E. Lee 4th of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to William Townsend Crittenberger, a son of the late Col.
Dale Jackson Crittenberger, U.S.A., and the late Mrs.
Crittenberger.
Msgr.
John J.


A Failed Coup: The Bush Team and Noriega  A special report.; Panama Crisis: Disarray Hindered White House
LEAD: At 9 A.M.
Monday, President Bush gathered his senior advisers in the Oval Office to decide whether to throw the might of 12,000 American soldiers behind a little-known Panamanian major who hoped to overthrow Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Breaking the Sound Barrier
LEAD: TO THOSE WHO HAVE TROUBLE hearing a doorbell ring or a baby cry, the computer has become as significant as the hearing aid itself.


Rose Palermo Marries
LEAD: Rose Claire Palermo and Antonio DaSilva Castro, both lawyers, were married yesterday by the Rev.
John Clermont, a Roman Catholic priest, at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride, 31 years old, is an associate at the firm of Shea &amp; Gould in New York.
She is a daughter of Rose Palermo of Freehold, N.J., and the late Vincent Palermo.


Sandra Guerra Marries
LEAD: Sandra Guerra, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfredo E. Guerra Jr. of San Antonio, was married yesterday to Gilbert Andrew Garcia, a son of Roland Garcia and Anne Marie Garcia, both of Corpus Christi, Tex.
Msgr.
William C. Kinlough officiated at Most Precious Blood Roman Catholic Church in Corpus Christi.


Review/Music; Puppets And More, From Java
LEAD: Every culture has its puppets (in our case, they're muppets), and in some of those cultures puppet plays achieve the status of high art.
Often, like Shakespeare's plays and Mozart's operas, they mix noble legend and raucous low comedy in blissful equilibrium.


Dorian M. Wiggin Wed To James P. Maguire Jr.
LEAD: The marriage of Dorian Margaret Wiggin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Mitchell Wiggin 3d of Short Hills, N.J., to James Patrick Maguire Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maguire of Short Hills, took place there yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Charles A. Cesaretti performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


A Pointillist Painting
LEAD: A FRIEND'S WIFE RE-cently persuaded him to buy a memory book, one that would help counteract his lifelong absent-mindedness.
The next day, going in to the office, he left it on the train.


Bradley Clements Wed to J. S. Moore
LEAD: Deborah Bradley Clements, a daughter of Dr.
Rex S. Clements Jr. of New Hope, Pa., and Mrs.
John C. Bennett Jr. of Wyndmoor, Pa., was married yesterday to Jonathan Scott Moore, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Moore of New York and Sergeantsville, N.J.
Judge Kenneth C. MacKenzie of Superior Court in Morristown, N.J., performed the ceremony at Round Hill Farm, the bridegroom's parent's home in


Software Backlash
LEAD: To the Editor:


Even 1-3 Teams Get Excited on Monday
LEAD: The Jets and the Raiders, two powerful symbols of the genre, tomorrow play their final Monday night game of the 1980's, a sports decade often described as cynical and avaricious.


Under the Pyramid, Foie Gras and Frites
LEAD: AMONG the amenities under the Louvre's new pyramid is an oasis, a place of calm and repose, of good food and fine wines.
Called Le Grand Louvre, it is the flagship of the underground restaurant complex that has been installed in the museum's new entrance area.


Stiff Soccer Test
LEAD: The United States soccer team, two victories and a tie from qualifying for a World Cup tournament for the first time, faces a key test in Guatemala today without two Latin American-born stars.
Missing will be Hugo Perez, a Salvadoran-born midfielder and forward who is out with a torn groin muscle, and Tab Ramos, a native of Uruguay who will be serving an automatic one-game suspension for committing two major penalties in the team's previous game, a 1-0 victory over El


FICTION
LEAD:  SNAKEWALK.
By Charles Wheeler. (Harmony, $18.95.) When Patrick Todd is blinded in a boating accident, he takes his changed status in stride.
He enrolls in a school for the blind and finds the physical adaptations surprisingly easy; warned that it might take two years to become proficient in Braille, he masters it in two weeks.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: The most valuable offensive players were clearly Kevin Mitchell and Ruben Sierra.
If one puts enough weight on defensive play and team leadership, one might well opt instead for Ryne Sandberg and Robin Yount.
It might be noted that Sandberg's r.b.i. total is about what Howard Johnson's would have been if he had batted second all year.


Christina Fiore Becomes Bride Of an Executive
LEAD: Christina Barbara Fiore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Fiore of New York and Point Lookout, L.I., and Philip Van Munching, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Van Munching Jr. of Darien, Conn., were married yesterday by the Rev.
Eugene J. Prior at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.


Works In Progress; Outfoxing the Viewer
LEAD: ''THE MORE I DO THIS KIND OF work, the more it feels like making a film,'' Sandy Skoglund says. ''A film in one frame.'' The kind of work she's talking about - ''it's been sort of codified as 'tableau photography,' '' she says - draws on elements of sculpture and photography.
But indeed, as the detail at the right, from ''A Breeze at Work'' (1987) illustrates,


Kate L. Phypers Weds R. C. Heidt
LEAD: Katharine Lockwood Phypers, a daughter of Janet Thatcher Phypers and Dean Pinney Phypers, both of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Richard Clark Heidt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl E. Heidt of West Simsbury, Conn.


Social Events
LEAD:  Under a Tent on Park Ave.


The Cancer War: A Major Advance
LEAD: IN SEPTEMBER OF 1984 DR.
RON-ald H. Spiro told Robert A. Pfeiffer that he had a large tumor at the base of his tongue, right next to the vocal cords in his larynx, that had already spread to some lymph nodes in his neck.
The standard treatment for such tumors was an extensive operation that involved removing the entire larynx, or voice box.


New Sanctums, Faces and Perils For 'Mystery!'
LEAD: Armchair detectives will spot some dramatic changes when PBS-TV's ''Mystery!'' begins its 10th season this week (Thursday on WNYC-TV, Channel 31; Saturday on WNET-TV, Channel 13).


Readings and Interviews In 92d Street Y Series
LEAD: ''Geographies: Writing of Place,'' a four-part series of readings and interviews sponsored by the 92d Street Y, begins on Tuesday at 6 P.M., with the writer Jan Morris as guest at the Hunter College Playhouse, East 68th street between Lexington and Park Avenue.
Ms.
Morris - whose books include ''Manhattan '45,'' ''Conundrum,'' the ''Pax Britannica'' trilogy and ''The World of Venice''- will read from her works at 8:30 P.M.


200 Military Officers Are Pardoned in Argentina
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem today pardoned more than 200 military officers accused of human rights abuses and aiding military rebellions, saying the move was essential for national reconciliation.


The Tax Breaks America Couldn't Give Up
LEAD: THE brief experiment in tax reform seems to be coming to an end.
The three-year-old law, the dream of generations of academic experts, has fallen victim to political reality - a new President who wants to use the tax code to meet economic and social goals, powerful interests that lobby for favorable tax treatment and


Put Limits on Death Compensation
LEAD: Much has been written recently about the adverse impact on American industry and society of skyrocketing verdicts (and settlements in fear of such verdicts) for personal injuries and deaths in tort cases.


Jane Fonda's Daughter Freed in Drug Case
LEAD: The daughter of Jane Fonda, the actress, was released from a Manhattan jail yesterday, one day after she and a companion were arrested outside a drug den and her companion was charged with heroin possession, officials said.


Henderson Steals Show With 2 Homers
LEAD: Rickey Henderson did not steal a base today. There was little need.


Review/Jazz; Grappelli at Carnegie Hall, Still Seeking New Options
LEAD: Stephane Grappelli's concert at Carnegie Hall Wednesday night was an odd mixture of the beautiful - Mr.
Grappelli's violin playing is still an example of an unfettered imagination at work - and the badly planned and thoroughly banal.
Mr.
Grappelli also played with a flat-footed group, including the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, put together by Roger Kellaway; the grouphad the jazz sensibility of a brick wall and the marketing sensiblity of Madison Avenue.


Miss Brittingham Weds L. C. Davis
LEAD: Paget Brittingham, the daughter of Mrs.
Richard A. Nielsen of Greenville, Del., and Baird C. Brittingham of Trappe, Md., was married yesterday to Lewis Caldwell Davis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Hornor Davis 3d of Charleston and White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in


Pact Will Not Bankrupt Hospitals, Officials Say
LEAD: New York City's troubled private hospitals will not, as hospital representatives predict, be driven into bankruptcy by last week's $250 million settlement with their union workers, financial analysts, state and union officials say.


America's Health: An Assessment
LEAD: YOU WON'T BELIEVE WHAT'S HAP-pened to Americans since you took leave of this world some 30 years ago.
We've become a bunch of health nuts.
And sometimes I wonder whether serious scientists and even health columnists like your beloved daughter don't deserve a bit of the credit - or is it the blame?


International Kosher Cuisine in Baltimore
LEAD: Sunday is the eve of Yom Kippur, the beginning of the traditional day of fasting and holiest day of the Jewish year.
After the fasting, there is the break fast, a hearty family meal.


Patricia Ragusa Is Wed
LEAD: Patricia Arnell Ragusa, an actress, and Michael Harrison, the general director of the Baltimore Opera, were married yesterday in Baltimore at Old St.
Paul's Episcopal Church by the Rev.
Jesse L. A. Parker.
The bride, 38 years old, is the daughter of Bernard T. Ragusa of Marrero, La., and the late Gladys Ragusa.


Merging the Tastes of Two Continents
LEAD: TO call a restaurant American Bistro might sound contradictory.
Yet this charming new restaurant in Kings Park is appropriately named.
American ingredients are highlighted, while food styles, preparation and sauces are rooted in Europe.
Bordelais, Cumberland and Champagne sauces, as well as Calvados apple compote, share the menu with Nantucket sea scallops, Long Island duck breast, New England lobster, North and South Fork terrine and


Legendary Lunch
LEAD: I LOVE eating out - especially out of the country.
My husband, Bert, and I have had our most memorable meals in faraway places: Thanksgiving dinner in an Army mess hall in South Korea, a traditional Sabbath among the Jews of Marrakesh, a 12-course Chinese banquet on the Yangtze River, and a herring and aquavit party on a smiling summer night in the


Millions of Dollars in Errors Found in Indian Fund
LEAD: An audit has uncovered widespread Government mismanagement of an Indian trust fund, including an unexplained disappearance of $17 million because of sloppy bookkeeping, officials said Friday.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  BINGO BROWN AND THE LANGUAGE OF LOVE  By Betsy Byars.
Drawings by Cathy Bobak. 132 pp.
New York:  Viking Kestrel. $11.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


First Lessons
LEAD: THE first weeks of school have come and gone for our 6-year-old daughter, weeks full of the kinds of experiences that shower down upon us as parents like shards of glass from a seemingly once-perfect globe. ''The boys wouldn't listen to the teacher again.'' ''Some boys climbed up on the desks and threw papers and books on the floor.


Time for Straight Talk
LEAD: This is the time of year, the High Holy Days, when Jews are supposed to look into themselves, reflect on what has been and commit themselves to what should be.
In 1989 it should be a time also for honest thinking about the future of Israel.


Afghanistan Waits for East-West Compromise; Badly Needed Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Influx of Wasps Makes Outdoors Riskier
LEAD: AN unusual influx of yellow jackets and other wasps is making outdoor activities in Connecticut more risky this fall.


Incoherent Ravings
LEAD: To the Editor:


Little York Draws Big Talent
LEAD: When Janet Hayes Walker decided to form a small theater company on Manhattan's Upper East Side in 1969, the venture seemed as unlikely as Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland staging a full-scale production in somebody's barn.
Like the plucky teen-agers portrayed by that pair in numerous musicals, Mrs.
Walker had plenty of drive and imagination but limited behind-the-scenes experience and even less cash.


Comfortable Bistros and a Handsom Indian Spot
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.


Close, But No Marriage
LEAD: Sandra Jennings said that she and William Hurt (below, second from right) were married ''in the eyes of God,'' but the law looks at things differently.
A Manhattan Civil Court judge ruled last week that the weeks Ms.
Jennings spent living with the actor while he was filming ''The Big Chill'' (below) in South Carolina seven years ago did not constitute a legal marriage.


About Cars; BMW Cuts Back On Price of Luxury
LEAD: Conventional wisdom has it that luxury cars are bulletproof.


Protest Is Held at Site Of Rights Chief's Talk
LEAD: Gay rights protesters held a demonstration today at a hotel where a conservative church group was running a symposium in which speakers warned that homosexuals are a threat to American culture.


'Bitter Fame'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; Janis Brenner Explores Isolation and Dependency
LEAD: Janis Brenner's dancing is simultaneously taut and supple.
That unusual mix was also characteristic of the four fine dancers who performed with Miss Brenner on Thursday at the Whitney Museum at Equitable Center.
And it made for expressive performing, full of detail, that was reminiscent of the dancing of Murray Louis.


On Panama: Luck and Incompetence
LEAD: The United States turns out to be fortunate indeed that President Bush decided against strong U.S. military intervention in Tuesday's Panamanian coup attempt.
But the way he reached that decision now looks like a model of incompetence.


THE SKY IS MELTING
LEAD:  THE END OF NATURE  By Bill McKibben.  226 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95


Porter's 'Kate' Revived in darien
LEAD: FOR decades, musical comedy aficionados among us have been waiting for a first-class revival of ''Kiss Me, Kate.'' Now that the Darien Dinner Theater is having its way with the 1948 classic of Cole Porter and Bella and Samuel Spewack, with a little help from William Shakespeare, we're still waiting.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: My mother, too, was shot by a deer hunter - while clearing brush outside her house in Kent, Conn., in 1976.
That particular Nimrod left her to bleed to death in her backyard, then fled to his lawyer's office.
She managed to crawl to a phone - and help.
She, too, was an ''outsider'' and was told that criminal prosecution was impossible.


Katarina Mesarovich Weds
LEAD: Katarina Mihajlo Mesarovich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mihajlo Mesarovich of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, was married yesterday to Donald Robert Mullen Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mullen of River Edge, N.J.
The Rev.
Lisa Ward performed the ceremony at the All Souls Unitarian Church in New York.
Mrs.


THE SHRINK ON THE COUCH
LEAD: Barbara Hey has some uneducated theories about psychotherapy (''The Shrink on the Couch,'' April 16).
First of all, a good therapy depends as much on the patient as it does on the therapist.
A brilliant therapist cannot ''cure'' a resistant patient, and a patient who wants to be cured more than anything else could probably do so with a less-than-brilliant therapist.


Let's Just Pick Up And Leave
LEAD: ''TENNESSEE.
How about Tennessee, hon?
We can buy a nice house there for about half of what it costs here.''


Reward for Tarpley
LEAD: A week after being promoted from sixth man to starter, Roy Tarpley has gotten a contract worthy of his new status with the Dallas Mavericks.
Tarpley, who had two years to go on a contract scheduled to pay him $560,000 this season and $660,000 the next, signed a three-year extension that will bring him a bit more, an average of $2.6 million a year for the last three years, The Dallas Morning News reported.


Picture a Home With Flat-Screen TV
LEAD: Most corporations are quite secretive about their long-term research so that, when the time is ripe, they can spring a surprise on their competitors.
In a notable exception to this rule, Matsushita of Osaka - the giant company that makes consumer products under the name Panasonic - recently staged an exhibit in


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.33
7.47
7.75
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.62
8.60
7.77
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.42
6.43
6.03
Bank Rate Monitor


The Saving Grace of Chicken Livers
LEAD: THERE are two ways to buy chicken livers.
The expedient method is to purchase the necessary quantity from the butcher or supermarket.
The other way is to collect them from the whole chickens you buy, freezing them until you have enough for a recipe.


At Center of Drama in Manila, Marcos's Body
LEAD: The uncertainty surrounding the disposition of the body of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos lingers, awaiting the outcome of a Supreme Court ruling here.


Talking; Reserve Funds; Getting The Best Return
LEAD: OFFICERS of cooperative corporations, condominiums and homeowner associations are feeling increasing pressure to become more knowledgeable about investing their reserve funds.
The funds are ballooning while the need to tap them becomes increasingly unpredictable as structures age.


Joan M. Cheever Weds D. C. Quinn
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of the Mission San Jose in San Antonio, Joan McKinney Cheever, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Cheever Jr. of San Antonio, was married yesterday to Dennis Christopher Quinn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Quinn of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
William J. Collins officiated.


FIGHTING AIDS ALL THE WAY
LEAD: AS A HEART MONITOR BEEPED AT MY side and an automatic blood-pressure machine quietly inflated and deflated, the nurse started the infusion.
Doctors and more nurses hovered nearby.
The drug dripping into my vein was dideoxyinosine, or DDI.
Thus, on July 22 of this year, I became one of about 100 people in the United States to receive what was being described in the press as a ''promising'' new AIDS drug.


Police and Protesters Clash Amid East Berlin Festivity
LEAD: East Berlin ended its 40th anniversary celebrations tonight with clashes between demonstrators demanding change and police troops.


Rejoice! It's Independents' Day
LEAD: Alternative commercial cinema lives.
Among other things, the box-office success of Steven Soderbergh's independently produced ''Sex, Lies and Videotape'' is proof that there is vibrant life outside of the Hollywood establishment.


Newcomers Mix With the Famous In Weisman Collection
LEAD: TO be on the mailing list of the Frederick R. Weisman Art Foundation is, naturally, to be aware of its activities, which include traveling shows like that now at the Neuberger Museum, on the State University of New York campus here.
More surprising, it means also to be apprised by newsletter of what's new at Mid-Atlantic Toyota Distributors Inc.


Correction
LEAD: An article on page 31 in the Arts and Leisure section today about the ''Mystery!'' television series gives an incorrect day for the program's new season on Channel 13.
It will be seen on Thursdays starting this week, not Saturdays.


The Saving Grace of Chicken Livers
LEAD: THERE are two ways to buy chicken livers.
The expedient method is to purchase the necessary quantity from the butcher or supermarket.
The other way is to collect them from the whole chickens you buy, freezing them until you have enough for a recipe.


The Girls of Summer
LEAD: HER last night in the major leagues, Mindy Rashbaum saw less action than the ice cream man.


A LOVE AFFAIR WITH WALKING
LEAD: It was a refreshing breath of air to read Harrison E. Salisbury's article on walking.
I too have a love affair with walking.
My ''love affair'' actually led to the divorce of a husband!
I found myself putting my all-important walking loop ahead of putting hubby's potatoes in the oven.
Walking simply came first, and still does.


FLEEING DEATH AND TENNIS
LEAD:  NECTAR AT NOON  By Sheila Cudahy.  151 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $16.95.


University of Virginia President Will Resign
LEAD: The president of the University of Virginia will resign next year to take a new post as director of a center for the protection of freedom of expression.


Persuading Savimbi To Return to the Table
LEAD: JONAS SAVIMBI, who has fought the Angolan Government for 14 years, pulled out of peace talks three weeks ago, saying the mediator, President Mobutu Sese Seko of neighboring Zaire, was ''not neutral.'' But after a visit to the White House, where the rebel leader came under gentle pressure from President Bush, Mr.


THE MAN WHO MADE NEWS
LEAD:  BENNETT'S NEW YORK HERALD AND THE RISE OF THE POPULAR PRESS  By James L. Crouthamel.  202 pp.
Syracuse, N.Y.:  Syracuse University Press. $27.95.


LECH'S AMERICAN ANGEL
LEAD: IT WAS A PERFECT PLACE FOR AN EPIPHANY.
THE SCENE WAS near St.
Brygida's Church in Gdansk, the spiritual home of Poland's Solidarity movement.
The date was May 25, 1989, the occasion the annual Corpus Christi procession.
Among those leading the 25,000 marchers were Lech Walesa and Barbara Piasecka Johnson, the Polish-born American woman who inherited much of the Johnson &amp;


Suited for Promotion
LEAD: Dressing for success in the New York City Police Department doesn't necessarily require the familiar blue.


THE A.C.L.U.'S POLICIES
LEAD: The A.C.L.U. supports restrictions against the production of child pornography.
However, it opposes legal strictures against the distribution of child pornography.
An analogy might be that it is illegal to produce cocaine, but if law enforcement is evaded at the production stage, it should be perfectly legal to sell cocaine.


Diana Schwab and Marc T. Kennedy, Financial Analyst, Wed in Maryland
LEAD: Diana Bliss Schwab, a daughter of Mrs.
Julian S. Stein Jr. of Union Bridge, Md., and Oquossoc, Me., and Walter P. B. Schwab of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday at the Iron Horse Farm in Union Bridge to Marc Tyson Kennedy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Tyson Kennedy of Pittsburgh.
Judge Lawrence Shipley of the Carroll County Circuit Court in Westminster, Md., officiated.


Sustaining Sales by Improving Convenience
LEAD: Taken a good look at your favorite vending machine lately?


R. T. Wheeler Weds Susan Schneider
LEAD: At the First United Methodist Church of Orange, Calif., Susan Lee Schneider, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert W. Schneider of Phoenix, was married yesterday to Raymond T. Wheeler, the son of Lieut.
Col. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Wheeler of Dolgeville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Lee Truman officiated.


Subtle Ways to Eat Your Cake and Have It Too
LEAD: Commodities or not commodities - this is one of the big contemporary art questions of the moment.
When does art that sets out to satirize the commercial side of art making cross the line and become just another pretty collectible?
More and more often, it seems.
What does it mean when artists who intend to be subversive turn out irresistible objects, seeming to embrace or otherwise take advantage of the very thing they would criticize?


Climbing High To Fitness
LEAD: PEOPLE ALWAYS ASK ME HOW I can do these crazy things - climbing mountains,'' says Dr.
Donald B. Levy, 40, an internist and an instructor at Harvard Medical School. ''But it's not really crazy.
Lots of people walk for exercise.
I'm just a walker who walks uphill.''


China Deplores Peace Award to Dalai Lama
LEAD: China expressed ''utmost regret and indignation'' today over the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama, saying the exiled Tibetan leader was working to undermine national unity.


How New York City Is Trying to Keep Its Numbers High
LEAD: FEARING the loss of millions of dollars and of incalculable political power as the result of another undercount in the Federal census, New York City officials have begun mapping the demographic terrain over which they will have to travel to insure that the most invisible and reluctant New Yorkers are enumerated next year.


Sideline Worker Honored
LEAD: Bernie Sherman, an end on DeWitt Clinton's unbeaten, untied, unscored upon football team of 1932, worked his 500th consecutive game with the sideline marker chains yesterday at the Governors' homecoming in the Bronx.
The milestone was marked by honoring the 75-year-old Sherman during halftime of the game with Curtis and giving him the game ball after Clinton's 16-6 victory, its fourth without a loss this season.


Campus Life: Massachusetts; Troubled Dorm Offers Support For Minorities
LEAD: The University of Massachusetts at Amherst, a focal point for racial unrest in recent years, has turned a residence hall with a history of bias incidents into a place with a support system for minority students.


The Joy of Starvation
LEAD: RECENTLY - IN THE space of a few days, it seemed to me - apples, grapes and all manner of produce grown by means of photosynthesis, as well as all meats derived (directly or indirectly) from animals, have been declared unsafe.
It was while I was reeling from this news that I changed my position on censorship.


Shirley S. Sagawa Weds G. A. Baer
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Alexandria, Va., Shirley Sachi Sagawa, a counsel to the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee in Washington, was married yesterday to Gregory Arthur Baer, an associate at the Washington law firm of Williams &amp; Connolly.
The Rev.
Geoffrey M. St.
J.
Hoare officiated.


Susan Gilbert Marries Stuart Lovejoy
LEAD: Susan Gilbert, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George J. Gilbert Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Dataw Island, S.C., was married yesterday to Stuart Simmons Lovejoy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Stuart Lovejoy of Sewickley, Pa.
The Rev.
Charles A. Ribaudo officiated at St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Brookville, L


Rising Heroin Use and Addict Deaths Alarm Italy, Where Drug Is Legal
LEAD: Calm as if on a coffee break, two young couples sat down on a bench in the Piazza della Repubblica and started shooting heroin into their arms.


State's Early Retirement Plan More Popular Than Expected
LEAD: ALMOST 3,000 state employees - a thousand more than expected and half of those eligible - have opted for a retirement incentive program that includes bonuses of up to $600 a month for three years and fully paid medical insurance.


N.F.L. List Down to 4
LEAD: The list of candidates to be considered as Pete Rozelle's successor as National Football League commissioner was officially reduced to four yesterday: Jim Finks, Paul Tagliabue, Willie Davis and J. Patrick Barrett.


IN SHORT
LEAD:  BAD INTENTIONS: The Mike Tyson Story.
By Peter Heller (NAL Books, $18.95.) A biography of Mike Tyson should offer some insight into the heavyweight champion's effectively brutal behavior in the ring and puzzlingly erratic behavior outside it.
It should, at least, provide some entertainment, as the tabloid headlines of the past couple of years are stitched into a juicy narrative.


In the War on Drugs, Planes Are a Big Enemy
LEAD: CAUGHT up in the war on drugs, Federal and private groups have recently proposed several measures to help disable the smuggler's preferred mode of transport: the small plane.


Penn State Hands Rutgers Its First Loss
LEAD: The heart of this year's Penn State team is its defense, which shut down Rutgers today at Giants Stadium and helped the Nittany Lions win, 17-0, before a crowd of 52,688.


There's a Small Hotel; London: Coziness and quirks
LEAD: NOBODY comes for the weather.
But for years, London has lured visitors with its sights, its shopping, its theaters, its ambiance - and its attractive prices.
You can still pick up a pair of prime orchestra tickets for shows like ''Shirley Valentine'' and ''Les Liaisons Dangereuses'' for less than $50.


Pamela Johnson Weds S. P. Davis
LEAD: Pamela Joan Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larrabee MacMillan Johnson of New York and Rockport, Me., was married yesterday to Police Capt.
Stephen Paul Davis, a son of Justine Davis of New York and the late John Joseph Davis.
The Rev.
Ferdinando D. Berardi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.


Sally J. Schwartz Wed to a Lawyer
LEAD: Sally Jean Schwartz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Schwartz of New York, was married yesterday to Bruce Llewellyn McDermott, the son of E. Harriet McDermott of Pittsburgh and the late H. Bruce McDermott.
Justice Harold Baer Jr. of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Pegasus Suite at 30 Rockefeller


Bette Davis, a Queen of Hollywood, Dies at 81
LEAD: Bette Davis, who won two Academy Awards and cut a swath through Hollywood trailing cigarette smoke and delivering drop-dead barbs, died of breast cancer Friday night at the American Hospital in Neuilly-sur-Seine, France.
She was 81 years old and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.


Loose or Broken Banisters
LEAD: Bannisters, or staircase posts and railings, are as much a safety feature as they are a decorative element.
This makes repairing loose or broken bannisters important, but also somewhat complicated, because fasteners are usually hidden.


Heavy Metal's Not-So-Obscure Objects of Desire
LEAD: Commercial hard-rock musicians, almost to a man, are interested in thighs.
Firm thighs, hot thighs, sweet thighs - any kind of thighs, really, just as long as there is an adjective involved, and it scans right.


Afghanistan Waits for East-West Compromise; Back Up Our Rhetoric
LEAD: To the Editor:


Order on the Field
LEAD: Things seem to have gotten a bit unruly in European soccer recently, and now the sport's governing body, the Union of European Football Associations, has taken steps to restore order.


'Cage Aux Folles': The Gender Trap
LEAD: ''LA CAGE AUX FOLLES,'' a spun-sugar confection of romance served up with just a dollop of reality, is the season's opener at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Hotel Rates Cut in Israel After Dispute


Adrienne Brodeur to Marry Next Year
LEAD: Mrs.
Henry Hornblower 2d of Boston and Paul Brodeur of North Truro, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Adrienne Willets Brodeur, and Bartlett Christmas Brewster, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Brewster of Plymouth, Mass.
The wedding is to be next summer.


Holiday On Tomorrow
LEAD: Columbus Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office at 33d St. and Eighth Ave. open.
Banks: Option to close.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: I feel that Bart Giamatti was and is this year's m.v.p.
This is not based on his untimely and tragic death, but rather on what he wished to address while he was alive: the integrity of the game and, in part, society.
He addressed the question of gambling in baseball, and indirectly all that ills society, with honesty, fairness and open-mindedness.


Shari Perlstein Wed to Roger Barzun
LEAD: Shari J. Perlstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Perlstein of Aberdeen, N.J., was married last evening to Roger M. Barzun, a son of the cultural critic and historian Jacques M. Barzun of New York and the late Mariana Lowell Barzun.
Rabbi A. Allen Block officiated at Publican's on the Pier at the South Street Seaport in New


Forest Project Called Peril to New Jersey
LEAD: Two members of Congress from New Jersey and a water delivery expert warned today that the proposed development of 19,000 acres of Sterling Forest in southeastern Orange County could imperil the drinking water for two million residents of northern New Jersey and make them more vulnerable to floods.


A Chance to Hear the Stockholm Arts Trio
LEAD: ALONG with its exhibitions, gallery talks and other community offerings, the Hudson River Museum has been presenting chamber concerts in Yonkers for nearly a quarter of a century.
Next Sunday's 3 P.M. recital not only opens the 24th season but also introduces the Stockholm Arts Trio in what will be the ensemble's only appearance in the New York City area during its 10-state


A Bit of Old Athens on the Susquehanna
LEAD: The PennsyLvania State Capitol is a flamboyant Italian Renaissance extravaganza, a building that gloriously mixes City Beautiful splendor with robber-baron vulgarity.
Finished in 1906 and designed by Joseph Huston, it is one of the triumphs of civic architecture anywhere in America, with a 272-foot-high dome modeled after the dome of St.


Trimming the Fat From School Costs
LEAD: Right on, Mr.
Gerber! (''Trim the Fat From High Cost of Education,'' Opinion, Sept. 24).
I am a founder of the East Northport-Northport School Tax Watch and believe he hit the target.
Our district still has 10 schools and half the students of a decade ago.
We have one superintendent and three assistant supers.


Elizabeth H. DetwilerMarries A. W. Regan
LEAD: Elizabeth Harper Detwiler, a daughter of Helen P. Detwiler of Metamora, Mich., and Peter M. Detwiler of New York and Bedminster, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew William Regan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Regan of New York and Dublin.
Canon John T. Morrow officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Gladstone, N


AROUND THE GARDEN
LEAD: For This Week: Bulb planting begins as catalogue orders start to arrive; if the bulbs cannot be put in the ground for several days, store in a cool, dry place so they do not start to sprout in warm temperatures.
If the lawn is becoming covered with leaves, begin raking, but also keep mowing; use rakings to make the first layer of the new compost pile.


The Baby Bomb
LEAD: SINCE HER DAUGHTER, CARMEN, was born, Jasmine Gazzarato of Royal Oak, Mich., says she has taken on three jobs.
She works full time developing training programs for the Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers, takes care of her daughter and caters to her husband, Melvin Winkler.


Exploring the New-Look Louvre
LEAD: IT started out as a fortress in the 14th century; then, when the times became less dangerous, it was converted into a palace; finally, with the fall of the monarchy, it became a museum, the first of its kind in Europe.
Now, at the behest of a President with a passion for building, it is going through yet another series of radical changes: enlarged, reorganized, with a new entrance pavilion, it has become in many ways a new museum.


Museum Is Named for Ansel Adams
LEAD: Ansel Adams, who died in 1984 at the age of 82, is still an inspiration for the Friends of Photography, the group of artists and scholars he helped establish 22 years ago in Carmel, Calif.


AIDS Is Spreading in Teen-Agers, A New Trend Alarming to Experts
LEAD: Alarmed by new data showing that the AIDS virus is rapidly spreading among some groups of teen-agers, experts are calling for an expanded national effort against the epidemic.


Dead Photographer a Cause Celebre for Kenya
LEAD: In the stone courthouse here, an inquest into the death of an English photographer at a popular game reserve has Kenyans riveted much the way a celebrated murder trial captivated the country nearly 50 years ago.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''I'm sure the President is not going to be willing to submit to all that extraneous material in the deficit package just to get capital gains.''
Senator John H. Chaffee,
Republican of Rhode Island.


CHINA FEARS STRIFE DURING HARD TIMES
LEAD: China has entered a period of severe economic austerity and budget shortages that Government officials and foreign economists say may create new political dissatisfaction and uncertainties at a time when the Communist Party is trying to rally support.


JUST TWO WOMEN
LEAD: Jean Hey writes that her mother found in her servant Nancy ''a friend more than a servant.'' Why is it, then, that when Nancy had no one with whom to spend Christmas, she was allowed to serve her mistress's Christmas dinner?
Why, instead, didn't she sit with her ''friend'' and partake of the meal?


For the Automobile's Sake, An 1855 House Faces Razing
LEAD: ITS shutters hang at odd angles, and many of the windows are broken.
A wraparound front porch, once the hallmark of Victorian splendor, is now weatherworn and buckled.
But for James R. Croucher, 58 years old, the battered house brings back visions of a time when neighbors knew neighbors and farm life revolved around the rising and setting sun.


THE BLOOD OF A GENIUS
LEAD:  FEDERICO GARCIA LORCA  A Life.
By Ian Gibson.
Illustrated. 551 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $29.95.


Anne Simmons Nimick Married to Carl L. Neilson
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., Anne Simmons Nimick, the daughter of Anne Corkran Nimick of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday to Carl Lundquist Neilson, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Jack D. Neilson of Parkersburg, W.Va.
The Rev.
Mark Andrus officiated.


ed&gt;Rings of Time
LEAD: THE treasure, an old filigreed wedding band set with three small diamonds, lay lightly in my hand.
It had been wrapped up in cloth inside a manila envelope in the bottom of my dresser drawer when I came across it quite by accident while searching for some papers.


Claire Townsend Wed to Engineer
LEAD: Claire T. Townsend, the daughter of Mrs.
Harold P. Salembier of Oyster Bay, L.I., and New York, and Charles C. Townsend of Germantown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edward V. Bacher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick A. Bacher of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L


LIFE AMONG THE DEMI-CELEBS
LEAD:  SMILE, HONEY  By Anabel Donald.  256 pp. San Francisco: Mercury House. $19.95.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: It does not take a lot of imagination nor is it cynical to suggest that if the geography and sex roles were reversed (i.e. a female deer hunter from outside Maine who hunted near the home of a native male and shot him), an indictment would have resulted.
In all likelihood, she would have been perceived as trespassing (rather than hunting) and inept with a gun.


Correction
LEAD: Articles on pages 5 and 6 of the Arts and Leisure section today about George Abbott's new musical ''Frankie'' misstate Mr.
Abbott's age.


The Saving Grace of Chicken Livers
LEAD: THERE are two ways to buy chicken livers.
The expedient method is to purchase the necessary quantity from the butcher or supermarket.
The other way is to collect them from the whole chickens you buy, freezing them until you have enough for a recipe.


Japan and the War: Debate on Censors Is Renewed
LEAD: A court decision this week upholding the Government's right to censor history textbooks has revived the long-running debate over Japan's willingness to teach all aspects of the nation's role in World War II.


Koch Will Lecture at N.Y.U.
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch will become a visiting fellow at New York University's Urban Research Center after he leaves office in January.


BRIDGE
LEAD: Those around the world, who value the traditions of the game are mourning the demise of the world's oldest bridge periodical, Bridge International.
The English publishers have announced that, for financial reasons, the current issue will be the last.


Hers; Who Said Ignorance Is Bliss?
LEAD: MY LIFE AS A freelance radio reporter from Paris began when I was 51, so it's no wonder that my fellow female journalists are all 20 or 30 years younger than I am.
What disconcerts me about this age difference is not, for instance, the fact that the French cabinet ministers who try to seduce them during interviews are younger and more virile than the shambling old fonctionnaires who make the occasional pass at me.


Karen I. Eaton Is Married to Robert A. Raidt Jr.
LEAD: Karen I. Eaton, a daughter of John P. Eaton of Roslyn, L.I., and the late Dorothy P. Eaton, was married yesterday to Robert A. Raidt Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raidt of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
James Bergin performed the ceremony at St.
Peter the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Amagansett, L.I.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; An Off-Key Tremor in Darien's Even Tenor
LEAD: THE even tenor of life in Darien - a community known for its low profile, high incomes and relative freedom from commercial development - has been fractured for months by disputes over two pieces of property, one marked for low-income housing, the other a movie theater expansion, and by other indicators of change.


Polly Runyon Is Married
LEAD: Mary Gilbert Runyon, the fund-raising coordinator for the Performing Arts Research Center of the New York Public Library, was married yesterday to Thomas Henry Wittrock, an architect at the New York firm of Cooper, Robertson &amp; Partners.
The Rev.
Heather Morrison, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Keene Valley, N.Y.


In the Region: New Jersey
LEAD: Recent Sales  Brick ... $149,900  324 Madison Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; patio, wall-to-wall carpeting, family room; taxes $1,580.
Freehold ... $187,900  31 Guilford Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; central air-conditioning, deck, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $3,115.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  High Reserve Fund


How the Japanese Saw the Arrival of the West
LEAD: IN a way, Lincoln Kirstein was anticipating camp when he began collecting Japanese prints in the 1930's.
Not for him the Utamaros and Hiroshiges favored by connoisseurs; his rebellious spirit was attracted to the woodcuts turned out for popular consumption on cheap paper in colors that, after the introduction of aniline dyes, seem tawdry - even today.


Record of 'Thin Blue Line' Conviction Stands
LEAD: A judge has denied Randall Dale Adams's request to expunge the records of his conviction in a 1977 murder case.


Forget What You've Heard: Risotto Isn't Hard to Make
LEAD: No matter what you may have read about risotto, it is no more difficult to make than a dish that includes pasta.
And it certainly does not take any more time.


THE MAN-WOMAN THING
LEAD:  LIGHT  By Seymour Epstein.  282 pp. New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


Yes, More Money for Air Travel
LEAD: Most problems can't be solved just by throwing money at them, but some can't be addressed any other way.
James B. Busey, the head of the Federal Aviation Administration, correctly insists the nation's overloaded air traffic control system is one of those that needs money - at least twice as much for capital improvements each year as is currently being spent.


Ogrodnick Shines in Revival
LEAD: It is tough to forget the past when everything you do requires you to explain it all over again.
So for John Ogrodnick, every success brings another encounter with past failures.


CONGRESS IS FACING MEDICARE CONFLICT
LEAD: The House and the Senate face a daunting task of reconciling drastically different approaches to curtailing expanded health benefits to the 33 million Medicare beneficiaries.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary on Sunday about the composer and critic Virgil Thomson misidentified a performer whose repertory was dismissed by Mr.
Thomson as ''silk-underwear music.''


COINS
LEAD: Where does the $ sign come from?


Will Decreased Use of Chemicals Leave Farmers Better Off?
LEAD: To the Editor:


All Some People Really Want to Know Is in Shorter Books
LEAD: SAUL BELLOW'S new novel, ''The Bellarosa Connection,'' began arriving in bookstores in recent weeks.


Damage Control for The Holidays
LEAD: THE IDEA OF HEALTH-ful holiday food is something of an oxymoron.
Holidays, after all, are times of feasting, and feasting connotes an embarrassment of food -plates piled high with succulent meats, larded puddings and wedges of buttery pie.
These are, of course, precisely the kinds of foods that we should eat only in moderation.


PLAYING DICE WITH MEDICINE
LEAD: In her article ''Playing Dice With Medicine'' (April 16), Linda J. Heller notes that millions of Americans ''fail to take their medicine properly or don't take it at all.'' She gives several reasons for this and I would like to add another: the hierarchical relationship between many doctors and patients.


Nicole Falconer Weds Michael Pisani
LEAD: Nicole Claire Falconer and Michael B. Pisani were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J., by Msgr.
John Corr.
The bride, 24 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Warren E. Falconer of Convent Station, N.J.
The bridegroom, also 24, is a son of Mrs.
David S.


On the Street; Briefcases: Post-Punk To High Tech
LEAD: The briefcase, once a symbol of staid, business-as-usual efficiency, has been lightened up considerably for the computer generation.
It now comes with such distinctive decorative touches as high-tech metal strips and clasps, telephone-receiver handles and dials on the flaps, the sort of latch closings normally used on seagoing vessels, even mail slots on the side.


Bradford P. Foley Weds Miss Imhoff
LEAD: Jennifer Marley Imhoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest F. Imhoff of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Bradford Perkins Foley, the son of Polly Sears Foley of Woodstock, Vt., and Robert Perkins Foley of Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
David Malone officiated at the Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church.


Katherine Holihan Weds
LEAD: Katherine Margaret Holihan, a daughter of Margaret Katherine Holihan of Piermont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Joseph Aloysius Burke, a son of Mary Helen Burke of Buffalo and the late Howard Vincent Burke.
The Rev.
Robert Saccoman officiated at St.
John the Baptist Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.


For Women, A New Age Of Choices
LEAD: I AM among the missing.
Many people would like to find me and ask some questions about where I have been for more than 20 years.
You see, I am a registered nurse who stopped working in that profession when I was 26 years old.


Reaching Out To the Disabled
LEAD: I am writing in response to Robert McDonald's article, ''Giving Special Workers a Chance'' (Opinion page, Sept. 3).
Robert worked as a summer residential counselor at our agency, the Kennedy Center of Bridgeport.
Student employees and volunteers have proved to be an invaluable resource to organizations like ours that serve adults with disabilities.


Finding an Authenic Irish Harp
LEAD: IN Ireland the harp is better known as an icon than as a musical instrument.
The earliest surviving Irish harp, a 14th-century instrument displayed in the Trinity College Library in Dublin, is depicted on every coin minted in the republic - and even appears on bottles of Guinness stout.


Commercial Property: Prairie Growth; In Sioux Falls, Commerce Blooms Like Wildflowers
LEAD: AT first glance, the modern office buildings and an expanding mammoth retail center set amid grazing cattle and cornfields that edge this prairie city seem inappropriate investments for such a setting.


Charleston Looks To Spring Recovery
LEAD: CHARLESTON, one of America's most beautiful cities, is battered and bruised after Hurricane Hugo, but the historic district and nearby resorts are already making plans for the spring tourist season.
It will take that long, historic preservationists, merchants and city officials say, before the 300-year-old city will be able to accommodate the usual number of visitors who regard Charleston as proof that architectural and arboreal beauty aren't restricted to


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The family room in our house is directly above the basement.
In warm weather, this room has a musty odor, especially when the humidity is high.
We use a dehumidifier and ventilate the room, but it has not helped much.
We had the carpet shampooed, and this relieved the problem temporarily.
How can we get rid of the odor?


I Need Some Repairs
LEAD: MY person is in need of mending along with my house and car.
We're running neck and neck, falling apart simultaneously.
My old Buick-friend is no more.
It has spluttered, squeaked and coughed its way to its dotage; it has hiccupped, wheezed and sometimes purred its way to decrepitude.
For a car 26 years old it is over the hill in spades.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: A knee injury will keep Boris Becker out of this week's Australian Indoor championships. . . .
Curtis Strange, the United States Open champion; Mark Calcavecchia, the British Open champion, and Nick Faldo, the Masters champion, have all entered next month's Australian Open golf tournament . . .
Mike McCallum's defense of his World Boxing Association middleweight championship against Michael Watson of Britain has been moved up from Dec.


OUR MOST NOTORIOUS SCULPTOR
LEAD: Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, is a scenic place.
Every summer, Canadian tourists descend by the thousands to camp along its beaches and hike its winding trails.
There are souvenir shops everywhere, and the gifts they carry - tartan tams, bright plaid ties, bagpiper key chains -proudly advertise the island's


Ms. MacFadyen Is Married in Maine
LEAD: Camilla MacFadyen and Montgomery M. Lewis Jr. were married yesterday in Small Point, Me.
The Rev.
John Ineson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Small Point Baptist Church.


Of Cats and Frogs And Lessons
LEAD: I was truly impressed with Maggie McCool's pro-animal position until I read of her 16 cats (''A Lesson Refused and a Lesson Learned,'' Aug. 27).
The photograph of her with one of her cats showed no evidence of a bell or other device that would warn prey of a cat's presence.
Apparently, Ms.
McCool's animal advocacy extends only to creatures she favors, e.g., frogs, but not to those whose deaths she may not notice.


WARHOL FACES THE BIG SCREEN INSTEAD OF THE SILKSCREEN
LEAD: Documentaries thrive on public television, but they rarely entice audiences to movie theaters.


The Panama Jinx; What Should Washington Do About Noriega?
LEAD: AFTER Washington stops arguing about the extent to which President Bush fumbled last week's attempt by Panamanian troops to oust Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Administration will have to think about where American policy goes from here.


Sarah S. Spurdle Plans to Marry David R. Stack
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Spurdle Jr. of New York and Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Stuart Spurdle to David Rorick Stack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
William Stack Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.


Moscow No Big Potato
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:  Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  BORIS ARONSON


Maryann Mangan Becomes Bride Of C. C. Palermo
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph in Bronxville, N.Y., Maryann Mangan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Mangan of Bronxville, was married yesterday to Christopher Coyne Palermo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony R. Palermo of Rochester.


Try Drug Legalization On Experimental Scale
LEAD: To the Editor:


TAKING GLEE IN HIS WAYWARD PAST
LEAD:  COLLECTED POEMS,  1937-1971  By John Berryman.
Edited by Charles Thornbury.  348 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Greg Taylor, No. 16, Auburn wide receiver, has the ball knocked from his grasp by Chris Tolbert of Kentucky in the first half. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL: SOUTH; Virginia Tech Upsets West Virginia
LEAD: The freshman Mickey Thomas kicked four field goals today and Virginia Tech upset West Virginia, 12-10, as the Mountaineers lost their first regular-season game since 1987.


Scarlett O'Hara: Miss or Miz?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: With apologies to Pedro Guerrero, can a New Yorker not but imagine one of their outfielders with around 50 home runs and 130 runs batted in!
National League most valuable player: Kevin Mitchell.


Catalogue Companies Should Not Sell Names
LEAD: For Patrick J. O'Connor's information (''No Innocent Victims of Direct Mail,'' letters, Aug. 20) I wrote over two months ago to the Direct Marketing Association to ask that my and my husband's names be removed from mailing lists.


The Arts Endowment: Still in Trouble
LEAD: THE struggle in Congress over how much control it should have over the National Endowment for the Arts seems as unlikely to reach a quick resolution as a Wagnerian opera.
Although the endowment appears to have avoided being saddled with the Helms amendment, which would have prohibited the financing of ''obscene or indecent'' art as well as that which ''denigrates the objects or beliefs of the adherents of a particular religion or nonreligion,'' the debate over publicly financed art has just begun.


NEW FIGHTS OVER SPOILING YOUR BABY
LEAD: Marie Winn's article ''New Fights Over Spoiling Your Baby'' (April 16) states the widely held misconception that infants are only able to communicate by screaming.
Numerous scientific observations document what sensitive parents and professionals can easily observe: babies have a rich and eloquent vocabulary of expression, gesture and gaze.


Campus Life: Oglethorpe; Proposed Sale Of Greek Row Upsets Students
LEAD: Squarely in the path of a real-estate development juggernaut, Oglethorpe University has put 15 acres of property, including the school's Greek row, up for sale - and at least a few students are upset about it.


Swedish Dance Tries To Reclaim Its International Standing
LEAD: We haven't heard much about dance in Sweden since 1982, when a dancer in that country's foremost experimental troupe, the Cullberg Ballet, bared her breasts onstage in front of some other visitors at the Brooklyn Academy of Music - the King and Queen of Sweden.


COMMUNIST PARTY IN HUNGARY VOTES FOR RADICAL SHIFT
LEAD: The Hungarian Communist Party voted today to transform itself into a socialist party and said it would strive to bridge the gulf between doctrinaire Marxism and European democratic socialism.


The End of Pegasus
LEAD: Television has provided the world with many remarkable images over the years, but none more beautiful than that of a horse named Secretariat winning the Belmont Stakes.


Pace Loses to St. John's
LEAD: Scott Scesney completed 20 of 31 passes for 326 yards and three touchdowns as undefeated St.
John's held off Pace, 28-21, in the Liberty Conference game yesterday at Finnerty Field, Pleasantville, N.Y.


TV's Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


Figure in Biggest U.S. Drug Haul Tells Prosecutor of Ring's Scope
LEAD: A man identified as the manager of the Los Angeles warehouse where the Government made the largest cocaine seizure on record has told drug agents that 60 tons of cocaine passed through the warehouse in the last year, a prosecutor said Friday.


Sarah D. Schmidt Weds Executive
LEAD: Sarah Denise Schmidt, the daughter of Mrs.
Jack G. Schmidt of Columbus, Ohio, and the late Mr.
Schmidt, was married yesterday to George Austen 3d, the son of Dr.
Austen Jr. of Lynchburg, Va., and the late Langhorne Watts Austen.
The Rev.
Ronald George Abrams officiated at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.


Friday the 13th: A Virus Is Lurking
LEAD: A potentially potent computer virus, known variously as Datacrime or the Columbus Day Virus, is programmed to activate itself Thursday in a large number of computer systems in North America, computer security experts say.


Florida State Runs Over Syracuse
LEAD: Terrell Buckley returned a punt 70 yards for a touchdown and LeRoy Butler scored on an 88-yard interception return three minutes later today as Florida State ended Syracuse's home winning streak at 16 games with a 41-10 victory.


Review/Music; A Concert in Celebration Of Rochberg's Electicism
LEAD: Even in the program notes for a concert of his music, George Rochberg is likely to be discussed more for what he represents than for what he is.
Mr.
Rochberg is known, to the extent he is known at all, as the apostate serialist, the composer who decided he loved old music with its melodies and intelligible harmonies and would jolly well write that way whether it was in line with progress and current thinking or not.


Long Way For Leahy
LEAD: Charley Winner was the head coach, Joe Namath was the quarterback, Buddy Ryan ran the linebackers and a Briton named Bobby Howfield was the injured place-kicker when a soccer player named Pat Leahy joined the Jets in 1974.


Skateboard Ramp Removed in Milford
LEAD: SKATEBOARD enthusiasts in Milford, already banned from zipping through the downtown area, have now lost the use of a ramp provided for them behind the city library.


Why Mets Lost: Let Us Count
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Running as a G.O.P. Crime Buster: Can Giuliani Match Dewey?
LEAD: The Republican candidate, a celebrated prosecutor, faced a daunting task.
There were 563,000 registered Democrats in New York City and only 122,000 enrolled Republicans.
He had never run for elective office before, and many wondered whether he could make the transition from intense courtroom pyrotechnics to the more relaxed glad-handing of the campaign trail.


Transactions
LEAD:  Basketball


Loose or Broken Banisters
LEAD: Bannisters, or staircase posts and railings, are as much a safety feature as they are a decorative element.
This makes repairing loose or broken bannisters important, but also somewhat complicated, because fasteners are usually hidden.


For Yankees, Less Is More
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Great Care Taken In Education Plan
LEAD: The recent article ''Plan to Revamp Special Education Draws Criticism'' provided valuable information to parents of educationally handicapped pupils and special-education professionals.
The article presented a balance of the different points of view expressed by a variety of people.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: Ironically, on the day your article appeared, more than 3,000 gun enthusiasts attended the 12th annual Bangor Gun Show.
Meanwhile, as hunting season begins, many of us in the Bangor, Me., area will be especially cautious as we venture outdoors near our homes, lest we, too, be mistaken for an animal by some overzealous hunter.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


'Touched by an Angel': Different Views
LEAD: I did not find ''Touched by an Angel'' touching in the least.
In fact, I found it very disturbing.
According to the author, after a short visit with her family, Angel is transformed from a ''street-wise kid with no understanding of our family's values or rules'' into ''just another boy'' - just one ''of our own kids.


A Jazzman's Fountain of Youth
LEAD: In the family of jazz, parents have insulted children nearly as often as embraced them.
For every Coleman Hawkins playing sideman to Thelonious Monk, there was Louis Armstrong denouncing be-bop as ''Chinese music.'' For every Duke Ellington recording duets with John Coltrane, there was Roy Eldridge branding Ornette Coleman a fake.


A Prize Winner for Peace
LEAD: Millions of tourists visit Washington each year and leave without a trace.
But one visitor from Berkeley, Calif. may soon realize her dream of a multi-million dollar garden dedicated to the pursuit of peace.


A Whirl of Parties To Save a Museum And Honor Artists
LEAD: Monday and Tuesday were busy nights last week in New York City.
At Jean-Claude Baker's restaurant, Chez Josephine, on West 42d Street, a dinner on Monday honored Evelyn Anderson, thought to be the last living original cast member of ''La Revue Negre,'' which began Josephine Baker's career in Paris 64 years ago.


Correction
LEAD: The Prospects column on Sept. 24 about the Ford Motor Company's proposed acquisition of a stake in Jaguar referred incorrectly to a comment from Charles M. MacDonald, an executive of the Jaguar Clubs of North America, on the status of Jaguar's racing team.
He said Jaguar sponsors two racing teams, one in the United States and another in Europe.


Constance Pierce Weds R. S Fowler
LEAD: Constance Catherine Pierce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Pierce of Mountain Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Saxton Fowler, a son of Robert A. Fowler of Houston and Mrs.
Samuel A. Bowman of New York.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
David Mahon at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N


H. C. Cushing 5th, Media Specialist, Weds Ms. Hawk
LEAD: Laura Elsa Hawk and Harry Cooke Cushing 5th were married yesterday at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York by the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal priest.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Powell Fowler Milbank of New York and William McKinley Hawk Jr. of Fort Collins, Colo.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr.


The Town That Determination Is Building Again
LEAD: FALL in Bantam is not the same this year.
People here have put aside such customary pursuits as apple gathering and leaf peeping as they continue to rebuild from the wreckage of a tornado in July.
Residents still have leaves to rake, but they also have piles of downed trees and uprooted stumps to clear.


Compromise Plan to Move Newsstands Off Curbs
LEAD: After a year and a half of negotiations, representatives of the newsstand business and the newspaper industry announced last week their general support for proposed regulations that would govern the size, location and operation of sidewalk newsstands in New York City.


Mara Dolan Wed To Daniel O'Day
LEAD: Mara Grace Dolan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Dolan of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Daniel Patrick O'Day, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John O'Day of Wilton, Conn.
The ceremony was performed at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church by the Rev.
Michael G. Pierce, assisted by the Revs.


Teresa Duncan Weds Harry Cox Jr.
LEAD: At the Shiloh Baptist Church in Plainfield, N.J., Teresa Maria Duncan, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Duncan of Dayton, Ohio, was married yesterday to Harry L. Cox Jr., a son of Dorothy Cox of San Francisco and Mr.
Cox of Mountain View, Calif.
The Rev.
Jerry W. Henry officiated.


Fashion Preview; MILAN: A NEW SEASON
LEAD: THE ITALIANS ARE THE FIRST TO SHOW ready-to-wear collections for 1990, and this weekend spring comes to Milan.
As usual, the Milanese are expert at tailoring.
But they have given up their crispness in favor of a new fluidity. ''You have to risk,'' says Giorgio Armani. ''It's a feminine collection, for the sophisticated woman who likes to have fun with clothes.


Nancy Rees Wed to Thomas Wall 4th
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Nancy Williams Rees and Thomas R. Wall 4th.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. G. Rees of Watch Hill, R.I., and New York.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wall 3d of Warwick, Bermuda.


Question Of the Week; Who Should Be Baseball's M.V.P.'s?
LEAD: Although Will Clark will be the player of the 90's, his fellow Giant slugger, Kevin Mitchell, was the player of 1989.


When Verdi Spoke, Everyone Listened
LEAD: On Friday, Nov. 13, 1868, Gioacchino Rossini died at his home in Paris at the age of 76.
Four days later, Giuseppe Verdi, a sincere admirer if not a close personal friend of the great Italian composer, wrote his own publisher, Tito Ricordi: ''In order to honor the memory of Rossini I should like the most outstanding composers of Italy to write a requiem which shall be performed on the anniversary of his death.


Raiders Piece Their 'Family' Back Together
LEAD: It is Wednesday afternoon and the Los Angeles Raiders are strolling in bunches onto the field at their training facility nestled in a neighborhood full of well-kept homes and loyal, curious well-wishers.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  A Functional Embrace


Alison Schroeder Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Alison M. Schroeder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Schroeder of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Robert T. Bedenkop, a son of Ila J. Bedenkop of Cincinnati and Barry T. Bedenkop of Syracuse.
Msgr.
James Connolly officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph.


Casualties Of a Truce In Angola
LEAD: Just before dawn a couple of weeks ago, peasants in this languid town in Angola's central highlands were awakened by singing and chanting.
Then, without warning, the shooting began.


A Dollar Coin May Lift Patrons' Purchasing Power
LEAD: Representatives of the vending industry have recently found themselves vigorously lobbying Congress to pass a measure that would mint a new dollar coin. ''It's really vending that's carrying this thing,'' said James C. Benfi, but can give change only in coins, not currency.


Olive Branch in the Ukraine
LEAD: The Ukraine's new Communist chief has offered to curb harassment of nationalists, provided that they do not advocate secession.
Page 18.


TAKING OFF THE WHITE GLOVES
LEAD: Why did it take the overseas arrival of Elle to send publisher S. I. Newhouse Jr. racing up and down the halls at Vogue, tearing apart the magazine (''Taking Off the White Gloves,'' by Gigi Mahon, Sept. 10)?
A leisurely stroll in the offices of his own striking and unusual foreign editions might have inspired Mr.


For Giuliani, a Weekend of Much Marching


IN SHORT
LEAD:  REAL FARM: Encounters With Perception.
By Patricia Tichenor Westfall. (New Chapter Press, $14.95.) ''Real Farm'' is the affecting and frequently humorous memoir of an urbane college professor who fell in love with life on an Iowa farm, while simultaneously falling out of love with her husband, a doctoral student at the University of Iowa to whom she gives the pseudonym Mark in this volume.


Jeannine E. Davis Marries
LEAD: Jeannine E. Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald M. Davis of Burr Ridge, Ill., was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Richard B. Harris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Harris of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Douglas Tompkins officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.


Perspectives: New Walk-Ups in Queens; Striving for Style in a Transitional Zone
LEAD: THERE is a corner of the Jamaica Estates section of Queens that is something of a laboratory of housing change.
It is along Highland Avenue, within walking distance of the 169th Street subway station on Hillside Avenue, a busy commercial thoroughfare.
Since the 1920's, a range of housing types, from detached single-family houses to midrise elevator buildings, has been developed in the neighborhood.


Jeanette P. Joyce, A Nurse, Marries
LEAD: Jeanette P. Joyce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher J. Joyce of Dumont, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert A. Cancellieri, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Cancellieri of Riverside, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Riester officiated at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church on Long Beach Island, N.J.


Protesters Call for More Help For Homeless Who Have AIDS
LEAD: Demonstrators staged a ''die-in'' in front of the White House today, lying prone on the street while chanting and waving signs calling for more Federal help to provide housing for people with AIDS.


Home Alone And Disabled
LEAD: I HAD JUST RETURNED FROM A business trip to see three prospective clients.
My consulting company was growing, and I was preoccupied with acquiring more office space.
On the way to a meeting with the manager of my building, my knees began to feel weak and the simple act of walking suddenly required concentration.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The family room in our house is directly above the basement.
In warm weather, this room has a musty odor, especially when the humidity is high.
We use a dehumidifier and ventilate the room, but it has not helped much.
We had the carpet shampooed, and this relieved the problem temporarily.
How can we get rid of the odor?


Pope in Korea After Greeting Soviets From the Air
LEAD: Pope John Paul II began a journey across East Asia today after making the first papal flight over the Soviet Union and sending greetings from the air to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Connecticut's Governor Suffers From Taxes
LEAD: PORTENTS of a volatile 1990 race for governor are appearing across Connecticut as unhappy residents and would-be candidates assess the implications of record tax increases and a state deficit that has suddenly become a surplus.
Recent opinion polls showing


Turning to the U.S., Again, for Peace Ideas On the Middle East
LEAD: AS Arabs and Israelis have traded talk of peace in recent months, United States diplomacy has seemed to move in the wings, half-player, half-prompter, offering a phrase here, a word there, sometimes a whole chunk of the script.
Now, inexorably, a reluctant Washington is being beckoned on stage.


CAMERA
LEAD: The man behind the counter at the one-hour photo lab handed me my batch of prints and then offered a word of advice: ''Don't use 400-speed film for the desert.
Save it for when the light is low.''


Of Cats and Frogs and Lessons
LEAD: The excellent article ''A Lesson Refused and a Lesson Learned'' revealed the problems faced by a student who objects to using animals as classroom tools.
Sadly, the academic status quo often penalizes those who show the most sensitivity and insight.
Rather than teaching respect for all creatures, classroom dissection and vivisection desensitize students to animal suffering.


Champion Race Horse, Cherished Friend
LEAD: Secretariat'S death on Wednesday marked the end of a wonderful dream I have been privileged to live.
In my eyes, he was the finest thoroughbred performer of the last 50 years and he certainly provided me with a unique experience.


Miss Labine Wed in Massachusetts
LEAD: Sherry Beth Labine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Labine of Wilbraham, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Gerard Donovan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donovan of Savannah, Ga.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul W. Zeckhausen, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the Protestant ceremony at the Wilbraham United Congregational and Methodist Church.


ALONE IN GDANSK
LEAD:  A LIFE OF SOLITUDE  Stanislawa Przybyszewska: A Biographical Study With Letters.
By Jadwiga Kosicka and  Daniel Gerould.
Illustrated. 247 pp.
Evanston, Ill.:  Northwestern University Press.
Cloth, $32.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Thousands March on Washington In Protest Against Homelessness
LEAD: Tens of thousands of people marched on the Capitol today to protest the shortage of decent, affordable housing.


Washington Keeps Battling
LEAD: Even though the George Washington Trojans are the defending Public Schools Athletic League B Division champions, they have had to scratch just to stay alive.


Community Training
LEAD: It may not be a busman's holiday, but for Mike Tyson, it's going to be hard to tell where training camp leaves off and community service begins.
Tyson, who is preparing to take on the Canadian champion, Razor Ruddock, moved his training camp temporarily from Las Vegas, Nev., to Albany, where he was sentenced to perform community service after pleading guilty to speeding in two incidents last summer.


Berenice Abbott's New York
LEAD: In the 20's an Ohio woman named Berenice Abbott was living in Paris and photographing the famous.
Everybody came to Miss Abbott's studio - James Joyce, Nora Barnacle Joyce, Andre Gide, Jean Cocteau - and it is partly through her images that we know them.
But in 1929 she came back to the United States and ''There it was, for better or for worse'': New


Puerto Rico's 'Watergate' Is Filmed
LEAD: Scene one: Day, interior.
The prosecutor taps his pen nervously on his files during a Senate hearing.
His language may be American legalese, but his pen taps a 6/8 Latin beat.


Easy Goer Surges To Win Gold Cup
LEAD: For a moment, the Jockey Club Gold Cup yesterday looked as if it was going to be a real horse race.
Easy Goer had cruised to the lead round the stretch turn, but Cryptoclearance was making a stirring bid and drawing alongside the leader at the top of the stretch.


Diverse Indian Specialties in Stamford
LEAD: MEERA, Stamford's latest Indian restaurant, is another winning newcomer.
Its look is as cool as its cuisine is hot, and the diverse menu is demystified by careful translations and by a friendly, expeditious Indian staff adroit in English.


Doctorow vs. Brandeis: 2 Winners
LEAD: College alumni magazines rarely make news, except to notify former classmates of one another's whereabouts.
But when administrators at Brandeis University offered to print E. L. Doctorow's address to the graduating class of 1989 in the Brandeis Review - and then awkwardly reneged over the summer - they touched off a tempest.


Putting Efficiency Into the Organization
LEAD: WHO among us has not been haunted by the loss of a critical piece of mail?
Who has not floundered hopelessly in a sea of paper?


Oppressed Woman, Your Name in Opera Is Legion
LEAD: I may be the last person alive to have realized it, but isn't it remarkable that opera is so heavily populated by oppressed, manipulated and otherwise pitiable women?
This revelation came to me with blinding force the other evening as I sat transfixed by Teresa Stratas's hair-raising performance in the Metropolitan Opera's ''Suor Angelica.


Partner in Manes's Business Gets a 2-Year Term for Fraud
LEAD: A Queens lawyer who operated a collection agency set up with the late Donald R. Manes to gather overdue parking fines for New York City was sentenced on Friday to two years in prison for mail fraud.


Anne Bogart Changes Course At Trinity Rep
LEAD: On a recent autumn night, Anne Bogart sat on the stage of the Trinity Repertory Company, facing a small but lively audience.
Ms.
Bogart had just assumed the theater's artistic directorship and was conducting her first post-performance discussion - a conversation about that night's production of ''No Plays, No Poetry,'' her drama based on the theoretical writings of the German playwright Bertolt Brecht.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's dreadful and it's going to be devastating.''
- Dr. Gary R. Strokash,
on AIDS among teen-agers.  [ 1:1. ]


Labs for Kenilworth; Enlarging the Medicine Chest
LEAD: New Jersey has long considered itself the ''medicine chest to the nation'' because of the large number of pharmaceutical companies based there.
Schering-Plough Corporation, with headquarters in Madison, is one of them, and the expansion of its research facility in Kenilworth will no doubt help the state hold the title.


DATA BANK: Oct. 8, 1989
LEAD:
$
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7
Industrial Production Index
August
July
Year Ago
Percent change, monthly and year to year
0.3
0.1
0.2
Housing Starts
August
July
Year Ago
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,350
1,420
1,440 $


Students Punished Over Prank
LEAD: One University of Mississippi student was expelled and four others were suspended Friday for their involvement in a fraternity prank.
The incident occurred Sept. 18, when a Beta Theta Pi member and a pledge were stripped, blindfolded, painted with racial slurs and dropped off at Rust College, a predominantly black school about 25 miles to the north.


Rent a Picasso With $3 and a Little Bit of Luck


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The family room in our house is directly above the basement.
In warm weather, this room has a musty odor, especially when the humidity is high.
We use a dehumidifier and ventilate the room, but it has not helped much.
We had the carpet shampooed, and this relieved the problem temporarily.
How can we get rid of the odor?


Annette Linde Marries Stephen Weatherhead
LEAD: Annette Linde and Stephen Wayne Weatherhead, graduates of the Syracuse University School of Architecture, were married yesterday in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard R. McKeon Jr. officiated at Zion Episcopal Church.


VOTES IN CONGRESS
LEAD:  Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate  1.
Flag Desecration: Vote to kill an amendment to a bill outlawing desecration of the flag that would have banned only public acts against the flag.
Approved 53 to 47, Oct. 5.  2.
Flag Desecration: Vote on final passage of a bill that would make it a crime subject to a penalty of one-year in prison and a $1,000 fine to mutilate, deface, burn or physically defile any United States flag.


SAY IT WITH SIGNS
LEAD:  SEEING VOICES  A Journey Into the World of the Deaf.
By Oliver Sacks.
Illustrated. 180 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $15.95.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: Your article failed to point out that in discharging a firearm within 100 yards of a residential dwelling (i.e., my neighbor's house), the killer of my wife was in violation of Maine hunting regulations.
The implication in your article was that the man was sufficiently distant because he was more than 300 feet from my house.


London
LEAD: Visitors to London this fall will be forgiven if they feel a bit confused about what year this is.
The place looks contemporary enough, with its sleekly gentrified buildings, smartly dressed young people, streets lined with Range Rovers and controversial new glass and metal telephone booths, which have uprooted many of the beloved red boxes of yore.


Trouble Finding Things? Tips on How to Organize
LEAD: TAKE a look around you.
Are you an ''Everything Out''?
Are papers strewn about your desk haphazardly, each related to a different project, each demanding immediate attention, and each destined to end up somewhere other than where you will eventually look for it?


Graduating From the Kitchen Floor
LEAD: ONCE upon a time there was an ordinary housewife who had three children.
She liked the wife part and the mother part must have been pretty good since she had two babies and then adopted a third one.


Where the Season Shines Brightest; Opera from Paris to Bologna
LEAD: FOR an American music lover, the main problem with planning trips abroad specifically for musical purposes is a dearth of reliable, sophisticated information.
Getting tickets can be a problem, too, of course, although - apart from nearly impossible-to-get-into festivals -that's sometimes solvable through a friendly travel agent or a local concierge or an imploring letter to the organizations in question, which sometimes hold seats aside for foreign visitors.


Bulk for Benefits
LEAD: To The Editor:


Economic Forces That Knock Down The Oldest Forests
LEAD: ONE hundred years ago, John Muir, the pioneer naturalist, rhapsodized about the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest and warned that the carpet of greenery stretching from the Cascade Mountains to the Pacific Ocean might one day shrink to a few small patches.


Correction
LEAD: The review of Paul West's novel ''Lord Byron's Doctor'' on Sept. 3 misstated the relationship of two members of Byron's circle.
A reader has written to point out that Claire Clairmont and Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley were stepsisters, not half-sisters.


REFERENCE
LEAD:  THE NORTON/GROVE CONCISE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MUSIC.
Edited by Stanley Sadie with Alison Latham. (Norton, $40.) Concise here really means concise.
Information from the 20 volumes of ''The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians'' has been abstracted into bare-bones, succinct entries for this big one-volume reference book.


Review/Dance; Triple Bill by Graham Company
LEAD: Martha Graham's superb dancers are back in New York.
But even they, with their expected power, can surprise, which they did with their exceptionally strong performances in every work on the third program in the Graham Dance Company's current season.


Kansas City Journal Civic Pride (And Pain) In a Hub Of Midwest
LEAD: All things considered, this was not exactly a banner week for Kansas City spirits.
People were just beginning to deal with the bankruptcy filing by Braniff, the city's main provider of air service, when they learned that they would soon also lose their venerable evening newspaper.


GIVING PERESTROIKA A CHANCE
LEAD:  OUT OF THE COLD  New Thinking for American Foreign and Defense Policy in the 21st Century .
By Robert S. McNamara.  223 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Michigan Warms Up To Top Wisconsin, 24-0
LEAD: Michigan's offense, scoreless in the first half, got touchdowns on its first two possessions in the third quarter today and the Wolverines beat Wisconsin, 24-0, in their Big Ten Conference opener.


History, Foliage and Manhattan Views
LEAD: The roar of American artillery hurling cannonballs at passing British warships 213 years ago has been replaced by the hum of traffic emptying off the George Washington Bridge into New Jersey.
But the Fort Lee Historic Park makes every effort to erase two centuries of technology and transport the visitor back to the late 1770's.


Tanker Captain Wins Relocation of Trial
LEAD: Joseph J. Hazelwood, the captain of the tanker that caused the worst oil spill in the nation's history, has won state prosecutors' agreement to have his trial moved out of the south Alaskan port city of Valdez.


Where Humans Have Edge on Computers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Growers Say Rain Hurt Apple Crop
LEAD: TOO much rain and insufficient sun have lead apple growers in the state to fear that the crop this year will fall one-quarter to one-third.


Pseudo-Macho Nonsense
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Find Out About Soviets, F.B.I. Turns to Advertising
LEAD: In a novel approach to the second-oldest profession, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has turned to advertising to recruit potential Soviet counterintelligence assets and beckon would-be defectors.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Babcock Industries, Fairfield, Conn., an industrial and consumer-products manufacturer, said Dennis F. Flint had been named deputy group chief executive of its parent company, FKI Babcock P.L.C., Halifax, England.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Dai-Ichi Mostly Buying Expertise
LEAD: In the last few weeks, the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank has committed nearly $1.5 billion to expanding in the United States, the largest investment made in the country by a Japanese bank.
But the most important aspect of the splashy acquisitions had nothing to do with their impressive financial bulk; it was the expertise Dai-Ichi


Pardon of Argentine Officers Angers Critics of the Military
LEAD: The decision by President Carlos Saul Menem to pardon military officers accused of ruthlessly repressing dissent has left victims of the crackdown bitterly angry.


Ise Journal; An Ancient Shrine Is Testing a Modern Emperor
LEAD: Inspired by religious faith, reverence for tradition and simple curiosity, millions of tourists and worshipers go out of their way every year to visit this sacred and historic spot in a densely forested and hilly coastal area of central Japan.


The Russians Are Still Coming
LEAD: We live in an age of image-building - an age in which it is increasingly difficult to distinguish appearance from reality.
Soviet leaders have taken full advantage of this situation in conducting foreign policy.
They say one thing, and do another.
Since most people cannot determine where the truth lies, they believe noble intentions.


Dazzling, Daring A's Win Crown
LEAD: They can exhibit the strut of a group that knows its business, but they also possess the willingness to attend to the details that can close a deal.


Holidays Today
LEAD: Columbus Day and Yom Kippur are observed today.
Here are the schedules for the holidays.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office at 33d St. and Eighth Ave. open.
Banks: Option to close.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Fixed Mortgages Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages averaged 10.10 percent last week, down from 10.16 percent the previous week, according to a national survey released Friday by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.72 percent last week, up from 8.70 percent the week before, Freddie Mac said.


We Can Act on Coming Faculty Shortage Now; Business Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yugoslav Chief to See Bush and Seek His Support
LEAD: Prime Minister Ante Markovic is to arrive in Washington on Monday to ask President Bush's support for the economic program that he hopes will pull Yugoslavia out of its long crisis of hyperinflation, high unemployment, a steadily declining standard of living and a crippling foreign debt.


Critic's Notebook; Christine Lahti as an Angry Heidi in 'Chronicles'
LEAD: Christine Lahti has stepped into the role of Heidi Holland, the art historian from whom stand-up comics could take a lesson.
When she begins her witty lecture at the top of Wendy Wasserstein's lavishly awarded play ''The Heidi Chronicles,'' at the Plymouth Theater, Ms.
Lahti, who took over the role last month, wastes no time in banishing all traces of her predecessor Joan


Business and the Law; A Judicial Attack On Ethics Filings
LEAD: BREAKING legal ground, a Federal court has decided that a law firm could avoid a conflict of interest charge by ousting a partner.


Katherine Reed, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Katherine Fuller Reed, an assistant vice president for marketing for Citicorp/Citibank, and Kenneth Franklin Hall, the general counsel of Citicorp's Mid-Atlantic Banking Group, both in Washington, were married yesterday in Scarborough, N.Y.
The Rev.
D.
Williams McClurken performed the ceremony at St.


JOBS BEING FILLED BY ILLEGAL ALIENS DESPITE SANCTIONS
LEAD: Despite the Government's effort to turn the workplace into the front line in the battle against illegal immigration, most illegal aliens are able to find jobs in the United States.


Growing Gap in Life Expectancies Of Blacks and Whites Is Emerging
LEAD: After narrowing for decades, the gap in life expectancy between blacks and whites has grown for three years in a row, Federal health experts say, and most of the disparity is due to patterns of behavior.


People
LEAD: * Tony Gomes has been promoted to associate creative director of Deutsch.


The Dynasty That Wouldn't Look Ahead
LEAD: JOSE CANSECO'S artillery shot into the hands of an opera singer in the fifth deck of the Skydome brought friends and foes to the top step of the dugout on Saturday.
But the Oakland Athletics have been stunned by a more dramatic home run than Canseco's.
Now they are back to where they were a year ago, before hobbling Kirk Gibson swung Wonder


Hungary's Extraordinary Change Draws Critics of Varying Ideologies
LEAD: A day after the Hungarian Communist Party changed its name to the Socialist Party and rejected orthodox Marxism, leaders contended today with criticism from members who thought it had not gone far enough as well as from die-hards who thought it had gone too far.


Power Is Out, and So Are Jays
LEAD: In the ninth inning of the fifth game of the playoff for the American League pennant, in his final time at bat in 1989, George Bell hit a home run.
It was too little and too late, and it was a parting shot that symbolized the downfall of the Toronto Blue Jays and the success of the Oakland Athletics.


The Emigres' Voices
LEAD: For East Germans now in the West, individual tales testify to difficult times and personal dramas emerged from the chorus of cheers.
Page A6.


3 Weeks After Storm, St. Croix Still Needs Troops
LEAD: The 1,100 Army troops sent to restore civil order after Hurricane Hugo devastated St.
Croix three weeks ago are still needed to insure the peace, local officials acknowledge.


Fed Seen Delaying Lower Rates
LEAD: Credit market analysts predict that the Federal Reserve Board will not move quickly to lower interest rates, despite fresh signs of economic weakness.


Opponents of Queens Park Development Get Federal Money
LEAD: A dispute over a Government plan to let private developers build profit-making attractions in a Queens park has spurred a drive for public financing to upgrade Gateway National Recreation Area.


Don't Touch That Dial
LEAD: Don't adjust your television sets tonight.
That is Jets green and not Giants blue coming at you live on ''Monday Night Football,'' courtesy of a California-based company called Flying Colors, which was hired by the Jets to alter the look of Giants Stadium for Jets home games.


Wilson to Test Market
LEAD: Mookie Wilson, who opened the season sitting on the bench with the Mets, ended it today as the regular left fielder for the Toronto Blue Jays.
He expressed his gratitude to the Blue Jays for giving him a showcase for the last two months, but said he was going to consider all his options as a free agent before deciding where to play next season.


Review/Music; Quartet's Romantic Offering
LEAD: The chamber music world had its version of a baby boom in the late 1960's, when forming an ensemble seemed almost as glamorous an endeavor as pursuing a solo career.
Many groups that were spawned then have remained together, and they are now into their third decades.


4 Itinerants Add To Giants' Stability
LEAD: Circumstances forced the San Francisco Giants to rebuild and rearrange their team while the 1989 season was in progress, and four of the principal figures in that adaptability played the prominent roles in tonight's 6-4 victory over the Chicago Cubs.


Question Box
LEAD:  Mack vs.
McGraw  Q. Did the two legendary baseball managers Connie Mack of the Philadelphia Athletics and John McGraw of the New York Giants ever oppose each other in the World Series?
A.
It happened three times in the 30 years from 1901-30 that Mack and McGraw were managerial contemporaries with their respective American and National League teams, but those three occurrences all took place in the first 13 years.


100 Lbs. of Marijuana Found
LEAD: More than 100 pounds of marijuana estimated to be worth at least $25,000 was found today during a raid on a house here, Onondaga County Sheriff's deputies said.
The two-story private house at 866 West Genesee Street. contained 71 fully grown plants in pots under time-controlled lights in the basement and 121 smaller 3-foot plants growing in an upstairs room, the police said.


President Quits At Ann Taylor
LEAD: Michele Fortune, president of the Ann Taylor stores, has resigned from the retail fashion chain, the company announced on Friday.


The Man With No Plan
LEAD: The greatest palindrome - a sentence spelled the same backward - was created in the Teddy Roosevelt era: ''A man, a plan, a Canal - Panama!''


'Junk Bond' Inquiry by S.E.C. Seen
LEAD: The recent turbulence in the ''junk bond'' market has spurred a new inquiry into this high-risk market by the Securities and Exchange Commission, people close to the investigation said last week.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The President has said he wants him out, and I can't believe that between the will of the people of Panama, and the will of the people of the United States, we can't achieve that.
If you want odds, I'd say 8-to-5 that he probably will be out.''  -John H. Sununu, the White House Chief of Staff, speaking about Gen.


Market Place; Funds Cautious On Hong Kong
LEAD: SIR PIERS JACOBS, Hong Kong's financial secretary, is out ''beating the drum'' for the bustling market at China's door.


Breaking Card Barriers
LEAD: For someone trying to crack a $365 million market, Lud Denny is taking a curious route.
The market is for sports trading cards, and while baseball, according to Denny's own figures, accounted for $350 million of the retail total last year, his company has zeroed in on a segment that accounted for only $10 million.


U.S. Fails to Gain in World Cup Bid
LEAD: The United States missed a chance to improve its World Cup qualifying hopes today when it had to settle for a scoreless tie with Guatemala.


Florida Football Coach Quits
LEAD: Galen Hall resigned as football coach at the University of Florida today amid charges that he made unauthorized payments to a player and to his assistant coaches in violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules, the university's interim president said.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Cookie-Crisp, a children's cereal made by the Ralston Purina Co., to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, with an undisclosed budget.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A2-7, A18  East German protesters clashed with the police in cities throughout the nation.
The Government celebration of its 40th anniversary of Communism has prompted rallies and demonstrations urging reform.
Page A1  Emigres tell why life in East Germany proved intolerable


New Fund Form For Campaigns Is Turned Down
LEAD: New York State's Board of Elections has turned down a proposal to change campaign disclosure forms in a way that proponents said would have made it harder for contributors to evade the state's campaign finance laws.


Eagles Rally Over Giants
LEAD: In a game of delirious, delicious knocks where little came easy, the New York Giants jumped on the Philadelphia Eagles early here today.
The Giants led by 10-0 early in the second quarter, by 13-7 at halftime and by 16-7 early in the fourth quarter.


College Coaches Cool to Plan for Shorter Athletic Schedules
LEAD: Some of the country's leading college basketball and football coaches feel that a proposal to shorten the basketball season and cut spring football practice by 10 days was a well intentioned but misguided attempt by college presidents to reorder priorities in intercollegiate athletics.


Monica Driscoll, Biologist, Is Married
LEAD: Monica Anne Driscoll, a National Institutes of Health Research Fellow in biological sciences at Columbia University, was married yesterday to Stephen Thomas Buzbee, an architect in the New York firm of Thanhauser &amp; Esterson.
The Rev.
John Hedger, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Deer Isle (Me.) Congregational


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL REPORT  The Bush Administration is under growing pressure from West Germany and other European allies, as well as American manufacturers, to allow the export of sophisticated machine tools to Communist countries. [ Page D1. ] West Germany's unions are pushing to reduce the workweek to 35 hours, from the current average of 38.7, without cutting the salaries of workers.


We Can Act on Coming Faculty Shortage Now; Pool of Scholars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pope, at Huge Mass in Seoul, Prays for a Reunified Korea
LEAD: On a vast plaza designed to be turned into a military airfield should North and South Korea go to war again, Pope John Paul II prayed today for the reunification of a people torn by seemingly implacable hatred.


An Early Favorite in Not-Just-Hockey Country
LEAD: THIRTY years ago, when the Minneapolis Lakers were opening their final season in the Twin Cities, Harvey Ratner and Marv Wolfenson were young businessmen who had bought a 3 percent share of the struggling franchise for $1,500.


Immunity Is Seen as Possible for 2 Top H.U.D. Figures, but Not Pierce
LEAD: The lawmaker who has led the primary Congressional investigation of political abuses in Federal housing programs says he expects that Congress will soon consider granting immunity to two top aides to former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr., although not to Mr.
Pierce.


3 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues this week includes the weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills, which will be tomorrow because of the holiday today, and Wednesday's auction of new seven-year notes.


Sale Price Arouses Wonder Over Deal in South Carolina
LEAD: THE recent sale of three small daily newspapers in South Carolina has left many in the newspaper industry scratching their heads in wonder at the huge prices papers generally command, despite industrywide problems like fierce competition and soft advertising.


Accounting Unit Delays New Tax-Benefit Rule
LEAD: The Financial Accounting Standards Board announced on Friday that for the third time it would extend the date by which companies should adopt its new rules on how income tax expense is reported to shareholders.


Abortions Will Be Moot Soon
LEAD: Typically, technological development creates political debates: nuclear power, radioactive waste, genetic engineering and environmental pollution, for example.
In one exceptional case, however, technology may end a debate.
The issue is abortion, and the technological development is the French abortion pill.


Prisons Aren't Nursing Homes
LEAD: On June 7, 1973, a 50-year-old homeless man named Quenton Brown walked into a bread store in Louisiana and, at gunpoint, stole $100 and a 15 cent pie.
He then crawled under a nearby house where he remained until the police arrived.
After his arrest, the state found that Mr.
Brown had an I.Q. of 51 - the intelligence of a three and one-half year old child.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Immunity in H.U.D.
Inquiry?
The leader of a Congressional investigation into housing programs says immunity from prosecution may be considered for two aides of former Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr., but not for Mr.
Pierce.
Page A12.
A Debate on Export Curbs  The Bush Administration is under pressure from European allies and American companies to allow the export of sophisticated machine tools to Communist countries.


Police Detectives' Chief Announces Retirement
LEAD: After 35 years in the New York City Police Department, Robert Colangelo, the Chief of Detectives, announced yesterday that he would retire just before Election Day, Nov. 7.


Little Progress in Budget Talks
LEAD: Senate Democratic and Republican leaders made little progress today in their efforts to strike a deal that would strip various tax and spending measures from a $13 billion deficit reduction package and provide a separate vote on reducing the capital gains tax.


McMillan Ready for a Change
LEAD: Half an hour after practice on Saturday, Erik McMillan stood outside the Jets' training rooms and attempted to put the events of the last few days in perspective.


At 3, The Independent Is a Solid Success in Britain
LEAD: When the lofty notion of a daily newspaper founded by journalists and dedicated to political independence and high professional standards was first presented to him, Stephen Glover gave it ''about a 5 percent chance of success.''


Bridge
LEAD: Most of the jungles of the world greet intruders with a plague of mosquitoes.
The bridge jungles of Australia are inhabited by a pesky creature called a Moscito, which caused a lot of trouble during the recent world championships in Perth.


Nursing Home Fire Alarm Is Under Scrutiny
LEAD: The authorities say there is evidence that an automatic fire alarm system may not have worked when a fire started last week at a nursing home, killing nine people.


Policeman Dies in Hospital After Being Shot by Student
LEAD: A 24-year-old police officer shot in the head early Saturday morning during what the police said was a fight with his girlfriend's former boyfriend died later the same day at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, the City Medical Examiner's office said.


Business Near Victory on Worker Benefits
LEAD: Led by an army of inflamed small-business owners, the nation's 3.5 million employers are on the verge of a sweeping legislative triumph that would free them of what are widely acknowledged as overly burdensome regulations governing health-insurance and other employee benefits.


Amoco-Saudi Venture
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation, the Chicago-based oil company, signed a letter of intent to study the idea of building a petrochemical plant with Saudi Arabia that would produce up to 400,000 metric tons annually of a chemical used in making polyester.
It would cover expected demand into the late 1990's, said James Fligg, an Amoco representative.


Abbado Will Succeed Karajan At the Berlin Philharmonic
LEAD: Claudio Abbado, the 56-year-old Italian who is music director of the Vienna State Opera, was elected yesterday as chief conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic, succeeding the late Herbert von Karajan.
Mr.
Abbado accepted the post by telephone, although details of his contract have yet to be negotiated.


Louisiana Changes Course And Accepts Tax Increase
LEAD: Reversing at least part of the message they sent in a spring election, Louisiana voters on Saturday overwhelmingly approved a gasoline tax increase intended to finance a costly building program and breathe life into the state's dismal economy.


Latvians Seek Freedom And Fret for Gorbachev
LEAD: As the largest political alliance in Latvia met today to demand independence for this reluctant Soviet republic, Yuris Dobelis reckoned the timetable this way: If the Soviet Union continues on the course set by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Latvia will be a free nation within five years.
If he is replaced by hard-liners, ''no one can predict.


Williams Helps Giant Barrage To Continue
LEAD: Even when the night had ended, Matt Williams could not completely reconstruct the single electric moment in the fifth inning when he stood at the plate and kept fouling off pitches, one after another.


Laurie Anderson Ill
LEAD: The Brooklyn Academy of Music canceled yesterday's afternoon and evening performances of the performance artist Laurie Anderson's ''Empty Places'' because she was under doctor's orders to rest.
Ms.
Anderson became ill during Saturday's show, a spokesman for the academy said, and was told by her doctor to rest for at least 48 hours.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Martinez to Face Evert: Conchita Martinez, the 17-year-old who helped Spain reach the final of the Federation Cup tournament in Tokyo, will face Chris Evert today in the showdown between the top-seeded United States and second-seeded Spain for the women's version of the Davis Cup.
The French Open champion, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, will face Martina Navratilova, the world's second-ranked woman player.


Soviet Corn Purchases
LEAD: Private exporting companies have sold the Soviet Union an additional 1.1 million metric tons of United States corn, with a potential value of nearly $100 million, for delivery in 1989-90 under a long-term supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said Friday.
The corn sale was the fourth of last week to the Soviet Union, with orders now totaling 3.7 million tons of corn and 100,000 tons of soybean meal.


'Good Strong Quads' Bring Biathlon Victory
LEAD: RUSS JONES has given on-the-job-training a new meaning.
Jones, a letter carrier who has walked the same 10-mile route in Camden, N.J., for the last nine years, has accomplished more on his beat than just delivering the mail on time.


Review/Dance; Graham Explores Her Early Repertory
LEAD: ''Steps in the Street'' is another important revival from Martha Graham's so-called lost repertory of the 1930's and her company performed the work on Friday night with formidable success for the first time in more than 40 years.
As usual, anyone interested in the development of a great artist cannot afford to miss it.


Inflation Drops In Argentina
LEAD: Argentina's inflation rate, which in July reached a record 196.6 percent, fell below 10 percent in September for the first time in seven months.
It was the second consecutive monthly drop in the inflation rate.


Swing Into Perfection
LEAD: Before you get out your credit card and dial Rich Ohly's 800 number to order one of his Perfect Swing Trainers for $600, ask yourself one question:


Retreat in Congress; The Catastrophic-Care Debacle - A special report.; How the New Medicare Law Fell on Hard Times in a Hurry
LEAD: With the benefit of hindsight, legislators and policy makers in both parties now agree that the seeds of disaster for the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act were sown well before it became law barely a year ago.


Bolar Begins Drug Recall
LEAD: The Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a generic drug maker, yesterday voluntarily began the recall of a generic antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infections.
The move came a day after the Food and Drug Administration requested the action.


Farmer's Apples Aren't Pretty, and She Likes Them That Way
LEAD: For Amy Hepworth, a fruit grower here, a shiny red apple without a single blemish is a sign of an unhealthy agriculture.


Noriega Reportedly Orders Executions of Coup Figures
LEAD: Moments after putting down a violent coup attempt last Tuesday, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega exploded in rage against his captured opponents and ordered the immediate execution of several rebel officers, including a close friend who was the coup leader, diplomats here said today.


Susan Warms Dryfoos, Author, Wed To Daniel Mayer Selznick, a Producer
LEAD: Susan Warms Dryfoos and Daniel Mayer Selznick were married yesterday at the home of the bride's grandmother Mrs.
Arthur Hays Sulzberger in Stamford, Conn.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Andrew Heiskell of New York and Darien, Conn., and the late Orvil E. Dryfoos.
Mr.
Selznick is a son of Irene Mayer Selznick of New York and the late David O.


Supporters Elude Giuliani As He Courts Hispanic Vote
LEAD: The Rudolph W. Giuliani mayoral campaign spent much of yesterday courting the Hispanic vote from East Harlem to the canyons of Fifth Avenue.
It was not an easy day.
What the campaign had promised would be an endorsement from the ''oldest Latino club'' in New York City turned into a confusing non-endorsement.


Crash in Canada Kills 12
LEAD: A tractor-trailer hauling logs skidded and crashed into a wagon taking people on a hayride today, residents said.
At least 12 people were reported killed and 45 injured.
As many as 50 people were on the outing, part of a reunion held each Canadian Thanksgiving weekend by the Leger and McGraw families.


Outdoors: How You, Too, Can Begin Surf-Casting 200 Yards
LEAD: EVERY veteran surf fisherman has watched screaming terns diving over a school of surface-feeding bluefish that are just beyond his own casting range.
That can be accepted with some degree of equanimity, except when the fellow beside you, who has no trouble reaching out another 40 or 50 yards, is fast to a fish on every other toss.


Immunomedics President Named After Year's Search
LEAD: After a yearlong search, Immunomedics Inc. has chosen Russell C. McLauchlan as president.
Mr.
McLauchlan, 41, was previously vice president and general manager of Lederle Laboratories, a division of the American Cyanamid Company.
He has also served as managing director of Cyanamid of Great Britain


Financial Analyst of Publishing Companies Who's Done a Thing or Two
LEAD: Even if there were such a thing as a typical Wall Street investment banker, Ivan Obolensky, the senior vice president of research for Josephthal &amp; Company, would not be it.
That is, not unless the typical investment banker was also the London-born son of a Russian prince and a grandson of John Jacob Astor, who is said to have been the wealthiest man in America when he went down with the Titanic.


Replica of Half Moon to Sail Hudson River
LEAD: Nearly four centuries after the explorer Henry Hudson sailed up the river that bears his name, a replica of his ship, the Half Moon, will sail down the river.


Topics of The Times; The Charter Needs Justice
LEAD: One way or another, New Yorkers will vote Nov. 7 on a referendum to amend their City Charter.
One way is better than the other, though: the way that allows New York City voters to know, before Election Day, what the United States Justice Department thinks about the charter proposal.


Review/Television; The Travails of Cambodia As Seen by Prince Sihanouk
LEAD: The recent withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia and the threat of the return of the infamous Khmer Rouge lend immediacy to ''Cambodia: The Prince and the Prophecy,'' a political history of that much beset land.
This first of two ''Intercom'' programs, at 10 o'clock tonight on Channel 13, takes us from legends of the ancient empire of the kings of Angkor up to the only too real events of the 1970's.


The Democrats - Late and Lame
LEAD: The Democratic Party is in trouble.
The floundering over capital gains taxes has raised serious questions about the quality of the party's leadership, the coherence of its message and the condition of its soul.
The Democrats aren't wholly to blame for their troubles.
But the signs of decay are worrisome - not just for the party but the country.


Where Iron Doses of Stamina Count
LEAD: WHAT does it take to prepare for one of the most arduous sporting contests on earth?
It depends on where you set your sights.
You may want to win, or you may only hope to finish.


Books of The Times; A Man of Letters and the Pull of Visual Arts
LEAD:  Just Looking  Essays on Art  By John Updike  Illustrated. 210 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


Humphrey Carries Broncos
LEAD: Bobby Humphrey, rushing for 102 yards in the first start of his pro career, scored a tackle-breaking touchdown with 1 minute 3 seconds left as the sluggish Denver Broncos beat the San Diego Chargers, 16-10, today.


William J. Fischer, Auctioneer, 91
LEAD: William J. Fischer, a New York auctioneer of furnishings, decorations and art, died yesterday in a nursing home in Burbank, Calif.
He was 91 years and lived in Manhattan until he moved to California 18 months ago.


Opera Musicians Reject Pact
LEAD: The orchestra of the New York City Opera, which has been on strike since Sept. 13, voted 56 to 4 on Saturday to reject the company's latest proposal.
The vote was tabulated yesterday.
The rejection increases the possibility of a cancellation of the rest of the company's season, scheduled to run until Nov.


Albany Gets Private Offer To Purchase Its Airport
LEAD: While virtually every American airport served by scheduled airliners is publicly owned, Albany County is considering an unusual offer by a private group to buy its 61-year-old airport.


Verrazano-Narrows Bridge Turns 25


Turf Classic Won By Yankee Affair
LEAD: Yankee Affair and Sewickley repeated recent Grade I victories by winning major stakes races at Belmont Park yesterday to make strong cases for themselves as divisional champions.


Bears' First Loss Is to Buccaneers
LEAD: After sliding up and down the scale of improvement for a month, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers reached the top today.


Karen Anderson Weds a Lawyer
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Anderson to Stephen Michael Ouellette took place yesterday at the Eastern Point Yacht Club in Gloucester, Mass.
The Rev.
James McCloy, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony.


Bush Aide and Senator Clash Over Failed Coup in Panama
LEAD: In an extraordinary public disagreement over intelligence policy, President Bush's national security adviser and the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee clashed sharply today over whether President Bush has been handcuffed by Senate restrictions on covert action in Panama.


When the Money Really Would Stop
LEAD: With Congressional leaders and Administration officials failing again over the weekend to work out a way to allow budget legislation to be enacted this week, prospects grew that across-the-board spending reductions in Government programs would automatically go into effect on Oct. 16.


Indians' Education Criticized
LEAD: Education Secretary Lauro F. Cavazos criticized the Government's educational programs for American Indians today, referring to them as having a history of ''crossed purposes and unfulfilled hopes.''


Group to Fight Alcohol Ban
LEAD: An advertising industry group plans to continue to fight an amendment to the Senate antidrug bill that would restrict advertising for alcoholic beverages on college campuses, even though the sweeping language of the legislation had already been narrowed.
The bill was passed by the Senate last Thursday.


Ms. Moisen and John d'Arbeloff Wed
LEAD: Virginia Susan Moisen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chandler J. Moisen of Boston and Newport, R.I., was married yesterday to John Alexander d'Arbeloff, a son of Sybil d'Arbeloff of Cambridge and Rockport, Mass., and the late Dimitri V. d'Arbeloff.
Msgr.
Oscar Ferland performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the nondenominational Chapel by the Sea at the Newport Naval


Azerbaijan Rail Strike Is Reported After Ban
LEAD: Azerbaijani railroad crews defied a national ban on transport strikes today and again stemmed the flow of desperately needed supplies to Armenia, the official Soviet press agency, Tass, said.
There were conflicting reports on how much food, fuel and building supplies were reaching the Armenian republic.


Sending Mr. Savimbi a Message
LEAD: President Bush did well to push the Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi back to the negotiating table.
But it remains to be seen whether Mr.
Savimbi is prepared to bargain on the basis of the African-sponsored framework for settling Angola's 14-year civil war.
He needs to understand that continued U.S.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 9, 1989:  MONDAY  Phillips Pet Co  PS Group Inc  TUESDAY  Diversified Energs Minn  Procter &amp; Gamble Co  Lomas Finl Corp  Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt Co  WEDNESDAY  AAA Corp  Hillenbrand Inds Inc


Henrik K. Carlsen, 75, A Heroic Sea Captain
LEAD: Henrik Kurt Carlsen, a sea captain who gained international attention in 1952 for staying stubbornly aboard his crippled freighter for seven days as she slowly sank, died Saturday at his home in Woodbridge.
He was 75 years old.


3 Jewish Students Beaten by Men Yelling Ethnic Slurs in Brooklyn
LEAD: Three Jewish students were attacked outside a fraternity party near the campus of Brooklyn College early yesterday by as many as 20 white men who shouted ethnic slurs at them and beat them with ''fists, feet and beer bottles,'' the police said.


We Can Act on Coming Faculty Shortage Now
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article Saturday about the expense of Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's travel misstated the point at which the Federal Bureau of Investigation advised the Justice Department that Mr.
Thornburgh should avoid commercial jets because of security and communications concerns.


Company To Go Private
LEAD: The First Constitution Financial Corporation has agreed to be taken private by a group of New York investors at a price of $25 a share, or a total of $275 million.


Benefits of Soviet Entry Into Tariff System
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Debate On Controls Of Exports
LEAD: Faced with calls for increased economic cooperation with Poland and Hungary, the Bush Administration is under growing pressure from its European allies, led by West Germany, to allow the export of sophisticated machine tools to Communist countries.


Kansas Journal; The Land Wherein 'Wizard' Is A Humbug
LEAD: Don't bother looking for Toto T-shirts in Kansas.


Detroit Is Honoring Honda, the Man and the Car
LEAD: Soichiro Honda, the automobile maker whose company first had the audacity to use American workers to build Japanese cars, will soon take his place in the Automotive Hall of Fame, an honor that some say is long overdue.


Review/Television; Channel 2 Enlists Rivers And Rivera in Ratings War
LEAD: When in doubt, go with highly recognizable faces, especially if they belong to personalities with an undeniable talent for self-promotion.
Let's talk about Joan Rivers and Geraldo Rivera.


Tales Emigres Tell: Why Life in East Germany Proved Finally Intolerable
LEAD: The thousands of people who have left East Germany in recent weeks have seized opportunities for escape as they arose, first through Hungary and then through Czechoslovakia.
Seen from afar, their flight seemed to be a mass exodus.
But in this West German border city, as the tired travelers disembarked, individual voices testified to often difficult choices; personal dramas emerged from the chorus of cheers.


A Sweet Prelude to the Day of Atonement


Film Festival; 'Breaking In,' Crime Primer, Features Burt Reynolds
LEAD: The 27th New York Film Festival rolls effortlessly to its conclusion tonight with the 9 o'clock showing of Bill Forsyth's halcyon new comedy, ''Breaking In,'' at Avery Fisher Hall.


Stock Market Fail-Safe Plan
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange asked the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday to approve a one-year extension for a system that would halt trading if the market drops sharply.


Campaign Matters; On Running With the Ghost Of La Guardia
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani declared his candidacy for mayor last May in an Upper East Side Republican club that he identified as the site where Fiorello H. La Guardia began his successful mayoral campaign 56 years before.


Rumors of Saatchi Bid
LEAD: The stock of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. rose several points last Friday on the London and New York stock exchanges amid rumors that the British advertising company might be a takeover target.
Fueled by speculation that an American asset-management company might make a bid for Saatchi, and that a Swiss employment agency was interested in buying some of its consulting operations, Saatchi's stock was the third-most actively traded issue in the London market.


Impact of Harcourt Deal
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. released a statement on Friday describing the financial impact of its agreement last week to sell Sea World amusement parks to the Anheuser-Busch Companies for $1.1 billion.
Harcourt said that it would gain $550 million from the sale and that the proceeds would allow it to reduce interest costs on its debt by $115 million a year.


How MTV Has Rocked Television Commercials
LEAD: MTV, the cable television rock-music network, is having a profound influence on the way products are advertised on television, advertising professionals say.


Three Military Airmen Killed When Jet Crashes in Atlantic
LEAD: Three Navy airmen were killed on Saturday when they ejected from a military jet that apparently malfunctioned shortly after it took off from an aircraft carrier in the Atlantic Ocean, the Navy said today.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article Saturday about the Senate's refusal to back repeal of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act described the Senate's measure incorrectly in some copies.
Unlike the House's, it deals only with Medicare.
It is not part of the deficit-reduction bill.


2 Held in Cutting Up of Car in Fatal Accident
LEAD: A 15-year-old girl was killed in a hit-and-run accident early Saturday morning as she was trying to cross a street in front of a discotheque for teen-agers near East Farmingdale, L.I., the Suffolk County police said.


Aboard Treadmill To Better Fitness
LEAD: A treadmill has been designed to absorb the impact of running with use of a suspension system in its foot bed.
The machine will be available in January.


Shorter Workweek a Volatile Issue for Germans
LEAD: A hallmark of West German labor negotiations in the 1980's has been a drive by the nation's powerful trade unions to reduce the workweek to 35 hours, from the current average of 38.7, without cutting pay.
With many labor contracts in important industries expiring early next year, the debate has flared anew.


SECURITY FORCES STORM PROTESTERS IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: Protesters clashed with the police and security forces today in cities throughout East Germany as the Communist Government's efforts to celebrate its 40th anniversary ignited rallies and demonstrations urging changes in the country's hard-line system.


Mexico's Baja Wines In Bid for U.S. Market
LEAD: If the wines of California can become world-renowned and gain respect, then the wines of Baja California should be able to do the same.
If Mexican beer can be made to appeal to the American palate, the same should be true of Mexican wine.


Schools Have a Role In Combating Racism
LEAD: To the Editor:


L. Yaseen, Realty Expert, 77, Dies
LEAD: Leonard C. Yaseen, a real-estate executive who specialized in relocating factories and offices, died of a heart attack early yesterday at the Rhode Island Hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 77 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.


A Record for Henderson as A's Advance to World Series  The Giants beat the Cubs, 6-4, to take a 3-1 National   League series lead. SportsMonday, page C1. (AP)


Unesco Didn't Approve Censorship Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cargo Boom Causes Plane Shortage
LEAD: Sharp growth in cargo shipments by air is producing a shortage of freighter aircraft around the world.
Companies with freight to ship are having trouble finding planes on short notice, and freight rates have begun to rise.


El Salvador Accepts Plan for Evacuation Of Wounded Rebels
LEAD: After a tense seven-week standoff that included a church occupation, an embassy takeover and diplomatic maneuvering, the Government of El Salvador has acceded to rebel demands that wounded and disabled guerrillas be evacuated abroad for medical treatment.


Rockefeller Drug Law Is Still Not Overhauled
LEAD: To the Editor:


Houston and Ware Hit Stride
LEAD: The popularity polls of college football embrace statistical excesses and therefore the stock of Miami went up Saturday while Notre Dame's went down.
Regarding Heisman Trophy candidates, perceptions of Houston's Andre Ware grew larger while the mystique of West Virginia's Major Harris diminished.


Federal Industries
LEAD: Federal Industries Consumer Group said on Friday that it would pay $54 million (Canadian) in cash for W. H. Smith Canada Ltd., a unit of W. H. Smith Group P.L.C. of Britain.
Federal Industries will pay 86.5 percent of the cash to W. H. Smith Group and the rest to three Canadian institutional investors.


Topics of The Times; Dueling Umbrellas
LEAD: New York City's relentless rains have provided abundant opportunities for observing umbrella styles.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Retail sales Sept.
Automobile sales Early Sept.
Producer prices Sept.


Rangers Beat Hawks
LEAD: The advantage was enormous, the exploitation of it extraordinary.
And so when Al Secord's match penalty was over early in the third period, so was the game.


'Custodian' Fees Are Set By Goldman
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company has adopted a policy to charge retail investors for holding their securities.


Marsha Rich Weds Steven Camerino
LEAD: Marsha A. Rich and Steven V. Camerino, both graduates of Dartmouth College, were married yesterday in Woodstock, N.H., at the Moosilauke Ravine Lodge of the Dartmouth Outing Club.
Peter B. Rotch, a lawyer and a New Hampshire justice of the peace, performed the civil ceremony.


7 Die in Bogota Blast; Police Seek Drug Link
LEAD: Seven passengers were killed and eight wounded today in a bus bombing here, and the police were trying to determine whether it was linked to the war of cocaine traffickers against the Government.


W. T. Eveleth 3d Weds Miss Litten
LEAD: The wedding of Barbara Anne Litten, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack D. Litten of Bethany, Conn., and William Tappan Eveleth 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eveleth 2d of Chazy, N.Y., took place yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church on the Green in New Haven.
The Rev.
Andrew E. Fiddler performed the ceremony.


Colts Crush Bills, 37-14
LEAD: Eric Dickerson ran for two touchdowns, and the Indianapolis defense converted six Buffalo turnovers into 23 points today as the Colts won, 37-14, for a share of the American Football Conference Eastern Division lead.


Rising Taxes Are Issue In Jersey Shore District
LEAD: The green lawns of many homes in the 11th Assembly District along the Jersey Shore are festooned these days with ''for sale'' signs.


Most Markets Open
LEAD: Currency and Government securities markets will be closed today in observance of the Columbus Day holiday.
The commodity, stock and corporate bond markets will be open.


CORE CURRICULUMS IN COLLEGE URGED
LEAD: Asserting that too many college students graduate with limited exposure to the ''basic landmarks of history and thought,'' the National Endowment for the Humanities urged colleges today to bolster required undergraduate studies.


More Covered By Recycling In New York
LEAD: With New York City's recycling law in effect since July 14, the Sanitation Department reports that more than 600,000 households in the five boroughs are now engaged in the curbside recycling program, in which the department picks up newspapers, magazines and corrugated cardboard.


How the Modern Got the van Gogh
LEAD: The 1888-89 portrait of Joseph Roulin by Vincent van Gogh, which is one of the most spectacular additions to the Museum of Modern Art in many years, was paid for by the museum through an elaborate deal that involved the sale of seven paintings from its permanent collection.


Amserve Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amserve Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,089,937
1,870,392
Net inc
356,912
255,113
Share earns
.12
.09
Shares outst
3,097,090
2,836,939
The company said year-ago share earnings has been restated to reflect the 5 percent stock dividend declared in November 1988.


Test Flights Start Today Over Adirondack Park
LEAD: The Air Force announced today that it would begin low-level flights over northern New York and Adirondack Park Tuesday.


Gasoline Prices Flatten
LEAD: Abundant oil supplies and volume discounts to sellers virtually halted a rise in retail gasoline prices that had been running contrary to seasonal trends, an industry analyst said Sunday.
The biweekly Lundberg Survey of 12,000 gasoline stations nationwide showed the average price, including taxes, for all grades of gasoline was $109.56 cents a gallon - up only 13-hundredths of a cent per gallon from two weeks earlier.


Heart-Disease Prevention Begins in Childhood; Eating American
LEAD: To the Editor:


LOUISIANA VOTERS DEFEAT COURT PLAN
LEAD: A plan designed to elect more black judges in Louisiana was defeated by the voters Saturday, in part because of voter concern over a clause that would have protected the jobs of predominantly white incumbents, analysts said.


Carolian Systems Internaional reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolian Systems Internaional
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,193,393
4,225,225
Net loss
700,178
b600,051
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income  Results are in Canadian dollars.


Shell Makes a Successful Debut As Jets Are Quick to Cooperate
LEAD: The Jets, plagued for the second successive game by erratic secondary play and no offense to speak of, made Art Shell's head-coaching debut a success tonight by dropping a 14-7 decision to the Los Angeles Raiders.


Consider the Racism In the Term 'Hispanic'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Centel Agreement
LEAD: The Centel Corporation said it agreed to buy the cellular telephone franchises serving Aiken, S.C., and Augusta, Ga., from the Pond Branch Telephone Company for undisclosed terms.
It said the deal was subject to the approval of minority shareholders and state and Federal regulators.
Centel serves 41 markets and is the 10th-largest cellular company.


Holiday Closings
LEAD: Most domestic markets for Treasury bills, notes and bonds were closed yesterday in observance of the Columbus Day holiday.
But commodity, stock and corporate bond markets were open.
In Canada, all financial markets were closed for a national holiday.


Review/Music; Milwaukee Symphony Tests Carnegie Hall
LEAD: The Milwaukee Symphony was on the stage of Carnegie Hall Saturday night, but these visitors from the Midwest seemed almost bit players in the larger drama of Carnegie Hall's acoustics.
The plot has arrived at Act III, Scene 1 - from the celebrated sound of this historical space, to the much criticized acoustical changes that accompanied a major renovation several years ago, and now to August's further modifications, which have included absorbent material applied above and behind the playing area and at the back of the hall.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Scientists have confirmed that an unidentified flying object recently landed in a park in the Russian city of Voronezh.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
N.A.
8.81
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.59
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.63
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
8.06
N.A.
30-YR.


President's Cyst Found to Be Noncancerous
LEAD: A cyst removed from the middle finger of President Bush's right hand was not cancerous, a spokesman said today.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Hungarian Party Chief  Hungary's newly named Socialist Party, which as the Communist Party decided to turn away from orthodox Marxism, elected Rezso Nyers its President.
But he faced demands for more change.
Page A10.
Land Battle in West  Western states have come to regret a deal in which they accepted vast tracts from the Federal Government decades ago, and Utah wants to sell off about 82,000 acres.


Metro Datelines; Child, 2, Is Killed When Struck by Bus
LEAD: A bus struck and killed a 2-year-old boy yesterday after he apparently broke away from a teen-ager watching him and ran in front of the vehicle, the Paterson police said.


Bogota Blast Called Accident
LEAD: The explosion that tore through a Bogota bus and killed seven people on Sunday was apparently accidental and not the work of drug traffickers at war with the Colombian Government, the police said today.
Initial police reports said the bus appeared to have been hit by a firebomb.


Metro Datelines; General Dynamics Is Denied Immunity
LEAD: A state judge has ruled that the General Dynamics Corporation cannot block a lawsuit filed against it by Norden Systems by claiming immunity from legal action under the nation's national security laws.


Cover Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cover Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,800,000
16,300,000
Net inc
589,550
863,076
Share earns
.09
.15
Results are in Canadian dollars.


New Jersey Rebutted on Its Car Insurance Losses
LEAD: The insurance industry, blamed by New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner for nearly $1 billion in losses by the state's Joint Underwriting Association on policies issued to car drivers, has reviewed the studies on which the Commissioner based his charge and come up with far different conclusions.


Dollar Is Narrowly Mixed; British Pound Moves Lower
LEAD: The dollar was narrowly mixed yesterday in thin holiday trading.
Gold prices were lower.
Currency dealers said trading was subdued and abbreviated because of the Columbus Day and Yom Kippur holidays.
The markets in Hong Kong were also closed for a holiday, while trading in Japan slowed on the eve of a holiday there.


Norex America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norex America Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,638,000
15,242,000
Net inc
b11,629,000
c960,000
Share earns
2.65
-
Yr rev
55,252,000
59,808,000
Net inc
b13,505,000
c3,997,000
Share earns
3.07
-


Pardoned Argentine Officers Out of Jail
LEAD: More than a hundred military men and accused leftist subversives were freed today as a result of pardons extended by President Carlos Saul Menem in a gamble to win the loyalty of the Argentine armed forces to political democracy.


2 Fund-Raising Groups Form to Aid Hispanic Organizations
LEAD: For the first time in the New York region, hundreds of Hispanic social service or cultural groups that have competed for dollars, often with scant success, will have two new fund-raising organizations to help them.


N.H. Thrift Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* N.H. Thrift Bancshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
206,023
292,914
Per share
.09
.14
9mo net inc
964,264
819,026
Per share
.44
.38
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Patterns
LEAD:  Rumors of Money


Interco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
430,198,000
491,335,000
Net inc
b118,661,000
c34,881,000
Share earns
2.43
.93
6mo sales
898,852,000
981,397,000
Net inc
87,061,000
c65,570,000
Share earns
1.14
1.73
Shares outst
40,232,000
37,830,000


First American Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,065,000
16,130,000
Share earns
.13
.70
Shares outst
23,043,000
23,002,000
9mo net inc
21,658,000
33,806,000
Share earns
.94
1.47
Shares outst
23,029,000
22,992,000


Bingo Buses Attacked at Indian Reservation
LEAD: Buses carrying bingo players were stoned and shot at during weekend violence at the St.
Regis Indian Reservation, where residents are feuding over the legalization of casino gambling.
One woman was hurt.
The woman, Janet Langley, of Ottawa, Canada, was injured by the rock throwing and treated for cuts at a hospital, officials said.


Japan Questions Ban on Sending Military Abroad
LEAD: The Government has reopened one of the most politically charged questions in Japan's halting moves toward taking a bigger role in international politics: Can the Japanese military be sent abroad, even on non-military missions?


Our Towns; Students Paying For Their Teams At a Free School
LEAD: When the school year began at Amityville High School this fall, Patty Scheffer and Gretchen Lottman, both l7 years old and both seniors, looked forward to another year on the girls tennis team, Patty in singles and Gretchen playing doubles.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Highest Temperature  Q. Is there a maximum temperature that corresponds to absolute zero?
A.''There is no maximum temperature, because there is no limit to the amount of energy you can put into anything,'' said David Goodstein, vice provost and professor of physics and applied physics at the California Institute of Technology,


Ocilla Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ocilla Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
2,007,000
12,825,000
Net loss
426,000
2,057,000
6mo sales
4,092,000
24,663,000
Net loss
1,206,000
4,000,000


Devtek Corp reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devtek Corp
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
153,775,000
135,132,000
Net inc
6,863,000
7,384,000
Share earns
.70
.77
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Ex-Quintus Executive in High Intergraph Job
LEAD: The Intergraph Corporation, a software company in Huntsville, Ala., announced yesterday that James W. Meadlock, the company's president and chairman, had been promoted to the new position of chief executive.


Reviews/Music; Elton John, Still Colorful And Popular
LEAD: It seems like only yesterday, but it was actually 19 years ago that Elton John scored his first major hit with ''Your Song.'' Every year since then, the singer and pianist has had at least one moderate hit and more often than not he has had two or three.


Seattle Journal; The Art Of Burying A Century Alive
LEAD: In trying to package the present for future generations, officials at the Washington State Centennial Commission have discovered that history isn't what it used to be.


U.S. Asserts Soviet Advisers Are Fighting in Afghanistan
LEAD: Despite Moscow's assertion that all Soviet troops have been withdrawn from Afghanistan, the Bush Administration says Soviet military advisers are still there, firing Scud missiles on Afghan guerrillas.


TENTATIVE ACCORD ON INDIAN FISHING
LEAD: A band of Chippewa Indians has agreed to curtail its spearfishing and other treaty rights in exchange for a multimillion-dollar aid package.


For Top U.S. Science Students, a Soviet Magazine
LEAD: A SOVIET magazine that helped America's student team win top honors in this year's international Physics Olympiad will soon be distributed to top high school science students throughout the United States.


Silk, Silk, Silk Intl reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silk, Silk, Silk Intl (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,731,775
5,498,258
Net loss
2,043,291
1,127,585
Shares outst
8,365,000
6,099,167


Clues to Ethnic Attack Sought in Party
LEAD: Detectives are investigating the possibility that a group of youths who attacked three Jewish students near Brooklyn College, severely beating two of them while shouting anti-Semitic slurs, may have been at the same fraternity party shortly before the incident, officials said yesterday.


Summit Bid By Venezuela
LEAD: Venezuela's President, Carlos Andres Perez, is calling for a special summit meeting of rich and poor countries to tackle the crippling debt and other economic problems of South American nations.


Toxic Levels For an Aquifer Worry E.P.A.
LEAD: The Ciba-Geigy Corporation, a chemical manufacturer with a legacy of pollution cases at its sites here and in Rhode Island and upstate New York, has created an underground lake of contamination next to the Toms River that Federal officials say will require 30 years to remove.


Sonoco Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products Co (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
402,527,000
408,942,000
Net inc
b25,767,000
c23,393,000
Share earns
.59
.53
9mo sales
1,251,098,000
1,195,823,000
Net inc
b78,895,000
c71,903,000
Share earns
1.80
1.64
Shares outst
43,907,603
43,803,628


Compaq Stock Up
LEAD: Shares of the Compaq Computer Corporation soared to an all-time high in heavy trading, but company officials said they were not sure what had inspired the rise.
After a morning of light trading, Compaq's shares soared $6.25 yesterday, to finish at $104.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.
It was the third-most-active issue, with more than 1.2 million shares traded.


'Covert' Means Fiasco
LEAD: Once again, in misguided zeal to rearrange another nation's affairs, the U.S.
Government has demonstrated all that's wrong with ''covert operations,'' and why they have no useful place in the policies of a democratic nation.


Washington Talk; Instincts to Be Cautious With Panama Prevail
LEAD: Brent Scowcroft, the White House national security adviser, spoke Sunday about ''the fog of war'' as one element that had sorely complicated the Bush Administration's reaction to the attempted coup last week in Panama.


2d California Desert Quake
LEAD: The second minor earthquake in the Southern California desert in three days was felt in the remote San Jacinto mountain range Sunday, but no damage or injuries were reported.
The midmorning quake measured 3.0 on the Richter scale of ground motion and was centered 23 miles south of Palm Springs, said Robert Finn, a spokesman for the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.


Anderson Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anderson Group
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Revenue
6,729,000
12,627,000
Net inc
91,200
340,000
Share earns
.05
.20
6mo rev
13,284,000
26,476,000
Net inc
136,000
795,000
Share earns
.08
.44


Ecology &amp; Environment Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecology &amp; Environment Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
18,553,000
17,275,000
Net inc
910,000
764,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
3,935,044
3,935,641
Yr rev
66,298,000
60,244,000
Net inc
2,691,000
2,924,000
Share earns
.68
.74


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Danaher Corp., Washington, a maker of automotive parts and tires, sold its minority interest in Mohawk Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio, to an affiliate of Japan's Yokohama Rubber Co. for $45 million.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
66,931,000
57,301,000
Net inc
3,407,000
1,695,000
Share earns
.16
.08
Shares outst
20,852,000
20,937,000
6mo rev
138,022,000
116,693,000
Net inc
6,648,000
b8,954,000
Share earns
.32
.43
Shares outst
20,850,000
20,937,000


Tyson Trains in Albany As Part of His Sentence
LEAD: As part of his sentence for speeding in the Albany area twice last summer, Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, sparred for a half-hour and signed autographs yesterday morning at a boxing clinic at St.
Joseph's Youth Center in downtown Albany.
In the afternoon, he took part in drug-related talks at the nearby Arbor Hill Community Center.


USX Sells Stakes In South Africa
LEAD: The USX Corporation said it had sold all of its equity interests in South African companies, but it withheld the identity of the buyers and the sale price.
Shareholders had submitted a resolution earlier this year that USX sell its holdings in the racially segregated nation.
They withdrew after management said sale negotiations were under way.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Bus to Stores By American Express
LEAD: TO advertisers and retailers, the distance to the consumer often seems to represent a yawning gulf.
So, now and then, they make aggressive moves to bridge that gulf by bringing the shopper to stores that sell the advertised products.


Telerate Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telerate Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
127,819,000
112,325,000
Net inc
19,464,000
23,618,000
Share earns
.21
.25
Shares outst
94,883,000
94,821,000
9mo rev
377,183,000
326,366,000
Net inc
62,982,000
70,632,000
Share earns
.66
.75
Shares outst
94,867,000
94,807,000


Heat Signs Douglas
LEAD: Sherman Douglas, the Miami Heat's second-round draft choice, signed a two-year contract yesterday after having missed the team's summer camp and the first three days of fall practice.
The 6-foot guard from Syracuse, taken 28th over all in the June draft, will be paid an estimated $275,000 a season.(


Seething Giants Ready To Get Over Defeat
LEAD: If Coach Bill Parcells had chosen yesterday to mull over the myriad of reasons why his Giants crumbled and lost by 21-19 to the Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday, there would have been enough to ponder until he turned blue.


Thermwood Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermwood Corp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,918,466
2,214,790
Net inc
134,311
12,287
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
10,135,052
8,734,201
Net inc
501,766
371,321
Share earns
.10
.08
The company is listed on the Boston and Pacific stock exchanges.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore has moved its offices to 100 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan.


Giants Defeat Cubs for Pennant; Will Face A's in World Series


On Horse Racing; Gold Cup Upstaged By OTB
LEAD: rrMaybe the Belmont Special train that left Penn Station Saturday morning is still stuck in a tunnel somewhere.
Maybe 15,000 people all got the day wrong and thought that the Jockey Club Gold Cup was next Saturday.
Or maybe the meters on the turnstiles counted only every second customer.


No More Likud Excuses
LEAD: The Likud leadership never seems to run out of ways to avoid talks with Palestinians.
Last week's split decision by the Israeli Cabinet to reject an Egyptian initiative for getting such talks under way is the latest example of this ingenuity.


International Microcomputer Software reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microcomputer Software
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,276,174
5,311,276
Net loss
561,163
1,883,873
Shares outst
120,859,000
118,095,000


By Design; Work Boots, for Play
LEAD: They're the latest steps in the sturdy-footwear fashion movement.
With high-tops that end above the ankle, snug lace-up fronts and thick block heels, this season's new boots qualify as members of the comfort class.
The ones with rounded toes and thickish ripple rubber soles certainly do.


Barry Andrew Kearsley, Stage Manager, 42
LEAD: Barry Andrew Kearsley, stage manager of the Broadway play ''M.
Butterfly,'' died of a heart attack Saturday after collapsing backstage during a performance.
He was 42 years old.


Winning Is Craig's 'Happiest Feeling'
LEAD: Roger Craig rarely displays deep emotion, and even tends to mumble a little bit when his thoughts outrace his words in certain tense situations.


New Toyota Luxury Car
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation introduced a high-performance luxury car today that it calls its new flagship automobile.
The Celsior features a 4,000-cubic-centimeter, eight-cylinder engine with 260 horsepower.


Bond International Gold Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bond International Gold Inc (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
205,899,000
101,365,000
Net loss
69,863,000
20,428,000


Bush to Veto U.N. That Includes Abortion
LEAD: President Bush has informed Congressional leaders that he will veto a foreign aid bill that includes renewed support for the United Nations Population Fund, a group that has been criticized by anti-abortion groups.


Miller (Herman) Inc(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller (Herman) Inc(O)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
196,143,000
190,498,000
Net inc
8,390,000
b12,776,000
Share earns
.35
.52
b-After an accounting adjustment gain of $3.3 million, or 13 cents a share, representing adoption of SFAS No.


From Milan, a Soft and Shimmery Spring
LEAD: Italian fashion exploded over the weekend, as established manufacturers and newcomers alike tried to stage their spring shows before the start of Yom Kippur.
The spate of presentations around the city, in lofts and workrooms that could hold an audience of up to 1,000 as well as at the Milan Fair, made it perfectly clear that the slick, hard-edged Italian look had turned soft and gentle in the face of spring.


Argentina Pardons Its Demons
LEAD: Argentina's tentative democracy was dealt a cruel, if expected, blow Saturday by President Carlos Saul Menem, in the form of a blanket pardon for accused military officers and suspected leftist terrorists.
His action promises temporary gains, but it undermines Argentina's integrity.


Foundation Seeks Self-Sufficiency for Puerto Rico
LEAD: With help from foundations and United States corporations, a new style of philanthropy is taking root here and scattering seeds through the Caribbean.


Pope, on Delicate Ground, Visits Indonesia
LEAD: Pope John Paul II brought a message of Roman Catholic kinship and loyalty to Indonesia today as he began a diplomatically delicate visit to the world's most populous Muslim country.


U.S.-Soviet-Chinese Teams Will Jointly Attempt Everest
LEAD: Teams from China, the Soviet Union and the United States will attempt to scale Mount Everest together next year to draw attention to international cooperation and problems of the environment.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,513,000
307,000
Per share
1.09
.05
9mo net inc
16,770,000
5,480,000
Per share
2.81
.92


USAir Stock Rises Sharply, But a Profit Slump Is Seen
LEAD: Stock in the USAir Group, owner of the nation's seventh-largest airline, rose sharply yesterday after a published report that its largest shareholder, the money manager Michael H. Steinhardt, wanted the company to increase its share price and might consider a hostile bid.


Budapest Encore: Old Socialist Elected
LEAD: The newly named Hungarian Socialist Party, which as the Communist Party over the weekend abandoned hard-line Marxist dogma, today elected Rezso Nyers, a once and present Socialist, as its President.


Ax Plays Beethoven and Schoenberg
LEAD: Emanuel Ax played the best of Arnold Schoenberg's piano music and a rousing selection of Beethoven's most animated, Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y. It was an exhilarating recital and something of a surprise even to a listener who has always admired Mr.
Ax.
Here, more than I can recall from other occasions, he seemed to have something close to the ideal combination of qualities for the material at hand.


Amex and Philadelphia Markets End Talks
LEAD: Negotiations about a possible merger of operations by the Philadelphia Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange have broken off, and officials from the exchanges said yesterday that no agreement was likely to be reached.


Dow Gains 5.89, to 2,791.41, on Low Volume
LEAD: Stocks ended moderately higher yesterday, and the Dow Jones industrial average set its fifth record in a row after moving in a narrow range throughout the day.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Evans Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
19,071,000
19,652,000
Net loss
b2,006,000
c1,367,000
Shares outst
4,918,301
4,935,438
6mo sales
35,604,000
34,431,000
Net loss
b4,291,000
c3,695,000
Shares outst
4,918,576
4,935,067


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hi-Shear Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,757,000
17,168,000
Net loss
38,000
b500,000
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income  The company said operating results for this year's first quarter were negatively impacted by losses incurred by Hi-Shear's Defense Systems' operation in Reno, Nev.


Dead 'War Hero' Unmasked: A Life of Lies to Hide Failures
LEAD: Nancy Fife never doubted that her husband was scarred in mind and body by his Viet Cong captors and was a war hero. nearly 20 years ago, her sneakers seemed to drive her husband, Robert, berserk.
He told her that his captors wore sneakers when they came to his cage to beat him and urinate on him and that the enemy soldier he strangled to escape was wearing sneakers.


Indiana Man Is Guilty Of Planting 13 Bombs
LEAD: A Federal jury convicted a man today on 29 charges in connection with the planting of 13 bombs in nearby Salem, a plot prosecutors said was rooted in his lifelong rivalry with a state legislator.


New Mayor Should Continue Housing Program That Is Working
LEAD: To the Editor:


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,344,700
975,307
Per share
.41
.33
9mo net inc
3,772,935
2,116,257
Per share
1.13
.77
Per share earnings reflected a 3-for- 2 stock split effective May 1989.


Chrysler Revises Cash-Back Offer
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation revised the cash-back incentives for its 1990 models.
It raised the incentive on the Dodge Daytona from the $500 offered on 1988-89 models to $750 on 1990 models.
Incentives on the Daytona ES and the LeBaron convertible Premium GT and GTC were increased $250, to $1,000.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: International A3-19


St. Croix Has No History of Racial Unrest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Double Hull the Valdez
LEAD: To the Editor:


Valdez Cost To Exxon
LEAD: The chairman of the Exxon Corporation, Lawrence G. Rawl, said he did not expect many more expenses associated with the Exxon Valdez oil spill in March.


Thomson McKinnon Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomson McKinnon Asset Management (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,810,000
8,015,000
Net inc
3,810,000
3,457,000
Share earns
.38
.35
9mo rev
25,430,000
22,572,000
Net inc
10,900,000
9,683,000
Share earns
1.09
.97


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Roger Rowe has been named senior vice president and associate creative director of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


Unemployment Rate Steady Because of Service Sector
LEAD: Some big companies have been making big layoffs.
But the relatively steady unemployment rate, which has fluctuated between 5.1 percent and 5.3 percent since April, means that others must be hiring.


Met Gains a Major Photography Collection
LEAD: Thanks to some strategic matchmaking and the largest corporate gift it has ever received for acquisition purposes, the Metropolitan Museum of Art is on the way to building a major photography collection.


Market Place; Icahn's Attempt to Pressure USX
LEAD: When Carl C. Icahn recently lifted his stake in the USX Corporation to 14 percent, the investor ignited a flurry of speculation on Wall Street about just what he can make the giant steel and energy concern do.


Calton Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calton Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,040,000
36,957,000
Net loss
1,660,000
b2,814,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
33,730,000
36,016,000
9mo rev
78,247,000
101,341,000
Net loss
2,389,000
b10,924,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
33,753,000
35,062,000


Telco Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telco Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
17,179,000
17,339,000
Net inc
1,160,000
332,000
Share earns
.13
.04
Shares outst
9,063,000
8,144,000
Yr sales
71,175,000
58,620,000
Net inc
2,856,000
b1,384,000
Share earns
.33
-
Shares outst
8,765,000
8,176,000


Darnell Takes Over
LEAD: Gary Darnell took over the Florida football program yesterday and said he was confident about his ability to lead the Gators out of troubled times.


Fans Drink Up Early Because of Beer Policy
LEAD: John Destefano gazed into his cup of beer as if his tickets for tonight's game between the Jets and the Los Angeles Raiders had sunk to the bottom of it.


Kelly Will Be Out 3 Weeks With a Separated Shoulder
LEAD: Jim Kelly, the Buffalo Bills' quarterback, who was smashed to the Hoosier Dome's artificial turf by the Indianapolis Colts' defensive end Jon Hand on Sunday and suffered a separated left shoulder, is expected to be sidelined for at least three weeks.


Pistons' Johnson Hurt
LEAD: Vinnie Johnson, the Detroit Pistons' guard, tripped over John Salley, a teammate, in a practice on Friday at the University of Windsor (Ontario) and will be sidelined for 10 to 14 days with a broken rib.(AP)


Metro Datelines; Man, 31, Is Slain By Shotgun Blast
LEAD: A 31-year-old Queens man was shot and killed yesterday by an unidentified gunman as the victim's grandmother watched in horror, the police said.


Review/Dance; Penitence and Temptation In a Martha Graham Work
LEAD: Martha Graham's choreography was at its best on Saturday night at the City Center Theater (131 West 55th Street) when it was most crisp.
The Martha Graham Dance Company gave the season's first performance of ''El Penitente,'' a terse choreographic sketch from 1940 that depicts a performance by three strolling players in the American


Chess
LEAD: After the first three games of the semifinal world championship candidates matches in London, the former titleholder, Anatoly Karpov of the Soviet Union, led his countryman Artur Yusupov, 2-1, and Jan Timman of the Netherlands led Jonathan Speelman of Britain, 2-1.


A Tass Bulletin: Knobby Aliens Were Here
LEAD: Everyone seems to be coming to the Soviet Union these days: entrepreneurs in search of joint ventures, actors looking for stage sets, heavy metal musicians, arm wrestlers, even aliens.


Baldwin Securities Corp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldwin Securities Corp (AMEX)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,352,000
-
Net loss
1,976,000
7,729,000
Shares outst
2,355,717
2,763,740
The latest year revenue included securities gains of $414,000.
The year-ago revenue was a negative figure of $5,033,000 and included securities losses of $7,229,000.


CHILD CARE BILLS NEAR COMPLETION
LEAD: Federal legislation that vastly expands the Federal Government's role in providing child care assistance is nearing completion in Congress, and supporters predict they will overcome remaining obstacles, including the threat of a Presidential veto.


Iraqi Warning On Oil Exports
LEAD: Iraq has sharply increased its oil-export capacity, but a top Iraqi oil official said his country would increase its shipments only if OPEC agreements collapse, the Middle East Economic Survey reported today.
Ramzi Salman, head of the


Gene-Altering Process for Animals Is Patented
LEAD: DNX Inc., a tiny, privately held biotechnology company in Princeton, N.J., said today that it had obtained approval for a patent on a fundamental process for creating genetically engineered animals.


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
228,724,000
221,767,000
Net inc
36,519,000
34,487,00
Share earns
.84
.79
9mo sales
709,661,000
674,565,000
Net inc
123,550,000
113,026,000
Share earns
2.83
2.59


Wickes to Sell Car Parts Unit
LEAD: The Wickes Companies said it had agreed to sell A.P.S.
Inc., a distributor of automotive parts, for $200 million to a company organized by the management-buyout firm of Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc.


Southern Co reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Co (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,357,629,000
7,236,951,000
Net inc
890,143,000
755,902,000
Share earns
2.82
2.45


The Young Captive
LEAD: That winter two men of Asia came to India, each on a pilgrimage.
One was a captive and the other his captor.


Giuliani Adds Longtime G.O.P. Adviser to His Inner Cricle
LEAD: A month before the Nov. 7 election, Rudolph W. Giuliani has added an adviser to his inner circle, to help overcome the political missteps that have plagued his mayoral campaign and to compensate for a shortage of money for television advertising.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about efforts to repeal the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act referred incorrectly to the surtax that helps provide the benefits.
Generally, those of the elderly with incomes of more than $15,000, not $35,000 - calculated by their income tax liability - pay the surtax.


Play With a Full Deck
LEAD: CRIBBAGE and gin rummy, two of the most popular card games, are hard to simulate on a computer.
How do you imitate that elusive quality, card sense, in a box of transistors?
The Software Toolworks of Chatsworth, Calif., has done it in spades with Cribbage King-Gin King, a new program for I.B.M.-compatible computers.


Skolniks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skolniks Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
2,606,006
2,296,438
Net loss
248,741
b65,155
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
2,354,460
2,450,000
Yr rev
9,974,136
9,194,524
Net loss
142,023
b600,728
Share earns
-
.33
Shares outst
2,354,460
1,850,000


Studies Trace Syphilis From New World to Old
LEAD: Researchers who reviewed studies of skeletal remains have concluded that syphilis was carried from the New World to Europe after Christopher Columbus's voyages.


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oce-van der Grinten NV (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
242,700,000
201,500,000
Net inc
8,800,000
7,800,000
Share earns
3.00
2.66
9mo rev
690,100,000
615,200,000
Net inc
27,300,000
24,900,000
Share earns
9.31
8.50
Shares outst
2,931,283
2,924,894


Digital Communications Asociates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications Asociates Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
53,143,000
51,717,000
Net inc
7,103,000
7,069,000
Share earns
.48
.47
Shares outst
14,902,000
15,088,000


Leader of Panamanian Coup Is Buried  Mourning over the coffin of Maj. Moises Giroldi   Vega in Panama City was the mother of the major, who was in charge of security at General Noriega's headquarters.   Opposition leaders have charged that many rebels were executed after the failed coup, but the Government says they were killed in combat. (Reuters)


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Connecticut (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,621,000
1,479,000
Per share
.75
.68
9mo net inc
4,416,000
4,016,000
Per share
2.04
1.85


What an Actress!
LEAD: ''What a dump!'' . . . ''I'd love to kiss ya, but I just washed my hair'' . . . ''Fasten your seat belts; it's going to be a bumpy night.'' They are three of the most memorable bits of dialogue in American film - primarily because they were delivered by one of the most memorable of American film stars.


Tunnel Needs $2.4 Billion
LEAD: Eurotunnel, the company digging a rail tunnel between Britain and France, may need up to $:1.5 billion, or $2.4 billion, in new financing to finish the project, its co-chairman said today.


Developers Rushing Into Europe
LEAD: With tight regulation keeping office vacancy rates in Europe below 3 percent, North American developers are rushing to get a foothold in this profitable market before 1992, when trade barriers fall.


A New Pro Tour
LEAD: Ben Hogan said yesterday in Fort Worth that his company had decided to spend $15 million over the next three years for a proving-ground professional tour because he feels he owes an obligation to the game.


Talcon L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talcon L.P. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
933,000
b742,800
Shares outst
5,761,118
3,926,138
9mo net inc
3,186,000
b3,283,100
Shares outst
5,148,944
3,926,138
b-Net loss  The latest 9 months' net included a net gain of about $833,000 resulting from the sale of a partnership interest.


Recharting War on Smog; States Like California Are Taking the Lead Over Washington in Pollution-Control Law
LEAD: Civics textbooks say that Federal law is made in Washington and then applied around the country, but when it comes to clean air, a different pattern has emerged.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Account
LEAD: *
Curtice-Burns Foods Inc., to W. B. Doner, Baltimore, for the potato chip brands Hiland and Old Vienna, with an undisclosed budget.


Treats Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Treats Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,258,198
968,594
Net inc
b3,450
cd98,214
Yr sales
3,590,982
2,902,657
Net inc
b268,107
c56,355
Share earns
.05
.01
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $141,351.


Business Digest
LEAD:  Companies


Rev. John Lord, 87; Was Methodist Bishop
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
John Wesley Lord, a retired bishop of the United Methodist Church who was active in the civil rights movement and in the racial integration of his church, died Sunday, apparently of a heart attack, at Huggins Hospital in Wolfeboro, N.H.
He was 87 years old and lived in Wolfeboro and Lakeland,


VTN Corp reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VTN Corp (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,373,655
12,348,977
Net inc
713,333
198,565
Share earns
.05
.02


At Long Last, Glamour Comes to Ellen Barkin
LEAD: ''Suddenly, I've been perceived differently by the powers that be,'' said the film actress Ellen Barkin. ''I'm perceived as this glamorous, sexy, leading lady.
No, they see me as the sex goddess!
It's amazing to me.''


Dinkins Ties To Clubhouse Under Attack
LEAD: For a decade before his election as Manhattan Borough President in 1985, David N. Dinkins was City Clerk, keeper of city records.
It was a post he received on the recommendation of the Democratic county leader in Manhattan after years of loyal service as a district leader.


Penny Lernoux, 49, a Reporter
LEAD: Penny Lernoux, an author and investigative reporter who specialized in Central and South American affairs, died of lung cancer Sunday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 49 years old and lived in Bogota, Columbia.


Dispute on New President Shatters The Tranquility at Rockefeller U.
LEAD: For decades, Rockefeller University in New York City has been a citadel of basic research in biology and medicine: a place where professor-researchers outnumber students and the ''poetry of science'' (as one of the four Nobel laureates on the faculty puts it) holds sway.


Bridge
LEAD: Half a century ago only 21 players had earned the rank of life master, which then required, and still does, 300 master points.
And in 1940 there were only three additions to the rank.
They would have been astonished to know how that number would grow: there are now 40,729, and of these, 79 are Grand Life Masters, having earned 10,000 points and won at least one major national title.


Change in Medicare Law to Be Costly
LEAD: The moves by Congress to dismantle expanded health benefits for older Americans would shift most of their medical costs back to the patients, to taxpayer-supported programs and, to a lesser extent, to private employers, health care experts and insurance industry spokesmen say.


Price Soars For Black Pearls
LEAD: Heavy Japanese buying sent the price of black pearls soaring at weekend auctions in Tahiti, dealers said today.


Snacking Said to Cut Heart Risk
LEAD: SNACKING throughout the day instead of eating three full meals, can lower cholesterol and reduce the chance of heart disease, a study has found.


Review/Dance; A Look at Words and Music By a West German Troupe
LEAD: It was as if a time capsule had been unearthed and opened on Friday night when Else Klink's Eurythmeum Stuttgart performed at the Triplex Theater of the Borough of Manhattan Community College.
A company of 13 dancers and 6 musicians offered a solemn, reverent look at eurythmics, a system of translating musical and spoken rhythms into physical movement, derived from Francois Delsarte's theories of gesture, and developed and elaborated by Emile Jaques-Dalcroze and Rudolf


New Chain Store Splits Hamlet in Adirondacks
LEAD: A new gasoline station and convenience store in this picturesque Adirondack hamlet is to many longtime residents a welcome addition, offering gas at reasonable prices and another spot to meet the neighbors.
But to Baird Edmonds and two other residents, it is an architectural outrage, the equivalent of visual pollution.


A Road Map for Genes
LEAD: An international effort to map the genes of a wide variety of plants and animals, from slime molds to human beings, advanced significantly this week when scientists settled on a common method of identifying the genetic markers distributed on chromosomes.


Planters Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,974,000
3,146,000
Share earns
.42
.45
Shares outst
7,027,016
6,981,243
9mo net inc
8,495,000
7,893,000
Share earns
1.21
1.13
Shares outst
7,018,930
6,976,598


Kansas City Tries to Revive School, but the Cost Is Criticized
LEAD: There are skeptics aplenty, but an enthusiastic staff and other supporters are convinced that a forbidding old monolith of a high school in a grim inner-city section here will be transformed into one of the most promising arenas of academic and athletic achievement in the nation.


Hewlett-Packard's New Work Station
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company plans to introduce a computer work station Tuesday that features the Intel Corporation's i486 microprocessor and a circuit design called Extended Industry Standard Architecture, or E.I.S.A.
The design, adopted last year by a group of competitors of the International Business Machines Corporation, is intended to increase the performance of I.B.M.-compatible computers and to compete with I.B.M.


Rig Count Down by 18
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil and gas in the United States dropped by 18 last week, to 960, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
It was the first decline in six weeks, but the count remained above the 914 rigs working at this time last year.


Ira Hirschmann Is Dead at 88; Executive and Leading Nazi Foe
LEAD: Ira Hirschmann, a business executive, pioneer in radio broadcasts of classical music and political associate of Fiorello H. La Guardia, died of heart failure yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.


When Will Albany Act Against Hate?
LEAD: Another hate crime in New York City - this time the victims were three Jewish college students - rightly stirs shock and outrage.
It is also cause for frustration.


Review/Dance; Jazz Versions Of Tales From Japan
LEAD: As a child, Midori Kashiwagi trained in traditional Japanese dance but went on to become a jazz dancer, establishing what is said to be the first jazz dance studio in Japan.
In her New York debut, in a Saturday matinee at Gould Hall, Miss Kashiwagi presented two pieces that fused traditional and jazz dance.


Software for OS/2
LEAD: THE Microsoft Corporation is firing a barrage of newly updated products for International Business Machines PC's and compatible computers.
Among them is Microsoft Excel for OS/2 with Presentation Manager, which is being released today, the first major spreadsheet application for the operating system that is the designated successor to D


Scat Hovercraft Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scat Hovercraft Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,159,000
1,288,000
Net inc
378,000
b47,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
2,116,000
2,111,000
Net inc
278,000
b389,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Lower Bid Accepted By American Medical
LEAD: American Medical International Inc. said today that it had agreed to a revised acquisition offer from an investor group but left open the possibility that it would seek another bidder for the company.


Coptic Pope's Visit Cheers Faithful
LEAD: When they say ''Pope'' at the Roman Catholic school where Michael Muraghy is in the fifth grade, they of course mean Pope John Paul II.
But the other day, Michael, 10 years old, and hundreds of other Coptic Orthodox Christians had a chance to meet their own Pope - Shenouda III - at a Brooklyn Church.


Maryat Lee, Playwright, 66
LEAD: Maryat Lee, a playwright and producer for community theaters, died of heart disease on Sept. 18 at home in Lewisburg, W. Va.
She was 66 years old.


Magna International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
471,451,000
418,117,000
Net inc
7,364,000
2,941,000
Share earns
.27
.10
Yr sales
1,923,657,000
1,458,603,000
Net inc
33,611,000
19,542,000
Share earns
1.21
.70


Corrections
LEAD: A Company Briefs listing in Business Day on Thursday misstated the size of a Defense Department contract awarded to the Aerospace Corporation of El Segundo, Calif.
It was for $415.3 million.


Jackpot Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jackpot Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,143,000
9,428,000
Net inc
924,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.18
.25
Yr rev
37,475,000
27,947,000
Net inc
4,971,000
b4,487,000
Share earns
.96
.86
Shares outst
5,037,500
4,780,913


Sensing Silent Cues Emerges As Key Skill
LEAD: UNPOPULARITY, poor grades and a host of other problems that afflict schoolchildren may derive from an inability to read the nonverbal messages of teachers and peers, new findings show.


Greenspan's Soviet Visit
LEAD: The Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, began talks today with Soviet officials on how the United States might help the Soviet Union out of its economic difficulties.


Strangely, Chile Race Seems Normal
LEAD: On a recent Saturday, the presidential candidate Hernan Buchi, wearing red running shorts and jersey, jogged for two and a half miles along a sun-drenched beach-front avenue in the Pacific coast resort town of Vina del Mar.


Metro Datelines; Son and Father Plead In Drag-Race Killing
LEAD: A 23-year-old man accused of hitting and killing a teen-age girl while drag-racing appeared in court yesterday to answer, along with his father, charges of cutting up the car and hiding the pieces.


Sewage Dump Site Teems With Sea Life
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have found a seabed teeming with tiny plants and animals, as richly populated as a tropical rain forest, at the very spot in the ocean where New York and New Jersey have been dumping their sewage sludge for more than two years.


Dow Jones &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
404,081,000
383,755,000
Net inc
28,811,000
31,992,000
Share earns
.29
.33
Shares outst
100,779,000
96,368,000
9mo rev
1,248,585,000
1,190,111,000
Net inc
277,168,000
185,115,000
Share earns
2.75
1.92
Shares outst
100,731,000
96,327,000


EAST GERMANS LET LARGEST PROTEST PROCEED IN PEACE
LEAD: Tens of thousands of East Germans marched peacefully through Leipzig this evening in the largest of a wave of demonstrations for change that has swept East Germany in recent days.


Mugabe Urged to Reopen College
LEAD: The closing of the University of Zimbabwe by the Government last week has led to a chorus of outrage here, and President Robert Mugabe's Government has responded to the dismay with further measures to stifle dissent.


Joint Venture To Acquire ICI Drug Unit
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company and Johnson &amp; Johnson announced an agreement yesterday to buy the over-the-counter drug business of ICI America Inc., a unit of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. of Britain, in a deal they valued at $450 million.


Books of The Times; Past Traced to the Present In a Family's Intricate Story
LEAD:  The Other Side  By Mary Gordon  386 pages. Viking. $19.95.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AON Corp., Chicago, an insurance holding company, named Paul R. Davies chairman of its AON Reinsurance Agency subsidiary.
Gene Taylor was named vice chairman of the division, and Stephen L. Lunsford was made senior executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Unfinished Business Is Main Label for A's
LEAD: ''If you care about the label,'' Tony La Russa was saying, ''you can't be a great team unless you're world champions.''


Business and Health; Hospitals Suing On Medicaid Lag
LEAD: TIGHT-FISTED Medicaid policies are costing the nation's hospitals billions of dollars each year in lost or delayed payments, health-care experts and hospital industry spokesmen say.


Sheriff's Indictment Angers Oklahomans
LEAD: The Sheriff here and a police officer who is the Sheriff's son-in-law in-law are accused of plotting to kidnap a man they thought was a drug dealer, bring him across state lines and torture him to make him talk.


GTech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTech Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1989
1988
Revenue
39,654,000
30,302,000
Net inc
1,082,000
448,000
Share earns
.11
.05
Shares outst
9,657,808
9,624,672
6mo rev
80,261,000
63,215,000
Net inc
1,545,000
b1,512,000
Share earns
.16
.16
Shares outst
9,646,168
9,619,573


Tourist Trade Increases 19%
LEAD: Foreign visitors to the United States spent $20 billion in the first half of the year, 19 percent more than in the corresponding period of 1988, the Commerce Department said today.


Deals
LEAD:  Basketball


Lesotho King Tries to Set Up Talks by South Africa Rivals
LEAD: The King of Lesotho, a tiny African kingdom entirely surrounded by South Africa, said today that he was trying to bring together leaders from all sectors of South African society with the cooperation of the South African Government to discuss the nation's political future after apartheid is abolished.


Disney Stock Rise
LEAD: Shares of the Walt Disney Company soared $6.75, to close at $134.625 a share in New York Stock Exchange trading, more than double the price a year ago.
A Disney spokesman declined to comment, but analysts attributed the jump to heavy demand in Europe for newly issued shares of Euro Disneyland, the theme park Disney is developing outside Paris.


Divided Iranians Seem Unable To Settle on Firm Policy Course
LEAD: Four months after the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran seems unable to settle on a clear course in its domestic and foreign policies.


Science Watch; Smog on Pluto
LEAD: The latest observations of distant Pluto, the only known planet yet to be visited by spacecraft, reveal what appear to be smoggy hazes in the thin atmosphere over the polar ice caps.
The phenomenon reminds scientists of atmospheric patterns seen over the poles of Mars and in the Los Angeles basin.


Village Super Market reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Village Super Market
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
181,619,000
184,022,000
Net inc
1,281,000
2,090,000
Share earns
.39
.63
Yr sales
658,143,000
621,468,000
Net inc
5,050,000
6,140,000
Share earns
1.52
1.84


G.M. May Buy Stake In Jaguar
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it might buy a minority interest in Jaguar P.L.C. and was discussing manufacturing and marketing joint ventures with the British auto maker.


Fuji's Deal in Canada
LEAD: Fuji Heavy Industries said today that it would buy the Canadian sales company for its Subaru cars, Subaru Auto Canada Inc. of Richmond, British Columbia, for more than $25 million (Canadian).
After acquiring the sales concern, which is owned by a Canadian businessman, Fuji will change the name to Subaru Canada Inc.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Microsystems (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
13,069,000
12,736,000
Net inc
113,000
605,000
Share earns
.04
.19
Shares outst
3,117,000
3,194,000
6mo sales
27,156,000
24,864,000
Net inc
692,000
1,277,000
Share earns
.22
.40
Shares outst
3,117,000
3,187,000


Galileo's Itinerary: To Jupiter With an Assist From Venus
LEAD: The Galileo space probe is to be launched Thursday on a looping, circuitous waltz across the heavens during which it will change planetary partners three times and make fleeting passes by other bodies on its journey to Jupiter.


Scotty's Inc reports earnings for Year to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scotty's Inc (NYSE)
Year to July 1
1989
1988
Sales
561,126,000
550,827,000
Net inc
b3,423,000
c17,471,000
Share earns
.23
1.19
b-Included pre-tax charges of $10.5 million related to restructuring and impending merger with an affiliate of the GIB Group.


Soviet Legislature Approves Law Providing Limited Right to Strike
LEAD: The Soviet legislature approved a law tonight that grants workers the legal right to strike, but severely restricts the conditions under which they may do so.


Groups Protest Use of Plutonium on Galileo
LEAD: THE nearly 50 pounds of plutonium that will produce electricity on the Galileo probe make this space shuttle launching the most disputed ever.


Peoples Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,969,000
2,722,000
Per share
.43
.40
9mo net inc
9,176,000
7,433,000
Per share
1.33
1.11


Girl Who Received New Liver as Infant Has a Splenectomy
LEAD: Jamie Fiske, who as an infant received a liver transplant after her father had appealed for a donor, underwent surgery today to remove her spleen.
She is 7 years old.


Dow Jones Earnings Off 10% As Advertising Falls Again
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company reported yesterday that its net income dropped 10 percent in the third quarter, a result of further declines in newspaper advertising and of start-up costs for foreign services at Telerate Inc., an electronic information service that it controls.


Review/Television; How Koop Surprised Friends and Foes
LEAD: ''The Controversial Dr.
Koop'' recounts the high spots of Dr.
C.
Everett Koop's surprising eight years as Surgeon General.
He surprised both the liberals who opposed the confirmation of a man whom they dismissed as an anti-abortion zealot and the conservatives who expected him to follow the line set by the Reagan Administration.


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,399,000
4,832,000
Per share
.61
.54
Shares outst
8,924,000
8,923,000
9mo net inc
15,861,000
13,171,000
Per share
1.78
1.48
Shares outst
8,924,000
8,918,000


U.S. Securities Prices Climb in Light Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher in very light holiday trading yesterday, furthering an advance that began on Friday after weaker-than-expected September employment data were released.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Wildman Consolidates At Rosenfeld, Sirowitz
LEAD: The rosy glow at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss these days comes from the agency's newest account, Frederick Wildman &amp; Sons, an importer of wines and spirits.


Grain and Soybean Prices Decline on Harvest Report
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures prices closed lower yesterday as traders reacted to news of near-perfect harvesting conditions over the weekend.


Wordstar International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wordstar International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,317,000
12,084,000
Net loss
b793,000
1,101,000
Yr rev
43,157,000
42,500,000
Net loss
b3,034,000
5,101,000
b-Included $1,059,000 writeoff for an investment in a MacIntosh product acquired from Challenger software.


Bank of New Hampshire Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New Hampshire Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,902,000
2,242,000
Per share
.56
.66
Shares outst
3,372,000
3,383,000
9mo net inc
6,485,000
5,836,000
Per share
1.92
1.73
Shares outst
3,371,000
3,366,000


Clark Drives Giants Past Cubs and to Pennant
LEAD: In the moments that followed the celebration, when it was finally certain that there would be a World Series between teams no farther apart than the bridge that runs between them, there was still a picture of Will Clark.


Ithaca College Pupil Charged With Killing Cornell Student
LEAD: A 19-year-old Ithaca College student was held on $20,000 bail today in the death of a Cornell University junior, the authorities said.


Texas Pacific Price
LEAD: Shares of Texas Pacific Land Trust, which rose sharply on Friday after an article in Business Week magazine said the company's stock might be undervalued, continued rising yesterday.
The stock jumped $8.75 a share, or 21.7 percent, to $49.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
It rose $3.50 a share on Friday, the day that Business Week said the holder of oil and gas properties may be worth $92 a share.


California Cancer Researchers Win Nobel Prize in Medicine


Threat to Plankton
LEAD: SOLAR radiation penetrating the ozone hole over Antarctica may be damaging the base of the food chain that sustains virtually all wildlife in the region.


Hazards in Arms Cuts, NATO Chief Warns
LEAD: The Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization warned Western allies today that it was ''wrong and dangerous'' for them to take independent steps toward disarmament in response to the process of change in the Soviet bloc.


Oranjemund Journal; Swapo and De Beers: Are They Engaged to Wed?
LEAD: In 1908 a railway laborer cleaning the tracks of sand found a small diamond glittering in the desert sunshine.
The laborer, Zacharias Lewala, obediently turned it over to his supervisor, August Stauch, who had told his crew to watch for ''shiny stones.''


Midway to Buy Dornier Planes
LEAD: Midway Airlines Inc., a midsize carrier that is expanding rapidly, announced that it had agreed to purchase 33 twin-engine turboprop airplanes for $244 million from the West German manufacturer Dornier Deutsche Aerospace G.m.b.H.


United Vermont Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Vermont Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,074,000
934,000
Share earns
.55
.60
Shares outst
1,936,000
1,558,000
9mo net inc
2,950,000
2,502,000
Share earns
1.53
1.63
Shares outst
1,930,000
1,542,000


Daugherty Injured
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers said last night that Brad Daugherty, their center, would the miss the first two or three weeks of the regular season with a slow-healing foot problem.
His recuperation from surgery six weeks ago to correct a nerve swelling between the toes has been slower than expected.(AP)


Spearhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spearhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,457,000
7,054,000
Net inc
578,000
316,000
Share earns
.12
.07


An Old Land Deal Nettles the West
LEAD: Nearly a century after the West was won and tamed, the Western states have come to regret a deal in which they accepted millions of acres of land from Washington in tiny plots like islands in an ocean of Federal territory.


Heart-Disease Prevention Begins in Childhood; Where's the Evidence?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kleinert's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kleinert's Inc
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
17,217,000
17,504,000
Net inc
b674,000
195,000
Share earns
.46
.13
9mo sales
32,365,000
29,870,000
Net inc
b574,000
c78,000
Share earns
.39
-
b-After extraordinary credits of $224,000, or 15 cents a share, for the quarter and $191,000, or 13 cent a share, for the 9 months, both from tax loss carryforwards.


HONG KONG FEELS RANCOR OF CHINA
LEAD: Angry over Hong Kong's decision not to send back a top Chinese swimmer who sought political asylum here, China has retaliated by refusing to accept the routine return of 70 Chinese who immigrated illegally to Hong Kong.


Review/Theater; 'Frankie,' the Frankenstein Tale Set to Music
LEAD: Before settling into marital bliss, Dr.
Victor Stanford has decided to devote himself to an ambitious scientific experiment.
Embracing his fiancee, he sings to her of his dream of becoming famous: ''I'll be cited in schools with Hippocrates and Darwin.'' If by Darwin he means ''survival of the fittest,'' the doctor is out of luck - as is the show in which he appears, ''Frankie,'' George Abbott's modern musical version of ''Frankenstein.


Commissioner Voting May Face a Standstill
LEAD: There is strong sentiment among the 28 National Football League owners convening in Dallas today that too much polarization remains among them for one of four candidates to gain the 19 votes needed to become the league's next commissioner.


Electro Rent Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,677,000
29,383,000
Net inc
1,703,000
2,173,000
Share earns
.41
.43
Shares outst
4,192,000
5,102,000


Little Chance Seen for Bills That Would Put Rein on Fed
LEAD: This month, Congress plans to take its first close look in years at how the Federal Reserve makes economic policy.
Two competing measures introduced by House Democrats, one supported and the other strongly opposed by the Fed, would in totally different ways assert political influence over the powerful, secretive institution.


Slot Machines for Soviets
LEAD: A small Swedish company has signed a deal to sell 25,000 slot machines to the Soviet Union, the national news agency reported last week.
The company, Bonik A.B., almost went bankrupt after Swedish authorities banned gambling slot machines 10 years ago.
The news agency said Bonik was buying existing machines from across Sweden and adapting the coin slots for rubles before transporting them by truck to various towns in the Soviet Union.


Christian Protest Alters Cancer Society Plan
LEAD: The American Cancer Society canceled plans to hold a lavish medieval festival on Friday, which will bethe 13th, after loud protests from fundamentalist Christians opposing the day's evil implications.


Notre Dame Slips a Bit And Loses Some Esteem
LEAD: While several undefeated, highly rated college teams - Miami, Colorado, Nebraska and Houston - were adding to their prestige by thrashing their opponents by more than 45 points Saturday, the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame lost some esteem by having to struggle to defeat unranked Stanford, 27-17.


Oklahoma Gas Find Splits Drillers
LEAD: Wildcatters and pipeline companies are struggling over how to exploit a 1987 Arco discovery of a major natural-gas field far below the rugged terrain of southeastern Oklahoma.


Sports of The Times; Why the Cubs Didn't Win This Time
LEAD: It's enough to make an 18-game winner tell the manager, ''I feel great'' when he knows his control has deserted him.
And it did.
After having walked Candy Maldonado and Brett Butler with two out in the eighth inning, that's what Mike Bielecki told Don Zimmer, but then he walked Robby Thompson on four pitches before Will Clark's two-run single off Mitch Williams decided the 3-2 victory over the Cubs that earned the Giants the National


Ryder Expects Loss in Quarter
LEAD: Ryder System Inc. will record a $57 million after-tax charge in the third quarter, resulting in a loss for the quarter, the transportation and aircraft services company said today.


Results Plus
LEAD:  TENNIS  U.S.
Takes Federation Cup: Chris Evert, 34 years old, and Martina Navratilova, 32, handled two 17-year-olds yesterday to lead the United States past Spain in the final of the Federation Cup in Tokyo. ''You will win this tournament in a few years, but this time it was won by over-30's,'' Evert told the Spanish teen-agers, Conchita Martinez and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, at the award ceremony.


Islanders Pour It On
LEAD: The Islanders scored four times within five minutes in the third period today and rallied to beat the Vancouver Canucks, 5-2.


Supermarket Workers Strike
LEAD: Unionized truck drivers and other workers at the Finast Supermarkets warehouse walked off the job today in a contract dispute, threatening to halt shipments to 67 supermarkets in Connecticut, New York and Massachusetts.
The strike by the 525 members of the Teamsters Local 559 is the first at the warehouse in Windsor Locks.


Iran Expects Mitsui Money
LEAD: Mitsui &amp; Company of Japan will pay Iran about $1 billion in compensation for canceling a joint petrochemical complex, the Iranian press agency I.R.N.A. said today.


Careers; Swiss M.B.A. Program Is Getting Ready for '92
LEAD: GONE are the abbreviations I.M.I., which stood for International Management Institute, and Imede, as the International Management Development Institute was known.
The Swiss schools, which were among Europe's best-known graduate business programs, have merged to form I.M.D., the International Institute for Management


2 Doctors Share Nobel Prize for Work With Cancer Genes
LEAD: THE Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded yesterday to Dr.
J.
Michael Bishop and Dr.
Harold E. Varmus, cancer researchers at the University of California Medical School in San Francisco.
The two scientists discovered a collection of normal genes that can cause cancer when they go awry.


La Jolla Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Jolla Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,460,000
b1,177,000
Per share
.21
.18
9mo net inc
3,353,000
b1,902,000
Per share
.49
.29
b-Included a tax loss carryforward of $317,000 from the merger with the Bank of Del Mar.


Demonstrators Gather for Special Florida Legislative Session on Abortion


MGM/UA Talks Continue
LEAD: Representatives of the MGM/UA Communications Company and Qintex Group of Australia continued discussions today to get Qintex's stalled $1.5 billion takeover bid for MGM/UA back on track.


Review/Television; 'Roseanne' and 'Chicken Soup'
LEAD: If Rudolph W. Giuliani fails to become the Mayor of New York City, he might be able to scold Jackie Mason.
But if Mr.
Mason's ABC series ''Chicken Soup'' goes down the drain, as seems increasingly likely, the comic can hardly point an accusing finger at the politician.
Poorly conceived and charmlessly executed, ''Chicken


Color Systems Techology reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Color Systems Techology (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,615,000
10,112,000
Net loss
b7,131,000
c19,275,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $4,094,000 representing purchase of film library by General Electric pension trust after loan default.


Heart-Disease Prevention Begins in Childhood
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Some, a Welcome Addition; to Others, an Architectural Outrage


Valley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,232,000
25,434,000
Net inc
42,000
605,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo sales
56,505,000
73,502,000
Net loss
7,253,000
b513,000
Share earns
-
.06


Dravecky Hurt Again
LEAD: Dave Dravecky, who battled back from cancer only to break his arm while pitching, injured the arm in the post-game celebration on the field today after San Francisco won the National League pennant.


Genetic Tests 'Inconclusive' In Jogger Rape
LEAD: Laboratory tests on genetic evidence that prosecutors hoped would link six young defendants to the rape and attempted murder of a Central Park jogger appear inconclusive, law-enforcement officials disclosed yesterday.


Giuliani Offers Strategy to Help City's Homeless
LEAD: In the first of what his campaign promised would be a flurry of policy statements over the next week, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday released an 11-page plan for ending homelessness.


The Dollar Rises Sharply After Greenspan's Remarks
LEAD: Spurred in part by comments from Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, the dollar rose sharply yesterday, passing the important 1.90-mark level again and breaching 144 yen.
The British pound also fell sharply against the dollar and other currencies.


Flames' 4-Goal 2d Period Disorganizes Devils
LEAD: The first regular-season confrontation between National Hockey League teams with Soviet players went the way of the Calgary Flames, the defending Stanley Cup champions.


Sale of Nuggets Falls Through
LEAD: The much heralded sale of the Denver Nuggets to two black businessmen has fallen through.


Fire Delays IRT an Hour at Grand Central
LEAD: A fire on the subway tracks in the Grand Central station at the height of the evening rush yesterday disrupted service on the No. 7 IRT line for nearly an hour and left several trains stranded in the tunnel from Queens, the Transit Authority said.


Dell City Journal; After Fire, A Town's Strength Is Tested
LEAD: The people of Dell City want to make it clear that they did not fall apart when their only grocery store burned to the ground last month.


About New York; Puckish Fans Face Off at Bar In Bilious Rivalry
LEAD: Time for a sports column.
Maybe one beginning: ''Hey, Mr.
Steinbrenner, great news about your slacker, Rickey Henderson, winning the M.V.P. award for Oakland in the American League Championship Series. (Boss!)''


New York Judge Backs Limit on Intern Hours
LEAD: A state judge today rejected a challenge to New York State's new rules increasing hospital supervision of medical interns and cutting their long work hours.


We Can't Keep Turning Farms Into Cities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alan F. Conwill, 67, A Lawyer and Official
LEAD: Alan F. Conwill, a lawyer and former director of the division of corporate regulation of the Securities and Exchange Commission, died of heart failure in his sleep Monday during a trip to San Antonio, Tex.
He was 67 years old and lived in Wyckoff, N.J.


Science Fraud Charges Baseless and Irrelevant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Copper Prices Suddenly Fall After Advancing to Highs
LEAD: Copper futures prices staged a striking turnaround yesterday, rising to new contract highs early in the session before plunging on reports that a three-month-old strike at a Canadian copper mine was nearly settled.


Books of The Times; Inside Jokes From the Knights Templar to Snoopy
LEAD:  Foucault's Pendulum  By Umberto Eco  Translated by William Weaver.
Illustrated. 641 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $22.95.


U.S. SAYS LEADERS OF PANAMA REVOLT WERE IN DISARRAY
LEAD: To head off expected criticism from Panamanian rebels who have just arrived in Miami, the Pentagon sought today to portray the leaders of the failed coup as hopelessly divided over what to do with Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega when he was in their custody.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: A standard criticism of the public school system is that, as a monopoly, it treats its customers - parents and their children - as captives.
The remedy?
Competition, a growing number of educators and politicians say.
Letting parents choose their children's schools.
This was one of President Bush's key proposals at the recent education summit.


Four Aliens Found Dead in Texas In Fumigated Trailer on a Train
LEAD: Four men believed to be illegal aliens were found dead here this morning in a truck trailer in which a cargo of flour had been fumigated with a toxic pesticide.


A Welcome Shift on Child Care
LEAD: ''A witches' brew'' is what Representative Thomas Downey calls the upcoming Senate-House conference on Federal support for child care.
He's not far off the mark.
There are conflicts not only between the House and Senate but within the House itself, which endorsed a legislative package last week that is roughly parallel to the Senate's Act for Better Child Care Services.


Ex-Giant Fan Hopes to Beat Them
LEAD: Long before there were any Oakland Athletics or a Bay Area Rapid Transit, Dave Stewart was a San Francisco Giants fan.
And that was plenty good for a young man from the hard-times section of Oakland.


Chile's Top Communist Back From Soviet Exile
LEAD: The former Communist Party leader of Chile, Luis Corvalan, returned today after 13 years of exile in the Soviet Union and quickly declared support for the opposition's presidential candidate.


Major Quakes in California
LEAD: Major earthquakes, in order of magnitude as measured on the Richter scale, that have struck California this century.
The measurement for the 1906 San Francisco quake is an estimate, because the quake occurred before the Richter scale was developed.
1906
San Francisco
8.3
1952
Tehachapi-Bakersfield
7.8
1927
Offshore San Luis Obispo
7.7
1923
North Coast
7.2
1980
Eureka
7.0
1989
San Francisco
6.9
1940
Imperial Valley
6.7
1911
Coyote
6.6
1980
Mammoth Lakes (four)
6.0-6.6
1983
Coalinga
6.5
1979
Imperial Valley
6.4
1968
Anza


Panamanian Captain Buried Amid Reports of Executions
LEAD: An army captain who the Government said had been jailed for complicity in the failed coup against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega last week was buried today as unconfirmed reports continued to circulate of reprisal executions and torture.


Mary A. Rice, 78, Dies; Fashion Show Producer
LEAD: Mary Alice Rice, a retired producer of fashion shows and former showgirl, died Monday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N,J., after a long illness.
She was 78 years old and lived in Summit.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Bassett-Walker, a maker of fleece wear, to the Martin Agency, Richmond, with a budget of $3.5 million to $5 million.


A Haven for Rambo, Lady and Friends
LEAD: LONG before Rambo was a muscle-bound hero, he was an apple.


Soybean Meal to Soviets
LEAD: Private exporting companies have sold an additional 150,000 metric tons of United States soybean meal to the Soviet Union for delivery in 1989-90 under a long-term supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said today.
The latest sales increased the purchases of United States soybean meal by Moscow to 250,000 tons for 1989-90.


Baker Is Seeking Talks on Mideast in Washington
LEAD: In an effort to revive the faltering Middle East peace process, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d is seeking to organize a meeting in Washington between the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Israel to pave the way for negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians.


Communist Chief Is Named Deng's Heir Apparent
LEAD: The Communist Party declared today that General Secretary Jiang Zemin would serve as the ''core'' of the third generation of Chinese leaders and thereby succeed Deng Xiaoping as China's paramount leader.


Let's Have No More Language Bigotry; Views of Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sallie Mae Prices $500 Million Notes
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, priced $500 million of short-term floating-rate notes in its regular monthly issue.


K Mart Plans Expansion
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation outlined a $1.3 billion expansion plan today intended to double sales and profits at the second-largest United States retailer and burnish its image.


For Fendi, Lagerfeld Offers A Perky Twist for Spring
LEAD: The mannequins moved gracefully along the winding runways Fendi set up in a tent Monday night at the Palazzo Barozzi for about 1,000 people.
They moved in a continuous line, crisscrossing the audience so everyone could have a first-rate view.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in Business Day on Monday misstated the circumstances of Michele Fortune's departure from the Ann Taylor stores, where she had been president.
The company said last week that Ms.
Fortune had left, not that she had resigned.
Ms.
Fortune was not available for comment last week but said yesterday: ''I did not resign.


Tax-Law Shift May Affect How the Baby Sitter Is Paid
LEAD: A little-noticed change in Federal tax law may curb the widespread but illegal practice of paying child-care providers off the books.
At the same time, child-care experts say, it may drive up the price of care by adding in the cost of taxes and Social Security.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Albert Fisher Group P.L.C., London, a diversified food supplier, named Keith Brackpool chief executive of its North American operations.


JUDGE REJECTS BAN ON NASA LAUNCHING
LEAD: A Federal district judge this evening denied a motion by environmentalists to delay the launching of the space shuttle Atlantis on Thursday because of concerns over a nuclear power supply.


Copter Crash Kills 3 Aides Of Trump
LEAD: Five people, including three high-level executives of Donald J. Trump's three casinos in Atlantic City, were killed yesterday when their helicopter crashed in pine woodlands on the Garden State Parkway near Forked River, N.J.


Phoenix Cardinals Sign Ex-Giant McConkey
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals placed the defensive tackle Shawn Knight on the injured-reserve list yesterday and signed the free-agent wide receiver, Phil McConkey, to replace the ailing Roy Green.


Middlebury College's President to Bow Out
LEAD: Saying he feels like ''a free man,'' Olin C. Robison has announced he will resign as president of Middlebury College, effective next summer, ending a 15-year tenure as leader of the liberal arts school.


Financing Race For Governor
LEAD: In 1974 New Jersey became the first state to enact a law providing public financing for gubernatorial candidates.
The limit on spending has been raised several times, and in 1980 the law was extended to cover primary elections for governor as well as the general election.


Review/Theater; Version of the Creation In a Gospel Musical
LEAD: In the sermons of James Weldon Johnson, whose writings form the heart of the 1969 gospel musical ''God's Trombones,'' famous Bible stories are told in fervent oratorical cadences and embellished with storybook imagery that turns them into stirring folk tales.
An early 20th-century poet, civil-rights leader, diplomat and preacher,


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  ECONOMY  Supporters of a lower capital gains tax are bidding for votes in the Senate, offering ever more generous packages of tax breaks.
The latest offering would cut capital gains taxes for individual taxpayers and corporations.
It would also provide tax breaks for small high-risk businesses and would restore the deductibility of individual retirement account contributions.


McDonnell Douglas Bypasses New Engine
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it would introduce versions of its short- to medium-range commercial airliners next year that will be powered by traditional jet engines rather than a new technology the company has been considering.


With Phones Everywhere, Everyone Is Talking More
LEAD: Americans tell pollsters that they do not have enough time to cook, clean, see their children or just relax.
But they are spending an ever-growing part of their day on the telephone.


Taxing Social Security Benefits Is a Con Game
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Soviet Republic to End Rail Embargo of Armenia  Nationalists in Azerbaijan agreed to end a rail embargo that deprived neighboring Armenia of supplies, ending a threat that Moscow would take control of the railroad.
Page A6.
New York Tax Revenue Off  Revenue from some of New York City's most important taxes are lagging behind expectations, raising concern about the need to cut back services or raise taxes.


Governor Nominates 6 Candidates For the SUNY Board of Trustees
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo nominated six people today to the State University board of trustees, including the chairwoman of the state chapter of the N.A.A.C.P., Hazel N. Dukes.


A Serious Rivalry Now
LEAD: In nine exhibition games last spring, Oakland beat San Francisco eight times.
But the World Series is another ball game.
Page D29.


Greenspan View of Russians
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that Soviet economists appear to be unconcerned with ideology as they deal with their country's economic problems.
He said that Soviet economists are ''willing to reach beyond the usual confines of what economic policy makers are willing to do.


Dorothy McConnell, 90, Editor and Author
LEAD: Dorothy McConnell, an editor, author and former chief executive of the Women's Division of the Methodist Church, died Friday at her home in Lucasville, Ohio.
She had moved to Ohio from Manhattan last year and recently celebrated her 90th birthday.


WEFA Fills Operating Post
LEAD: William A. Mundell, 29 years old, yesterday was named chief operating officer of WEFA Inc., an economic research and management consulting group formed in 1988 through the merger of Wharton Econometrics and Chase Econometrics.


Charleston Unemployment Rises After Storm, but Mayor Is Hopeful
LEAD: Hurricane Hugo put a lot of people out of work temporarily but should not cause long-term damage to Charleston's economy, Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. says.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 20 about the Soviet reaction to Poland's new Government misstated a remark by Fyodor M. Burlatsky, a Soviet newspaper commentator and member of the Supreme Soviet.
As Mr.
Burlatsky has since pointed out, he said the clash of forces from the right and the left could lead to the danger of a military government in the Soviet Union similar to the one installed in Poland in 1981, not to a military government in Poland now.


Holy Cross Has Reasons to Respect Army Team
LEAD: For a college with a lesser football reputation, playing a game at West Point can be an intimidating, awesome event.
That is a concern of Mark Duffner, the Holy Cross coach whose unbeaten team on Saturday will take on the Army.


Telerate Panel Rejects Offer
LEAD: Telerate Inc., a provider of computerized financial information, said yesterday that a special panel of its directors had rejected as inadequate Dow Jones &amp; Company's $576 million offer for the 33 percent of Telerate's shares that it does not already own.


Frenchman Says Nobel Panel Overlooked His Contribution
LEAD: In an international dispute over this year's Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, leading French scientists are contending that a French researcher was overlooked, while Americans say he played only a subordinate role in the research.


Taxing Social Security Benefits Is a Con Game; Elderly Singled Out
LEAD: To the Editor:


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: FETA, the tart, salty white cheese associated with Greek cuisine, can add a lively, sharp edge to all kinds of dishes.


An Apolitical City Sadly Notes a Scandal
LEAD: Residents here are regarding the current mayoral contest in New York with a gloomy pride.
Pride because we have had a black mayor for 16 1/2 years; gloom because that Mayor, Tom Bradley, is now in a bit of a pinch.
And it is hard to find anybody - left, right or center, black or white, politician or civilian - who is happy about that.


3-Month Closing For Ford Plant
LEAD: Production at the Ford Motor Company's Wayne assembly plant will stop for about three months to retool the factory for the next generation of Escort subcompact cars, the company said today.
The United Automobile Workers union said it expects fewer than 100 layoffs because of the change-over.


U.S. Acting On Guinness Extradition
LEAD: Justice Department officials said yesterday that extradition proceedings had begun against a Washington lawyer who has been linked in Britain to a secret $100 million investment three years ago in an arbitrage company run by Ivan F. Boesky.


Water-Main Break Spews Asbestos Into 8th Ave.
LEAD: A water main burst at the intersection of Eighth Avenue and West 43d Street yesterday, sending asbestos-laden mud gurgling up the avenue and cascading down onto the IND subway tracks below, officials said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  American Upset in Australia: Johan Anderson of Australia upset seventh-seeded Richard Matuszewski of the United States, 6-2, 6-2, in a first-round match at the Australian Indoor championships yesterday in Sydney.
In other matches at the Sydney Entertainment Centre, Christian Saceanu of West Germany defeated Simon Youl of Australia, 6-2, 6-4; Niclas Kroon of Sweden beat fourth-seeded John Fitzgerald, 6-3, 2-6, 6-4, and No.


Age Groups Differ on Rating Colleges
LEAD: Adults are not as impressed with how well colleges and universities are performing as younger Americans are, according to a recent Gallup Poll.
The poll also found that most minority students feel they do not have equal access to college because of their race.


Group W to Represent Cable Sports Networks
LEAD: Seeking to capitalize on the fragmentation of media outlets, Group W has started a venture to represent six regional cable sports networks to national advertisers.
The company has retained Earle Palmer Brown/New York to promote the effort with a trade advertising campaign.


South Korea Rebuffs U.S.
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, received an early rebuff today when South Korea's Agriculture Minister rejected her demand that Seoul liberalize beef imports.


High Court to Consider Medical Device Patent
LEAD: The Supreme Court, which rarely examines Federal patent law, agreed today to decide a patent issue of considerable importance to the growing medical technology industry.


They Aren't Fleeing Hungary
LEAD: Why are thousands of East Germans taking to the streets and thousands more running from home?
Why are Hungarians doing neither?
The explanation has less to do with economics than with everything else.


California Alliance Proposes Vote On Broad Environmental Measure
LEAD: In a move that has as much to do with California politics as the environment, an alliance of politicians and environmentalists today offered a ballot measure that they called the broadest effort ever mounted to protect air, food and water against chemical contamination.


Taiwan Man In Stock Case
LEAD: A businessman from Taiwan has been named in a 439-count indictment for his role in the second-largest insider trading case in United States history, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The indictment against Fred


Let's Have No More Language Bigotry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paula M. Gilpatric, 55 A Real-Estate Broker
LEAD: Paula Melhado Gilpatric, a real-estate broker, died of cancer yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 55 years old.


European Jobless Data
LEAD: The unemployment rate in the 12-nation European Community stood at 9.2 percent in August, unchanged from July, the European Community's statistical agency, Eurostat, said today.
In the eight-month period between January and August, the rate fell to 9.2 percent from 10.1 percent.
Eurostat did not give a figure for the total number of unemployed in August because the Netherlands had not yet sent its data.


El Diario of Los Angeles
LEAD: Lack of cash has shut down one of the city's three Spanish-language dailies, the newspaper's lawyer said today. ''The paper was undercapitalized, and they ran out of money,'' Jose Mariano Castillo said of El Diario de Los Angeles, which ended publication after Saturday's issue.
Mr.
Castillo said El Diario's owners, Inmobiliaria America Latina Inc., hoped to revive the newspaper, which was begun in May 1987 and had been losing about $80,000 a month.


Blown Fuse Delayed Norfolk Firefighters. A City Official Says
LEAD: A blown fuse in an alarm system delayed the response of firefighters to a nursing home fire that killed 11 people, a city official said Monday.


Lawrence Goossen, 46, Producer and Manager
LEAD: Lawrence Goossen, a co-producer of plays and a company manager, died of AIDS on Monday at his home in Greenwich Village.
He was 46 years old.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Ronstadt's Dreams


Beit Sahur Journal; In a Tax War, Even the Olivewood Dove Is Seized
LEAD: To press the Palestinian uprising, the people of this town have refused for months to pay their taxes.
In response, Israel has begun to confiscate their goods.
The raids, Aysa Hanna Khier says, have produced some incongruities.


2 Generations of Fans Enjoy Rolling Stones' Live Legacy
LEAD: Officer Donald Thomas of the New York City Transit Police, a man usually stationed far below ground in the subways of Manhattan, pulled a plum assignment yesterday.
Above him, the sun was shining.
Behind him, Mick Jagger was warbling ''Angie.''


Dow Slips 6.08 Points, Ending 6-Day Surge
LEAD: Stocks fell moderately yesterday as some futures-related trading ended a six-day surge that had carried the Dow Jones industrial average to a gain of nearly 100 points.


Aide at Pentagon Backtracks On Changing Military Paper
LEAD: A Pentagon spokesman said Monday that the armed services newspaper Stars and Stripes, accused of censorship in recent years, would be run in the future by civilians instead of military officers.
The remark apparently took a Pentagon-appointed ombudsman by surprise, and today the spokesman said such a decision would not be made until the ombudsman, who is studying the newspaper, submits his report.


Treasury Securities Are Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers used comments by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, as an excuse to take some profits.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-13  Panama's coup leaders were divided over what to do with General Noriega when he was a prisoner, the Pentagon said in a move to head off criticism from rebels in Miami.
Page A1  Panama captain buried amid execution reports  A10  Two pardoned Argentines return


Indonesia Moving Quietly Toward a More Private Economy
LEAD: In the last few years, there has been a quiet but undisputed economic revolution in Indonesia, which is moving away from the traditional economy - planned, dominated and often owned by the state - toward more deregulation and private enterprise.


Deal to Buy MGM/UA Collapses
LEAD: An Australian entertainment company's deal to acquire the MGM/UA Communications Company collapsed today amid recriminations and legal action, opening the possibility that Rupert Murdoch might make another bid for the film and television studio.


Reaganism Now Liability For Giuliani
LEAD: When Ronald Reagan became President in 1981, Rudolph W. Giuliani went to Washington as a top official in the Justice Department and vigorously pursued the new administration's policies.


Storm-Delayed Election Puts Mayor in Runoff
LEAD: Mayor Sue Myrick today swamped her opponent in a Republican primary that was delayed two weeks by Hurricane Hugo.
Ms.
Myrick's victory sets the stage for a Nov. 7 battle with Craig Madans, a Democrat, to lead North Carolina's largest city.


Israeli Peace Campaigner Begins Jail Term


Sony Hiring Seen Gaining
LEAD: The Sony Corporation appeared to clear a hurdle today in its plan to install two top Hollywood producers as co-chairmen of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., the studio Sony is acquiring for $3.4 billion.


G.E. Curbs Lifted
LEAD: The General Electric Company's aerospace operations in Syracuse resumed shipping products to the Navy and Air Force after Defense Department officials determined that the company had corrected serious procedural and quality control problems.
Sanctions were imposed in February because the company was found to be mixing production on contracts for both the United States military and foreign governments, whose specifications were less stringent.


MIPS Agreements With Nixdorf, Bull
LEAD: MIPS Computer Systems Inc., a maker of microprocessors and computers based in Sunnyvale, Calif., reached agreements on technology and marketing with Nixdorf Computer A. G. of West Germany, and Groupe Bull of France.
MIPS's products are based on RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, which speeds data processing by limiting nonessential tasks.


Dr. Vivian Chang, 58, Public Health Official
LEAD: Dr.
Vivian Chang, an assistant Surgeon General in the United States Public Health Service, died in an automobile accident Sunday near Wilmington, Del.
She was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Grace Liotta, 86, Dies; A Community Leader
LEAD: Grace Bellezza Liotta, a community leader in Brooklyn for almost 50 years, died Monday at Woodhull Hospital.
She was 86 years old and had suffered a stroke months ago.


Review/Television; When Show Business Meets College Sports
LEAD: Tonight's edition of ''The Other Side of the News'' brings us coaches, college presidents, sports writers and others acquainted with what Eamon Kelly, the president of Tulane University, who ended the men's basketball program in 1985 after a point-shaving scandal, calls the systemic mess of intercollegiate sports.


Market Place; A Clean-Air Bet On Sun Electric
LEAD: INVESTORS looking for a pure play in the growing trend toward stricter automotive emissions controls will not look at Sun Electric at first, but it could prove to be one of the biggest winners in the field.


German Morning After; The Signs Are Mixed on Whether Reforms Are Closer in East in the Wake of Protests
LEAD: As the wave of street protests that swept East Germany on its 40th anniversary seems to recede, the question left behind is whether democratic change is any closer.


Servers Spurring an Evolution in Computing
LEAD: A new class of specialized computers is becoming the next area of opportunity in the computer business, and a host of new companies are staking their claims to it.


A Woman Obtains A Restraining Order To Protect Embryos
LEAD: A Louisville woman obtained a restraining order today to prevent her estranged husband, an endocrinologist whose specialty is in vitro fertilization, from destroying the couple's six fertilized eggs.


Mayoral Camps Meeting Today On Debate Plan
LEAD: A debate about debates begins today, with representatives of the New York mayoral candidates planning to meet to discuss the number, dates, locations and formats of debates.


Giuliani Ties Racial Harmony to Strong Economy
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday the poor ''will suffer the most'' without a strong city economy, as his mayoral campaign continued its strategy of making a policy statement each day.


Chicago on Brink of New School System
LEAD: On the eve of the election that will put parents in charge of the nation's third-largest school system, Veronica Kyle stood outside her son's South Side elementary school, flagging down constituents as they dropped off their children.


Howe: Never Mind
LEAD: With Wayne Gretzky on the verge of breaking Gordie Howe's National Hockey League career scoring record, there were reports the past two days that the 61-year-old Howe, a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame, was planning to come out of retirement for one game after Jan. 1 in order to push his career into the 1990's, For Howe, who began his N.H.L.


Ecolab Revamping May Be Discussed
LEAD: Southeastern Asset Management Inc., a Memphis-based investment advisory concern that holds a 12.1 percent stake in Ecolab Inc., said it had been approached by third parties interested in discussing a possible revamping of the St.
Paul-based cleaning and maintenance company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Southeastern Asset said it ''may engage in such discussions with third parties.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the USAir Group misstated the period this year in which the airline's passenger flights were less full than in 1988.
Last month, USAir flights were 56.3 percent full, compared with 57.4 percent in September 1988.


2 Pardoned Argentines Return
LEAD: Two former leftist guerrilla leaders accused of murder and other crimes in the 1970's returned to Argentina today after receiving presidential pardons and said they regretted ''the errors committed in the past.''


Real Estate; 5-Year Commercial Revival Brings Lift to South Bronx
LEAD: WHEN Zaro Bakeries, Farberware Inc., Empire Glass and other companies opened operations in the South Bronx several years ago, they were viewed as risk takers in an area that had come to represent urban decline.


Security Council Bars Drug Fight
LEAD: A group of third world nations have blocked a British attempt to involve the Security Council in the battle against drug trafficking, saying they want the Council to deal only with direct threats of military hostilities, diplomats said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about Dow Jones &amp; Company misstated the performance of the company's business publications in the third quarter of the year.
That division of the company reported a slight gain in operating income compared with the third quarter of 1988, not a sharp drop.
The article also misstated the quarter in which Dow Jones reported one-time gains; those gains were in the third quarter of last year, not the current year.


Chip Orders Decline
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator continued falling in September as United States semiconductor shipments rose, but orders declined, a trade group reported today.


Unisys Picks President For Its Healthcare Unit
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation announced yesterday that it had named David M. Pomerance, a 44-year-old entrepreneur, as president of its Unisys Healthcare Systems unit.
Mr.
Pomerance joined Unisys earlier this year as vice president and general manager of the division.


Du Pont Offers $300 Million Issue
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company is offering $300 million in notes due 1996 through Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Good/Bad News
LEAD: There is a tremendous sense of urgency in Poland now.
The survival question for democratic transformation is just the opposite from the beginning of the decade when Solidarity was born.


Review/Art; Fresh Insights Into Dali, in European Show
LEAD: Given the nature of Salvador Dali's output in recent years, the last thing on earth that this critic wanted to do was to go halfway across Europe to see a mammoth exhibition - more than 300 works, it was said - by the Spanish Surrealist.
But then the word went round that in all kinds of unexpected ways this was a show that had to be seen.


Supreme Court Roundup; Abortion Foes Lose Plea for Hearing on Their Racketeering Law Penalties
LEAD: The Supreme Court today let stand a lower court's ruling that found a group of abortion protesters liable under the Federal racketeering law for damages to a Philadelphia abortion clinic they tried to drive out of business.


Bridge
LEAD: Perceptive readers will detect something apparently wrong with the diagram: East has made the opening lead, which on every other day of the year comes from the West side.
East has of course led out of turn, a situation that regularly creates confusion.


Lessons
LEAD: Like most colleges, the University of Southern California has a computer that sends out ''personalized'' recruiting letters to prospective freshmen.


Soviet Pros at Home
LEAD: Natalya Zvereva has played professional tennis all over the world, except, until yesterday, in her own country.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alco Standard Corp., Wayne, Pa., a maker of paper products and glassware, said its Paper Corp. of America unit had acquired Inter-City Paper Co., Minneapolis, and its Roll Source Inc. unit.
Terms were not disclosed.


Azerbaijanis Agree to End Rail Embargo of Armenia
LEAD: Azerbaijani nationalists agreed tonight to end a rail embargo that has deprived neighboring Armenia of fuel and other supplies for two months, apparently ending a potentially dangerous political impasse.


Economic Scene; A Gold Standard For the Kremlin?
LEAD: THE folks who persuaded Ronald Reagan that deficits do not matter have an idea or two for the Kremlin.
Surprisingly, perhaps, Mikhail Gorbachev's economic advisers are giving these ideas a respectful hearing: They were reportedly even discussed at last month's mini-summit meeting in Jackson Hole, Wyo.


City Opera Delays Decision On Cancellation
LEAD: In response to requests from other unions affected by the strike of the New York City Opera orchestra, the company announced yesterday that it was postponing by 48 hours its final decision on whether to cancel the remainder of its fall season, which is scheduled to run until Nov. 19.


Garcia Trial Testimony Ends; Summations Will Start Today
LEAD: After three weeks of testimony, prosecutors yesterday completed the presentation of their case against Representative Robert Garcia of the Bronx and his wife, Jane Lee.


Florida Grandfather Charged Under a New Child-Gun Law
LEAD: A man whose 8-year-old granddaughter shot herself in the thumb may be the first person charged under a new Florida law intended to keep loaded guns out of children's hands, the authorities said today.


Manson Is Suspended
LEAD: Dave Manson, a defenseman for the Blackhawks, was suspended on Monday by the N.H.L. for three games for demeaning an official during a game against the Rangers on Sunday in Chicago.
After Chris Nilan of New York poked Alain Chevrier, the Chicago goalie, in the mask with his stick in the third period, Manson rushed toward Nilan and pushed aside Ron Asselstine, a linesman.


Second Bombing in 2 Days at High School
LEAD: The high school here was shaken by a bomb explosion today for the second time in two days, and bomb threats have been received by at least four other high schools in central Indiana.


Review/Theater; 'Earnest' in Hartford Has the Director in the Lead
LEAD: ''In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity, is the vital thing,'' says Gwendolen, one of the perceptive if frivolous dilettantes in Oscar Wilde's ''Importance of Being Earnest.'' In his new production of the play at the Hartford Stage, Mark Lamos has taken Gwendolen's dictum to heart, staging an ''Earnest'' that delivers the bon mots born of boredom in turn-of-the-century British drawing rooms and country estates.


Black Leaders To Be Released In South Africa
LEAD: South Africa will release Walter Sisulu and other leaders of the banned African National Congress, but will not immediately free Nelson R. Mandela, President F. W. de Klerk said today.


J.P. Morgan Unit Wins Lead In Savannah Electric Offer
LEAD: J.P.
Morgan Securities Inc., the investment banking subsidiary of J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company, became the first bank securities subsidiary to act as sole lead manager on a corporate underwriting yesterday, when it won a $30 million issue at competitive bid.


With Bay Area Series, Sun Rises in the West
LEAD: Thanks to two World Series-bound baseball teams, the Bay Area finally has a chance to even old scores.


Data General Sets Move and Layoffs
LEAD: The Data General Corporation, a Westboro-based computer maker, said it would sell its plant in Portsmouth, N.H., and move manufacturing operations to a larger plant in Apex, N.C., in the next year.
The company said it would eliminate 2,200 of 14,200 jobs and that more than 700 people would be affected immediately.


What It Means to Be a Serious Cook: Forget the Ingredients. Study the Knife.
LEAD: I HAD always taken slicing for granted, like walking or eating.
I'd always thought that anyone who ever confronted a knife and a cucumber would know what to do.


U.F.O. Landing Is Fact, Not Fantasy, the Russians Insist
LEAD: It is not a joke, nor a hoax, nor a sign of mental instability, nor an attempt to drum up local tourism by drawing the curious, the Soviet press agency Tass insisted today in discussions of what it called an extraterrestrial visit to southern Russia.


MCI Sues A.T.&amp;T. Over Ads
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation filed suit today in Federal District Court in Washington, accusing the American Telephone and Telegraph Company of false and deceptive advertising in connection with a campaign claiming better quality and service.


RICO and Abortion Protesters
LEAD: The Supreme Court let stand a ruling that anti-abortion protesters are liable under racketeering law for damage to a clinic.
Page A23.


I.B.M. Introduces New Laser Printer
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation introduced a new I.B.M. laser printer that can produce up to 10 pages of text a minute as well as high-quality graphics.
The company said that the printer turned out documents 25 percent faster and used less desk space than previous models.


Eating Well
LEAD: NUTRITION information is like mercury: it slips through your fingers whenever you try to capture it.
First the experts tell you to lower your cholesterol; then others question that wisdom.
Next they say polyunsaturated fat should be substituted for saturated fat; then they change their minds.
Use monounsaturated fat instead, they say, and it is all right to eat a little saturated fat.


Dravecky Injured Again
LEAD: Dave Dravecky re-fractured his left arm when he was bumped from behind during the on-field celebration Monday after San Francisco won the National League pennant, the Giants said today.


Glaxo's Search: Son of Zantac
LEAD: Ernest Mario, the new chief executive of Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., is obsessed with avoiding a problem that has plagued other drug companies: having a highly successful drug, but not having others to succeed it one day.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  KANSAS CITY (AL) - Exercised the option on the contract of Bret Saberhagen, pitcher, for 1990.
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Named Scott Proefrock assistant of baseball operations.
BASKETBALL  ATLANTA (NBA) - Released Anthony Taylor and Keith Wilson, guards.
PHILADELPHIA (NBA) - Waived Jarvis Basnight, forward.


2 Concerns Weigh Rescue of Ferranti
LEAD: Two of Europe's biggest military electronics contractors, Thomson-CSF of France and British Aerospace P.L.C., said they were considering a bid to rescue Britain's Ferranti International Signal P.L.C.
Thomson-CSF and British Aerospace, in a statement released in Paris and London, said an offer would aim to uphold Ferranti's position as a principal supplier of British military equipment.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: The arrival of fall is not good news for me. It revives my fear of math.


Curbs Listed On Textiles
LEAD: The United States and Canada have increased restrictions on imports of textiles and clothes in the last three years, according to a report submitted today to a world trade body.


Topics of The Times; Bedside Lawyers
LEAD: AIDS patients have many needs, and not the least of them is for legal advice they may be unable to afford.
Now trust and estate lawyers from some of New York City's top law firms are volunteering to help out.
The project deserves praise and replication elsewhere.


Dredging Up War Relics From Frigid Alaskan Waters
LEAD: An obscure chapter of World War II history is emerging from beneath the cold, clear waters off the Aleutian Islands, where divers using sonar have made a survey of Japanese wrecks.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


McCaw Bid For Lin Sweetened
LEAD: Continuing its bid to dominate the cellular telephone industry, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. sweetened its tender offer yesterday for the Lin Broadcasting Corporation, which owns valuable cellular franchises in several large cities.


Finance Law Evens Odds in Jersey Contest
LEAD: With less than a month to go before the Nov. 7 election, the candidates for governor have reached or are close to reaching the limit on campaign contributions set by New Jersey's public-financing law.


Pilots to Continue Strike Benefits at Eastern
LEAD: The Air Line Pilots Association announced yesterday that its membership had voted to continue paying strike benefits to Eastern Airlines pilots, making it likely that the seven-month strike against Eastern will continue for weeks, or even months.


Man Guilty of Planting 13 Bombs in Indiana City
LEAD: A Federal District Court jury has convicted a man on charges of planting 13 bombs around a small city in southern Indiana in a plot that prosecutors say stemmed from a lifelong rivalry with a state legislator.


Topics of The Times; Leapin' Lizards!
LEAD: The Postal Service has taken heavy flak for mislabeling its new 25-cent dinosaur stamp, a drawing of a pair of dinosaurs captioned ''Brontosaurus.'' Furious purists point out that the ''brontosaurus'' is now properly called ''apatosaurus.'' They accuse the stamp's authors of fostering scientific illiteracy, and want the stamps recalled.


W.B.A. Sets Deadline For Tyson-Holyfield
LEAD: The World Boxing Association has put Mike Tyson on notice that if he beats Donovan (Razor) Ruddock on Nov. 18, he must fight Evander Holyfield within 120 days.


Europe Seeks New Steel Deal
LEAD: The 12-nation European Community hopes to reach a new deal soon with the Bush Administration on the trade bloc's steel shipments to the United States, an official of the community said today.


Anthony Gaubis, Securities Analyst, 87
LEAD: Anthony Gaubis, a securities analyst and investment adviser, died Sunday at John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J.
He was 87 years old and lived in Sparta, N.J.


Most Bank Yields Decline, Anticipating Drop in Rates
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mostly down for the week ended yesterday.


How New York Prisons Deal With AIDS Inside Their Walls
LEAD: To the Editor:


After the Ball Is Over
LEAD: While edging toward coma during the endless years of baseball this week I suddenly realized I didn't know what a slider was.


Rutgers Reserves a Dorm for Women in Science
LEAD: On Thursday, Douglass College here will dedicate a dormitory for 110 women as part of an innovative program to address the national shortage of female scientists and engineers.


ABC Near No. 1 As 2 Shows Set Rating Records
LEAD: ''Roseanne'' and the season premiere of ''The Wonder Years'' both had their highest ratings ever last week, helping to bring ABC within eight-tenths of a point of first-place NBC in the prime-time ratings.
NBC squeaked by with an average prime-time rating of 15.2, winning the week for the 68th time.


Worker Survives 12-Story Fall
LEAD: A worker installing lights in a medical building fell 12 stories and survived today, his plunge broken by an atrium's glass ceiling and by a man sitting near a second-story railing.
The 24-year-old worker, Troy Livingston, was later described as being in ''very critical condition'' at St.
Luke's Lutheran Hospital, suffering from various fractures and internal injuries.


New Digital Software Links Various Products
LEAD: In a move intended to link its computers with those of its competitors, the Digital Equipment Corporation introduced a second generation of computing applications today that would enable office professionals to work together electronically.


Arnold M. Picker Is Dead at 76; Film Executive Was Fund-Raiser
LEAD: Arnold M. Picker, former head of international operations for United Artists Pictures Inc. who was a prominent fund-raiser for Democratic political candidates, died of pneumonia on Sunday at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
He was 76 years old.


Woman Is Charged in Death Of Husband on Nudist Beach
LEAD: A woman who told the police her husband was shot to death at a a nudist beach by strangers was charged today with plotting to murder him for financial gain.


Veryfine Picks Mullen Agency
LEAD: Veryfine Products Inc., turned its back on Manhattan yesterday, awarding its $10 million account to Mullen Inc., a small agency that is its neighbor in Massachusetts.
The account had been at Chiat/Day/ Mojo until July, when Veryfine pulled the business, citing a growing conflict with another Chiat beverage account, Soho.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We will be the media capital of the world for a couple of weeks.
Everyone will see that we're just as regular as the rest of the country.
We get excited, we cheer madly and we wear funny costumes just like they do in New York, Chicago or Boston.''  - Mayor Art Agnos of San Francisco.


Texas Sheriff Goes on Trial In a Kidnapping Conspiracy
LEAD: About 20 people wearing blue ribbons stood outside court in support of two law-enforcement officers today as the officers went on trial on charges of plotting to kidnap and torture a suspected drug dealer.


Another Snag For Integrated
LEAD: Integrated Resources Inc., a struggling financial concern, was dealt another blow yesterday when the Whitehall Financial Group said it could not obtain financing to buy Integrated's core financial services businesses.


'The Chance of a Lifetime to See a Legendary Band'


Older (and Better) Vintages of Alsace
LEAD: Wine growers in the Alsace region of France call riesling the king of grapes and gewurztraminer the queen.
The reason for their respect was shown at three unusual tastings that centered on older vintages in New York last month.


LAWMAKERS SPURN CURBS ON ABORTION IN FLORIDA SESSION
LEAD: The Florida State Legislature today rebuffed a call for tighter restrictions on abortion that the Governor made after the United States Supreme Court opened the way for tougher state laws.


Top Runners for Event
LEAD: Margaret Groos, winner of the 1988 United States Olympic women's marathon trials, and Zoya Ivanova, the biggest winner among Soviet marathoners, have entered the New York City Marathon on Nov. 5.


A Speedier Way to Move a Ship's Cargo
LEAD: Ships that transport thousands of small packages of delicate and perishable goods are finding a gentler and faster method of loading and unloading cargo on the Houston Ship Channel at a new operation that is the first of its kind in the United States.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THE fortress that dominates this remote hill town south of Siena looks as impregnable as it must have been in the 15th century, but it has not been able to fend off modern times.


N.F.L. Is Taking Its Time Selecting a Commissioner
LEAD: The 28 National Football League owners, after nearly 10 hours of work and four ballots today, were unable to elect a new commissioner here tonight and adjourned until Wednesday morning.


Hospitals Urged Not to Count On a 'Big Bailout'
LEAD: The New York State Health Commissioner told administrators of the state's financially ailing hospitals today that they should not count on the state for ''any big bailouts'' and instead should act to reduce costs.


BREAKS ARE ADDED IN TAX-CUT PLANS
LEAD: Supporters of a lower tax on capital gains are waging a bidding war in the Senate, offering ever more generous tax breaks in an effort to find the 60 votes they need to overcome parliamentary obstacles.


Kean Accused of 'Conspiracy' in a Toll Increase
LEAD: Gov.
Thomas H. Kean participated in an ''unspoken conspiracy'' that allowed the New Jersey Highway Authority to raise tolls on the Garden State Parkway, a special bipartisan State Senate committee said today.


Praise for Little League
LEAD: President Bush, a former Little League coach, joined the celebration yesterday for the team from Trumbull, Conn., that won the Little League World Series in August, the first United States team in six years to take the title.


Rates Decline At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper fell sharply yesterday, to their lowest levels since mid-August.


Volvo Talking With Renault
LEAD: Volvo A.B. said it is holding discussions with France's Renault, although it would not confirm published reports that the auto makers were in the final stage of negotiating a merger or joint venture.
The business magazine


A Rivalry Mild No More In First Series By the Bay
LEAD: After two rapid playoffs that took only five games apiece to decide the pennants, the major leagues cleared the stage yesterday for their main event - the first ''Subway Series'' in 33 years, the second straight Series in California and the first ever to be played entirely in the San Francisco Bay area.


Nuclear Plant's Transformer Catches Fire in N. Carolina
LEAD: A fire broke out in a transformer at the Shearon Harris Nuclear Plant on Monday night but was confined to a section separated by concrete from the reactor and posed no threat to the public, the plant owner said today.


Mary Byrne Bocklett, Teacher, 76
LEAD: Mary Byrne Bocklett, a teacher in Long Beach, L.I., before her retirement, died of a heart attack Saturday at the home of her son, John J. Ferguson, in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 76 years old and lived in Naples, Fla.


Iberia to Purchase 8 Airbus A340 Jets
LEAD: Iberia Air Lines of Spain has agreed to purchase eight Airbus A340 commercial jets with an option to buy four others, the European consortium Airbus Industrie said.
Iberia said the deal was worth $700 million.


War as Abomination, And a Debate on Evil
LEAD: The last time Paul Fussell wrote about war, it was World War I, and his book, ''The Great War and Modern Memory,'' won two major book awards and became something of a classic.
Mr.
Fussell has now returned to the subject of war, this time World War II, and the critical response has, he admits, taken him by surprise with its intensity and, at times, its ferocity.


Atalanta Stake Cut
LEAD: An investment group led by the Atalanta Sosnoff Capital Corporation, a New York money management concern controlled by Martin T. Sosnoff, has lowered its stake in America West Airlines Inc. to the equivalent of 6.2 percent from 8.4 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Atalanta Sosnoff gave no reason for the sale.


What's in a Name? Just Ask the Hungarians
LEAD: Attila Agh, until last weekend a leading ''reform Communist,'' was asked today what party members should be called now that their organization has become the Socialist Party. ''Radical Socialists,'' he replied.
For the first time in a Communist country, a ruling party has formally abandoned Communism.


Sihanouk, the Key to Cambodian Peace
LEAD: With the Cambodian problem moving from the conference table to the battlefield, many in the U.S. are questioning the wisdom of Washington's support of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the non-Communist resistance.
These critics are wrong: Prince Sihanouk, a Cambodian patriot, is the only Cambodian leader who can bring about national reconciliation.


Annie And Friend Are Chosen
LEAD: Eleven-year-old Danielle Findley of Lee's Summit, Mo., can stick out her chin and grin today: she was chosen yesterday from among almost 400 young girls to play the role of Annie in the new musical ''Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge.''


Police Identify A Suspect, 18, In Beating Jews
LEAD: Investigators have identified an 18-year-old Brooklyn man as a suspect in the beating of three Jewish students near Brooklyn College early Sunday by a gang that shouted anti-Semitic slurs, the police said yesterday.


Bank of Japan Increases Rate
LEAD: The Bank of Japan said today that it had raised its discount rate to 3.75 percent, from 3.25 percent.
Finance Minister Ryutaro


A's Prowess Leaves Giants Unawed
LEAD: They would have to deal with the subject soon enough, so Monday seemed like the right time.
Even in the midst of their playoff celebration, the San Francisco Giants could not avoid talk about the Oakland Athletics, the team from across the bay and now their World Series opponent.


House Ethics Panel Criticized Over Speed of Gingrich Inquiry
LEAD: The Congressman who filed an ethics complaint against the House Republican whip, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, said today that the House ethics committee was unnecessarily delaying a decision on his request that it investigate Mr.
Gingrich's financial dealings.


On American Ice at Last
LEAD: There's an Oldsmobile, this year's vintage, in the driveway of a suburban New Jersey condominium so new that the air around it remains tinged by the smell of sawdust.
On the front step is a bright-hued coleus, a standard welcome-to-the-neighborhood gift.
In the foyer, a vigilant gray poodle is pacing, uncertain whether to receive guests who speak English instead of his accustomed Russian with a wag of his tail or a worried growl.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Keillor on Radio Again


Belgians Raise Rates
LEAD: The Belgian central bank raised short-term interest rates today for the fourth time in two weeks.
Belgium's three-month treasury bill rate, considered the key rate, was raised by a quarter of a point, to 9.55 percent.
The one- and two-month rates were raised to 9.55 percent each from 9.2 and 9.25 percent, respectively.


More Companies to Phase Out Peril to Ozone
LEAD: More large companies have agreed to eliminate ozone-destroying chlorofluorocarbons and halon in their worldwide operations, the Environmental Protection Agency said today.


Court Rules Agency Can Bar Funds for Abortion Backers
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today upheld the right of the Agency for International Development to deny financial aid to private groups supporting abortions in foreign countries.


Review/Jazz; Pat Metheny's Serious Side
LEAD: In 1976, the arrival of the guitarist Pat Metheny's first album, ''Bright-Size Life,'' announced a new way of looking at the jazz guitar.
Mr.
Metheny, mixing jazz with an abstraction of country music, reimagined the American musical landscape, producing an intimate synthesis that blossomed with possibilities.


Ban on Ivory Trading Is Opposed
LEAD: A proposed worldwide ban on ivory trading to save Africa's remaining elephants from poaching, widely thought to be the foregone conclusion of an international meeting here, is being vigorously opposed by some southern African nations.


Police and Protesters Clash On National Day in Taiwan
LEAD: Police officers swinging riot sticks charged thousands of protesters who threw rocks and fired slingshots today to demand freedom for political prisoners on Taiwan's National Day.


Critics Accuse Cuomo Of Budget Double Talk
LEAD: In the face of tremendous fiscal problems, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this year proposed the tightest state spending plan in a decade and reproached many of his critics for demanding more money. ''I would put the emphasis on tighter management and spending discipline,'' he said.


Vital New York Taxes Lag, and Economy Is Blamed
LEAD: Revenue from several of New York City's most important taxes lagged well behind expectations in the last three months and, in some cases, dropped sharply from the same period last year, budget officials say.


Chief of P.&amp;G. Is Stepping Down
LEAD: In a surprise announcement, the chairman and chief executive of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that he plans to step down from those posts on Jan. 2, nearly three years before mandatory retirement.


Jury to Decide Fault in '87 Jet Crash in Detroit
LEAD: Jury selection has begun in the liability trial in a 1987 Northwest Airlines crash that killed 156 people, with lawyers prepared to battle over who is to blame for the accident.


Pilots Approve Funds at UAL
LEAD: About 90 percent of the 6,240 pilots at United Airlines voted yesterday to put up $200 million in equity as part of a deal to buy the UAL Corporation, United's parent, for $300 a share.


Walker's Deal Up to Him
LEAD: The Dallas Cowboys had an open ''fire sale'' on Herschel Walker today.
Walker's agents, Peter Johnson and Ralph Cindrich, were considering a restructuring of the running back's $1 million-a-year contract as part of the price for Walker leaving the Cowboys.


Swiss Inflation at 3.4%
LEAD: Switzerland's annual inflation rate rose to 3.4 percent last month, the highest since July 1985, the Federal Statistics Office announced today.
Higher prices for heating oil and vegetables were leading factors in the increase, a news statement said.
The annual inflation rate had remained stable at 3 percent from May through August.


Bush Will Attend Latin Drug Talks
LEAD: The leaders of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia urged President Bush today to meet them within 90 days to discuss ways to curb the cocaine trade, and the President quickly agreed.


Deputy Creative Head Resigns From Ogilvy
LEAD: Ogilvy &amp; Mather's New York office lost another senior creative executive yesterday with the resignation of Jay Jasper as deputy creative head.
Mr.
Jasper, 52 years old, left for Young &amp; Rubicam's San Francisco office, where he will become executive vice president and creative director.


Inquiry Cites Retaliation Against Whistle Blower
LEAD: A New York City Housing Authority manager was singled out for retaliation after he warned authority officials about suspected corruption in the agency, the city's Department of Investigation has determined.


Wanted: A Jet to Catch Passes From O'Brien
LEAD: Ken O'Brien has become a quarterback in search of a receiver: one of his own, not the other team's.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


The Mayoral Debate That Matters
LEAD: Just about every front-runner ducks debates, so it comes as no surprise that David Dinkins is reluctant to debate Rudolph Giuliani one-on-one.
He obviously prefers including Ronald Lauder, the Conservative Party's choice, and Henry Hewes, the Right to Life candidate.
New Yorkers should certainly hear all four.


Saatchi's Future Cloudier; Big Holder Weighs Options
LEAD: The future of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company became cloudier yesterday when its largest shareholder said it had been contacted by other parties interested in an overhaul of the world's largest marketing communications company.


Jogger Trial Judge Bans Lawyers From Disclosing Evidence
LEAD: The state judge hearing the Central Park rape case yesterday barred prosecutors and defense lawyers from discussing any evidence with the press.


People
LEAD: *
Katherine Chiles has been promoted to senior vice president, management director of the integrated communications group of FCB/Leber Katz Partners.


Food Notes
LEAD:  'Light' Ice Creams


Savoring the World According to Julia
LEAD: THE voice that launched several million cooks warbled through the big, quiet kitchen. ''I am 6 feet 1 and 3/4 inches tall,'' Julia Child said to a reporter who had called on the telephone.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


IP Timberlands Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IP Timberlands Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
77,000,000
63,000,000
Net inc
42,000,000
38,000,000
Share earns
.94
.75
9mo rev
166,000,000
165,000,000
Net inc
91,000,000
92,000,000
Share earns
2.32
2.01


Small Airline Merger Offer
LEAD: StatesWest Airlines Inc., a small regional carrier based in Phoenix, said today that it had sent a letter to Mesa Airlines Inc. of Farmington, N.M., proposing that the two airlines meet within 10 days to discuss a merger.


USX Stock Drops
LEAD: The USX Corporation's stock price slipped after the steel company adopted a shareholder rights plan that would make a hostile takeover more difficult.
USX's shares were down 37.5 cents, to $37.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Last week, the financier Carl C. Icahn said he had a 13.06 percent stake in USX.


Hospital Must Pay $25,000 For Loss of a Stillborn Baby
LEAD: The Westchester County Medical Center was ordered today to pay a Poughkeepsie woman $25,000 for losing the body of her stillborn baby in 1986.


Bond Offering Failure Hurts Ramada Deal
LEAD: Ramada Inc. said today that it had failed to raise $230 million in ''junk bond'' financing for a restructuring, threatening the company's deal to sell its hotel business.


Jackson Resorts To Raider Camp
LEAD: Bo Jackson went from outfielder to running back yesterday when he reported to the Los Angeles Raiders.
There was a chance he would play in a limited capacity Sunday against the Kansas City Chiefs.
Jackson had a big year for the Kansas City Royals, hitting 32 home runs and driving in 105 runs.
He took 10 days off before reporting to the Raiders for his third National Football League season.


Minister Found Slain in Brooklyn Church
LEAD: A 52-year-old Baptist minister was found slain in his church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn yesterday, the apparent victim of an attempted robbery, the police said.


A's See Clark As Human
LEAD: In the spring, when the emotions of two cities were far from the World Series that will draw them together this week, Dave Stewart pitched to Will Clark and struck him out.
Twice.


Boeing's Fight Over Bonuses
LEAD: The issue at the heart of the Boeing Company strike, which has idled 58,000 workers for more than a week, is a new one in the American labor movement - one that is forcing union leaders to confront not only management but also their own members.


Fund Yields Hold Steady
LEAD: Yields of money-market mutual funds surveyed by the IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were unchanged to slightly lower for the week ended yesterday.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPC International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,286,090,000
1,215,361,000
Net inc
87,245,000
76,695,000
Share earns
1.13
.98
9mo sales
3,804,703,000
3,523,655,000
Net inc
238,025,000
206,654,000
Share earns
3.05
2.62


Bridge
LEAD: Few players realize that there are considerable opportunities for effective deceptive plays in the trump suit.
There is, for example, a whole family of doubleton tenaces: jack-nine, queen-ten, king-jack and ace-queen.
In each case, it is sometimes productive to play the higher honor unnecessarily and lead the declarer down a tempting path.


Calder's witty way with castoffs


Weis Markets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weis Markets Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
305,090,000
290,868,000
Net inc
21,289,000
20,405,000
Share earns
.47
.45
9mo sales
915,301,000
861,757,000
Net inc
62,345,000
59,365,000
Share earns
1.38
1.31


Nugget Suitors, Set Back, Are Remaining in Pursuit
LEAD: Although Sidney Schlenker, the owner of the Denver Nuggets, said Tuesday that he had called off the proposed sale of his team to two investors who would have become the first black owners of a major sports franchise, there were indications yesterday that the transaction might still be alive.


J.B. Hunt Transport Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* J.B. Hunt Transport Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
135,172,000
103,890,000
Net inc
9,403,000
9,879,000
Share earns
.40
.42
Shares outst
23,629,000
23,591,000
9mo rev
377,218,000
290,369,000
Net inc
22,261,000
24,538,000
Share earns
.94
1.04
Shares outst
23,614,000
23,571,000


Leonard Davidow, 89, Publishing Executive
LEAD: Leonard S. Davidow, a publisher and executive of Sunday supplements and other publishing operations, died Tuesday at Highland Park Hospital in Illinois after a brief illness.
He was 89 years old and lived in Highland Park.


Buffalo Mayor Is Unopposed
LEAD: A court ruling today barring Wilbur Trammell from the ballot means Mayor James Griffin of Buffalo has no active opposition in his bid for a fourth term.
The New York Court of Appeals upheld a lower court ruling throwing out Mr.
Trammell's independent line on the ballot for the Nov. 7 election.
Mr.


Quilts Illustrating Images From Urban Landscape
LEAD: STAINED-glass windows, skyscrapers and Central Park, these are some of the images depicted in ''Quilts for an Urban Landscape,'' a show of 13 quilts by the 12 members of the Manhattan Quilters Guild.


Norwegian Wins Nobel For His Work in Economics
LEAD: The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science was awarded today to an obscure Norwegian professor whose pioneering work in methods for testing economic theories helped pave the way for modern economic forecasting.


Child Welfare Transcends Church-State Barrier
LEAD: To the Editor:


What of the Youngest?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Los Angeles Times Design
LEAD: In the most radical redesign in its recent history, The Los Angeles Times appeared today with a new format intended to make the paper more accessible to readers.


Early Retirees Are Happy, Study Says
LEAD: Most workers who take early retirement are happy with their decisions, a new study says.


Rangers Fend Off the Flames in Home Opener
LEAD: The game may, by season's end, prove to have been of limited value and consequence.
But for a night - an evening of unequivocal accomplishment and rarely equaled applause for the Rangers - it was a small treasure.


Hispanic Population Passes 20 Million, U.S. Says
LEAD: As Congress wrestled with the question of whether illegal aliens, many of them Hispanic, should be included in the 1990 census, the Government announced today that the nation's Hispanic population had passed a statistical landmark this year, exceeding 20 million people for the first time.


Oh, What a Puss Has the Hippopotamus
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-19  A need exists in East Germany ''to discuss all the basic questions'' of the society, and to learn the causes of the flight of nearly 50,000 East Germans to the West, the country's ruling Politburo said.
Page A1


New Federal Phone System
LEAD: The first phase of the Government's new telephone system officially went into service yesterday, providing Federal employees at 29 locations nationwide with faster, clearer communications services.
The new system, known as


Plasti-Line Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Line Inc
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
22,271,000
18,708,000
Net inc
1,255,000
725,000
Share earns
.35
.20
9mo sales
64,210,000
54,766,000
Net inc
2,876,000
1,653,000
Share earns
.80
.46


Photo Control Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photo Control Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,170,011
3,501,100
Net inc
212,079
152,304
Share earns
.15
.10


2 Knicks Sit Out
LEAD: Preparing for their preseason opener against the Denver Nuggets tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks had an intra-squad scrimmage last night at their State University training site in Purchase, N. Y. Mark Jackson and Kiki Vandeweghe did not participate.
Jackson has been sidelined for the past three days with muscle soreness in both legs, while Vandeweghe, who arrived in training camp last Friday with back spasms, still has not worked out with the team.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cathay Pacific Airways, Hong Kong, ordered two Boeing 747-400 cargo planes and secured options on two more.
Terms were not disclosed.


The End of Forever
LEAD: The greatest musical evocation of nature, for me, is Haydn's oratorio ''The Creation.'' As God creates the earth and its creatures, one hears them in instruments and voices: fields and mountains, eagles and whales and worms.


Kentucky Utilities Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Utilities Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
135,197,000
158,539,000
Net inc
21,813,000
27,339,000
Share earns
.54
.69
9mo rev
393,384,000
431,176,000
Net inc
b70,602,000
66,470,000
Share earns
1.75
1.64


Lebanese Official Cancels Speech to U.N.
LEAD: Lebanon has canceled plans to address the United Nations General Assembly, while King Fahd of Saudi Arabia urged all Lebanese parties today to step up their efforts to reach an agreement in the current peace talks.


Judge Revokes Inmate's Bail After He Is Freed by Mistake
LEAD: A judge revoked bail today for an inmate who was re-arrested after being mistakenly released in a publicly-funded bail program, officials said.


Unisys Introduces Imaging Products
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation introduced two systems that store images of checks and blueprints electronically.
The company's Image Item Processing System will be available in the first quarter of 1990 for $1.5 million to $3 million.
Combined with the software Image Check Processing System, it will allow high-speed image processing of checks for the banking industry.


May Stores To Sell Its Caldor Unit
LEAD: Moving out of discount retailing after 19 years, the May Department Stores Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its 118-store Caldor chain and to spin off its 73-store Venture Stores unit.


Lexington Precision Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexington Precision Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,760,000
12,758,000
Net loss
605,000
b2,338,000
Share earns
-
.58
Shares outst
4,012,000
3,956,000
b-Net income and included an extraordinary gain of $325,000, or 8 cents a share, from the utilization of loss carryforward.


Harley-Davidson
LEAD: A group led by Malcolm I. Glazer, a businessman, said it had requested Federal permission to increase its stake in the motorcycle manufacturer Harley-Davidson Inc. to 15 percent.
The investor group holds 6.24 percent of Harley's stock.
Harley reiterating its intention to remain independent.
Harley's stock was unchanged yesterday at $40.75 a share on New York Stock Exchange.


Cup Team Named
LEAD: Mark McCumber and Paul Azinger will defend the World Cup championship for the United States next month in Spain.
A total of 32 nations will enter two-player teams in the $1 million tournament, which is scheduled for the Club de Golf Las Brisas in Marbella from Nov. 16-19.
The United States has won the cup 17 times.


Student Loan Marketing Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
65,884,000
57,469,000
Per share
.65
.55
Shares outst
101,088,000
104,454,000
9mo net inc
189,629,000
166,188,000
Per share
1.87
1.57
Shares outst
101,289,000
105,256,000


Stricter Rules Urged for Cruise Ships
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board, pressing a campaign to more closely regulate cruise ships, today called for extensive changes in safety standards aboard vessels operating from United States ports.


Talman Home Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talman Home Federal S&amp;L (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,308,000
6,575,000
Per share
.44
.68
9mo net inc
16,869,000
20,912,000
Per share
1.74
2.16


Talking Deals; How T.V.A. Got Big Refinancing
LEAD: AFTER a 15-year absence from the public debt markets, the Tennessee Valley Authority will announce today that it plans to offer about $3 billion in bonds next week as the initial phase of a $6.7 billion refinancing, T.V.A. executives said yesterday.


A Mix of Roosevelt Island Housing Planned
LEAD: New York City and New York State have developed a plan for almost 2,000 new mixed-income apartments on Roosevelt Island, next to the Queensboro Bridge.


Bush Proposal For Clean Air Is Dealt a Blow
LEAD: After a confused White House lobbying effort, a House subcommittee voted narrowly today to weaken a major section of President Bush's clean air legislation that was intended to increase the use of fuels other than gasoline in motor vehicles.


Helen Hayes Honored on 89th Birthday
LEAD: The actress Helen Hayes was honored on her 89th birthday Tuesday at a champagne reception at the Algonquin Hotel in Manhattan.
The celebration included a progress report on the drive to raise $4 million for the restoration of the Tappan Zee Playhouse in her hometown, Nyack, N.Y.


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Data Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
31,614,500
19,062,500
Net inc
969,300
301,300
Share earns
.34
.10
The latest share earnings included a gain of 12 cents a share from the sale of Warehouse land.


Calder's Witty Way With Castoffs
LEAD: ''THE Intimate World of Alexander Calder,'' an exhibit that opens at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in Manhattan on Oct. 17, takes the design-as-functional-object enthusiast further afield than ever before.


Opening the World to a Generation
LEAD: THEY talk on the telephone for hours with the same friends they saw that day at school.
They want to hang out at the mall, to wear the latest style in jeans and sneakers.
They want pierced ears.
Their stereos could be a bit softer and their rooms a bit neater.
Yet their parents could not be happier to see them behaving much as other teen-agers do.


In Suffolk, Taxpayers Want to Know Where School District's Money Goes
LEAD: Over the last decade the number of students in public schools here has dropped by a third, to 4,212 from 6,441.
But the cost of education has more than doubled.
People say they do not know where the money goes.


Ex-Defense Official Appointed by Vickers
LEAD: Sir Colin Chandler, the former head of the British Ministry of Defense's export services department, was appointed yesterday as managing director designate of Vickers P.L.C., an engineering, military equipment and luxury car group.


Koch Weighs Column In The New York Post
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch, whose byline has appeared over a number of newspaper columns in his term at City Hall, may become a columnist for The New York Post after he leaves office in January.


Decorating Remodeling Gets a New Top Editor
LEAD: Olivia Buehl, a former editor and executive of the Working Woman/ McCall's Group, has been named editor in chief of Decorating Remodeling magazine, a publication of The New York Times Company Magazine Group.
Ms.
Buehl, 45 years old, was editor in chief of Working Mother and Home magazines, and, most recently, a consulting editor at Elle Decor magazine.


Profits of Gannett Rose By 11% in Third Quarter
LEAD: The Gannett Company said yesterday that lower newsprint costs and cost controls at its USA Today newspaper helped profits rise 11 percent in the third quarter.


Kelly McGillis Tries Classics to Cure Film Ennui
LEAD: ''I wanted to do some classical theater,'' says Kelly McGillis, ''to do something that challenged every part of my being -from my speech, to my diction, to my understanding of poetry and form and text to the physical demands of playing period roles as opposed to contemporary ones.
I really wanted to work hard - and this is much harder than making a movie.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Bio-Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Logic Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,479,030
2,358,662
Net inc
109,389
166,882
Share earns
.04
.06
Shares outst
2,729,947
2,786,390
6mo rev
4,735,496
4,608,973
Net inc
204,297
383,120
Share earns
.08
.14
Shares outst
2,701,028
2,822,993


Widow of Panama Coup Leader Says Fellow Plotter Betrayed Him
LEAD: The widow of a Panamanian major who led an abortive military uprising against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega last week said today that the coup attempt had failed largely because of the treachery of another major, who changed sides at the last minute and led his troops to General Noriega's rescue.


CBS Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBS Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
593,500,000
568,000,000
Net inc
61,800,000
69,800,000
Share earns
2.40
2.72
9mo sales
2,095,900,000
2,005,400,000
Net inc
b236,700,000
c1,109,800,000
Share earns
9.20
43.16


New Baseball League Likely to Wait Until 1991
LEAD: Founders and owners of teams in a proposed new baseball league met in New York yesterday and apparently decided to begin play in 1991.
The owners also decided to soon begin signing players to future contracts.


Dow Off 11.97 in Reaction to Weaker Bonds
LEAD: Stocks ended lower yesterday as a weaker bond market and the selling of blue-chip issues pushed equities down for the second day.


Ex-Navajo Chairman Charged With Crimes
LEAD: Peter MacDonald, the suspended Navajo Tribal Chairman, was accused today of 111 criminal charges, including bribery, fraud, conspiracy and elections violations while he led the nation's largest Indian tribe.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Health Cos., Rexburg, Idaho, promoted its founder, Sybil Ferguson, to chairman of the company and its subsidiary, Diet Center Inc.


Orion Pictures Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Pictures Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
115,450,000
103,874,000
Net inc
2,669,000
2,563,000
Share earns
.12
.14
Shares outst
22,165,000
17,368,000
6mo rev
244,291,000
215,122,000
Net inc
6,695,000
5,080,000
Share earns
.30
.28
Shares outst
22,187,000
17,363,000


A Teacher Remembered
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Candidates' Aides Argue on Debates
LEAD: Both sides seemed confident and the atmosphere seemed agreeable when representatives of David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani met yesterday to schedule mayoral debates.


Have the Democrats Lost Their Soul?; Yes: Blame Election Funds
LEAD: Two things have happened to Congressional Democrats in the 1980's: They have lost their identity; their campaign funds have swollen.
There's a single story here.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Squabbling on Tax Cuts  Congressional negotiations continued on a budget deal that would provide a separate vote on the capital gains tax, but the talks were marked by partisan finger-pointing.
Page D1.
Nobel Prize in Economics  An obscure Norwegian professor, Trygve Haavelmo, was honored for his work on methods for testing economic theories.


In Indonesia, A Quiet Pope Steps Lightly
LEAD: The Javanese, the dominant ethnic group in this country, have a reputation for indirection and for avoiding confrontation, and as he hopscotches across the Indonesian islands, Pope John Paul II has been a paradigm of Javanese temperament.


Provena Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,445,532
8,447,744
Net inc
69,561
204,936
Share earns
.03
.08
Shares outst
2,580,491
2,601,930
9mo sales
25,241,228
23,840,801
Net inc
181,125
537,487
Share earns
.07
.21
Shares outst
2,584,974
2,610,564


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: WE were up in an attic, three women, opening trunks and tearing the tape off boxes that had been sealed two years earlier.
Dust and the sharp scent of mothballs were tickling our noses, and once in a while one of us would sneeze.
There was no air in this attic and little light, and getting to it meant climbing a series of 2-by-4's nailed to a wall.


Second Debate In New Jersey Turns Nasty
LEAD: In a debate that at times turned nasty, the candidates for governor of New Jersey clashed tonight on more than a dozen issues, including their records on abortion and whether teachers or children infected by the AIDS virus should be allowed to continue in the classroom.


CalFed Plans Sale Of Insurance Unit
LEAD: CalFed Inc. agreed to sell its British property-casualty insurance business to an affiliate of John Head &amp; Partners, a New York merchant banking firm, for about $100 million.
The sale of the Anglo American Insurance Company is part of CalFed's strategy to sell its less profitable operations.
CalFed has already sold a number of insurance businesses and its $125 million credit-card portfolio.


Give Economy Priority In Mayoral Campaign
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nuclear Course Set by Pakistan Worrying U.S.
LEAD: The Bush Administration has certified to Congress that Pakistan does not possess a nuclear device, but it expressed concerns at the same time about Pakistan's continuing efforts to develop nuclear weapons.


The Israeli Occupation Must Come to an End; Worst of Situations
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Israeli Occupation Must Come to an End
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Protests TV Limits
LEAD: The United States formally challenged today a rule set by the European Community that puts informal limits on the amount of non-European-made programs that member nations may broadcast on their television stations.


International Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,900,000,000
2,400,000,000
Net inc
214,000,000
201,000,000
Share earns
1.91
1.74
Shares outst
108,800,000
112,100,000
9mo sales
8,400,000,000
7,000,000,000
Net inc
667,000,000
548,000,000
Share earns
5.91
4.76
Shares outst
109,600,000
111,800,000


Review/Music; Australian Boys' Choir Ends World Tour
LEAD: The Australian Boys' Choral Institute was founded in Melbourne in 1939 and is celebrating its 50th anniversary by sending its Boys' Choir and Vocal Consort on a world tour.
The final concert of the tour was on Tuesday evening at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in Manhattan.


Dollar Gains Despite Moves By Japan and Central Banks
LEAD: The dollar advanced yesterday against most leading foreign currencies despite heavy selling by central banks and an unexpected rise in the Japanese discount rate.
The British pound continued to fall against the dollar.


Events: Architecture, on Street and Paper
LEAD: Brooklyn Architecture, Cobble Hill Association; 718-852-5929.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Cedar vs.
Vinyl  Q.Our house was built in 1950 and is in a rural setting.
We are considering replacing the cedar shingles on the exterior with vinyl siding because we have been told that vinyl offers better insulation and protection from insects, and that it requires very little maintenance.


P.L.O. Puts Off for 2 Years Application to Join Unesco
LEAD: The P.L.O. today deferred for two years a longstanding bid to become a full member of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.


How the A's and the Giants Line Up
LEAD:  Catchers(Average, home runs, r.b.i.)  36Terry Steinbach  (.273, 7, 42; .200, 0, 1)  Hit .216 in second half of season and didn't do much in playoff.  24Ron Hassey  (.228, 5, 23; .167, 0, 1)  Could split time with Steinbach.
Infielders(Average, home runs, r.b.i.)  25Mark McGwire 1b  (.231, 33.


Early Surge and a Late Burst Carry Islanders Past Kings
LEAD: The Islanders took a 5-1 lead over Los Angeles tonight, then survived a furious Kings comeback to emerge with a 7-4 victory.


Walton Sends O'Brien To Bench
LEAD: Kyle Mackey, whose National Football League career consists of three starts in strike games and one incomplete pass two Sundays ago, today became the Jets' quarterback as Coach Joe Walton sent a stunned Ken O'Brien to the bench.


U.S. Issues Sag on Supply Fears
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices sagged in lackluster trading yesterday as worries about placing a flood of forthcoming new issues prompted dealers to sell securities.


A-PLANT NOMINEE FACES QUESTIONS
LEAD: A Pennsylvania lawmaker charged today that the man nominated by President Bush to run the nation's troubled nuclear weapons complex has made contradictory statements to Congress about his conduct in a highly unusual investigation at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


CVN Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVN Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
171,910,000
127,001,000
Net inc
7,439,000
cd2,914,000
Share earns
.35
-
Shares outst
30,355,000
17,474,000
Yr sales
682,727,000
545,089,000
Net inc
b17,924,000
d11,416,000
Share earns
1.01
.65
Shares outst
30,045,000
17,571,000


S.E.C. Chief Is Sworn In
LEAD: At a private White House ceremony attended only by family and close friends, Richard C. Breeden was sworn in today as the 24th chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
248,500,000
236,100,000
Net inc
28,100,000
27,300,000
Share earns
.58
.57
9mo rev
738,600,000
699,200,000
Net inc
83,200,000
95,700,000
Share earns
1.72
1.99
Shares outst
48,500,000
48,100,000


Mcorp Unit to Ameritrust
LEAD: The Ameritrust Corporation, a regional bank holding company based in Cleveland, has agreed to pay $120 million to acquire the Mvestment Corporation, the trust and investment subsidiary of Mcorp, the two companies said today.


80 Youths Slain in Sri Lanka; Officials Suspect Vigilantes
LEAD: The bound bodies of 80 Sinhalese youths, all with gunshot wounds and some burned, were found along a southern road today, the authorities said.


Dinners Aid Cause Of Grouse and Trout
LEAD: rrIf you'd like to contribute to the well-being of a bird that many regard as the supreme challenge for the upland gunner as well as a symbol of unfettered wildness, you might wish to attend the first annual dinner of the Greater New York City chapter of the Ruffed Grouse Society.


Two Nations Pledge to Clean Up Great Lakes
LEAD: William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and Canadian health officials said today that the Great Lakes are facing ''a critical situation'' as a result of toxic contamination and the destruction of wildlife habitat.


Giants Say No to Walker
LEAD: The Giants have no interest in Herschel Walker, the Dallas Cowboys' running back, even though Walker has said he would like to be traded to the Giants.


2 Held Under Fetal Drug Law
LEAD: Two pregnant women who tested positive for drug use when they went to a hospital for abdominal pains have been jailed on charges of distributing cocaine to a minor: their fetuses.
Prosecutors said the arrests marked the first use of a new South Carolina law dealing with such cases.


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clayton Homes (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
62,980,000
62,219,000
Net inc
4,215,000
3,754,000
Share earns
.26
.23
Shares outst
16,088,000
16,040,000


CBS Profits Off 11.5% As Video Venture Lags
LEAD: CBS Inc. said yesterday that its net income for the third quarter fell 11.5 percent, largely reflecting lower income from its videocassette joint venture.


Teacher Accused of Past Anti-Semitism Quits Dinkins Camp
LEAD: A black community organizer has withdrawn from David N. Dinkins's New York City mayoral campaign after the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith called on him to disavow anti-Semitic comments and articles attributed to him 20 years ago.


Malpractice Costs Cut Ranks of Obstetricians
LEAD: The Institute of Medicine said today that a two-year study found that frequent malpractice lawsuits and sharply rising insurance premiums are leading some doctors to stop delivering babies, leaving poor women with only limited obstetrical care.


Phone System Dumping Cited
LEAD: Some small-business telephone systems and subassemblies from Japan and Taiwan are being dumped in the United States at less than fair value, the Commerce Department said today.


Notes on China; 2 Birthdays: Li's at a Villa and Zhao's Under Guard
LEAD: Two of the best-known men in China celebrate their birthdays this month in their homes in the center of the capital, but they are unlikely to exchange cards.


Chhainsa Journal; Food Aplenty for Children, for Bodies and Minds
LEAD: If she had been left to the bleak statistics of rural India, Savita Devi, born 12 years ago into the large family of a poor rural shopkeeper, might have little more to look forward to now than an early marriage, perennial motherhood and a world circumscribed by one small hamlet.


Results Plus
LEAD:  GOLF  Jersey Wins Dodge Cup: The New Jersey section of the Professional Golfers Association captured the sixth annual Dodge Challenge Cup over the Met section of the P.G.A. in a one-hole sudden-death playoff yesterday at Rockaway River Country Club at Denville, N.J.
The two eight-player teams were tied at 72 points after a 27-hole format that included best-ball, alternate-shot and singles matches.


Reviews/Music; Dylan Dusts Off His Wit and Rage
LEAD: Bob Dylan looked and sounded closer to his volatile mid-1960's self than he has in years on Tuesday evening at the Beacon Theater, where he played the first concert of a four-night engagement.
By turns grimly triumphant, sarcastic and comically self-parodying, the singer, who is now 48 years old, conveyed much the same mixture of compressed fury and secret knowledge that defined his mystique more than 20 years ago.


Blushing John Is Favored
LEAD: Blushing John, the Pimlico Special and Hollywood Gold Cup winner, was made the even-money morning-line favorite as a field of eight was drawn yesterday for the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup tomorrow night at Meadowlands Race Track.


Bandag Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
136,415,000
125,525,000
Net inc
19,946,000
18,520,000
Share earns
1.37
1.25
9mo sales
379,376,000
352,983,000
Net inc
53,840,000
49,642,000
Share earns
3.70
3.31


In Glasgow, An Infatuation With Art Deco
LEAD: LAST year the Scottish Opera put on a new production of Johann Strauss's operetta ''Die Fledermaus,'' set in contemporary Glasgow.
Instead of taking place in the usual 19th-century drawing room in Vienna, Act I unfolded in a smart Glasgow apartment with cool white walls.


Utility Refund Bill Loses
LEAD: The House Ways and Means Committee today defeated a bill that could have been worth an average of $223 per household for customers of power, gas and telephone companies.


Review/Television; Another Sleuth Joins the 'Mystery' Team
LEAD: Reeling from the fast-paced adventures and rapid-fire jokes of network prime time?
Relief is at hand.
Tonight at 8 on Channel 13, ''Mystery'' begins its 10th season on public television.
Now joining Miss Marple and Inspectors Morse and Dalgleish in this revolving repertory of sleuths from Britain is Albert Campion, who is a bit of a mystery himself.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Designers Worry About Self-Image
LEAD: IN an era in which stylish mass-produced images are more pervasive than ever, the people responsible for them - art directors, illustrators, typographers and other graphic designers - are doing some soul-searching about their own self-image.


Negotiations Break Off In City Opera Strike
LEAD: A last-minute negotiating session between the New York City Opera and its striking orchestra broke off Tuesday night without hint of a resolution of their differences, both sides reported yesterday.
No new bargaining sessions are scheduled.


Core Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Core Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
61,094,000
55,333,000
Net inc
697,000
2,639,000
Share earns
.07
.27
Yr sales
239,039,000
208,786,000
Net inc
7,100,000
10,212,000
Share earns
.73
1.05
Shares outst
9,775,000
9,764,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.81
8.87
8.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.71
7.63
7.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.68
7.66
7.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.12
8.08
8.73
30-YR.


Superior Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
53,541,000
45,140,000
Net inc
3,021,000
2,530,000
Share earns
.38
.32
9mo sales
185,216,000
143,484,000
Net inc
11,162,000
8,801,000
Share earns
1.41
1.10


Catholic Draft Urges Palestinian 'Sovereignty'
LEAD: Three Roman Catholic archbishops, including John Cardinal O'Connor of New York, have drafted a policy statement for the American church hierarchy calling for Palestinian ''territorial and political sovereignty.''


Measure of Greatness For Two N.H.L. Stars
LEAD: While growing up in the southern Ontario town of Brantford, Wayne Gretzky watched Gordie Howe on ''Hockey Night in Canada'' and marveled at his productivity and his poise under pressure.


New England Bank Discussing Sale
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation, said it would discuss selling part of its leasing business to the Bank of Tokyo.
The bank said it had agreed to negotiate for a short period with the Bank of Tokyo.


Polonia Begins Penalty
LEAD: The Yankees' outfielder Luis Polonia, who pleaded no contest to a charge of having sexual relations with a 15-year-old girl during the team's trip to Milwaukee in mid-August, began community service work Tuesday for a social services agency in Milwaukee.
Polonia, 24 years old, received permission last week from Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Thomas P.


Sunbelt Nursery Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunbelt Nursery Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,681,000
35,968,000
Net inc
1,145,000
c3,489,000
Share earns
.28
-
Shares outst
3,766,000
3,741,000
Yr sales
154,198,000
157,944,000
Net loss
b14,850,000
4,625,000
Shares outst
3,748,000
3,744,000


Analysts Expect More Banks to Post Loan Losses
LEAD: Led by large New York banks that have already announced plans to take heavy losses on their loans to less-developed countries, other banks are likely to report poor earnings for the third quarter, analysts say.


Plan to Decommission Shoreham Lags
LEAD: Three months after the Long Island Lighting Company gave final approval to the sale of its $5.5 billion Shoreham nuclear power plant to New York State, the reactor has been stripped of its uranium fuel rods and its staff has been reduced by more than a fourth.


CNN Newscast Gets 2 Anchors
LEAD: The Cable News Network said this week that Bernard Shaw, a CNN reporter and anchor, and Catherine Crier, a former Texas judge, would be the anchors of ''The World Today.''


Laidlaw Transportation Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Transportation Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
345,862,000
281,602,000
Net inc
b71,136,000
36,858,000
Share earns
.32
.19
Shares outst
218,340,000
179,673,000
Yr rev
1,413,375,000
1,182,974,000
Net inc
b210,785,000
147,406,000
Share earns
1.00
.76
Shares outst
202,704,000
176,974,000


Advanced Micro Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Sales
274,847,000
285,484,000
Net inc
12,086,000
7,179,000
Share earns
.12
.06
Shares outst
82,346,000
81,389,000
9mo sales
819,351,000
877,800,000
Net inc
34,230,000
53,420,000
Share earns
.32
.56
Shares outst
82,090,000
80,973,000


Kinark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinark Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,336,000
7,083,000
Net inc
554,000
393,000
Share earns
.16
.11
9mo sales
23,608,000
20,906,000
Net inc
1,405,000
958,000
Share earns
.40
.27


State Dept. Drafts Plan to Rebuild Bugged American Embassy in Moscow
LEAD: State Department officials say they have drafted a new plan to tear down and rebuild part of the unfinished American Embassy office building in Moscow, which is riddled with Soviet eavesdropping devices.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


Percival Goodman, 85, Synagogue Designer, Dies
LEAD: Percival Goodman, an architect, planner and artist who was one of the nation's leading designers of synagogues, died of lung cancer yesterday at Beth Israel Hospice in New York.
He was 85 years old and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan and in a house of his own design in East Hampton, L.I.


Bush and Senators Meet On the Coup That Failed
LEAD: President Bush met with the Democratic and Republican leaders of the Senate Intelligence Committee today to smooth relations with them over the Administration's handling of the failed coup in Panama.


Federal Express Sets Offering
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation is offering $100 million in sinking fund debentures due 2019 through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.


HOUSE, IN BIG SHIFT, VOTES TO RESTOR AID FOR ABORTIONS
LEAD: In a significant policy reversal long sought by abortion rights advocates, the House of Representatives voted today to allow the Federal Government to pay for abortions for poor women whose pregnancies result from rape or incest.


Surrounded By 'Nice Memories'
LEAD: JULIAN TOMCHIN went for the 50's look; Russell Selman for the 30's.
Mr.
Tomchin, the vice president for creative development at Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. in New York, and Mr.
Selman, a partner in the Chicago law firm of Bell, Boyd &amp; Lloyd, separately chose to decorate their new offices with ''nice memories,'' as Mr.


Brenco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,843,000
12,817,000
Net inc
1,181,000
778,000
Share earns
.12
.08
9mo sales
53,152,000
36,701,000
Net inc
3,885,000
2,429,000
Share earns
.40
.25


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
416,570,000
408,736,000
Net inc
33,720,000
c62,356,000
Share earns
.24
.41
9mo rev
1,282,580,000
1,453,209,000
Net inc
b409,141,000
c20,916,000
Share earns
2.73
.13


Allegheny's Proposals
LEAD: The beleaguered consumer products company Allegheny International Inc. today proposed two alternate reorganization plans, its seventh and eighth since filing for bankruptcy protection in February 1988.
Allegheny is best known for its Sunbeam and Oster lines of appliances.
As with Allegheny's earlier plans, the current ones have opposition.


'Junk Bond' Market Comes Under Selling Pressure
LEAD: The 'junk bond' market came under further selling pressure yesterday, swept with rumors about large blocks of bonds being sold by dealers and investors.
Prices of some large, actively traded issues like RJR Holdings were quoted down a point and a half, or $15 for every $1,000 face amount.


Reviews/Music; 'Holy Blood,' Opera Written by a Rock Drummer
LEAD: The ballyhoo was extreme for the world premiere Tuesday night of Stewart Copeland's opera, ''Holy Blood and Crescent Moon.'' And at the end, this first operatic effort by Stewart Copeland, the drummer of the former rock band the Police, received a standing ovation, with especially fervent cheers from the younger, hipper members of the audience.


S.I. Man Hurt in Car Blast
LEAD: A 24-year-old Staten Island man was critically injured yesterday when an apparent pipe bomb exploded in his car, the police said.
Vincent Ferro was taken to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, where he underwent surgery and was listed in critical but stable condition, said a hospital administrator, Sol Torres.


Rights Chief Offers to Quit; White House Has Yet to Act
LEAD: William Barclay Allen has been seeking to resign as chairman of the United States Civil Rights commission, but the White House has yet to accept the resignation, which was first offered five weeks ago, Government officials said today.


Study Cautious on Surgery For Some Small Aneurysms
LEAD: Small bulging weak spots in the main blood vessel in the abdomen do not need to be routinely repaired in most patients, unlike large weak spots, researchers have concluded.


De Klerk and Tutu Meet on South Africa's Future


Health Worker Seized In '70 Killing in West
LEAD: A New York City Health Department employee was arrested at his East Village apartment yesterday and charged with the murder of a man in Los Angeles 19 years ago, the police said.


Turner System Debt Securities
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System Inc. yesterday priced $750 million in debt securities and $550 million in debentures through Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. as sole underwriter and $200 million in liquid yield option notes through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets as sole underwriter.


ABORTION ACCESS STANDS IN FLORIDA
LEAD: The Florida Legislature ended its special session on abortion today after killing every proposal by Gov.
Bob Martinez for tougher state laws.


Edgar Smith, 69, Dies; Retired Time Executive
LEAD: Edgar P. Smith, a magazine and broadcast executive with Time Inc. who originated the ''Fortune 500'' list of the country's largest businesses, died of cancer Tuesday at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Mendham Township, N.J.


Fragrant Colors
LEAD: To The Home Section:


EAST GERMANS CALL FOR SELF-SCRUTINY ON REFUGEE EXODUS
LEAD: After an unusually long session, the ruling East German Politburo said today that there was a need ''to discuss all basic questions of our society'' and to learn the reasons that sent nearly 50,000 East Germans fleeing to the West.


Generic Drugs: Are They as Good as the Original?
LEAD: Just how good are generic drugs?


New Incentive
LEAD: Female golfers, following the lead of the PGA and Senior Tours, will play a Skins game next year.
The Ladies Professional Golf Association announced yesterday that Nancy Lopez, JoAnne Carner, Jan Stephenson and a golfer yet to be selected will play for $360,000 in prize money at the Stonebriar Country Club in Frisco, Tex., on May 26-27..(


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelby Williams Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,839,000
38,027,000
Net inc
1,612,000
1,422,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
9,480,000
10,162,000
9mo sales
124,880,000
114,270,000
Net inc
4,360,000
5,155,000
Share earns
.46
.51
Shares outst
9,572,000
10,205,000


7 Governors Apparently Balk At Sununu Atom-Waste Plea
LEAD: Despite the personal intervention of the White House chief of staff, seven states today apparently resisted an effort by the Bush Administration to have them store radioactive waste from a nuclear weapons plant in Colorado.


Microcom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microcom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,768,000
14,260,000
Net inc
2,907,000
1,756,000
Share earns
.30
.21
Shares outst
9,842,000
8,207,000
6mo sales
34,780,000
26,623,000
Net inc
5,437,000
3,322,000
Share earns
.59
.40
Shares outst
9,333,000
8,172,000


Anthem Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
82,599,000
70,206,000
Net inc
4,279,000
b3,758,000
Share earns
.38
.33
9mo sales
229,171,000
200,035,000
Net inc
10,802,000
b9,621,000
Share earns
.96
.85


Total System Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total System Services Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,524,000
14,037,000
Net inc
2,796,000
2,467,000
Share earns
.17
.15
9mo rev
48,003,000
41,004,000
Net inc
7,814,000
6,561,000
Share earns
.49
.41


Whitehall Ends Integrated Talks
LEAD: The Whitehall Financial Group called off negotiations to buy five financial-services businesses from struggling Integrated Resources Inc.
Whitehall had said Tuesday that it was having difficulty obtaining financing for the planned $310 million transaction, citing ''worsening conditions'' in the nation's debt-financing markets and concerns over the value of the businesses.


United Insurance Co of Amerca reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Insurance Co of Amerca (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
145,200,000
145,900,000
Net inc
16,100,000
18,400,000
Share earns
3.92
4.48
Shares outst
4,095,327
4,095,336
9mo rev
438,300,000
434,400,000
Net inc
39,700,000
85,200,000
Share earns
9.69
20.80
Shares outst
4,095,327
4,095,442


JRM Holdings Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JRM Holdings Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,833,533
4,650,189
Net loss
1,666,237
487,299
The company said its latest year included a loss from discontinued operations of $549,574, compared with a loss of $236,630 from discontinued operations for previous year.


Frozen Pork Bellies Soar; Energy and Gold Prices Up
LEAD: Prices of frozen pork belly futures climbed sharply yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, supported by stronger cash markets, shrinking supplies and bullish technical signals.


Motorola's Profit Rises 2.3%
LEAD: Motorola Inc. today reported a 2.3 percent rise in third-quarter earnings on a sales increase of 19.9 percent.


Mario Fantini; Was Educator And Author, 62
LEAD: Dr.
Mario D. Fantini, a former dean of the School of Education at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst who had a major role in the decentralization of New York City's public schools, died Friday at Kaiser Permanente Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif., after a long illness.
He was 62 years old and lived in Woodland Hills.


Polygram to Acquire A&amp;M
LEAD: Polygram, the record company owned by Philips N.V., has agreed to buy privately owned A&amp;M Records for about $500 million, Polygram officials said yesterday.


In Mayor Race, Help From Out of Town
LEAD: Speaking at $80,000 a minute, President Bush, in just 10 minutes tonight, is expected to raise one-fourth or more of Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign budget at a dinner in New York City.


Mead Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mead Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
1,197,500,000
1,174,100,000
Net inc
69,700,000
170,500,000
Share earns
1.06
2.56
Shares outst
67,400,000
67,200,000
9mo sales
3,533,800,000
3,419,300,000
Net inc
184,500,000
309,300,000
Share earns
2.83
4.69


American President reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 22
1989
1988
Revenue
542,600,000
534,200,000
Net inc
8,100,000
30,200,000
Share earns
.28
1.30
Shares outst
16,900,000
21,300,000
9mo rev
1,643,000,000
1,512,700,000
Net inc
19,600,000
65,800,000
Share earns
.55
2.82
Shares outst
16,800,000
21,200,000


Latin Presidents Discuss Panama and the Drug War


On Field or Off, Eckersley Battles
LEAD: When the Toronto Blue Jays' manager, Cito Gaston, interrupted the final inning of the American League Championship Series last week to have umpires check Dennis Eckersley's glove for a foreign substance, the Athletics' top reliever grew stormy.
He had never had his glove checked before, he told reporters later.


Q-Med Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Q-Med Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,691,238
2,733,542
Net loss
389,120
75,462
9mo sales
6,046,912
6,813,874
Net loss
1,010,276
2,845,520


Roll-Call Vote to Allow Payment for Some Abortions of Poor
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 216 to 206 by which the House of Representatives agreed today to allow the Federal Government to pay for abortions for poor women whose pregnancies result from rape or incest.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote to get rid of the restrictions.
Voting ''yes'' were 175 Democrats and 41 Republicans.


Nichols Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Research Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,400,715
12,095,461
Net inc
811,617
630,654
Share earns
.23
.18
Year rev
53,891,491
42,576,129
Net inc
2,829,390
2,302,336
Share earns
.82
.68


Review/Film; 2 Old Sisters and a Love Interest for One
LEAD: The best that can be said for ''An Unremarkable Life,'' the genteel soap opera opening today at Cinema 2, is that it strikes a blow against prejudice, provincialism, depression, loneliness and fear of the unknown.
The worst to be said is that the blow lands with an awful thud.


Right and Wrong on Student Ignorance
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Humanities reports appalling ignorance among college students about ''basic landmarks of history and thought.'' A survey of 700 college seniors conducted in the spring found that 25 percent did not know that Christopher Columbus came to America before 1500.
And more than 40 percent did not know when the Civil War was fought.


Mister Donut Bids
LEAD: The International Multifoods Corp. said that it had been approached about selling its Mister Donut franchising business and that it was soliciting other offers for the chain.
Mister Donut, the second-largest doughnut chain in North America after Dunkin' Donuts Inc., has 573 shops.
Its estimated sales for this year are $156 million.


Machinists Ask Inquiry On UAL Deal
LEAD: The buyout of the UAL Corporation has taken an important step forward with the overwhelming vote by its pilots to commit $200 million from their pension fund, but the machinists' union, which is opposed to the deal, asked the Labor Department yesterday to examine the transaction to determine whether it is fair.


USLife Income Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLife Income Fund (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
50,886,159
50,943,237
Per share
9.50
9.51
Net income represented net assets; per share, assets per share.
First quarter Sept. 30 net investment income was $1,214,357, or 23 cents a share, compared with $1,229,091, or 23 cents a share, a year earlier.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Financial World to Get A Redesign Next Month
LEAD: Gentlemen's Quarterly became GQ, House &amp; Garden became HG, and now Financial World magazine has announced that next month it will be transformed as FW.
The new logotype and cover design for the magazine - whose name formally remains Financial World - reflect what its president and publisher says has been its gradual evolution to a more contemporary content.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
George T. Hayes Jr., a senior vice president at McCann-Erickson/New York, has been promoted to director of media planning.


Senior Service Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Senior Service Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,265,144
2,014,981
Net loss
19,449
b66,558
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Vitro S.A. Offering
LEAD: Vitro S.A. of Monterrey, Mexico, said today that it had received from Security Pacific National Bank a commitment to finance Vitro's entire $20-a-share tender offer for the Anchor Glass Corporation.
Security Pacific committed $139 million to buy Anchor Glass shares, pay fees and expenses and pay interest due on margin facility notes.


All New Yorkers Benefit From State Health Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SCREWS can be troublesome to use if they are not selected and installed correctly.
Here is a guide for choosing wood screws, the kind most often needed around the house, and basic instructions for installing them neatly and effectively.


What Price Luxury? Bigger Deficit
LEAD: As the first luxury models from Japan's two biggest automobile makers reach the United States this fall, each car is adding three times as much to the American trade deficit as the far less expensive vehicle it replaces under the current import-quota agreement.


The Real Columbus Day, at Last
LEAD: Notwithstanding the official U.S. holiday this Monday or New York City's Columbus Day parade last Friday, today is Columbus Day.
It is the 497th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's first landing in the New World, properly celebrated as such in most of Latin America and the Caribbean.


WD 40 Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WD 40 Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,581,000
20,593,000
Net inc
5,239,000
4,142,000
Share earns
.69
.54
Yr sales
83,932,000
80,005,000
Net inc
15,755,000
b15,548,000
Share earns
2.08
2.06


Football's Headless Horsemen
LEAD: rrAmong football's the most enduring nicknames in sports is The Four Horsemen of Notre Dame.
But with the National Football League still without a new commissioner, its 28 club owners deserve to be dubbed The Headless Horsemen.


Edward Muldoon, 75, Petroleum Executive
LEAD: Edward Gerard Muldoon, a retired petroleum executive, died Monday at his home in Hilton Head Island, S.C., after a short illness.
He was 75 years old.


Syrian Pilot of MIG-23 Is Said to Defect to Israel
LEAD: A Syrian Air Force major flying a Soviet-made fighter-bomber landed in Israel today, stunning Israeli officials who said the pilot had asked for political asylum.


10 Rules To Prevent Boorish Behavior
LEAD: GARDENERS who are content to take pleasure from their own gardens and only theirs live impoverished lives, I believe.
The best gardeners I know regularly visit other gardens.
In return they often invite people to visit theirs.
Knowledge of gardening is dispensed in books (and newspaper columns), but gardens themselves, not words about gardening, are the best teachers of gardening's arts and crafts.


Toyota Sees Need to Expand Plants
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation's United States manufacturing cpaacity must increase by two-thirds to meet American sales expectations, a company official said.


No Mitchell As Giants Rest and Regroup
LEAD: The unauthorized absence of Kevin Mitchell upstaged routine activity this afternoon as the San Francisco Giants went through a workout at Candlestick Park, their first since winning the National League pennant in dramatic fashion here Monday.


Hickam (Dow B.) Inc(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam (Dow B.) Inc(O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,970,000
2,944,000
Net inc
203,000
255,000
Share earns
.09
.12
9mo sales
8,554,000
8,686,000
Net inc
614,000
804,000
Share earns
.28
.37
Shares outst
2,215,000
2,195,000


Alvin Ailey Is Accused Of Neglecting Professorship
LEAD: Some officials and students at the Borough of Manhattan Community College have accused Alvin Ailey of not appearing at many of the classes he was hired to teach.
Mr.
Ailey, the founder and director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, resigned from his $80,000-a-year post as a distinguished professor at the college on Aug.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Tuesday about the indictment of a sheriff and a police officer accused of a kidnapping plot in a town called Marietta misidentified the state.
It is Oklahoma, not Georgia.


Champions of Choice
LEAD: When the Supreme Court upheld Missouri's restrictions on abortion this summer, the right-to-life movement cheered a major victory.
Right-to-lifers saw the decision as the first step toward abolishing any legally protected right to end a pregnancy.
Events this week in Florida and in Washington suggest that the cheering was premature.


Failed Coup Puts Noriega 'Out on Limb'
LEAD: Within hours after the abortive coup attempt last week, soldiers had plastered over the bullet holes at army headquarters and touched up the paint.
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's base of power never looked better.


Official Says Navy Didn't Malign 2 Sailors on Iowa
LEAD: The Navy's investigation of the explosion that killed 47 sailors in a gun turret of the battleship Iowa last April was ''thorough, complete and expeditious'' and did not malign the character of two sailors on whom the inquiry focused, the Defense Department's inspector general said in a report obtained today.


Federal National Mortgage Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
211,900,000
132,400,000
Share earns
.82
.55
9mo net inc
570,100,000
354,000,000
Share earns
2.24
1.50
The company said all share earnings reflected the 3-for-1 common stock split approved in September 1989.


Milwaukee Helps Pace U.S. As Innovator for Workplace
LEAD: Without methodical planning or a grand design, this breezy and muscular city on Lake Michigan has become a flourishing laboratory of the kinds of workplace innovations that national policy makers and private businesses are only beginning to experiment with.


American Medical May Get New Bids
LEAD: American Medical International Inc., whose directors have accepted a $1.79 billion offer for the hospital concern, said it had been approached by two parties who have indicated that they might make higher bids for the Beverly Hills, Calif., company.


Investors Acquire 7.3% of A.P. Green
LEAD: A New York investment group led by two former executives of the Catalyst Energy Corporation has acquired a 7.3 percent stake in A. P. Green Industries.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, East Rock Partners said that it might seek control of the maker of heat-resistant metals, which is based in Mexico,


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


For Giants, Supremacy In Division Is on the Line
LEAD: After the Giants' 21-19 loss to the Eagles on Sunday in Philadelphia, many of the Giants' players were angry and sullen.
On Monday, they were essentially the same.
Today, they were almost benign.
The past seemed past.


New Spark For Classic Cigarette Lighters
LEAD: REPAIRING old Ronsons, Dunhills, Duponts and Zippos is a dying art.
Many cigarette lighter companies have gone out of business, and some who are still around do not fix old models, encouraging customers to buy new ones instead.
Luckily, there are a few independent repair shops that specialize in the task.


United Telecommunications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Telecommunications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,933,900,000
1,706,900,000
Net inc
94,600,000
b54,000,000
Share earns
.90
.52
Shares outst
104,574,000
102,689,000
9mo rev
5,552,700,000
4,759,400,000
Net inc
261,500,000
b129,400,000
Share earns
2.49
1.25
Shares outst
104,247,000
101,771,000


Oil Is Found Off Angola
LEAD: An international consortium led by Texaco Inc. has discovered high-quality crude oil in a previously unexplored area 17.5 miles off northern Angola, the company announced Tuesday.
The well is producing more than 6,100 barrels a day from about a mile and a half below the ocean floor.


Kaydon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
36,659,000
31,670,000
Net inc
5,494,000
5,074,000
Share earns
.64
.59
Shares outst
8,597,000
8,570,000
9mo sales
112,406,000
101,902,000
Net inc
17,225,000
15,334,000
Share earns
2.01
1.79
Shares outst
8,586,000
8,566,000


N.F.L. Hits Gridlock, Calls for Adjournment
LEAD: The National Football League owners adjourned their meeting here tonight, unable to elect a new commissioner after nearly 20 hours of debate over the past two days.
The owners will meet again Oct. 24-25 in Cleveland in another attempt to name a successor to Pete Rozelle.


Metropolitan Circuits Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Circuits Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Sales
4,799,000
8,134,000
Net loss
b1,100,000
c51,000
6mo sales
11,002,000
16,138,000
Net inc
b4,024,000
cd1,103,000
Share earns
1.60
-
b-After a loss of $14,000 for the quarter and a gain of $5,652,000, or $2.25 a share, for the 6 months, both from discontinued operations.


Argonaut Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Argonaut Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
149,600,000
115,900,000
Net inc
22,700,000
20,400,000
Share earns
2.36
1.91
Shares outst
9,633,014
9,982,677
9mo rev
404,400,000
382,700,000
Net inc
63,400,000
84,300,000
Share earns
6.36
7.69
Shares outst
10,665,671
10,952,988


United Telecom Links Units
LEAD: United Telecommunications Inc. said yesterday that it would combine its local telephone and long-distance businesses, including the U S Sprint Communications Company.


2 Killed in Plane Crash In Connecticut Woods
LEAD: Two men were killed when their single-engine plane crashed tonight in a heavily wooded area near Route 3, the police said.


Police Halt Protest in Taiwan
LEAD: About 2,000 police officers drove demonstrators away from a jail with clubs and water cannons early today and at least 28 people were reported injured.
The protesters demanded the release of a dissident publisher.
Demonstrations outside the Tucheng jail in a Taipei suburb began on Tuesday, Taiwan's National Day, when 10,000 people gathered to demand the immediate release of the publisher, Hsu Hsin Liang..


Racial Melees Disturb Two Schools in South
LEAD: One student was stabbed and six others arrested today in a racially inflamed melee at an Alabama high school, and at least 300 students at Central High School in Little Rock, Ark., were involved in similar fistfights, the authorities and witnesses said.


Companies
LEAD: May Department Stores agreed to sell Caldor and to spin off its Venture Stores unit, ending 19 years of business in discount retailing.
Caldor will be sold to an investor group that includes members of management for $500 million in cash and the assumption of $52 million in debt and lease obligations.


Teledyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
875,800,000
838,700,000
Net inc
78,700,000
77,400,000
Share earns
7.10
6.74
Shares outst
11,082,569
11,484,775
9mo rev
2,647,800,000
2,557,400,000
Net inc
196,000,000
293,600,000
Share earns
17.64
25.36


Gannett Co reports earnings for 13wk to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gannett Co (NYSE)
13wk to Sept 24
1989
1988
Revenue
827,882,000
804,314,000
Net inc
83,135,000
75,121,000
Share earns
.52
.47
39wk rev
2,549,615,000
2,409,202,000
Net inc
270,140,000
246,618,000
Share earns
1.68
1.52


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Noriega is very astute.
The next time, he has to be the first to be killed.''  - Adela Bonilla de Giroldi, widow of Panamanian coup leader.  [ A12:2. ]


Hong Kong Leader Tries to Tone Down Criticism of Beijing
LEAD: With Hong Kong's relationship to China growing steadily worse, the colony's governor gave an important policy address today and carefully avoided provoking Beijing.


New Ice Partnership: Soviet Skating Stars Join Torvill and Dean
LEAD: It is obviously not your usual ice show when Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, the British ice-dance idols, team up with top Soviet skaters to evoke the life of the Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaten and his wife, Nefertiti.
The inspiration behind Mr.
Dean's choreography, moreover, comes from the ''Egyptian'' ballets of the mother and father of American modern-dance, Ruth St.


Tutu and de Klerk 'Talk About Talks'
LEAD: Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu and two other clergymen met today with President F. W. de Klerk in the President's first in-depth meeting with leaders of the anti-apartheid movement since he took office last month.


Motorola Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motorola Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,408,000,000
2,007,000,000
Net inc
89,000,000
87,000,000
Share earns
.69
.67
9mo sales
6,968,000,000
6,057,000,000
Net inc
366,000,000
321,000,000
Share earns
2.82
2.48


Money Is Motive as Dinkins Takes Campaign Out of Town
LEAD: He is running for mayor of New York City, but David N. Dinkins spent today in Washington, the fourth day out of the last six that he has campaigned in a place where there are no votes.


Russell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
187,747,000
149,702,000
Net inc
20,184,000
16,514,000
Shares outst
40,899,787
39,353,679
Share earns
.49
.42
9mo sales
484,105,000
379,708,000
Net inc
43,170,000
36,297,000
Share earns
1.05
.92
Shares outst
40,829,591
39,358,364


Washington Talk; Congress Takes Notice Of the Youngest Citizens
LEAD: Baby-kissing is an old political tradition, but lobbyists for the babies have historically had a rough time translating photo opportunities into money and support.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 6
Sept. 29
Oct. 7
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.9
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.8
223.7
220.3
Distillate stocks
121.8
122.9
130.1
Crude imports, daily
6.3
6.3
5.2
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.8
2.0
Crude stocks
337.1
333.3
324.1
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
88.3
89.4
83.7


A Kobacker Moves Up In Family Shoe Concern
LEAD: The Kobacker Company, which operates a national shoe store chain, has another Kobacker in top management.
Arthur J. Kobacker, chairman, yesterday announced the appointment of his son, Alfred J. Kobacker 2d, as president and chief operating officer.


Furor Over Panama: It's Helms vs. White House
LEAD: As the debate over Panama policy continues in the capital, President Bush and his aides still seem puzzled over how to manage their basic political problem: a fierce disagreement between the White House and Senator Jesse Helms.
Mr.
Helms, a North


Murdoch View On MGM/UA
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, owner of a multinational collection of publications and entertainment companies, said today that he was lukewarm about re-entering the race to take control of the MGM/UA Communications Company, which on Tuesday terminated a $1.5 billion agreement to be acquired by Qintex Australia Ltd.


Blacks for Giuliani: Outnumbered, but Pressing On
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani ended a hard day of campaigning one night last week in a long, narrow room in a Harlem restaurant.
About 30 people were there for a reception sponsored by the New York State Black Republicans Council.


Rare Thrill for Tass: Joshing Over Its U.F.O. Report
LEAD: The report by the Soviet press agency Tass that lanky, three-eyed creatures took a stroll through a Soviet park last month has caused such reverberations in the United States that they have bounced back to Tass itself.


Cabre Exploration reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabre Exploration
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,784,000
5,674,000
Net inc
1,067,000
770,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Results are in Canadian dollars.


U.N. Unable to Verify Abuses by Swapo
LEAD: United Nations investigators said today that they had been unable to verify accusations that Namibian guerrillas imprisoned, tortured and killed hundreds from their own ranks between 1977 and 1989.


CRUCIAL JET PART FOUND BY FARMER
LEAD: A farmer harvesting corn has found the engine part suspected of causing the United Airlines jumbo jet crash that killed 112 people at the Sioux City airport in July.


A Sculpture of Shadows and a Roof With a View
LEAD: TWELVE vignettes by New York designers will be on view at the Great American Salvage Company, which sells architectural antiques at 34 Cooper Square (near Third Avenue and Sixth Street).


Kidder Selling 8 Retail Offices
LEAD: Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company announced the sale Tuesday of eight Florida and Puerto Rico retail offices to Merrill Lynch &amp; Company for undisclosed terms.


The Ruckus at Rockefeller
LEAD: Rockefeller University, in New York City, is in turmoil.
The board of trustees has offered the presidency to David Baltimore of M.I.T.
Some faculty members are concerned about his handling of a disputed scientific experiment that is still being investigated by the National Institutes of Health and a House subcommittee headed by Representative John Dingell.


Campaign Matters;
LEAD: Sitting amid a sea of paper and sipping cranberry drink on ice, Terrie Henry sounded yesterday about the way anyone would who is having the President of the United States and a thousand other people to dinner tonight.
But she won't even get to eat.
Mrs.
Henry's telephone rings.
An assistant hands her a pink message slip.


Trump Copter Rotor Recovered in New Jersey
LEAD: Crash investigators recovered yesterday the tail rotor of a helicopter that apparently broke apart and plunged into a wooded area in New Jersey, killing three executives of Donald J. Trump's Atlantic City casinos.


Magma Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Power (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,635,000
6,494,000
Net inc
7,892,000
2,623,000
Share earns
.36
.12
9mo rev
47,070,000
19,511,000
Net inc
15,302,000
6,991,000
Share earns
.70
.33


Andover Togs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Togs (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,404,000
25,847,000
Net inc
714,000
605,000
Share earns
.22
.19
9mo sales
70,617,000
54,385,000
Net inc
1,754,000
1,081,000
Share earns
.54
.33
Shares outst
3,237,000
3,240,546


Virtues and Pitfalls of TV Pilots
LEAD: Last month CBS announced a new policy of making pilots for weekly television series.
CBS decided to spread out making pilots over the full year rather than concentrating it in the winter and spring, as all three networks traditionally have.


Chase Has $1.1 Billion Loss
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation announced yesterday that it had lost $1.1 billion in the third quarter, about the same amount as it had estimated last month.


Reviews/Music; Perle's 'Windows of Order' Has Premiere
LEAD: When a new musical score is introduced to an audience, the accompanying pieces on the program are generally chosen without much concern for historical context.
The audience is seldom encouraged to hear connections between the new piece and anything composed before it.
The Juilliard String Quartet's program on Tuesday evening at the Juilliard Theater may or may not have been so casually planned, but it managed to set off interesting resonances.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,338,270
1,395,052
Net inc
784,601
841,604
Share earns
.28
.30
9mo rev
3,897,462
3,963,546
Net inc
2,241,913
2,302,042
Share earns
.79
.81


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A FEW weeks ago Sally Minard, an advertising executive in Manhattan, watched as her 15-year-old daughter, Gillian Garfinkle, went out on her first date with a boy.


Health &amp; Rehabilitaton Properties Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health &amp; Rehabilitaton Properties Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,906,000
4,773,000
Net inc
1,851,000
1,823,000
Share earns
.19
.18
9mo rev
16,709,000
13,981,000
Net inc
5,674,000
5,904,000
Share earns
.57
.59


Natural But More Durable
LEAD: IN the early 80's, Michele Oka Doner lived in a house in Michigan with three fireplaces. ''When I was lazy and sitting in front of one of the fireplaces, I used wood branches instead of iron fire tools to poke the fire,'' said Ms.
Doner, a sculptor and furniture designer in Manhattan.


Schiller Named Again To U.S. Committee Post
LEAD: Harvey Schiller, the commissioner of the Southeastern Conference, was named yesterday as the new executive director of the United States Olympic Committee.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Roto-Rooter Services Co., to Ketchum Yellow Pages, a subsidiary of Ketchum Communications, with a budget of $4 million.


Walgreen Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walgreen Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,341,069,000
1,201,936,000
Net inc
33,713,000
31,945,000
Share earns
.54
.52
Yr sales
5,380,133,000
4,883,520,000
Net inc
154,242,000
129,062,000
Share earns
2.50
2.10


Market Place; Shipping Outlook Divides Experts
LEAD: SHIPPING executives are turning to stock markets to finance the creation of new shipping companies as the industry shows signs of recovery from an eight-year slump.
The infusion of cash from Wall Street has contributed to nearly a tripling of second-hand ship prices over the last several years, but industry experts are divided on the long-term outlook for speculation in oceangoing vessels.


Reviews/Music; Icons Who Rock: The Stones Play Shea
LEAD: With planes regularly roaring overhead and sightlines more appropriate for landscape artists than for concertgoers, Shea Stadium isn't the perfect setting for a rock show.
But the Rolling Stones, who opened a six-night engagement on Tuesday, quickly made 66,000 fans feel comfortable.
Four or five songs into its two-and-a-half-hour set, the group dug into the rhythm and proved it could still summon the authority necessary to maintain its status as one of the world's greatest rock-and-roll bands.


The New Soviet Mafia
LEAD: If you were a racketeer seeking huge monetary reward with little potential of getting caught, what racket would you choose and where would you go?


Valvano Steps Down
LEAD: Jim Valvano has formally stepped down as athletic director at North Carolina State and has been replaced on an interim basis by Harold Hopfenburg, the school's associate dean of engineering since 1987.


Summations Are Begun In Garcia Case
LEAD: The prosecution's bribery case against Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee, is based entirely on the testimony of a ''liar, a perjurer and a thief,'' Mrs.
Garcia's lawyer asserted yesterday in his summation to the jury.


Ex-Military President Goes Free in Argentina
LEAD: Leopoldo Galtieri, a former military President sentenced to 12 years in prison for leading Argentina into the disastrous war with Britain for control of the Falkland Islands, was freed today by presidential pardon.


Criticized on AIDS Drug, Maker Will Give It to Some
LEAD: A pharmaceutical company accused of overcharging for a drug that prevents pneumonia in people infected with the AIDS virus says it will give the drug away to the uninsured but will not reduce the price for others.


Gandhi Draws Fire in Parliament
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was shouted down by opposition calls for his resignation today as he tried to address the Indian Parliament at the opening of a special legislative session.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article by The Associated Press on Aug. 18 about the denial of parole for Elmer (Geronimo) Pratt, a former Black Panther Party leader, referred incorrectly to his use of heroin.
In a California parole hearing, remarks about his drug use dealt with the period before, not after, he was imprisoned for the murder of a woman in 1968.


Delay of at Least 5 Days Seen for Shuttle Mission
LEAD: Technicians began removing a faulty engine control unit from the space shuttle Atlantis today as officials predicted that the craft would be launched no earlier than next Tuesday.


3 Teen-Agers Arrested in Bias Attack
LEAD: Three Brooklyn teen-agers were arrested late Tuesday and charged with assaulting three Jewish students at Brooklyn College in what the police have characterized as an anti-Semitic attack.


Japan Lifts Discount Rate; Dollar Still Gains
LEAD: The Bank of Japan surprised the foreign exchange market here today by abruptly raising its discount rate a half-percentage point in an effort to stem the dollar's surge.
But the increase, announced at midday, had a negligible impact, prompting concerns that central banks are running out of tools for taming the dollar.


Personal Health
LEAD: Many women at or past the age of menopause are worried and confused about taking hormones to replace the ones their ovaries are no longer producing in ''adequate'' amounts.


Ferre's Clothes Dazzle, As Krizia's Softly Charm
LEAD: The spring and summer collections here have taken a turn toward grandeur.
Not content with the cheerful, relaxed look that has dominated the runways since the shows began on Saturday, Gianfranco Ferre presented a collection of elaborately styled ready-to-wear clothes that had the precision detailing of made-to-order fashions.


Town &amp; Country reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Town &amp; Country (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
89,022,000
38,310,000
Net loss
3,488,000
b87,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
11,843,000
10,022,000
6mo sales
194,097,000
80,795,000
Net loss
2,769,000
b1,761,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
11,836,000
10,017,000


Structural Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Structural Dynamics (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,449,000
19,163,000
Net inc
2,251,000
1,509,000
Share earns
.34
.23
9mo rev
67,537,000
53,643,000
Net inc
5,770,000
3,754,000
Share earns
.87
.58


Wrangling On Gains Tax Continues
LEAD: Congressional negotiations on a budget deal that would provide a separate vote on cutting the capital gains tax continued today, marked by a round of partisan finger-pointing.


Poll on Values Ranks Abortion Issue Low
LEAD: Politicians who say they are fighting for family values by battling abortion and promoting prayer in school may be off target, a new study on the American family indicates.


Pennsylvania Power and Light
LEAD: The Pennsylvania Power and Light Company is offering $250 million in first-mortgage bonds due 2019 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


U.S. Tells of Its Concern About Olivetti
LEAD: President Bush told the President of Italy today that the United States was concerned that an Italian company might have sold technology for a supersonic jetfighter to the Soviet Union, officials said.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Dr.
Vivian Chang misstated some aspects of her career.
At her death she was both an assistant surgeon general of the United States Public Health Service and regional health administrator for the Federal Department of Health and Human Services in New York City.


Books of The Times; Trying to Peer Into the Animal Mind
LEAD:  Lily Pond  Four Years With a Family of Beavers  By Hope Ryden  Illustrated. 256 pages.
William A. Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.
A Cat Is Watching  A Look at the Way Cats See Us  By Roger A. Caras  Illustrated. 238 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $17.95.


Service Merchandise reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Service Merchandise (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
621,956,000
596,711,000
Net loss
11,690,000
b762,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
1,904,245,000
1,796,181,000
Net loss
2,250,000
4,130,000
b-Net income


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WPP Shift in Europe
LEAD: Michel Richardot, the vice chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Europe, has joined his agency's parent company, the WPP Group P.L.C., as group director of Europe.
Mr.
Richardot, who will report to WPP's group chief executive, Martin Sorrell, had helped build Ogilvy's agency network in France as president and later chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Paris.


Mosinee Paper Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
57,505,000
58,751,000
Net inc
2,910,000
3,093,000
Share earns
.40
.40
9mo sales
174,615,000
179,128,000
Net inc
10,192,000
5,893,000
Share earns
1.41
.76


Syrian MIG Pilot's Feat Worries the Israelis
LEAD: The Israeli military formally opened an investigation today to determine how a Syrian MIG-23 fighter-bomber pilot managed to fly his plane unhindered deep into Israel on Wednesday, land at a private airstrip, request asylum and wait 20 minutes before he saw or heard from anyone in the Israeli Air Force.


A Blend Of Rhythms, Urban And Exotic
LEAD: Tonight's bill of Zahar and Carbon, two of the downtown scene's best bands, is a typical evening at the Knitting Factory, the sort of night that makes out-of-town music fans think, if momentarily, about moving to New York.
It's typical not just because of the level of musicianship, but because of the emphasis on rhythm -on the joy, pleasure and sheer grinding noise of it.


Concerns About Polish Deal Bring Gains in Pork Bellies
LEAD: Frozen pork belly futures prices soared the permitted limit of 2 cents a pound yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange amid growing supply concerns rooted in the Government's decision to ship pork bellies to Poland.


How, and Why, the Dalai Lama Won the Peace Prize
LEAD: People close to the Nobel Peace Prize selection process say that the Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan leader, gained the advantage over other candidates, including President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, largely because of the brutal suppression of the democracy movement in China and the international outrage that followed.


Reviews/Music; A Voice of the Windy City
LEAD: Patricia Barber, a pianist and singer who has been packing them in for five years at a tiny room in Chicago appropriately called the Gold Star Sardine Bar, made her New York debut Tuesday evening at Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, where she is appearing through Oct. 28.


Gramm-Rudman? Let the Ax Fall
LEAD: Now that the House has passed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989, the deficit reduction bill designed to avoid automatic spending cuts under Gramm-Rudman, I have some advice for the members of the Senate, where the debate has stalled.
If you think that the Federal budget deficit should be reduced, the surest way to accomplish that goal is to shelve this legislation and allow the Gramm-Rudman spending cuts to go into effect next


Nellcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nellcor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
30,302,000
29,024,000
Net inc
2,484,000
3,000,000
Share earns
.17
.21


INSIDE
LEAD:  5 Win Nobel Prizes In Chemistry and Physics  Thomas R. Cech of the University of Colorado and Sidney Altman of Yale won the chemistry prize.
The physics prize went to Norman F. Ramsey of Harvard, Hans G. Dehmelt of the University of Washington and Wolfgang Paul of West Germany.
Page A10.
A Surprise on Wall St.


Results Plus
LEAD:  GOLF  Beck Advances in Match Play: Chip Beck trounced Aki Ohmachi of Japan, 8 and 6, yesterday to advance to the second round of the world match-play championship at Virginia Water, England.
Beck was the only one of three Americans to win opening-day matches of 36 holes over the 6,945-yard, par-72 Wentworth Golf Club course.


TV Weekend; Those Eccentric and Lovable English
LEAD: The 19th season of ''Masterpiece Theater'' begins Sunday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13 with a 90-minute drama entitled ''And a Nightingale Sang.'' With mini-series scarce in Britain these days, especially those of the lavish ''Jewel in the Crown'' variety, shorter productions will be presented more frequently on this prestigious imports showcase.


Review/Film; Alley and Travolta in 'Look Who's Talking'
LEAD: Amy Heckerling, who wrote and directed ''Look Who's Talking,'' says her own daughter was the inspiration for the film, a comedy in which a small baby's thoughts are heard on the soundtrack.


Fuel and Heating Oil Spilled in Antarctica
LEAD: About 50,000 gallons of jet fuel, gasoline and heating oil leaked onto the ice near the main United States base in Antarctica, the National Science Foundation said today.


F.B.I. Admits Bid to Disrupt Lawyers Guild
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation yesterday acknowledged a broad effort to disrupt and investigate the National Lawyers Guild for decades, although Government officials decided as far back as 1958 that they could not prove charges that the organization was subversive.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  CANADA COMES SOUTH


Washington at Work; Maestro as Political Symbol: The Americanization of Mstislav Rostropovich
LEAD: As Mstislav Rostropovich tiptoed through a news conference with the Soviet Ambassador earlier this year to announce the National Symphony Orchestra's plans to tour the Soviet Union, some of his musicians were struck by how he balanced his evident excitement and the diplomatic euphemism fashioned for the event.


Not Everybody Wants to Sign a Living Will; Rights of New Yorkers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
61,446,000
53,327,000
Per share
.93
.84
9mo net inc
177,778,000
151,772,000
Per share
2.74
2.40


Lebanese Factions Seem to Be Moving Toward Agreement
LEAD: Lebanon's warring religious factions appeared early today to be close to an agreement that would give Muslims a significantly greater role in national affairs.


National Community Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
12,200,000
11,100,000
Per share
1.17
1.07
9mo net inc
35,900,000
30,700,000
Per share
3.44
2.96


Exxon Capital
LEAD: The Exxon Capital Corporation is offering $200 million in noncallable capital notes, due in 1994, through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The 8 1/4 percent notes are priced at 99.75 to yield 8.312 percent, or about 37 basis points more than the Treasury's five-year note.
The notes are rated Aaa by Moody's and AAA by S.&amp; P.


Engine Disk Was Cracked Before Jet Took Off, Officials Say
LEAD: The large metal disk that broke away from the tail engine of a United Airlines jet over Iowa soon before the plane crashed at Sioux City last July was cracked before the aircraft took off, Federal safety investigators said today.


Bush, at Dinner for Giuliani, Praises 'America's Greatest Crime Fighter'
LEAD: President Bush praised Rudolph W. Giuliani last night as ''America's greatest crime fighter'' and said a Mayor Giuliani ''will have a friend in the Oval Office.''


Farmer Gets $110,000 Check
LEAD: Janice Sorenson, the farmer who found the fan disk suspected of causing the DC-10 crash in Sioux City, Iowa, in July, received a $116,000 reward check yesterday from the engine's manufacturer, the General Electric Company.


7-Year Fannie Mae Offering Is Priced With 8.474% Yield
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association took advantage of lower interest rates yesterday and priced a $900 million debenture issue in a nonscheduled offering through its regular selling group.


Rights Leaders Denouncing New Book by Ex-King Aide
LEAD: A new book by a former top lieutenant of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. is generating bitter denunciations from civil rights leaders and black officials and resurrecting old divisions among the followers of Dr.
King.


Jail Guard Drug Testing Upheld, 3- 2
LEAD: A plan to randomly test more than 10,000 correction officers in New York City's prisons for drug use was narrowly upheld yesterday by a New York appeals court.


Upbeat Ending to U.N. Talks
LEAD: Members of the 44th United Nations General Assembly ended their annual exchange of views on world problems today.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Fred Hersch


Review/Theater; Casualties of Officialdom: Language and Truth
LEAD: How do you write a truthful play in which everyone is a liar?
Set it on Capitol Hill, of course.
In ''Mastergate,'' Larry Gelbart's excoriating satire of the Iran-contra hearings, the witnesses before a Congressional committee aspire only to be ''steadfastly evasive and selectively honest,'' and they don't even succeed at that.


Victory Is Upheld
LEAD: The British Boxing Board of Control, meeting in London yesterday, ruled that Tony Wilson could keep his victory over Steve McCarthy on his record, even though Wilson's mother landed the winning blows with her high-heeled shoe in a light-heavyweight bout in Southampton, England, Sept. 21.


Westinghouse Credit Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Credit Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
35,500,000
43,200,000
9mo net inc
110,700,000
112,900,000
Third-quarter results last year included a $14.3 million ater-tax benefit from the sale of the company's fixed asset lending division.


Melee Erupts as Pope Speaks in East Timor
LEAD: Praying on a barren plain said to have been a killing field for Government troops, Pope John Paul II admonished Indonesia today to respect human rights in the disputed province of East Timor, where he said ''many innocent people have died.''


Senate Interferes in Azerbaijan's Affairs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elcor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
43,443,000
39,059,000
Net inc
b3,328,000
1,504,000
Share earns
.47
.22
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $1,131,000, or 16 cents a share.


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,870,000
4,895,000
Per share
.57
.57
9mo net inc
14,541,000
12,829,000
Per share
1.70
1.51


South Pole Ozone Is at Lowest Level, Researchers Report
LEAD: The ozone in the stratosphere over the South Pole has equalled the lowest level that scientists have measured, space agency scientists reported today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Travel Related Services Co. promoted Norma J. Arnold and Steven W. Alesio to senior vice presidents.


PANAMANIAN TELLS OF GOAL OF REBELS
LEAD: A Panamanian sergeant whose commander was slain leading an abortive coup against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega said today that while the uprising seemed well planned, he and other lower-ranking officers had been informed of it less than an hour before it began.


Teleflex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teleflex Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
78,356,000
76,014,000
Net inc
5,253,000
4,985,000
Share earns
.48
.46
9mo rev
259,330,000
235,086,000
Net inc
19,296,000
16,981,000
Share earns
1.77
1.57


Fur Vault reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fur Vault (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Revenue
16,899,000
13,576,000
Net loss
2,406,000
2,600,000
Shares outst
12,548,000
12,560,000


Economic Scene; Another Autumn Of Fiscal Discord
LEAD: WITH the new fiscal year 1990 under way, and the United States operating without a Federal budget, economic battles are raging in Washington from Capitol Hill to the White House to Constitution Avenue.


Dollar Off in Slow Trading; Dealers Await New Data
LEAD: The dollar fell in subdued dealings yesterday as traders awaited the release of new economic data.


Mellon Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
63,000,000
c166,000,000
Per share
1.16
-
9mo net inc
b204,000,000
c113,000,000
Per share
4.15
-
b-Included extraordinary gain of $29 million on the early retirement of debt.


Rubbermaid Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubbermaid Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
351,505,000
320,431,000
Net inc
b32,560,000
28,140,000
Share earns
.44
.38
9mo sales
1,034,088,000
905,627,000
Net inc
90,075,000
78,160,000
Share earns
1.22
1.06


Not Everybody Wants to Sign a Living Will; Additional Instrument
LEAD: To the Editor:


6th Indicted in Hawkins Death
LEAD: A sixth white defendant, Charles Stressler, was indicted yesterday for murder in connection with what the police have described as the racially motivated slaying of a black teen-ager on Aug. 23 in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn.
The victim, Yusuf K. Hawkins, 16 years old, was fatally shot after he and some friends went to the largely white neighborhood to look at a used car that was for sale.


Susan P. Riley, Doctor, Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Susan Patricia Riley and Thomas James Fleming Jr. were married yesterday by Justice Ernst H. Rosenberger of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in his chambers in New York.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Riley of Eltingville, S.I.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


Editor Resigns Post at U.S. News
LEAD: Roger Rosenblatt, the editor of U.S.
News and World Report for the last 14 months who has continued an active writing career, resigned yesterday.
In his letter of resignation to the chairman and editor in chief, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, who had wanted him to take a more active management role, he cited commuting difficulties.


INB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* INB Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
15,407,000
14,064,000
Per share
.88
.80
9mo net inc
43,522,000
40,679,000
Per share
2.49
2.34


Dow Falls By 13.52, To 2,759.84
LEAD: Stocks fell for the third session in a row yesterday, and the Dow Jones industrial average declined 13.52 points, to 2,759.84.


Eldorado Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldorado Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,027,000
982,000
Per share
.41
.40
9mo net inc
2,786,000
2,376,000
Per share
1.12
.99


Treasury Securities Prices Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose in light trading yesterday, as dealers awaited reports this morning on the economy and inflation.


Valley Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Resources Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,997,000
9,422,000
Net loss
921,000
656,000
Yr rev
59,686,000
56,439,000
Net inc
2,982,000
2,711,000
Share earns
.78
.72


Genlyte Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
123,432,000
117,694,000
Net inc
2,842,000
2,621,000
Share earns
.22
.20
Shares outst
13,030,000
13,078,000
9mo sales
381,192,000
367,755,000
Net inc
9,131,000
8,820,000
Share earns
.70
.67
Shares outst
13,042,000
13,078,000


Our Towns; Gadgets to Fight What Goes Bump In Your Night
LEAD: Melanie Franklin and her husband, Antony Lee, conceived of a security supermarket about two years ago when they were living in an apartment in New York City.


NBC Sought MGM/UA Deal Stake
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company said yesterday that it had expressed an interest in becoming an equity investor in an Australian entertainment concern's proposed buyout of the MGM/UA Communications Company.


Northwest Sets Deal For 90 Boeing Planes
LEAD: Northwest Airlines said today that it had placed orders and taken options for 90 jetliners worth from the Boeing Company worth $5.2 billion.


Kemp Suggests Pierce Testify And Adds, 'I Think He Will'
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp suggested today that his predecessor, Samuel R. Pierce Jr., should break his silence and testify before Congress about allegations of political favoritism that Mr.
Kemp said had ''tragically'' stained Mr.
Pierce's reputation.


Ross Reid, 72, Lawyer and Executive, Dies
LEAD: Ross Reid, a lawyer and business executive, died on Monday at New York Hospital after a long illness.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Giants Call on Riles For New Hitting Role
LEAD: With Kevin Mitchell back at practice and his one-day excursion home to San Diego being accepted as a ''failure of communication,'' attention at the San Francisco Giants' workout today shifted to the self-effacing but important Ernest Riles.


Msgr. Arthur F. Bukowski, Educator, 83
LEAD: Msgr.
Arthur Francis Bukowski, president of Aquinas College here for 32 years, died Tuesday of heart disease.
He was 83 years old.


Sale of Stamps for $1 Million Sets Record for a U.S. Issue
LEAD: A block of four United States stamps, the ''Inverted Jenny'' on which the plane in the center is upside down, was sold for $1 million last night, the highest price ever paid for an American philatelic item, a spokeswoman for Christie's auction house said.


Soviet Sale By Olivetti
LEAD: Ing.
C.
Olivetti S.p.A. of Italy, which shipped high-technology machine tools to the Soviet Union, said today that the sale had been approved by Italian authorities.


Ford to Sell Its Steel Unit
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it had signed a memorandum of understanding to sell its Rouge Steel Company to an investor group.


Panel Proposes To Raise Fares In Taxis 11.5%
LEAD: The Taxi and Limousine Commission yesterday recommended raising New York taxicab fares an average of 11.5 percent next year and replacing the night surcharge with one for the rush hours in hopes of encouraging additional cabdrivers to work in the peak hours.


Saatchi Is Getting a New Chief
LEAD: Maurice Saatchi, the co-founder of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, said yesterday that he would relinquish the position of chief executive in favor of a 43-year-old French executive barely known in the advertising business.


Review/Theater; Feydeau's 'Flea in Her Ear,' at Long Wharf
LEAD: John Tillinger's production of ''A Flea in Her Ear,'' which is opening the 25th season at the Long Wharf Theater, is performed with split-second synchronicity.
The mechanics of the farce never show as the actors and audience are swept away by the sport of the chase - the slammed doors, the revolving beds, the frazzled looks and the mistaken identities that confuse an irate husband with a drunken hotel porter.


Knicks Open With Nuggets
LEAD: With more plays for Patrick Ewing, a more controlled up-tempo game and emphasis on halfcourt defense rather than the press, the Knicks open an eight-game exhibition schedule Friday against the Denver Nuggets at Madison Square Garden.


How to Get Those Bright Colors on Film
LEAD: Photographing the spectacular colors of autumn requires no secret techniques, only a modicum of knowledge about cameras and films.
Even a simple camera that does all the focusing and exposure calculations for you is sufficient, provided its idea of the perfect picture coincides with yours.
And off-the-shelf amateur films are fully capable of rendering all the bright hues and subtle shades of fall, although some do it better than others.


Coca-Cola Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,302,564,000
2,128,320,000
Net inc
356,034,000
294,392,000
Share earns
1.03
.81
Shares outst
344,091,000
362,609,000
9mo sales
6,716,874,000
6,311,002,000
Net inc
950,301,000
807,988,000
Share earns
2.73
2.20
Shares outst
348,387,000
367,181,000


Hon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
152,513,000
133,513,000
Net inc
10,553,000
b7,090,000
Share earns
.61
.38
Shares outst
17,254,651
18,634,718
9mo sales
440,074,000
392,448,000
Net inc
27,763,000
b16,431,000
Share earns
1.59
.88
Shares outst
17,513,039
18,733,940


Green Tree Acceptance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green Tree Acceptance (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
10,320,000
6,444,000
Share earns
.70
.33
Shares outst
11,494,622
12,538,261
9mo net inc
20,800,000
b17,156,000
Share earns
1.21
-
Shares outst
11,450,509
12,561,132


Neighborhood Gangs Line Up for the Series
LEAD: The last time two gangs from the same neighborhood tangled in the World Series, Roger Craig was pitching for one of them.
Now the manager of the San Francisco Giants, Craig was overshadowed in the 1956 Series by his teammates in the Brooklyn Dodgers' lineup and his opponents in the Yankees' lineup.


Reviews/Music; San Francisco Symphony Plays Beethoven's 'Eroica'
LEAD: There is a feeling abroad that pieces like Beethoven's ''Eroica'' symphony, which the San Francisco Symphony brought to Carnegie Hall Tuesday evening, are all but played out - that they have been interpreted so much, played so often, heard so repeatedly that somehow they just don't work any more.
This speculation follows from the fact that lots of musicians and critics find themselves a little bored at a lot of performances of the canonic classics by artists and organizations that should be expected to do them well.


House Votes to Widen Oversight of C.I.A.
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to give lawmakers broad access to the Central Intelligence Agency's most private analyses of its own failings.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  New Cabaret Artist


Barnett Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
64,900,000
59,200,000
Per share
1.02
.95
9mo net inc
191,700,000
170,000,000
Per share
3.04
2.73


Mr. de Klerk Earns an Indulgence
LEAD: South Africa's President, F. W. de Klerk, took two strides this week in pursuit of his ''mandate for change.'' By releasing eight prominent political prisoners and holding ''talks about talks'' with three black leaders of the anti-apartheid movement, he seemed to signal that he was serious about negotiating an end to whites-only rule and finding a formula for enfranchising blacks.


Consolidated Natural Gas
LEAD: The Consolidated Natural Gas Company of Pittsburgh yesterday priced $150 million in sinking fund debentures, due in 2019, through competitive bidding won by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


U.S.-Soviet Drug Plan
LEAD: Officials of the United States and Soviet Olympic Committees today completed the fine-tuning of their bilateral agreeement to test each other's athletes for drugs, and said testing would start in 1990.


Hancock Team in Race
LEAD: The John Hancock Running and Fitness Clinic staff, which includes eight of the finest marathon runners in the world, will compete in the New York City Marathon on Nov. 5 and will also conduct the first Hancock Running and Fitness clinics in New York next month.


Records Show Unexplained Payments by Dinkins Campaign
LEAD: David N. Dinkins's campaign has failed to provide adequate documentation for a number of expenses, including three payments totaling $9,500 for a ''get out the vote'' drive led by a community organizer, Robert (Sonny) Carson, New York City campaign finance records show.


Westinghouse Electric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,127,800,000
3,057,000,000
Net inc
234,400,000
219,300,000
Share earns
1.60
1.51
9mo rev
9,192,700,000
8,851,300,000
Net inc
651,700,000
615,100,000
Share earns
4.46
4.23
Shares outst
146,100,000
145,600,000


Jackie Mason's Remarks Are as Inaccurate as They Are Dangerous
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.81
8.81
8.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.72
7.71
7.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.68
7.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.06
8.12
8.70
30-YR.


Top NATO Civilian Sees Role For Both Alliances in 1990's
LEAD: The Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization said today that he believed the Western alliance and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact would continue to exist for at least a decade more because they could both be useful in a time of dramatic change.


Rival Scientists Decide Universe Is Composed of 3 Types of Matter
LEAD: Using two giant particle accelerators, one in Europe and the other in California, rival teams of scientists have established beyond reasonable doubt that the universe contains no more than three fundamental types of matter.


Aristech Chemical Gets Takeover Bid
LEAD: The Aristech Chemical Corporation said it had received a takeover offer of $25 a share, or a total of about $842 million.
It said the Huntsman Holdings Corporation had proposed that its affiliate, the Banstar Corporation, acquire Aristech in a friendly transaction.
Aristech said its board would make a response ''at the appropriate time.


Bill to Ban Flag Desecration Passes House Easily
LEAD: The House of Representatives gave final approval today to legislation that outlaws flag desecration, and Congressional leaders began maneuvering for a greater battle next week over a constitutional amendment to protect the flag.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Panevino


Not Everybody Wants to Sign a Living Will; When People Give Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chemical Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
824,600,000
b211,900,000
Per share
-
3.43
Shares outst
65,600,000
57,800,000
9mo net loss
578,100,000
b465,100,000
Per share
-
7.36
Shares outst
65,400,000
57,200,000


Cowboys Trade Walker To Vikings
LEAD: Herschel Walker sauntered into the Dallas Cowboys' locker room at approximately 6:15 this morning, packed his gear and scurried to the airport for a flight to Minneapolis.
Walker, the 1982 Heisman Trophy winner as a junior at Georgia and one of pro football's outstanding backs, had just been traded to the Minnesota


Peoples Heritage Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Heritage Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,013,000
5,841,000
Per share
.71
.69
Shares outst
8,495,768
8,454,680
9mo net inc
17,639,000
16,271,000
Per share
1.98
1.81
Shares outst
8,482,479
8,449,907


Rape and Incest: Just 1% of All Abortions
LEAD: For all the symbolic importance of the House of Representatives' move to restore the Federal financing of abortions for poor women when the pregnancy resulted from incest or rape, the practical effect would likely be very limited.


No Tolerance for Hate
LEAD: Hateful words like ''shvartzer'' and ''nigger'' and ''kike'' are still unacceptable and objectionable to most New Yorkers.
But recent reminders that such ugliness has its adherents reinforces a troubling reality about New York: Though blessed with a rich ethnicity, the city is also threatened by deep ethnic and racial animosities.


An Altered Political Climate Suddenly Surrounds Abortion
LEAD: Victories for abortion rights supporters this week in the Florida Legislature and the House of Representatives, plus gains in electoral campaigns in New Jersey and Virginia, have shaken their opponents and emboldened Democratic politicians to challenge President Bush and the Republicans to defend their opposition to abortion.


Review/Film; Pfeiffer and 2 Bridges Brothers in 'The Fabulous Baker Boys'
LEAD: Long after midnight, New Year's Eve: a moment that ''The Fabulous Baker Boys,'' the slow, teasing, rapturously moody romance written and directed by Steve Kloves, has been waiting for.
Every waiter and busboy and reveler has left the hotel nightclub, but the balloons and the confetti remain.
On each empty table, a little lamp casts a deep, warm glow.


'Mistake in Judgment' by Garcia Is Conceded
LEAD: In his final remarks to the jury in the bribery trial of Representative Robert Garcia, the chief defense lawyer conceded yesterday that Mr.
Garcia ''made a mistake in judgment'' by borrowing $20,000 from a Wedtech executive and then trying to conceal the loan.


Development Fears Prompt Rally
LEAD: Voicing fears that a fast-food restaurant would destroy their neighborhood, about 100 people gathered on a sidewalk on the Upper East Side last night, waving placards that proclaimed, ''Save Our Services'' and ''Fast Food Clogs Arteries.''


J. Rupert Picott Dies; Teacher Advocate, 77
LEAD: J. Rupert Picott, an educator and early civil rights leader, died of prostate cancer Wednesday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 77 years old and lived in Washington.


A.T.&amp;T. Details Unix Licensing
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday announced the terms for licensing the Release 4.0 version of its Unix computer operating system, which is scheduled to be released later this year.


Philips Shipping TV Sets to Japan
LEAD: In a reversal of an electronics trend, the Philips Consumer Electronics Company began shipping American-made television sets to Japan.
Philips plans to export 1,500 sets to Japan this year, ''with significantly increasing exports projected for the 1990's,'' the company said.


First Lady Honored at Library Ceremony Timothy S. Healy, left, president of the library, and Andrew Heiskell, chairman. (NYT/Vic DeLucia)


Apple Harvest Festival With Crafts Lessons
LEAD: Pumpkin decorating, cider pressing, pony rides and lessons in making corn-husk dolls are among the activities that will be offered at the Apple Harvest Festival at the New Pond Farm Education Center in West Redding, Conn., tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.


Six in Seoul Briefly Occupy The U.S. Envoy's Residence
LEAD: Six intruders armed with firebombs and tear gas briefly occupied part of the residence of the United States Ambassador early today before the police removed them.


Edward P. Moore, 81, A Retired Consultant
LEAD: Edward P. Moore, a management consultant for many years before his retirement in 1977, died Tuesday at his home in Darien, Conn., after a long illness.
He was 80 years old.


As Gorbachev's Troops Pull Out. . .
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev startled the world last December when, in a speech to the United Nations, he promised to withdraw a significant part of Soviet forces in Eastern Europe.
These would be unilateral withdrawals and reductions; no price was extracted from the West for them.
Mr.
Gorbachev gave himself two years to complete them - by


Oneok Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oneok Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
106,603,000
96,568,000
Net loss
5,578,000
b11,107,000
Yr rev
618,324,000
571,434,000
Net inc
36,640,000
21,656,000
Share earns
2.58
1.51
b-Included a loss of $1.57 a share from writedowns.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morton International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
354,791,000
321,610,000
Net inc
25,993,000
32,967,000
Share earns
.54
.69


British Aerospace
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said it had bought 5.72 million shares of Ferranti International Signal P.L.C., raising its holding in the troubled British military-electronics company to 1.7 percent.
On Tuesday, British Aerospace and Thomson-CSF of France said they were working on a possible rescue of Ferranti and considering the possibility of making a bid.


A law professor with a beef takes the judge to task and the case to the public.
LEAD: For a variety of reasons judges, particularly those holding exalted appellate posts, enjoy a kind of immunity from criticism from lawyers.
Whenever the bar rates the bench, it does it in the way the Zagat Guide rates restaurants: through anonymous surveys.


Giants Face Redskins: Physical, Not Fancy
LEAD: The Giants will play the Washington Redskins on Sunday in Giants Stadium, and if you've seen one of their games you've seen them all.


Harlyn Products reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harlyn Products (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
24,787,000
24,980,000
Net inc
1,460,000
1,174,000
Share earns
.40
.32
The company said after the end of the fiscal year, it acquired George Hoffman Jewelry Manufacturing Inc., a Beverly Hills-based manufacturer and marketer of diamond jewelry.


Nationalists in Azerbaijan Win Big Concessions From Party Chief
LEAD: The Communist Party chief of Azerbaijan bought peace with his Soviet republic's defiant nationalists - and the end of a rail embargo against neighboring Armenia this week - by signing a remarkable pact with an unofficial political group.


On Stage
LEAD:  U.S.-Soviet Student Exchange


Filing Discloses Dispute Over Sale of Sheller-Globe
LEAD: It was just a few phrases buried in an otherwise dull financial document.
But it hinted at a smoldering dispute among some of the savviest financial executives on Wall Street and in the corporate world.
The targets of the mud being thrown include United Technologies; Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen, and Knoll International


New York City Opera Cancels Rest of Season
LEAD: The New York City Opera, shut down by a musicians' strike since Sept. 13, yesterday canceled the remaining 40 performances of its fall season at the New York State Theater in Lincoln Center.
The entire fall season, scheduled to run through Nov. 19, comprised 70 performances.


Review/Film; 'Crimes and Misdemeanors,' New From Woody Allen
LEAD: Judah Rosenthal (Martin Landau), a successful Manhattan ophthalmologist, and his best friend, Ben (Sam Waterston), a rabbi, are discussing what one of them describes as ''a small infidelity'' when they suddenly are confronting the meaning of existence.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We don't advocate leaving the Soviet Union.
Our position is that if the conditions are right, we can live in the Soviet Union.''  - Nadzhaf Nadzhafov, a director of the Azerbaijani Popular Front.  [ A6:4. ]


Hayes-Dana Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hayes-Dana Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
103,391,000
123,730,000
Net inc
3,305,000
b4,658,000
Share earns
.22
.27
9mo sales
387,600,000
435,852,000
Net inc
15,983,000
b17,298,000
Share earns
1.00
1.03


Walgreen Executive To Head Operations
LEAD: L. Daniel Jorndt, who joined the Walgreen Company out of college as a pharmacist, has been named to succeed Fred F. Canning as president and chief operating officer of the nation's largest drugstore chain.
Mr.
Canning, who is to retire on Feb. 1, 1990, will remain on Walgreen's board.


Ross F. Nigrelli, 85, an Expert On Disease of Sea Life, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
Ross F. Nigrelli, a marine biologist and world-renowned expert on diseases of aquatic creatures, died of complications of a stroke on Oct. 4 at Southhampton (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in East Quogue, L.I.


Californians Say Clean Air Pact Will Backfire
LEAD: California officials today denounced the new Congressional agreement to extend California's stringent automobile-emission standards to the rest of the country and called it a bad bargain for the state.


The Finalists Are Named In National Book Awards
LEAD: A first novel, ''The Joy Luck Club,'' by Amy Tan, is among the five finalists for the 1989 National Book Award in fiction, as is ''Billy Bathgate,'' a novel by E. L. Doctorow, who is a previous winner.
The five books nominated for the nonfiction prize are on such public policy issues as the American civil rights movement and the Middle


Coca-Cola Net Up 20.9% in Quarter
LEAD: Helped by strong overseas sales of soft drinks, the Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that third-quarter profits surged 20.9 percent, to $356 million, or $1.03 a share.
Sales rose 8 percent, to $2.3 billion.


Review/Art; Work Produced or Shown In Era of French Revolution
LEAD: New York this year has done very well by the bicentennial of the French Revolution.
At the New York Public Library and, later, at the Pierpont Morgan Library, there was much to enjoy and coincidentally much to learn.
And now there has opened at Colnaghi an exhibition called ''1789: French Art During the


Travelers, St. Paul Settle Texas Suit
LEAD: Two large insurance companies, sued in an antitrust case, have agreed to testify for the state and pay $500,000 in legal costs each, Attorney General Jim Mattox said.
The Travelers Insurance Company and the St.
Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company also agreed to cease certain activities in the settlement agreement.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly


Courter AIDS Proposal Faulted; He Would Bar Infected Teachers
LEAD: Representative Jim Courter, the Republican candidate for governor, found himself under criticism today for his proposal in the gubernatorial debate on Wednesday to remove teachers and children infected with the AIDS virus from contact with uninfected children in the classroom.


Market Place; A New Concern Over Asset Sales
LEAD: THE ''junk bond'' market, which has been reeling in recent weeks, was dominated by selling pressure again yesterday and it is likely to get worse before it improves, according to Robert M. Steinberg, the head of risk arbitrage at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
26,600,000
22,600,000
Per share
.83
.73
9mo net inc
76,400,000
66,200,000
Per share
2.42
2.14
Year-ago figures were restated to reflect the merger with Colonial American Bankshares in May 1989.


Call for Dialogue Raises Doubts in East Germany
LEAD: Diplomats and opposition leaders in East Germany reacted with caution and some skepticism today to a statement by the Politburo calling for discussion of national problems while making it clear that Communism was not negotiable.


Walbro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walbro Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
29,392,000
30,352,000
Net loss
1,877,000
c991,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
4,289,436
4,073,718
9mo sales
99,545,000
102,076,000
Net inc
b594,000
4,934,000
Share earns
.14
1.20


General Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,000,000,000
12,200,000,000
Net inc
945,000,000
815,000,000
Share earns
1.04
.90
9mo rev
38,400,000,000
34,600,000,000
Net inc
2,766,000,000
2,375,000,000
Share earns
3.06
2.63


FOREIGN SERVICE TO HIRE THE BLIND
LEAD: In a policy reversal, the State Department announced today that blind people may serve as Foreign Service officers.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Sports Pages yesterday about the selection of a new executive director for the United States Olympic Committee misstated the action taken.
Harvey Schiller was recommended for the post by a search committee, but the final selection will be made by the Olympic Committee's executive board.


Analogic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analogic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
37,825,000
30,376,000
Net inc
2,538,000
b1,592,000
Share earns
.17
-
Yr rev
144,924,000
134,348,000
Net inc
14,518,000
1,165,000
Share earns
.97
.07


Lockheed Reports Loss
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said today that it lost $32 million in the third quarter after taking a $165 million charge to cover cost overruns on several development contracts.
The loss was $3 million less than the company predicted last week, when it disclosed the write-off.


WHITE HOUSE SEEKS CLOSER CONTACTS IN A PANAMA COUP
LEAD: The White House plans to issue specific guidelines to American military, intelligence and diplomatic officials in Panama so they can provide clearer and more rapid communication with potential coup plotters, a senior official said today.


Corrections
LEAD: On Sept. 23 the obituary of Irving Berlin misstated the number of Academy Awards he won.
As a letter from a reader has pointed out, his only Oscar was for the song ''White Christmas'' from the 1942 film ''Holiday Inn.'' The song ''Cheek to Cheek'' from the 1935 film ''Top Hat'' was nominated for an Oscar, but did not win.


John Hanson Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hanson Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,100,000
800,000
Per share
.37
.14


A-PLANT NOMINEE ADMITS MISTAKES
LEAD: The former chief of staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission acknowledged today that for seven months he delayed an inquiry into allegations of drug use and safety problems at the Nine Mile Point nuclear plant in upstate New York, even though he believed they were probably true.


Jets Make the Big Switch At Right Time for Mackey
LEAD: Despite the snickering at what appears to be Joe Walton's folly, this may be the right time for the Jets' new quarterback, Kyle Mackey, to make his debut as a starter in a nonstrike game.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
62,833,000
58,024,000
Per share
.87
.82
9mo net inc
192,344,000
165,638,000
Per share
2.67
2.34
The per share figures have been adjusted to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split distributed June 30.


Rowan Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
65,096,000
62,374,000
Net loss
5,628,000
8,754,000
9mo rev
176,308,000
161,838,000
Net loss
21,364,000
42,061,000


No Forced Conversions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senior Service Names A New Chief Executive
LEAD: The Senior Service Corporation, a young company that provides publishing services, home health care products and day-care centers for older Americans, has named Donald L. Luke as president and chief executive.


United Stationers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
232,035,000
216,390,000
Net inc
4,008,000
6,083,000
Share earns
.26
.39
Shares outst
15,485,470
15,425,633
Yr sales
968,762,000
855,961,000
Net inc
24,715,000
23,147,000
Share earns
1.60
1.50
Shares outst
15,470,580
15,411,505


Florida Progress reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Progress (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,077,100,000
2,010,000,000
Net inc
192,300,000
175,000,000
Share earns
3.77
3.43


Lawrence Goossen, 46, Producer and Manager
LEAD: Lawrence Goossen, a co-producer of plays and a company manager, died of AIDS on Monday at his home in Greenwich Village.
He was 46 years old.


Houston's Ware: All Work At Play
LEAD: On Sundays, when the Houston Oilers are playing at home, the Astrodome is the House of Pain.
On Saturdays, it's the Ware-house, the home of the University of Houston Cougars.


Frederick Bush 3d, 85, Former Oil Executive
LEAD: Frederick A. Bush 3d, an oil executive and consultant, died Monday of leukemia at the Greenwich Woods Health Care Center in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 85 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Laclede Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Steel Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
78,002,000
76,950,000
Net inc
1,724,000
5,126,000
Share earns
.42
1.26
9mo sales
238,246,000
227,700,000
Net inc
6,132,000
13,310,000
Share earns
1.51
3.28


Leslie S. Pearl, Executive, 87
LEAD: Leslie S. Pearl, a retired advertising executive, died Tuesday after a long illness at his home in Katonah, N.Y.
He ws 87 years old and also lived in Blue Hill, Me.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glatfelter (P.H.) (A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
143,747,000
145,670,000
Net inc
21,973,000
19,701,000
Share earns
.91
.81
Shares outst
24,167,000
24,284,000
9mo sales
455,802,000
425,254,000
Net inc
71,205,000
59,065,000
Share earns
2.94
2.44
Shares outst
24,246,000
24,242,000


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From'88
Affiliated Publications Inc.
$8,500,000
*-
Alexander's Inc.
(1,700,000)
-
Boise Cascade Corp.
62,800,000
-12.7
Coca-Cola Co.
356,000,000
+20.9
General Electric Co.
945,000,000
+16.0
P.H. Glatfelter Co.


When Sewell Replaced Ray Chapman
LEAD: rrOn the eve of the World Series, Joe Sewell vividly remembers the first one he ever saw, 69 years ago.
He remembers it so well because he played in it.
Joe Sewell is the last living member of the 1920 Cleveland Indians team, which beat the Brooklyn Dodgers in seven games in the Series.
And it is a curious slice of history that in the fifth game he actually assisted in the only unassisted triple play in a World


Inspectors Tripping Up Truck Drivers
LEAD: Bill Lemasters was driving a tractor-trailer south on Van Emburgh Avenue, a narrow country road used by truckers to avoid a weigh station and congestion on nearby Route 17, when he was stopped by township police officers.


Review/Art; The Reinvented Americana Of Robert Gober's Mind
LEAD: Robert Gober's eccentric made-from-scratch objects constitute a kind of revised Americana.
They honor the humbler crafts while raising troubling questions about the culture that values them.
These questions are deeply personal, for almost all of Mr.
Gober's objects allude to the body, often to its most private functions.


Bairnco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bairnco (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,751,000
54,903,000
Net loss
b10,987,000
c4,875,000
Share earns
-
.45
Shares outst
10,760,000
10,792,000
9mo sales
147,625,000
154,021,000
Net loss
b4,524,000
c19,986,000
Share earns
-
1.88
Shares outst
10,765,000
10,624,000


Agreement Eases Way For Connaught Takeover
LEAD: Lawyers told an Ontario Supreme Court hearing today that an important obstacle to the takeover of a leading Canadian vaccine producer by a French company had been tentatively removed, The $943.5 million (Canadian), or $803 million (United States), acquisition of Connaught Biosciences Inc. by Institut Merieux S.A.


Canter Retiring After 43 Years
LEAD: Stanley D. Canter, whose prolific career included stints as an agency executive and marketing consultant, announced his retirement yesterday after 43 years in the advertising business.
Mr.
Canter, 65 years old, is president of Canter, Achenbaum, Associates, a consulting firm he co-founded with Alvin


Altera Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
15,660,000
10,109,000
Net inc
2,893,000
2,020,000
Share earns
.15
.10
Shares outst
19,714,000
19,512,000
9mo sales
42,668,000
27,199,000
Net inc
7,744,000
4,947,000
Share earns
.39
.27
Shares outst
19,657,000
18,552,000


Middlesex Journal; Gold Bugs Are Biting In a River in Vermont
LEAD: Robert Newhall, all 6 feet 6 inches of him, is standing calf-deep in the Mad River, his huge frame folded in half as he swirls a pan underwater.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Sci-Fi Specialist


Lockheed Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lockheed Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,107,000,000
2,274,000,000
Net loss
32,000,000
cd300,000,000
Share earns
-
5.06
Shares outst
63,400,000
59,300,000
9mo sales
6,553,000,000
7,189,000,000
Net inc
b107,000,000
d520,000,000
Share earns
1.71
8.61
Shares outst
62,400,000
60,400,000


Public Service Fellowships
LEAD: A fellowship program will be established at the Harvard Law School for students choosing careers in public service.


2 Bankers Cited In Iraqi Case
LEAD: Two senior officers at the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Italy's largest bank, were accused yesterday of fraud and racketeering in connection with the issuance of more than $2 billion of loan agreements and letters of credit, primarily to banks and Government agencies in Iraq.


California Changes Phone-Rate Structure
LEAD: In a move watched closely by regulators in other states, the California Public Utilities Commission today approved a different way of setting rates for the state's two largest local telephone companies.
The change is intended to provide freer competition in the marketplace.


Huzzahs for Armani's Soft and Slithery Collection
LEAD: Fashion is moving in a softer, gentler direction, and Giorgio Armani has reached the finish line first.
Skipping all the intermediary steps, he threw away shoulder pads, all kinds of inner construction and extraneous details like collars and made clothes that slither over the body in gossamer fabrics.


First Wachovia CorpN) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia CorpN)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
64,714,000
63,887,000
Per share
.93
.93
Shares outst
69,642,000
68,761,000
9mo net inc
199,927,000
182,129,000
Per share
2.88
2.72
Shares outst
69,390,000
66,933,000


Palme Conviction Upset; Drifter Is Freed
LEAD: A seven-member Swedish appeals court today unanimously overturned the conviction of the 42-year-old drifter and drug addict who had been found guilty of the 1986 murder of Prime Minister Olof Palme, and ordered him to be released immediately.


First Illinois Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,829,000
4,206,000
Per share
.18
.16
Shares outst
26,338,000
25,766,000
9mo net inc
13,889,000
11,834,000
Per share
.53
.46
Shares outst
26,163,000
25,730,000


Oilers Look for Luck On the Road to Chicago
LEAD: Here go the Houston Oilers on the road again.
And when the Oilers leave the Astrodome, they usually finish bone dry.


Alexander's Inc reports earnings for 12wks to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander's Inc (NYSE)
12wks to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
93,577,000
110,918,000
Net loss
1,691,000
2,242,000
52wk sales
463,119,000
524,844,000
Net inc
b17,461,000
c2,545,000
Share earns
3.51
-
b-After an extraordinary loss of $3,416,000.


Silicon Graphics To Buy Back Stock
LEAD: Silicon Graphics Inc. agreed to repurchase 2,360,000 common shares held by the Control Data Corporation.
The shares will be bought for $22.60 each, below the recent market price, for a total of $53.3 million.
The transaction will cut Control Data's holdings in Silicon Graphics to 702,750 shares, or just under 5 percent of the outstanding stock.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Burlington Resources Inc., Seattle, said it would seek buyers for the real estate properties held by its Glacier Park Co. subsidiary, which it said are worth about $450 million.


A.O. Smith reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A.O. Smith (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
217,718,000
236,605,000
Net loss
b8,107,000
c997,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
7,909,653
8,210,338
9mo sales
760,300,000
753,100,000
Net inc
b5,059,000
12,566,000
Share earns
.29
1.18
Shares outst
7,944,558
8,291,243


Fastenal Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fastenal Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,175,885
8,174,487
Net inc
1,339,058
914,436
Share earns
.28
.19
9mo sales
30,351,970
22,170,638
Net inc
3,035,853
2,286,445
Share earns
.64
.48


Katharine Graham Writing Her Memoirs
LEAD: Katharine Graham, chairman and chief executive officer of The Washington Post, is writing her memoirs, which will be published by Alfred A. Knopf Inc.
The announcement was made yesterday by Robert L. Bernstein, chairman of Random House Inc., of which Knopf is an imprint.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Jones Dairy Farm, a meat-products manufacturer, to Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable, Milwaukee, with a budget of $2 million.


Teheran Journal; Islamic Street Scene: Add a Whisper of Lipstick
LEAD: Militancy, once a trademark of this capital city, appears increasingly associated with poor taste.


Guerrilla Fighting in Sahara
LEAD: Polisario guerrillas killed 190 Moroccans and wounded 150 in fighting on Wednesday in the Western Sahara, a Polisario military communique issued in Algiers said today.
The guerrillas, who are fighting Morocco for independence of Western Sahara, captured six Moroccan bases and observation posts in the Hauza region in the northern Sahara, it added.


Deadly Night: New York Murders Keep Pace
LEAD: A Baptist minister, a doorman walking home and a printer who planned to be married on Saturday were among 11 people slain in New York City during the 12 hours between sundown Wednesday and the following dawn.
The police said it was one of the bloodiest nights the city has seen this year.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
331,868,000
288,338,000
Net inc
14,427,000
9,662,000
Share earns
.48
.32


'Good Health' Walk And Fitness Event
LEAD: A four-mile ''Good Health'' walk from midtown to lower Manhattan will start a health and fitness event on Sunday sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation and The New York Times Company.
The walk will begin at 1 P.M. at The New York Times Building, 229 West 43d Street, and will wind down Broadway to Battery Park, where a health festival will feature food, entertainment, sports clinics, competitions and prizes; the fair will continue until 4:30 P.M.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-13  American officials in Panama will get new guidelines on how to communicate effectively with coup plotters, the White House said.
The move amounts to an invitation to overthrow General Noriega.
Page A1  Panamanian tells of goal of rebels A8


Bill to Cut Capital Gains Tax Appears Thwarted, for Now
LEAD: Senators of both parties said today that the Democratic leadership had the votes to keep a capital gains tax cut out of the deficit-reduction package that came to the Senate floor today.


Review/Dance; Fairy Tales and Horror From Tanztheater Reinhild Hoffmann
LEAD: Grim.
That might be just about the right word for ''Machandel,'' and not because Reinhild Hoffmann's highly uneven dance-theater piece from West Germany is based on the Brothers Grimm.


Majors Dismisses Cobb
LEAD: Reggie Cobb of undefeated Tennessee, the top rusher in the Southeastern Conference, was permanently dismissed from the team yesterday by Coach Johnny Majors for a violation of team rules.
Majors did not say what the violation was.


Northern Telecom Technological Gain
LEAD: Northern Telecom Ltd. said it had developed a fiber-optic technology that would quadruple its current capacity.
The telecommunications concern, owned by BCE Inc., said the new high-speed transmission and switching technology would vastly increase the capacity of current copper-wire systems.
The technology will allow the transmission of all communications via a telephone line, including videotex, cable television, computer data and


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Willamette Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
486,556,000
440,999,000
Net inc
52,883,000
38,962,000
Share earns
2.08
1.54
9mo sales
1,415,903,000
1,270,339,000
Net inc
139,749,000
121,656,000
Share earns
5.50
4.79


Divi Hotels N.V.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Divi Hotels N.V.  (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,674,450
20,843,289
Net loss
7,222,786
4,722,929


Bank of New York Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New York Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
271,271,000
b54,236,000
Per share
-
1.51
9mo net loss
55,900,000
b158,295,000
Per share
-
4.52
b-Net income  The Bank of New York said it made a special addition of $600 million to its loan loss allowance in this year's third quarter.


C-Cor Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1989
1988
Sales
13,227,000
12,219,000
Net inc
1,113,000
1,066,000
Share earns
.26
.25


Dr. Philip G. Colin, 86, Chemical Engineer
LEAD: Dr.
Philip G. Colin, a chemical engineer who developed industrial processes for many drugs, died of a heart attack on Oct. 5 at his home in San Diego.
He was 86 years old.


Sidewalk Obstacle Course
LEAD: East Side, West Side, forget the light fantastic - just walking on the sidewalks of New York can be like threading through a slalom because of construction equipment and jury-rigged scaffolding.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: THE ECONOMY  Senate Democratic leaders said they had enough votes to keep a capital gains tax cut out of the deficit-reduction package under consideration.
Republicans conceded that they could not muster the 60 votes needed to add the tax cut to the deficit legislation, but they made it clear they would try to attach the capital gains reduction to other legislation, perhaps by the end of the month.


Up Thoughts for a Down Day
LEAD: People who regard 13 as unlucky - triskaidekaphobes - are especially unnerved by Friday the 13th.
There is always at least one a year, often two and occasionally, 28 times since 1800, three.
Today is the second and last for 1989, and time to shed some light in this dark corner of the calendar.


Restaurants
LEAD: The Meridien hotel chain pioneered the consulting-celebrity-chef strategy in the early 1980's, winging in three-star French chefs like Alain Chapel, Paul Bocuse and Jacques Maximin to oversee its kitchens around the United States.
At Maurice in New York's Hotel Parker Meridien, the imported luminary was Alain Senderens of Lucas-Carton in Paris, followed early this year by Marc Haeberlin of the renowned Auberge de l'Ill in Alsace.


Not Everybody Wants to Sign a Living Will
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carol B. Ohmann, 60, A Writer and Professor
LEAD: Dr.
Carol Burke Ohmann, a writer and professor of English at Wesleyan University, died Oct. 3 at her summer home in Hawley, Mass.
She was 60 years old and lived in Middletown, Conn.
The cause of death was suicide, said her husband, Richard.


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Year to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaway Food Town (OTC)
Year to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
512,359,000
448,070,000
Net inc
3,814,000
b9,235,000
Share earns
1.67
3.94
b-Included cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes of $1,085,000 and an after-tax effect of $5,170,000 attributable to a reversion of pension assets.


Jackie Mason's Remarks Are as Inaccurate as They Are Dangerous; A Place for Amateurs
LEAD: To the Editor:


ALC Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ALC Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
79,645,000
99,149,000
Net loss
9,572,000
b15,848,000
9mo rev
255,626,000
300,734,000
Net loss
9,937,000
25,654,000
b-Included writeoffs of $12.3 million for equipment upgrades and business and management restructuring.


Manila Moves To Cut Its Debt
LEAD: The Philippine Government offered Wednesday to buy back some of its commercial bank loans at half price in a bid to reduce its $29 billion foreign debt.
The central bank governor, Jose Fernandez, said Manila was prepared to buy $1.3 billion of the $7.2 billion in medium- and long-term bank debt at 50 cents on the dollar, or a total cost of $650 million.


Undaunted, Giuliani Swims Upstream
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani smiled stiffly at a subway stop in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn the other day, his arms folded across his waist, waiting for someone to shake his hand.
Deep in the liberal Democratic turf of David N. Dinkins, the Republican mayoral nominee was standing more or less alone.


Spurs Sign Elliott To 5-Year Contract
LEAD: Saying he was ''excited to get it over with,'' Sean Elliott, San Antonio's first-round draft pick in June, signed a five-year contract, reportedly worth $9 million, with the Spurs yesterday.
Elliott, the No. 3 draft choice in the National Basketball Association, has made publicity appearances and attended team meetings, but the 6-foot-8-inch forward from the University of Arizona has yet to work out with the team.(


Review/Film; Huppert as an Abortionist, in Chabrol's 'Story of Women'
LEAD: Isabelle Huppert has an uncanny ability to convey self-interest on the screen, a quality rendered even steelier by the utter indifference with which it is displayed.
Pale and fine-boned though she is, Ms.
Huppert never looks frail.
The same strength of will that can transform her from a mousy, nondescript figure into a vibrant beauty is apparent in the blatant single-mindedness with which some of Ms.


Potlatch Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potlatch Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
318,385,000
273,706,000
Net inc
35,133,000
28,292,000
Share earns
1.22
1.02
Shares outst
28,843,000
26,892,000
9mo sales
911,852,000
798,684,000
Net inc
96,762,000
79,325,000
Share earns
3.41
2.85
Shares outst
28,400,000
26,879,000


Luby's Cafeterias Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luby's Cafeterias Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
75,249,000
68,896,000
Net inc
8,146,000
7,739,000
Share earns
.45
.43
Yr sales
283,252,000
254,301,000
Net inc
29,482,000
27,509,000
Share earns
1.62
1.51


Space Shuttle Team Rushes to Complete Repairs to Computer
LEAD: Technicians perched on a platform worked round the clock today to remove a faulty engine computer and get the space shuttle Atlantis and its Galileo space probe prepared for launching next Tuesday.


A's Drills Have Air Of Spring
LEAD: On the fourth day between the end of the American League playoff and the start of the World Series, the Oakland Athletics spent another afternoon as if it were spring training in Arizona.


Festivals and Fairs
LEAD:  TODAY  BOOK AND RECORD FAIR, Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South.
Today, 2 to 8 P.M., and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information: 777-0033.
FALL CRAFTS AT RHINEBECK, Dutchess County Fairgrounds, Route 9, Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Leather goods, jewelry, ceramics, woodwork and entertainment.


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AmSouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
19,959,000
19,856,000
Per share
.82
.82
Shares outst
24,309,000
24,208,000
9mo net inc
61,958,000
59,627,000
Per share
2.55
2.46
Shares outst
24,277,000
24,210,000


Confident Vanbiesbrouck Is Rolling
LEAD: Sergei Makarov, perhaps the premier right wing in the world, was in alone against John Vanbiesbrouck.
Less than a minute remained in the game, less than a stride separated Makarov from the puck, and so Terry Crisp thought it something less than a preposterous notion to assume a goal would be scored.


Portsmouth Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portsmouth Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,180,000
910,000
Per share
.80
.23
Shares outst
3,954,167
3,949,867
9mo net inc
5,269,000
2,621,000
Per share
1.33
-
Shares outst
3,953,344
-
The latest third quarter results included securities gain, after taxes, of about $2,240,000, or 56 cents per share.


G.M.'s Van Output
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would move the production of its full-size vans to Flint, Mich., from plants in Lordstown, Ohio, and Scarborough, Ontario.
G.M. and union officials said the move would be completed in late 1991.
The shift will affect about 2,500 workers at the Lordstown plant, which employs a total of 11,500.


Nynex and Unions Seek Mediator in Strike
LEAD: At New York State's urging, Nynex and striking telephone workers agreed yesterday to seek a mediator for their 10-week contract dispute.


With Bird Walking Normally, Celtics Prepare to Walk Tall
LEAD: When the Boston Celtics' two-hour practice ended this morning, Larry Bird still wanted more work.
So he did some extra running on the sidelines with a teammate, Ed Pinckney.


Southnet Venture
LEAD: The Southnet Corporation and Fone America Inc., two long-distance telephone companies, agreed to form a joint venture.
Southnet, based in Tampa, and Fone America, a Nevada company, plan to consolidate and share switching centers, data-processing services, network facilities and billing services.
Terms of the agreement are expected to be completed soon, the companies said.


Conviction in Palme Murder Is Overturned


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the six teen-agers accused of the rape of a jogger in Central Park misattributed assertions about the role of one defendant, Steven Lopez.
It was a co-defendant, Kevin Richardson, who told the authorities that Mr.
Lopez had held the jogger down and struck her with a pipe.


Pentagon Charges Police Brutality in Lisbon Riot


G.E.'s Profits Up 16% On 7% Revenue Rise
LEAD: The General Electric Company yesterday reported a 16 percent increase in earnings for the third quarter, based on improvements in its financial services, plastics, locomotive and electrical generating equipment operations.


Pinball Scandal Erupts in Japan
LEAD: Both of Japan's biggest political parties found themselves enmeshed in new accusations of influence-peddling today after disclosures that one of Japan's most shadowy entertainment industries - its ubiquitous pinball parlors - contributed roughly $1 million to key politicians.


New Children's Museum Joins 2 Old Favorites
LEAD: BEFORE there were children's museums, children went to school to learn, to the playground to play and to museums to be bored.


BALL PARKS FIGURES
LEAD:  OAKLAND COLISEUM  Built: 1966  Seating capacity: 48,219 on three tiers.
Outfield distances:  Left-field foul line: 330 ft.
Left-field power alley: 375 ft.
Center field: 400 ft.
Right-field power alley: 375 ft.
Right-field foul line: 330 ft.


Lisa Steinberg's Mother Loses a Battle in Court
LEAD: A judge ruled yesterday that Michele Launders abandoned her daughter Lisa to Joel Steinberg, the disbarred lawyer convicted of killing the child, and that she is not entitled to sue for damages as her mother.


E-Z-EM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
21,171,000
17,053,000
Net inc
2,101,000
1,638,000
Share earns
.26
.21


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 470 money market mutual funds increased by $899.9 million, to $349.89 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 141 institutional funds decreased by $21.3 million, to $83.14 billion.
The assets of the 233 general-purpose funds were up by $436.7 million, to $114 billion.


Printronix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Printronix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
31,886,000
36,362,000
Net inc
1,237,000
255,000
Share earns
.30
.06
Shares outst
4,077,961
4,597,257
6mo sales
61,136,000
71,815,000
Net inc
630,000
1,674,000
Share earns
.15
.36
Shares outst
4,331,016
4,595,209


A Gain for Bid to Put Pros on Olympic Team
LEAD: The first administrative step toward the inclusion of National Basketball Association players on the 1992 United States Olympic team was taken today when the league joined the organization that oversees the national program in the sport.


Molex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
143,165,000
138,358,000
Net inc
14,709,000
15,704,000
Share earns
.59
.62


Electrosound Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electrosound Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,079,000
7,538,000
Net inc
b409,000
c1,808,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Included a tax credit of $142,000, or 5 cents a share and also included is a gain of $418,000 on sale of commercial duplicating equipment manufacturing operations.


In Salvador, Indians Declare Columbus Day a Day of Mourning


Boise Cascade Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boise Cascade Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,081,380,000
1,036,320,000
Net inc
62,780,000
71,900,000
Share earns
1.34
1.58
9mo sales
3,271,860,000
3,059,810,000
Net inc
216,290,000
212,670,000
Share earns
4.76
4.64


Lincoln Failure Inquiry Is Set
LEAD: The House Banking Committee voted today to subpoena Charles H. Keating Jr., a Phoenix millionaire, to testify about his insolvent savings institution, which is expected to require the Government's largest savings bailout ever.
The panel also subpoenaed L. William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; M.


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IMC Fertilizer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
251,000,000
268,600,000
Net inc
20,000,000
31,500,000
Share earns
.76
1.26
Shares outst
26,400,000
25,100,000


Stephen Hartigan, 86; Led Jail Guard Union
LEAD: Stephen C. Hartigan, a retired correction officer and former president of the Correction Officers Benevolent Association, died of congestive heart failure on Monday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in the City Island section of the Bronx.


Review/Art; William Tucker Explores The Shapes of Prehistory
LEAD: If the formlessness and scatological shapes and textures of William Tucker's new sculptures put you off at first (''dinosaur droppings,'' one visitor called them), give them a chance.
The 10 pieces of shifting, rocky matter at the David McKee Gallery in Manhattan and four larger, more boulderlike blocks at the gallery's Brooklyn exhibition space are among the most evocative and ambitious works Mr.


People
LEAD: *
Rick Flata has been named senior vice president and media director of Hill, Holliday, Connors &amp; Cosmopulos/New York.


AMR Offer To Pilots Is Reported
LEAD: The chairman of the AMR Corporation, parent of American Airlines, has held talks with the company's pilots' union to consider a buyout in which the company's unions would be offered a large stake, a person on Wall Street familiar with the talks said yesterday.


Say Yes to the Landmarks Compromise
LEAD: New York's Charter Revision Commission, dragged into the protracted battle between the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission and religious institutions, managed to extricate itself with an ambiguous compromise.
That compromise goes to the public as a separate question in November's referendum.
It won't resolve the eternal conflict between preservationists and religious institutions.


Foul Play By Eckersley?
LEAD: A videotape that the Toronto Blue Jays claim shows Dennis Eckers trying to hide something in his trousers in Sunday's playoff game has been sent to the American League president and to the commissioner's office, said General Manager Pat Gillick of Toronto.


Barrett Bows Out
LEAD: J. Patrick Barrett, who failed to get any backing from National Football League owners this week in the voting for commissioner, withdrew his name yesterday from the list of four being considered for the job.
Barrett, chairman of the New York State Republican Committee, said it was apparent that the process of selecting a successor to Pete Rozelle would be a protracted one and that he could not keep his life ''on hold'' any longer.(


Ex-Congressman to Head Amex
LEAD: In a surprise move outside Wall Street's inner circle, the American Stock Exchange announced yesterday that it had chosen as its new chairman a former Democratic Representative from Oklahoma, James R. Jones.


Pope's Visit to East Timor Is Marred by Violent Protest


Altman Deal To Financo
LEAD: The L. J. Hooker Company, the Australian developer that owns the B. Altman and Bonwit Teller department, named Financo Inc., the New York-based merger-and-acquisition consultant, as its financial adviser yesterday in the accelerated attempt to sell B. Altman &amp; Company.


Henderson the Run King
LEAD: The child who became the man of perpetual motion grew up not far from the stage that will serve as a backdrop for the opening games of the 86th World Series.
The reminders of Rickey Henderson's youth are scattered all across north Oakland, not so much in the places he played as in the minds of those who watched him.


Books of The Times; La Baker, the 20th Century's Empress Josephine
LEAD:  Jazz Cleopatra  Josephine Baker in Her Time  By Phyllis Rose  321 pages.
Doubleday. $22.50.


Review/Film; The Dismay Among Filipinos
LEAD: ''Fight for Us,'' opening today at the Paris Theater, is as much a political gesture as it is a political film.
Produced by French interests in the Philippines, the movie is the outraged response of its director, Lino Brocka, one of the most popular and successful Philippine film makers, to the human-rights abuses that are reported to be continuing in his country.


Edward G. Schumacher, Merchant Mariner, 66
LEAD: Edward G. Schumacher, a former merchant seaman who helped win veteran status for merchant mariners who served in World War II, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Dale City, Va.
He was 66 years old.


Exhibitions Are Planned On Titian And 1492 Art
LEAD: The National Gallery of Art today announced two exhibitions to dramatize the cultural ties between the United States and Italy: a retrospective of the work of Titian and a celebration of the quincentenary of Columbus's first voyage to America.


Bank of New York and Chemical Post Big Losses
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation and the Bank of New York Company announced large third-quarter losses yesterday as they greatly increased the reserves set aside to cover possible losses on loans to third world countries and to domestic businesses.


REHNQUIST RENEWS REQUEST TO SENATE
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, passing up a chance to defuse criticism from fellow Federal judges over his handling of a death penalty proposal, urged Congress today to act as quickly as possible on the proposal for speeding Federal court review of death sentences.


Society for Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
9,067,000
8,740,000
Per share
.76
.74
9mo net inc
40,728,000
23,619,000
Per share
3.42
1.99
The company said latest 9 months' figures included a gain on the sale of credit card receivables and accounts, and a loss from the accelerated amortization of goodwill.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Self-Defense Is Argued In Brooklyn Bias Case
LEAD: The lawyer for a Brooklyn teen-ager accused of being the instigator of an assault on two Jewish students told a judge yesterday that his client had ''fought back'' after he had been attacked by the students.


Two Indicted in Tax Fraud
LEAD: Two businessmen have been indicted in connection with a tax-fraud scheme said to have involved more than $4 billion in rigged and bogus transactions in Treasury bills and other Government securities.


Affiliated Publications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Publications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Revenue
126,295,000
130,111,000
Net inc
8,481,000
c26,525,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
69,956,455
68,981,945
9mo rev
394,396,000
397,241,000
Net inc
b2,879,000
c51,387,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
69,642,564
69,064,350


Louis Levine, 78, Dies; Manufacturer of Coats
LEAD: Louis Levine, a retired manufacturer of women's coats and suits, died of colon and bladder cancer on Monday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.


Barfield Signs 3-Year Pact
LEAD: Jesse Barfield, who hit 18 home runs and cut down 16 runners as a Yankee outfielder this past season and then became a free agent, signed a three-year contract with the team yesterday in Tampa, Fla.
No financial terms were announced.


SWEEPING CHANGE IN MEDICARE FEES NEARS FINAL STEP
LEAD: A measure that could lead to fundamental changes in the practice and costs of medicine is heading for the Senate floor and final Congressional approval in the next few days.


Budapest Hard-Liners Form Party to Toe the Old Line
LEAD: A group of hard-line Communists announced today that they were forming a Communist Party in rejection of the governing party's announcement that it was converting to democratic socialism.


Zenith Introduces 4 New Computers
LEAD: Zenith Data Systems, the soon-to-be-sold computer division of the Zenith Electronics Corporation, introduced four new personal computers, including the first battery-powered laptop model based on the powerful Intel 80386SX microprocessor.
Zenith, the world's largest seller of battery-powered laptop computers, said the new Supersport SX laptop could operate for more than three hours on the battery before it needed recharging.


Heritage Financial Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,731,000
1,704,000
Per share
.43
.42
9mo net inc
5,262,000
4,670,000
Per share
1.31
1.16


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celanese Canada
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
94,300,000
92,600,000
Net inc
10,800,000
12,200,000
Share earns
.78
.88
9mo sales
296,700,000
293,900,000
Net inc
36,400,000
36,500,000
Share earns
2.63
2.63


Woody Allen Supports Dinkins . . . and Mason
LEAD: Woody Allen came last night to praise David N. Dinkins at a chic fund raiser but ended up galling him by saying that Jackie Mason was ''just joking'' when he made charged remarks about blacks and Jews in the New York City mayoral campaign.


Raytheon Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
2,189,000,000
1,993,000,000
Net inc
137,400,000
126,700,000
Share earns
2.08
1.91
Shares outst
66,100,000
66,300,000
9mo sales
6,552,000,000
5,983,000,000
Net inc
391,900,000
362,300,000
Share earns
5.94
5.43
Shares outst
66,000,000
66,700,000


Auctions
LEAD:  An Heir's Collection


TV: Selling Off Credibility
LEAD: The local news ends on Channel 2 in New York.
Dan Rather's CBS Evening News show scrolls up - together an hour of highly professional news broadcasting, as usual.


O'Sullivan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Sullivan Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,002,000
45,573,000
Net inc
2,405,000
3,588,000
Share earns
.15
.22
Shares outst
16,486,000
16,488,000
9mo sales
168,408,000
147,351,000
Net inc
12,122,000
12,689,000
Share earns
.74
.77
Shares outst
16,486,000
16,488,000


First of America Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
25,166,000
22,857,000
Per share
1.60
1.60
Shares outst
12,815,427
11,325,247
9mo net inc
79,133,000
62,108,000
Per share
5.12
4.25
Shares outst
12,713,768
11,245,912


An Ungrand Total
LEAD: Among other significant recent events in Poland, the population of its prisons has fallen from about 116,000 in April 1986 to about 58,000 on July 31, 1989.
It seems worth noting that:


Dining Out Guide: Three-Star Sampler
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
The date of original publication is listed.
Prices are current.
Huberts (July 15, 1988), 575 Park Avenue (entrance on 63d Street), 826-5911 - Soft-edged and Japanese-inspired, the dining room at Huberts is designed for comfort and conversation.


5 Win the Nobel Prizes in Chemistry and Physics
LEAD: The Nobel Prizes in Chemistry and Physics were awarded yesterday to four Americans and one West German.


Ford Plans To Establish A New Unit
LEAD: In a move that would keep its tax bill from rising by millions of dollars, the Ford Motor Company said today that it would establish a separate subsidiary for the Associates Corporation, the finance company that Ford expects to acquire later this year.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums ''JUST-SO STORIES,'' a puppet show based on tales by Rudyard Kipling, 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday, at the Puppet Playhouse, 555 East 90th Street.
Tickets: $3.50.
Reservations: 369-8890. ''PETER AND THE WOLF,'' a show by the Hudson Vagabond Puppets, set to music by Prokofiev, 1:30 P.M.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Wolverine World Wide Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolverine World Wide Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
85,331,000
83,498,000
Net inc
2,050,000
1,743,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo sales
215,697,000
221,439,000
Net inc
3,363,000
3,065,000
Share earns
.50
.45


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption last Friday incorrectly characterized the Israeli Labor Party.
It is a partner in the coalition Government, not an opposition party.


Analysts International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysts International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,650,000
20,174,000
Net inc
1,323,000
1,080,000
Share earns
.29
.24
Shares outst
4,617,000
4,520,000
Year-ago share earnings and shares outstanding are restated for the effect of a 5-for-4 stock split in the form of a 25 percent stock dividend paid Aug.


Foliage Tours On the Farm-Stand Route
LEAD: IF anything could add to the splendors of a visit to the countryside this weekend to see the changing colors of the fall foliage, it must be returning home laden down with bags of farm fresh fruits and vegetables.


Stryker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stryker Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
54,668,000
44,416,000
Net inc
4,695,000
3,910,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
23,616,000
23,437,000
9mo sales
165,372,000
130,948,000
Net inc
14,360,000
11,960,000
Share earns
.61
.51
Shares outst
23,568,000
23,430,000


Lance Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lance Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
100,490,000
91,669,000
Net inc
11,159,000
9,299,000
Share earns
.35
.29
9mo sales
300,569,000
274,141,000
Net inc
30,628,000
29,390,000
Share earns
.97
.92


President Quits at Squibb
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that Jan Leschly, president of the Squibb Corporation, had resigned to pursue opportunities outside the company.


Great Northern Nekoosa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Northern Nekoosa Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
980,500,000
937,700,000
Net inc
85,700,000
92,300,000
Share earns
1.54
1.67
Shares outst
55,417,750
55,021,508
9mo sales
2,955,300,000
2,638,500,000
Net inc
269,200,000
255,900,000
Share earns
4.86
4.65


Breeders' Cup Candidates Making Their Moves
LEAD: Easy Goer and Sunday Silence will not race again before their showdown for Horse-of-the-Year honors in the Breeders' Cup Classic at Gulfstream on Nov. 4.


Europe Agrees To Steel Limits
LEAD: European Community negotiators have agreed to a compromise with the United States over limits on European steel exports, a community spokesman said today.


Perkins Signs
LEAD: The Dallas Mavericks have signed Sam Perkins to a one-year contract, which will pay the forward $975,000 this season.
Team officials said they had sought a three-year deal, but Perkins, who averaged 15 points and 8.8 rebounds last season, agreed to the one-year deal because he wants to become an unrestricted free agent at the end of the season.(


Bishops Shift Earlier Stance on AIDS
LEAD: In a sequel to an unusual public debate among Roman Catholic leaders, a committee of bishops issued a statement yesterday strongly rejecting the use of condoms to prevent the spread of AIDS and urging society to support an ideal of chastity for adolescents.


From Jet Disaster, an Iowa Family Harvests a Reward
LEAD: As she spoke, Janice Sorenson flashed the broad smile she has worn since Wednesday, the day her harvesting combine bumped into the long-sought fan disk suspected of causing the crash of a United Airlines DC-10 at Sioux City in July.


Beatrice G. Kresky, 73, Pediatrician From L. I.
LEAD: Dr.
Beatrice Greenwald Kresky, a pediatrician and proponent of prenatal care for pregnant teen-agers, died of cancer Thursday at South Nassau Communities Hospital in Oceanside, L.I.
She was 73 years old and lived in Rockville Center, L.I.


Rose Bowl Bid May Be at Stake
LEAD: It is only the second week of competition in the Big Ten Conference, but there have already been suggestions the title may be decided today when Michigan State is the host team in East Lansing, Mich., to Coach Bo Schembechler's Michigan Wolverines.


Bail Ordered for Ex-Agent in Jail for Spying
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled today that Richard W. Miller is not likely to flee and ordered a judge to set bail for the former Federal agent whose conviction for espionage in 1986 was overturned this year.


Charting Drug Trade From the Skies
LEAD: The Central Intelligence Agency and other Federal groups have begun using satellites to spy on the maze of clandestine airstrips, roads and factories run by the illicit drug industry in South America.


Books of The Times; Emma Goldman, Queen of Causes
LEAD:  Emma Goldman in Exile  From the Russian Revolution to the Spanish Civil War  By Alice Wexler  Illustrated. 301 pages.
Beacon Press. $24.95.


Transactions
LEAD:  Football


U.S. Plan to Use Eagles in Poison Test Is Protested
LEAD: Federal researchers plan to use 15 injured golden eagles in an experiment that could lead to the renewed use of Compound 1080, a highly toxic coyote poison.
The plan is meeting strong opposition from supporters of animal rights.


THE DOW'S WORST DAYS
LEAD: Following are the 15 largest one-day percentage declines for the Dow Jones industrial average since Oct. 1, 1928, when the average was increased to 30 stocks.
Yesterday was the 12th worst day.
Percent
Point
Date
Drop
Drop
Close
Oct. 19, 1987
22.60
508.00
1,738.74
Oct.


Warner Bros. Sues Sony Over Producers
LEAD: Warner Brothers Inc., the Hollywood studio owned by Time Warner Inc., filed a $1 billion lawsuit today against the Sony Corporation.
The suit contends that Sony induced two Hollywood producers, Peter Guber and Jon Peters, to breach their five-year contract with Warner to become co-chairmen of Columbia Pictures, the studio


Dreaded Virus Said to Cause Little Damage to Computers
LEAD: A long-feared electronic virus set to cripple personal computers today created high anxiety but caused very little actual damage.


Review/Dance; 2 Dancers Take Next Step
LEAD: Martha Graham has invited several of her dancers to create works for the Martha Graham Dance Company's current season at City Center (131 West 55th Street), through Oct. 22.
On Wednesday night, Thea Nerissa Barnes and Lyndon Branaugh presented dances that suggested these neophyte choreographers have learned from the committed, professional atmosphere of this major American modern dance company.


Ana L. Behrens-Pacanins Is Married To Luis Paraud-Carpena, Developer
LEAD: Ana Luisa Behrens-Pacanins, a daughter of Mrs.
Reinaldo Herrera of New York and a stepdaughter of Mr.
Herrera, was married in New York yesterday to Luis Felipe Paraud-Carpena, the son of Maj.
Gen.
Fernando Paraud and Mrs.
Paraud of Madrid.
The Rev.
Damian Myett performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


Times Square Renewal (Act II), a Farce
LEAD: After a six year intermission, the curtain has gone up on Act II of the long-running show at Times Square called the 42d Street Development Project.
The latest revised production hit the boards in August.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.62
8.81
8.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.20
7.72
7.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.66
8.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.81
8.06
8.90
30-YR.


Lockheed to Use Italian Jet Design
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation, in the early stages of competing for a $2 billion Air Force training jet program, said it would use an Italian jet design if it won the contract.
Lockheed said it had an agreement with Aermacchi S.p.A. of Varese, Italy, to use the MB-339 jet tandem-trainer for the United States Air Force's Primary Aircraft Training System program.


Review/Theater; Gorky's 'Summerfolk' in Providence
LEAD: It is clear from her debut as artistic director of the Trinity Repertory Company that Anne Bogart is not satisfied with halfway measures.
Her unorthodox production of Gorky's ''Summerfolk,'' which opened Wednesday night, is an ambitious attempt to reinvent the play as a radical and relevant comedy about the complacency and ennui of the new Russian bourgeoisie.


Jersey Takes Over Failing Schools
LEAD: Citing ''total educational failure,'' the state of New Jersey assumed full responsibility for all 37 schools in Jersey City - the first state takeover of a local school district in memory.
Coming on the heels of a summit meeting where the nation's governors promised improvements in education, the move demonstrates just how far some states will have to go to meet that obligation.


Storm May Cancel a City's Halloween
LEAD: Three weeks after a hurricane battered the Carolina coast, this inland city remains so littered with downed magnolias and willow oaks that officials are asking parents to keep children at home on Halloween.


End for 'Junk Bond' Takeovers?
LEAD: Institutional investors behaved yesterday as if the takeover craze had ended.
Mindful of recent turmoil in the ''junk bond'' market, they grew concerned that corporate acquisitions, which have done much to drive up stock prices in recent years, would grind to a halt because of a lack of credit.


H.U.D. Ousts Administrator In New York
LEAD: An investigation by the Department of Housing and Urban Development has found that its former New York administrator, Geraldine McGann, violated Federal ethical standards in connection with a subsidized housing program in her hometown of Island Park, L.I., but did not use her position to enrich her family or political allies.


Joe Foy, Baseball Player, 46
LEAD: Joe Foy, a third baseman with the 1967 American League champion Boston Red Sox and later a member of the Mets, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in New York.
He was 46 years old.


The Good Life Has Environmental Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Keeping Pull Cords Out of Tiny Hands
LEAD: Now that cooler weather is here and children are spending more time indoors it is a good time to see that pull cords for window coverings are safely secured.


U.S. Cites Right to Seize Fugitives Abroad
LEAD: Reversing a nine-year-old policy, the Justice Department has advised the Federal Bureau of Investigation that it may legally seize United States fugitives in foreign countries without the consent of foreign governments, Administration officials said today.


Medigap Policies: Fine for Now
LEAD: The Senate and the House of Representatives have moved to repeal all or part of the Federal program of expanded health insurance for older Americans.
A new measure to replace the 1988 Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act has still to be shaped by a Congressional conference committee, but there seems to be little doubt at this point that most of the benefits will end shortly, along with the income-tax surtax that was to pay for them.


Richard F. Uhlmann, Grain Dealer, 91
LEAD: Richard F. Uhlmann, a grain dealer who served as president of the Chicago Board of Trade in 1948, died at Highland Park (Ill.) Hospital on Monday after a brief illness.
He was 91 years old.


Retail Sales in September Advanced a Moderate 0.5%
LEAD: Retail sales rose a moderate five-tenths of 1 percent last month, the Government said today.
Analysts said the report showed consumer spending was still fairly strong, despite a slowing economy.


Merab Kostava, 50, a Soviet Rights Figure
LEAD: Merab Kostava, a leading Georgian human rights campaigner and dissident for more than 30 years, was killed today in a car accident, an independent newspaper said.
He was 50 years old.


Alcott &amp; Andrews to Close Its Stores
LEAD: After failing to win creditors' support for a 90-day financing agreement, Alcott &amp; Andrews, the retail chain that specializes in career apparel for women, said it would go out of business.


Mortgage Rates Drop
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 9.95 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.


Early October Auto Sales Down by 12.6%
LEAD: Sales of American-built cars fell 12.6 percent in early October after two months of steep discounts by auto makers seeking to clear year-end inventories of 1989 models.


Dollar Falls in Hectic Day; Gold Shows Little Reaction
LEAD: Currency dealers pounded down the dollar yesterday in hectic selling set off by a sharp drop in stock prices.


Campaign Trail; Giuliani Turning Up Heat on Dinkins
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani turned up the heat on David N. Dinkins yesterday, both on the air and on the stump.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-6  South Korea will pay more of the cost of stationing U.S. forces on its soil as its economy grows stronger, but a U.S. cutback should not be considered now, President Roh said.
Page 3  U.S. envoy in Seoul recalls raid 3 Pope ending Indonesia visit 6


Robinson Honored
LEAD: Gaston's chief managing rival, Frank Robinson, whose Baltimore Orioles went from last place to second place and improved by 33 games, was named manager of the year by The Associated Press yesterday.
Robinson received 69 points and Don Zimmer of the Chicago Cubs received 51 in voting by sportswriters and broadcasters.


Rutgers Finds Curbs on Student Drinking of Little Effect
LEAD: In the last five years, Rutgers University, long regarded as one of the foremost research centers for alcohol abuse, has also become a model for colleges seeking innovative ideas to help reduce drinking among students.


New York's Dangerous Insurance Policy
LEAD: New York's State Insurance Fund, founded 75 years ago by a socially inventive, farsighted Legislature, now writes 45 percent of all workers' compensation insurance in the state.
To mark its anniversary, the fund recently sent its policyholders a handsome financial statement complete with a message of congratulation from Gov.


U.S. Envoy in Seoul Tells of Raid
LEAD: Ambassador Donald Gregg described today how he and his wife listened from their locked bedroom while militant students broke into their residence and caused about $30,000 damage in the living room early this morning.


Corrections
LEAD: The Campaign Matters column on Oct. 5, about the issue of ethnic slurs in the campaign for New Jersey governor, referred incorrectly to a 1986 Federal indictment of a union that had contributed money to some campaigns of Representative James J. Florio.
The indictment accused leaders of roofers Local 30-30B, based in Philadelphia, of having made payments to a number of public officials, including state judges in Pennsylvania.


Christian Concern on Syria Delaying Lebanese Accord
LEAD: Christian insistence on guarantees of a Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon continued to hold up an agreement among Lebanon's factions today, but Arab officials expressed optimism that the sides would agree on a new charter for their nation.


Hidden Cracks Found in Rotor In Trump Crash
LEAD: One of the four main overhead rotors on the helicopter that crashed on Tuesday in central New Jersey, killing three senior Atlantic City casino executives and two crew members, broke in half in flight because of a series of cracks, Federal investigators said yesterday.


Producer Prices Show A Sharp Rise
LEAD: After three straight declines, prices at the producer level surged nine-tenths of 1 percent in September, mainly because of increases for energy and motor vehicles.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think this could be the end of the game.'' - Barbara L. Kenworthy, a portfolio manager, referring to the corporate takeover frenzy.  [ 33:3. ]


Garcia Case in Deliberations
LEAD: The jury in the bribery trial of Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee, began its first day of deliberations yesterday by requesting copies of evidence and asking to hear a reading of key testimony against the Garcias.
At 5:20 P.M., the jurors sent out a note which said they could go no further, and Judge Leonard B.


Syrian Pilot's Escape to Israel Was a 'Very Difficult Mission'
LEAD: The Syrian fighter pilot who defected to Israel in a Soviet jet fighter on Wednesday said today that his flight was ''a very difficult mission'' since he flew at about 800 miles an hour and was only about 100 to 150 feet off the ground.


Golden State Foods Exploring Merger
LEAD: The Golden State Foods Corporation, a privately held food processor and distributor that supplies only McDonald's restaurants, retained Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company to help it explore merger possibilities.
Howard Hansen, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, said the McDonald's Corporation was an unlikely suitor because it had a policy of not selling supplies or equipment to franchisees.


Japanese Make a U.S.-Style Movie, In English, Aiming for Global Appeal
LEAD: While Japanese companies are buying up Hollywood studios and financing American producers, a group of Japanese businessmen is hoping to invigorate Japan's sluggish film industry by grafting American rhythms and plot structure onto a Japanese movie.


Chrysler Price Rise
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it was raising its 1990 passenger car prices an overall 5 percent from comparably equipped 1989 models.
It attributed 3 percent of the increase to the installation of driver-side supplementary air bag systems as standard equipment on all of its United States-built cars.


Review/Rock; Just What the Tie-Dyed Crowd Wanted
LEAD: Grateful Dead concerts are as iffy as blind dates, but the band had a good night tonight, the second concert of a five-night stand at the Brendan Byrne Arena.
In two sets that added up to about two-and-a-half hours of music, the Dead concentrated on songs rather than its famous free-form jamming.


Janice M. Baker Weds C. G. Benedetto
LEAD: Janice M. Baker, a daughter of Jack Baker of Central Square, N.Y., and the late Janet M. Baker, was married yesterday to Christopher G. Benedetto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Benedetto of Huntington Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
James Morrison, a Baptist minister, and the Rev.
David Baehr, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the First Baptist Church in Central


Elephant Man Disease Not Neurofibromatosis
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESUTLS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Fernandez Beats Seles: Mary Joe Fernandez outlasted Monica Seles, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6, yesterday to earn a semifinal berth at the International tournament in Filderstadt, West Germany.
In other quarterfinal matches, Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina beat Hana Mandlikova of Australia, 6-3, 6-0; Zina Garrison beat Gigi Fernandez, 6-4, 6-2, and Laura Gildermeister of Peru beat Radka Zrubakova of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 2-6, 7-5.(AP)


Reviews/Music; The American Premiere Of an 1869 Musical Camel
LEAD: The ''Messa per Rossini'' that the New York Philharmonic presented under Helmuth Rilling's baton on Thursday evening is a musical camel, an improbable animal designed by a committee.
A collaboration by 13 Italian composers in memory of Rossini, it is a Requiem Mass of gangling proportions instigated by Verdi, who wrote the final section.


Mayor Gaynor Survived Assassination Attempt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Takeover Troubles Give Wall St. a Jolt
LEAD: A financing failure helped set off the drop in stock prices.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief review in the Sounds Around Town column of Weekend yesterday, about the Fred Hersch Trio, gave an incorrect address for Town Hall.
It is at 123 West 43d Street.


School Forfeits More Than Game
LEAD: Two school board members have resigned and seven athletes have quit an all-white private school's football team after it forfeited a game with a school that has a black player.


Bouncing Noriega Bush Style
LEAD: I am summoned to deepest Washington.
The summoner says he represents the most powerful man imaginable.
I tell him sure he does and I am the ghost of the late Henry James and am, therefore, repelled by the vulgar social situation in which we find ourselves.


President Hints at a Compromise Over Federal Funds for Abortion
LEAD: President Bush encouraged White House aides and Republican Congressional leaders today to continue negotiations to avoid a confrontation over Federal financing for abortions for victims of rape and incest.


Board of Estimate Extends Seaport Historic District by One Block
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate has voted to extend the South Street Seaport Historic District by one block, reversing a 1977 decision and confounding the development plans of five major banks.


Eat and Be Wary, Governor
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clements was among several diners who witnessed an armed robbery at a restaurant Thursday night in which one man was shot.
The lone robber apparently did not recognize Mr.
Clements, who was seated at a counter eating a hamburger, without his bodyguards.
A customer who tried to stop the gunman in the restaurant's parking lot was shot in the leg.


Suspended Leader of Navajos Vows to Fight Bribe Charges
LEAD: Peter MacDonald, the suspended tribal Navajo chairman charged with taking more than $400,000 in bribes and kickbacks, says he will ''stand up and fight'' the allegations.


Treasuries Climb on Stock Proceeds
LEAD: A ''flight to quality'' sent prices of Treasury securities soaring and yields plunging yesterday.
Dealers said the demand for all Treasury securities surged as stock prices began tumbling in the last 45 minutes of trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
But a sharp decline in the dollar tended to take the edge off the price advances.


Newsweek Agonizes Over Delay in Reporting Mason Remarks
LEAD: Though it has been nearly two weekssince Newsweek magazine reported that four senior members of its staff had been present when Jackie Mason described David N. Dinkins as a ''shvartzer,'' the magazine's handling of the information has continued to be a center of controversy.


Brooklyn Man Is Questioned In the Slaying of a Minister
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday and charged with breaking into a church where a minister was found slain, the police said.


BUSH ON ABORTION: HIS VIEWS THROUGH THE YEARS
LEAD:  February 1980


Professor Criticized for Exam on Yom Kippur
LEAD: Harry Edwards, a sociology professor with a reputation for bluntly criticizing racism in professional sports, has been accused of being insensitive to Jewish students in an introductory sociology class at the University of California at Berkeley.


Favored A's Are Eager to 'Get It Done'
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics are still being chased by the failure of 1988.
They say it is a forgotten part of their past, that last year has no bearing on this year, that there are no dark clouds hanging over them.
But the clouds are there, seen or unseen.


TAKEOVER STOCKS HIT HARD
LEAD: A late wave of selling swept the stock market yesterday, sending the Dow Jones industrial average down 190.58 points, or 6.9 percent, to 2,569.26.
In terms of points, the decline was the second largest in history, exceeded only by the 508-point plunge of Oct. 19, 1987, but the decline in percentage terms was not nearly so bad.


Facing Scandal, Gandhi Loses Parliament Votes
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, facing his most serious political crisis since coming to office in 1984, lost important votes in Parliament tonight, prompting speculation that he may call snap elections or try to postpone the voting while he rebuilds his political strength.


Peterson to Yankees
LEAD: The Yankees yesterday named Harding (Pete) Peterson, a former executive vice president of the Pittsburgh Pirates, vice president and general manager after Bob Quinn resigned, as expected.
Quinn accepted a similar position with the Cincinnati Reds.


William A. Kottmeyer, Educator, Dies at 79
LEAD: William A. Kottmeyer, an educator and a prolific author of textbooks, died of an aneurysm Wednesday during abdominal surgery at St.
Mary's Health Center in Richmond Heights, Mo.
He was 79 years old and lived in Town and Country, Mo.


Aristech Shares Climb Sharply
LEAD: The Aristech Chemical Corporation's stock rose today, one day after the company received a $25-a-share offer valued at $817.5 million, but some analysts said it would probably reject the bid from an investment group led by Jon Huntsman, chairman of the closely held Huntsman Chemical of Salt Lake City.


British Inflation Rises
LEAD: Retail prices in Britain rose by the steepest amount in five months in September, bringing the annual inflation rate to 7.6 percent, the Government reported today.
The Government said the rise of seven-tenths of a percent in the retail price index for September was the highest monthly increase since April's 1.8 percent.


Mi Selecto, at 9-1, Captures Meadowlands Cup
LEAD: Mi Selecto led a parade of long shots under the wire tonight in the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup at Meadowlands Race Track, while Blushing John finished a distant seventh as the 3-to-5 favorite.


Lawyers Work to Publicize Risks in Household Products
LEAD: A group of lawyers is calling on its members to become whistle-blowers who bring dangerous products to the attention of state and Federal safety officials.


Four Opera Seminars At the Guggenheim
LEAD: Philip Glass, Frank Corsaro, Maurice Sendak, Christopher Keene, Erie Mills, John Cheek and others will take part in a series of four seminars on ''Opera in the 20th Century,'' presented by the New York City Opera Guild at the Guggenheim Museum on four successive Mondays at 6 P.M.


Logic Behind Volvo-Renault Talks
LEAD: Talks between Renault of France and Volvo of Sweden about possible joint efforts are the latest sign of growing concern about increased competition in Europe when trade barriers fall in 1992, the rise of Japanese auto makers as a global force and the soaring cost of research and development.


Community Mental Health Plan Must Succeed
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Potting Mixtures
LEAD: Whatever happened to the old standard soil recipe (1-1-1) used for potting house plants and growing seedlings?


Steps to Control the Slide Yield Unintended Effects
LEAD: As the markets raced out of control yesterday, a series of emergency actions was initiated at the major stock, futures and options exchanges in an effort to limit price declines.


The Ancillary Race: Winning TV Coverage
LEAD: On Thursday night, television news viewers finally saw Rudolph W. Giuliani in a flattering light.
Entering a ballroom full of cheering supporters, the Republican mayoral candidate was escorted to a dais by the President of the United States.


Your Money; Many Advised To Review Wills
LEAD: With the overhaul of the nation's tax laws in recent years, many people have rearranged trust funds and shifted assets but failed to update their wills or or have new ones written.


A Killing in Brooklyn: Was Bias the Motive?
LEAD: Paul Trotman, a 19-year-old Brooklyn man, was mourned at his funeral yesterday as another victim of New York City's racial and ethnic violence.


Sharp Rise of Private Guard Jobs
LEAD: Walk into a store, and a security guard looks you over.
Try to enter the lobby of an apartment building and a doorman blocks the way.
Arrive for an appointment at a company office and a receptionist politely but firmly checks to see if the appointment really exists.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER, 14, 1989
LEAD:  Market Turmoil


Moncrief Retires
LEAD: Sidney Moncrief, an All-Star in the National Basketball Association five times who was dropped by the Milwaukee Bucks this summer because of knee problems, said yesterday he was retiring to become a broadcaster for the Dallas Mavericks.


All of the Hype Aside, It's Time to Play Ball
LEAD: After nearly a week of talk that has more closely resembled the annual hype before the Super Bowl, World Series LXXXVI begins Saturday with the Oakland Athletics and the San Francisco Giants playing for the championship of the Bay Area.
And of baseball, too.


U.S. Aid of $7.1 Billion Given In Deals for 4 Savings Units
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation said today that it had sold the assets and deposits of four insolvent savings institutions in transactions requiring $7.1 billion in Government assistance.
These were the first large deals since Congress approved a $50 billion taxpayer bailout package in August.


Allen on Injured List
LEAD: The Los Angeles Raiders placed their former All-Pro running back Marcus Allen on injured reserve yesterday because of a torn knee ligament, and he will not be eligible to return until late November.(AP)


Canadiens Top Devils In Overtime
LEAD: Although Coach Jim Schoenfeld made three significant changes tonight, the Devils failed to find the right combination for a third consecutive game.
The result was a 4-3 overtime loss to the Montreal Canadiens, the second successive setback for the Devils, who have one victory in four games (1-2-1) this season.


A Glimpse of Peace in Lebanon
LEAD: Against odds and expectations, what seems like a serious peace plan for Lebanon is being tacked together by aging politicians meeting in the Saudi Arabian resort town of Taif.
Arab League mediators have diligently promoted marathon talks among the surviving members of the Lebanese Parliament, elected in 1972.


Seoul Vows More for U.S. Troop Costs
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo says that South Korea will increase its share of the cost of stationing American military forces here as it grows stronger economically, but that a cutback of those forces should not be considered now.


Inmates in Jersey City Set Fires in an Uprising
LEAD: Inmates at the Hudson County Jail in Jersey City set fires in their cells last night and confronted guards and firefighters when they arrived to extinguish them, a prison spokesman said.


Peugeot in Labor Talks
LEAD: The French car maker Peugeot S.A. opened talks today with unions to resolve a six-week-old strike, after workers ended their 19-day occupation of an important foundry.


Police Almost Released 3 Suspects in Park Rape
LEAD: A New York City police officer testified yesterday that the police were about to release five youths who had been arrested after reports of marauding in Central Park last April, but changed their minds when they learned that a jogger had been beaten and raped in the park.


Yugoslav Premier Seeks U.S. Aid
LEAD: Prime Minister Ante Markovic of Yugoslavia met with President Bush today, seeking United States assistance in making economic and political changes opposed by hard-liners in the Communist Party.


Answers to Quiz
LEAD: Questions appear on page 15.


President's News Conference on Foreign and Domestic Issues
LEAD: Following is the transcript of President Bush's news conference here today as provided by the Federal News Service:
OPENING STATEMENT


Hofstra Upsets Wagner
LEAD: The Flying Dutchmen of Hofstra took off against Wagner tonight and upset the Seahawks, 42-24.
Wagner had been undefeated after five games and was ranked first among the East's 87 Division III teams.


Gaston Agrees to Pact For 1 Year at Toronto
LEAD: Cito Gaston, who took over as manager of the Toronto Blue Jays 36 games into the season and turned a 12-24 team into the winner of the American League Eastern Division title, agreed to a one-year contract yesterday.


Pope, Ending Indonesia Visit, Issues Careful Plea on Rights
LEAD: Pope John Paul II wound up a long trek across Indonesia today, telling Roman Catholic bishops to speak out against human rights abuses but trying to reassure the Government that Catholics present no threat.


Labor Secretary Gets 2 Sides To Meet in Long Coal Strike
LEAD: Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole announced today that the leaders of both sides in the Pittston coal strike had agreed to meet with her on Saturday in the first face-to-face negotiations since the walkout began six months ago.


Frederick A. Huettner, Executive, 86
LEAD: Frederick A. Huettner, a former president and director of Selchow &amp; Righter, the Long Island company that manufactured Scrabble, Parchesi and Trivial Pursuit before being bought by Coleco Industries, died Thursday at University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 86 years old and lived in Brightwaters, L


Population Bomb Keeps Ticking
LEAD: To the Editor:


Workers Replace Computer In Shuttle and Begin Checks
LEAD: Technicians replaced a defective computer in the space shuttle Atlantis today as they worked toward a launching scheduled for Tuesday.


JAY WARD, 69, THE TV CARTOONIST WHO CREATED BULLWINKLE, IS DEAD
LEAD: Jay Ward, the creator of Bullwinkle and other popular television cartoon characters, died of kidney cancer on Thursday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 69 years old.
Mr.
Ward, whose innovative work contributed sophistication and wit to television cartoons for more than three decades, was best known for his series about a bumbling, deep-voiced moose - Bullwinkle - and his sprightly companion, Rocky, the flying squirrel.


Group Fails To Finish UAL Deal
LEAD: The group seeking to acquire the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said yesterday that it had failed to complete the financing of its $6.75 billion buyout.
But the group said its banks had advised that the deal could be financed ''on revised terms.''


Air Midwest Bid Is Made by Mesa
LEAD: Air Midwest, a Wichita-based regional air services company, said Mesa Airlines Inc. of Farmington, N.M., was proposing to acquire all of Midwest's shares outstanding.
Mesa sent a letter proposing a combination of cash and Mesa stock for the purchase of Air Midwest.
Mesa's stock fell $1 today, to $6.75, on the New York Stock Exchange, while Air Midwest rose 50 cents, to $5.25, in over-the counter trading.


Review/Dance; Seoul Group Celebrates Nature
LEAD: The seasons of the year flowed gently by on Wednesday night at Alice Tully Hall.
The 88 Seoul Art Troupe evoked the passage of time and the beneficence of nature in ''Dance, Voice of the Earth.''


Haas &amp; Partners Ends Intertech Bid
LEAD: The Commercial Intertech Corporation, a maker of engineered metal components, said Haas &amp; Partners had advised the company that it does not intend to pursue its efforts to acquire control of Commercial Intertech.
The Texas-based Haas group offered to acquire Commercial Intertech late last month for $27.50 a share.


C. Emil Nelson, Leader In Salvation Army, 83
LEAD: Col.
C.
Emil Nelson, the former national chief secretary of the Salvation Army, died of complications of heart disease Thursday at Jersey Shore Medical Center in Asbury Park, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Asbury Park.


Patents; New Flexible Magnet Is Called Stronger
LEAD: Using a rare earth metal, a metallurgist has developed a high-energy flexible magnet that he said could easily be shaped into electronic components.


Patents; Mask May Improve Laser Eye Surgery
LEAD: Summit Technology Inc., a small manufacturer of laser systems in Watertown, Mass., has developed a mask the size of a contact lens that the company believes could make eye surgery easier and more reliable.


S.E.C. Chief Quiet on Drop
LEAD: Two days after being sworn in as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Richard C. Breeden spent this afternoon in his office and refused to discuss today's market drop with reporters.
A spokeswoman for the


Carl Newton, Lawyer, Dies at 91; A Mining Official in Roosevelt Era
LEAD: Carl E. Newton, a New York lawyer for more than half a century who served as Deputy Coal Administrator in Washington during World War II, died Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.


About New York; Chelsea Lifetime: 81 Years of Love, Survival and Art
LEAD: This is a tale of principles, survival, love, art and, in the most recent chapter, rock music videos and a tire commercial.
But it is especially about love.


Corrections
LEAD: The Auctions column in Weekend yesterday gave an incorrect date for the sale of 19th- and 20th-century prints at Sotheby's in Tokyo.
It took place yesterday; it is not next Friday.


Dinkins Talk Evokes 1960
LEAD: David N. Dinkins assembled more than 1,000 leaders of Jewish congregations and community groups at breakfast Thursday to repeat - this time ''as candidly and as plainly as I can'' -a message that has underscored much of his campaign for mayor of New York City.


Review/Film; 'Halloween 5' And Sinister Rustlings
LEAD: ''I prayed that he would be in hell, but in my heart I knew that hell would not have him!'' laments Dr.
Loomis (Donald Pleasence) the disfigured psychiatrist and veteran of three installments of the ''Halloween'' horror series early in episode 5.
Once again, Loomis is in pursuit of Michael Myers, the seemingly indestructible killer of teen-agers, who materializes in Haddonville, Ill., on


Turner Broadcasting Considering Publishing
LEAD: The Turner Broadcasting System is considering starting a book publishing operation, possibly with one or more foreign partners.
It is also looking into establishing a prize for works of fiction about the environment, according to Turner executives in Atlanta.


Population Bomb Keeps Ticking; China's Policy Decried
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cairo Says Qaddafi to Visit
LEAD: Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, will visit Egypt on Sunday for the first time in 16 years and hold talks with President Hosni Mubarak, Egyptian officials said today.
They said Colonel Qaddafi would meet President Mubarak in Mersa Matruh, a resort on the Mediterranean.


First Chicago Reports Loss
LEAD: Following the example of other leading United States banks, the First Chicago Corporation reported a third-quarter loss today after increasing its reserves for shaky third world loans by $200 million.


Warsaw Sinfonia
LEAD: Yehudi Menuhin will conduct the Warsaw Sinfonia in Mendelssohn's Overture to ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' Lutoslawski's ''Funeral Music,'' the Haydn Symphony No. 104 and the Bruch Violin Concerto at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.
Robert McDuffie is to be the soloist in the Bruch.
Tickets are $11 to $20.


SENATE APPROVES $14 BILLION PLAN TO REDUCE DEFICIT
LEAD: The Senate approved a $14 billion plan to reduce the deficit tonight, stripping from it hundreds of extraneous measures including child care assistance and Medicare changes, and putting off a battle over cutting the capital gains tax.


Eckersley Not an Issue
LEAD: Bobby Brown, the president of the American League, said today that the Dennis Eckersley emery-board issue is not an issue with him.


Patents; A Cube Game More Difficult Than Rubik's
LEAD: For people who think Rubik's Cube is too easy to solve, two graduate students patented a new cube puzzle this week that makes the original seem as simple as a picture puzzle.


Within the Kremlin, the Russian Orthodox Church Marks an Anniversary    The Mass took place in Uspensky Cathedral, one of the Kremlin's three main churches. It was believed to be the first time that a service was held there since shortly after the Bolsheviks took power. (Agence France-Presse)


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 16.


Jane Pauley Is Expected to Leave 'Today' Show
LEAD: NBC is expected to announce early next week that Jane Pauley, the co-anchor of ''Today,'' will leave the program to become part of a new weekly prime-time news program or series of programs next summer.


Ex-Reagan Aide Won Grant After Brief Talk With Pierce
LEAD: A top fund-raiser for former President Ronald Reagan disclosed today that he won $28 million in assistance for a housing project in Texas after a brief meeting with former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr.
The Congressional testimony of Gerald Carmen, who left Mr.
Reagan's 1980 transition team to head the General Services Administration, offered another example of what lawmakers have described as a pattern of political favoritism at the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the


Bridge
LEAD: An opening no-trump bid with a hand containing a singleton is frowned on by theory and avoided in practice by all but a few eccentrics.
But an overcall of one no-trump is another matter, as on the diagramed deal reported by David Berah from a rubber bridge game at the Cavendish Club.


Chinese Vice Premier Meets Gandhi and Sees Warm Ties
LEAD: The highest-ranking Chinese leader to visit India in nearly 30 years met with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi today and declared that a new era of friendship had begun between the two Asian giants.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Arby's 42 largest franchisees formed a group, A. P. Association Inc., to oppose the continued control of the roast-beef sandwich chain by Victor Posner, chairman of DWG Corp., which controls Arby's.


Wall St. Cites Sound Fundamentals
LEAD: Although Wall Street was stunned by the selling wave that swept the stock market in the last hour of trading yesterday, it was not devastated.
Some market participants attributed the 190-point, or 6.9 percent, plunge in the Dow Jones industrial average to overspeculation.


Recital in Brooklyn On a Mighty Wurlitzer
LEAD: Two years after extensive water damage silenced its pipes, a vintage Wurlitzer organ that was a permanent fixture at the Brooklyn Paramount Theater can be heard again this weekend.


Chief of Corrections Retires
LEAD: Richard J. Koehler, the Correction Commissioner of New York City, announced yesterday that he is retiring as commissioner effective Dec. 22.
Mayor Edward I. Koch praised Commissioner Koehler, who began as a police foot patrolman in 1967 for changing the Department of Correction ''all for the better in a quantum way.


Herbert M. Weed, 68, Anaconda Executive
LEAD: Herbert M. Weed, a former vice president of the Anaconda Company, a leading producer of nonferrous metals and uranium, died of a heart attack Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Denver.
He was 68 years old and lived in Cherry Hills Village, a Denver suburb.


Pretoria Is Said to Transfer Prisoners
LEAD: The Government was reported today to have moved Walter Sisulu and some other political prisoners to jails near their homes amid speculation that they would be released this weekend.


New York's New School Chief Visits City and Faults System
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez visited New York yesterday to start setting up shop as the new schools chancellor, and he immediately offered some blunt challenges to the city's way of running its schools.


Centrust Payouts
LEAD: Centrust Bank of Miami said yesterday that it had been ordered to stop paying dividends on its preferred stock because of financial problems including losses in its holdings of ''junk bonds.'' The order to stop paying dividends came from Federal regulators at the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Federal and state regulators are considering a proposal by Centrust to sell 63 of its branches for $150 million to the Great Western Financial Corporation of Beverly Hills, Calif.


The Voronezh Visitors
LEAD: Tass, the Soviet press agency, has reported the landing of an extraterrestrial vehicle in the Russian city of Voronezh.
The creatures who emerged were nine feet tall, with little knobby heads and three eyes.
They had a small robot in tow and went for a ''short promenade about the park,'' Tass reports.


Toronto Journal; Will They Always Get Their Man, Hats or No?
LEAD: Along with the moose and the maple leaf, the scarlet-jacketed Mountie in his light-brown ranger hat has been a Canadian totem.
Now, guardians of the country's traditions are being asked to accept a new image within the force that tamed the Canadian west: the Mountie in a turban.


Hyman Solniker, Judge, 82
LEAD: Hyman Solniker, a retired New York City Criminal Court judge, died Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital after a long illness.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Before There Were Subways, There Was a Subway Series
LEAD: The public has been well informed, by now, that this World Series between the San Francisco Giants and Oakland Athletics, which begins tonight in Oakland, is the first confined to a single metropolitan area since 1956, when the New York Yankees faced the Brooklyn Dodgers.
But what about the first one?


Gallant Suspended
LEAD: Gerard Gallant of the Detroit Red Wings has been suspended for five games by the National Hockey League for deliberately attempting to injure Garth Butcher, a defenseman for Vancouver, while going out of his way to retaliate in a game last Saturday.
The Red Wings said they would not appeal.(AP)


Wall Street Executives Stress Differences, But Traders Point to Troubling Similarities
LEAD: The parallels were almost eerie: a Friday afternoon in October, the 13th no less, and the stock market suddenly goes into a free fall.
In less than an hour, the Dow Jones index had declined by nearly 200 points.


Devils Lose in Overtime, 4-3


Lakers Release Dailey
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers ran out of patience with Quintin Dailey yesterday and released the veteran guard.
Dailey, signed as a free agent on Sept. 12, began training camp by missing a flight to the team's camp in Honolulu and then dropped out of the first practice early.
On Thursday, he overslept and missed a practice.(


U.S. News Owner Sees End of Turmoil
LEAD: The departure of Roger Rosenblatt as editor of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, officially announced yesterday, signals the end of five years of turmoil at the top echelon of the weekly magazine, its owner, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, said yesterday.


Extension of Seaport District Upsets Plans for Skyscraper


Walker Feels at Home After Viking Workout
LEAD: It was like a return to his pro football glory days for Herschel Walker today.
Here he was, just one day into his Minnesota Vikings career, and he felt comfortable in an offense for the first time this season.


Human-Eye View
LEAD: A special look into the ornithology collection of the American Museum of Natural History, at Central Park West and 79th Street, will be offered this weekend as part of the 50th anniversary of the opening of the Whitney Wing.
Staff members will demonstrate how an exhibition is mounted, using the guano island case in the Hall of Oceanic Birds.


Unselfish Knicks Finally Get Message
LEAD: Selfishness, the players' failure to give up the ball, was one of the biggest complaints about the Knicks last season, and Stu Jackson witnessed that fault repeatedly as an assistant coach under Rick Pitino.


O'Brien Hints He's a Scapegoat
LEAD: Ken O'Brien, distressed at losing his job as the Jets' starting quarterback, conceded today that ''the thought of being traded had crossed my mind.'' But he also said he was willing to wait to see how the situation was resolved.


Disabled Newborns Deserve to Live
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rangers' Streak Ends as Capitals Take Advantage of Miscues
LEAD: The scoring siren went off so often tonight behind John Vanbiesbrouck that by the end of the third period it sounded like one long scream.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about an increase in the Japanese discount rate misidentified the person who said that while the strength of the dollar was a factor in the increase, other factors were equally important.
He was Satoshi Sumita, governor of the Bank of Japan, not Susumo Saito of the Credit Suisse Investment Advisory Company.


INSIDE
LEAD:  F.B.I. Is Given Leeway To Seize Fugitives Abroad


Despite Slip in Polls, Thatcher Is Confident at Party Conference
LEAD: Though her Conservative Party's popularity is in a slump and her Government's policies are in a mess, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher showed no self-doubt and brooked none from her followers at a party conference here that ended today.


Patents; A Specialized Antibody For Cancer Treatment
LEAD: Oncogen, a Seattle-based division of the Bristol-Myers SquibbCompany, received a patent this week for a monoclonal antibody that company officials believe could treat lung and breast cancer.


French Concern's Bid For Connaught Stalled
LEAD: The Canadian Government today told Institut Merieux S.A. of France that its takeover bid of $943.5 million (Canadian) for Connaught Biosciences Inc. of Toronto was unacceptable under rules that require foreign buyouts of Canadian companies to be of ''net benefit'' to Canada.


Orange Juice Prices Plunge On Word of Brazilian Plan
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices plunged yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange on word that Brazilian producers planned to cut their export price.


SPORTS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: Will Clark has been labeled racially ''prejudiced'' by Jeffrey Leonard, whom the Giants' first baseman labeled a ''tumor'' when they were teammates.
Kevin Mitchell has apologized and agreed to pay what was described as a ''stiff fine'' by Roger Craig, the Giants' manager, for having missed Wednesday's workout.


Hills, in Japan, Stirs a Baby-Bottle Dispute
LEAD: In her first visit to Japan as the United States special trade representative, Carla A. Hills faced off today against Japan's hard-nosed bureaucrats.
They argued about baby bottles.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Medical Warnings
LEAD: Nearly any lapse from good health, with a few exceptions like the early stages of malignant tumors, will show up in one of the basic blood tests that can be performed in a routine physical.
Such a blood test is diagnostic; it examines proteins that may not be detrimental to health but that indicate imminent health problems.


U.S. Plans A Refuge Of 13 Isles In the Ohio
LEAD: An osprey with a fish in its talons languidly flaps by, well above a stream of acrid smoke belching from a power plant - a juxtaposition of industry and nature that is common here where the Ohio River flows around a string of unspoiled islands.


Ford Seeks 51% Of Saab-Scania
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company wants a 51 percent stake in the car division of Saab-Scania A.B., but the Swedish manufacturer will not relinquish control of the unit, the daily newspaper Svenska Dagbladet said. ''This is not just a business question,'' a source close to the negotiations was quoted as saying.


Review/Music; Ozawa Leads Mahler Ninth
LEAD: Mahler's progress from his Fourth Symphony to his Ninth tells us that life teaches much but not always what we want to know.
The two works are joined by a number of similarities - the delicate employment of elephantine orchestral resources, for one, also the persistent references to the land: horns call from the hills beyond, naive folk songs are sung,


HONECKER ADMITS NEED FOR CHANGE
LEAD: Erich Honecker, the East German leader, met today with leaders of normally pliant minority parties and spoke of the need to change economic and social policies, East German reports said.


Interned Artists, Devoid of Grievance
LEAD: ''WE had to make friends with the wild creatures in the camp, especially the spiders, mice and rats, because we were outnumbered.''


On the Embryo Front in the Battle of the Sexes; Collection Harassment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/ Concert; All-French Program by Riverside Symphony
LEAD: George Rothman opened the ninth season of his Riverside Symphony Thursday night at Alice Tully Hall with a piquant 20th-century French bill -actually, three pieces composed by Parisians within a span of 28 years.


Plain or Fancy, The Greeks Said It With Metal
LEAD: Greek metalwork - known more through adaptations made by Romans in antiquity and Europeans in the 18th and 19th centuries than through the originals - is far more remarkable in its vigor than are later manifestations.
This can be seen in an exhibition of 38 ancient Greek artifacts, vessels and items of jewelry produced over a period of 600 years, and a companion display of 10 neoclassical urns, candelabra and vases of the 18th and 19th centuries, exhibited at the Michael Ward Gallery, 9 East 93d Street.


HOW VIOLENT IS HE? MEMORY FAILS
LEAD:  TICKET TO RIDE  By Dennis Potter.  202 pp.
New York:  Vintage Books, Paper, $6.95.


Man Is Arrested in Virginia on Espionage Charges
LEAD: A Tennessee man who said he became involved with the K.G.B. in Moscow after he chanced upon a Soviet ballet troupe on a bus in Bolivia was arrested by Federal agents early today on espionage charges.


SEOUL RENEWS BID TO GAIN U.N. SEAT
LEAD: Four decades after its first application for membership in the United Nations, South Korea has begun a major diplomatic effort at the current session of the General Assembly to secure support for its admission.


Will Success Spoil Laurie Anderson?
LEAD: Can a performance artist who arose from the depths of lower Manhattan bohemia retain her artistic self-possession while backstroking through the shark-infested waters of commercial popular music?
And can an artist with a radically original but idiosyncratically limited style continue to grow and yet retain the stylistic signatures that distinguished her in the first place?


Tour Bus Accident Injures 42
LEAD: A tour bus swerved out of control and flipped on its side today on a rain-slickened interstate, injuring all 42 people aboard, officials said.
Robert Forbuss, president of Mercy Ambulance, said the 41 passengers and the driver were taken to four hospitals.
The worst injury reported was a pelvic fracture.


WHAT MOMA DONE TOLE HIM
LEAD:  JUST LOOKING  Essays on Art.
By John Updike.
Illustrated. 210 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


THE WEIRD, THE BAD AND THE SCARY
LEAD: ''Here's your basic convict,'' Sam Cornish said. ''This ghoul here is our own design.
Over there is Lucky Lemon Lio.
That's for next year.
If you need a barbarian ax or some monster hands, they're over against the wall.''


Reviews/Music; Kim and Serkin Begin Series Of Beethoven Violin Sonatas
LEAD: Beethoven's violin sonatas span the years 1797 to 1812, but for all their many merits, they hardly constitute a range of style and expression to equal the composer's string quartets or piano sonatas or symphonies.
Still, it is good to hear them periodically as a body of work, and so, quite apart from its virtues of performance, the series begun by Young Uck Kim and Peter Serkin Wednesday night at the 92d Street Y (and continuing there for the next two


Old Friends Give New Meaning To 'Pas de Deux'
LEAD: Simultaneously, the choreographers Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis were making dances in the same rehearsal studio.
While the white-haired Mr.
Nikolais played a tape of his own percussive electronic score and directed his cluster of dancers to crouch behind a screen and simulate jack-in-the-box movements, Mr.


Tempting New Offerings in Technology
LEAD: When stock prices crashed two years ago, hot young technology companies suffered some of the steepest declines.
The market for initial public offerings, particularly in technology, vanished.


Margaret L. Ford Marries a Lawyer
LEAD: Margaret Lane Ford, a consultant on bibliographies, and John Gillespie Stewart, an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, were married yesterday at the Greenville (Del.) Country Club.
The Rev.
Robert M. Doss, a Unitarian minister, officiated.
The bride, 31 years old and a daughter of Mr.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; For Day of Rest, Beef Dish That Almost Cooks Itself
LEAD: Weekends are the only time many people have to prepare dishes that require long, slow cooking.
The best kind are those that take very little time to assemble and can be pretty much left unwatched on the stove.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: It has taken some years for history to recognize that Mr.
Truman stepped into a position for which he was ill prepared but grew well into it.
It does his image no good to present the petty-minded picture that Ms.
Truman does of her father.
I would prefer to believe that he was capable of, and did rise to the demands of, the office admirably.


Bette Davis: The Mortal, The Myth
LEAD: Dorian Gray kept his portrait in the attic where only he could see it.
The rest of us aren't as lucky.
We walk around wearing ours.
In this respect movie stars as fine-tuned and long-lived as Bette Davis are both blessed and damned.


Door Opens to New Bishop's Knock
LEAD: When Episcopal Bishop Richard F. Grein ceremonially pounded on the great bronze doors of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine yesterday, the Episcopal Church in New York was hearing the sound of a new kind of leadership.


Should a School Athlete Pay to Play?
LEAD: THE new school year has begun; academic study and the interscholastic athletic programs are in full swing.
Enthusiasm is high, anticipation of success still undiminished.
But a trend has developed in western Connecticut that is disturbing.
That is the decision by boards of education to require students who choose to participate in athletic programs to pay for the privilege.


Bolar: A Drug Company Under Seige
LEAD: For more than a year, the Food and Drug Administration and the House of Representatives Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations have been reporting evidence of unethical behavior at generic drug companies.


Biotech Goes Begging
LEAD: A revived market for initial public offerings has yielded scant benefit for biotechnology companies.
Investors perceive biotech as a high-risk business where young companies, lacking revenues and earnings from products, are difficult to evaluate by conventional means.


'Extra' Work Propels Career
LEAD: SHE is seen but not heard as a Hasidic woman with a baby among the pushcarts on the Lower East Side (''Crossing Delancey''), as a mourner attending a funeral, again with a baby, in ''State of Grace,'' and as a neighbor, this time without a baby, watching Roseanne Barr blowing up her own house in ''She Devil.


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: Many times I've argued with short-sighted anti-competitive sports advocates about the merits of such activities.
How, win or lose, they foster social interaction, camaraderie, team spirit, promote physical and mental conditioning, and create a sense of working toward goals and dreams.
Celebration of one's own or his team's performance is normal and happy to see.


Optimism Emerging
LEAD: Stock exchange officials are bracing for tomorrow's market opening on Wall Street.


Outfield Assist To Remember
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Reaction Sought on Greenway Proposal
LEAD: COUNTY residents will have a chance this week to comment on the state's ''greenway'' concept, a plan to preserve the Hudson River Valley by creating a chain of interlocking parks, trails and recreation sites from New York City to Albany.


Sweet Success for Saviors of A's and Giants
LEAD: Bob Lurie remembers the day 13 years ago when he bought the San Francisco Giants for $8 million because they were more interesting than real estate and because they had their bags packed and were ready to skip town for Toronto.
He was cheered as a great civic hero for saving the ball club by the Bay.


Machines Replace Workers And Turn Out More Loaves
LEAD: Bread has looked like bread for centuries.
But the bakeries that make it have changed substantially to speed up production and reduce labor costs.


Julia Portale Wed To C. E. Hutchins
LEAD: Julia Diane Portale, a daughter of Emil Portale of Santa Cruz, Calif., and Susan Robertson Pease of Eugene, Ore., was married yesterday to Cameron Edwin Hutchins, the son of Mrs.
Dan E. Hutchins of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
Hutchins.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New


Searching for Ancestors Is Made a Bit Easier
LEAD: It might not have taken Estelle M. Guzik seven years to trace her family tree if there had been a guide to genealogical resources.
Now, she has edited one.
The guide, Genealogical Resources in the New York Metropolitan Area, was published by the Jewish Genealogical Society and offers information on more than 100 research centers in and around New York, including libraries, archives, government agencies and courts.


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: The showmanship so prevalent in baseball and other professional sports today is symptomatic of the pervasive influence of television, which has greatly inspired the ''styling'' as well as the myriad of congratulatory gestures at home plate.
Fans, reacting to an unfolding soap opera instead of a sporting event, clamor for curtain calls when their heroes save the day.


In a Shift, Towns Begin to Develop Low-Cost Housing
LEAD: RESPONDING to pressure from without and within, surburban communities that long resisted low- or moderate-cost housing are beginning to permit, encourage and even develop hundreds of such units.


The Design Story of the Decade
LEAD: ON A RAINY NIGHT in October 1982, over 3,000 people stood in line outside a loft building in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood, hoping to squeeze into an already crammed showroom.
The event was Memphis at Midnight, the United States' first look at the bold, colorful, quirky furniture that had been born in


Scholar's Progress, Home to Dorm
LEAD: ''WHEN are we going to start looking at colleges, Mom?''


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: It's the rare photographer who hasn't been moved by the glow of the setting sun or by rays of sunlight striking a colorful flower arrangement on the kitchen table.
In such cases, using flash would only spoil the effect, so the designers of cameras with built-in flash units have provided ways to keep the flash from firing.


Social Events
LEAD:  North Star Anniversary


Bush to Seek Death Penalty for Drug Chiefs
LEAD: The Bush Administration is preparing to ask Congress to expand use of the death penalty significantly by permitting execution of drug kingpins whether or not they are involved in a killing, Justice Department officials say.


WINDY CITY, SUBTLE PRIEST
LEAD:  CARDINAL BERNARDIN  Easing Conflicts - and Battling for the  Soul of American Catholicism.
By Eugene Kennedy.  316 pp.
Chicago: Bonus Books. $19.95.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: Transcaucasia - beyond the Caucasus Mountains: few geographical descriptions summon up for Westerners more exotic images of Asia, from Batumi on the Black Sea to Baku on the Caspian Sea, from Iran's northern border through the breadbasket of the Soviet Union in Georgia.


Ms. Sellers Weds A Fellow Lawyer
LEAD: The marriage of Martha E. Sellers and Alan M. Klein, both associates at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, took place yesterday evening at the Harvard Club in New York.
Rabbi Burt Siegal and the Rev.
John W. Payne, a minister of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), officiated.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Autumn Jubilee, Second Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Nature Survey Turns Up Surprises in Fairfield County
LEAD: THE slimy salamander, a North American variety of salamander that has long been considered to be rare in Connecticut, may not be as uncommon here as once thought, according to a survey of Fairfield County by the Nature Conservancy.


Design Preview; HIGH POINT: NEW RELIABLES
LEAD: NOSTALGIA WILL BE THE PRE-dominant theme at this fall's International Home Furnishings Market in High Point, N.C., where showrooms will feature such 19th-century styles as Victorian, Biedermeier and century-old Russian.
To see such traditional merchandise is not unusual at High Point, the largest wholesale furniture market in the country.


At a Border Crossing, a Rarity: Illegal Alien Is Caught


House Built by Students Awaits a Buyer and Site
LEAD: IT is apparent that real estate is in a slump when a new two-bedroom house in Ocean County is advertised at $16,000 for four months and does not sell.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''It's total emotional and psychological chaos. People are dumping everything.''
Eugene Peroni, analyst at Janey Montgomery Scott, on Friday's action.


Islanders, Ahead by 3, Settle for a Tie
LEAD: After the young Islanders squandered a 3-0 lead in their home opener and settled for a 3-3 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers today, the veterans Bryan Trottier and Don Maloney chose to stress the positive view that comes with experience.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  EIGHTY-EIGHT STEPS TO SEPTEMBER  By Jan Marino.  154 pp.
New York:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $13.95.  (Ages 8 to 12)


As the Charter Vote Nears, New Yorkers Still Argue
LEAD: NEW YORKERS will be asked on Election Day to choose not only a new mayor but also the form of government over which he will preside.
A proposal to revise the City Charter - the most sweeping change in the structure of municipal government since the turn of the century - will be on the ballot.


A FAST COMEBACK
LEAD: REIGNING INDIANAPOLIS 500 champion Emerson Fittipaldi is cruising past the farmhouses that dot the Irish Hills of Michigan.
It is a lazy Thursday afternoon in August, three days before the running of the Marlboro 500, and the Brazilian driver is making his leisurely way to the lake house he rents for the week of the race.


The Deficit Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


'The Culture We Deserve'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Victory Is Yet to Come
LEAD: As the new Solidarity-led Government moves into its second month, there is no triumphalism in Poland.
Is is as though winning the long struggle to wrest power from the Communist monopoly were a cold bath, an uneasy awakening from the heady if harsh days of confrontation.


Review/Rock; Scottish Band Called Texas Makes Its New York Debut
LEAD: There is something slightly incongruous about a rock band from Scotland that calls itself Texas.
But that is the name adopted by the young Glasgow-based group that appeared at the Bottom Line on Wednesday evening.
Like Deacon Blue, another promising young Scottish band with a growing reputation, Texas puts a Celtic stamp on American rock-and-roll forms, even while trying to sound as


Rivals for The No. 1 Spot
LEAD: To the Editor:


MIAMI MAYHEM
LEAD:  SKIN TIGHT  By Carl Hiaasen.  319 pp. New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $18.95.


A Levee Near Tijuana Becomes a Flashpoint
LEAD: The recent death of a 14-year-old Mexican boy, run over by a United States Border Patrol jeep, dramatized the chaotic and sometimes violent situation that has developed as more and more illegal aliens try to enter the United States through one narrow section of the California border.


The Abortion-Rights Movement Has Its Day
LEAD: A SERIES of bitter state-by-state battles over abortion has barely begun, but already advocates of abortion rights have proclaimed a watershed.
Never before, they argued last week, had political attitudes and behavior shifted so far, so fast, in their favor.


Miss Brownstein, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Nancy Anne Brownstein, an associate at Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, and Kevin Patrick Mallery, an associate at Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, both New York law firms, were married in Lenox, Mass., yesterday.
George Lee, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Cranwell Resort and Hotel.


DARING YET LIVABLE: The Mellowing of Deconstructivism
LEAD: Deconstructivism, the trendy architectural movement that began on the West Coast nearly a decade ago, is still influencing design.
But this strident style, known for its hard-edged austerity, is rarely seen in its purist form.
Rather, architects such as Wayne Berg, a partner of the Manhattan firm of Pasanella +


Eat and Be Wary, Governor
LEAD: Gov.
Bill Clements was among several diners who witnessed an armed robbery at a restaurant Thursday night in which one man was shot.
The lone robber apparently did not recognize Mr.
Clements, who was seatedestors sell their shares, because he was confident that any drop would be temporary. 'Some Shock


A Funeral Mass for Marcos in Hawaii


Stephen Lesser Weds Ms. Burton
LEAD: Carol Jeanette Burton, a financial consultant for Merrill Lynch Consumer Markets, was married yesterday in Westport, Conn., to Stephen Lesser, an architect at the Wilton, Conn., firm of Robert Faesy Associates.
The Rev.
Barbara Pescan, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the home of the bridegroom.


Villa Rental
LEAD: To the Editor: The article about rental of villas and castles in Italy (''How to Rent a Private Villa,'' Travel, Oct. 1) did not include our company, Hometours International (1170 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10001; 212-689-0851 or, out of state, 800-367-4668).
We also represent Villas Italia.
We offer a wide range of accommodations, from very simple apartments in small villages on the Mediterranean Sea, Adriatic Sea, Sicily, Sardinia and Tuscany inland to very large and beautiful villas on the Amalfi Drive and in Positano overlooking the Mediterranean Sea and Forte dei Marmi on the Italian


POSTINGS: Homes in the Ramapos; 4- to 14-Acre Lots
LEAD: Late in the 18th century, members of the Pierson family acquired a large chunk of what is now Sterlington in Rockland County, N.Y.
They used the streams of the Ramapo Mountains to power their forges to make nails and hardwood from the forests to fire their charcoal kilns.


Picture of Temptations Painted in Garcia Trial
LEAD: One of the prosecution's last witnesses at the bribery trial of Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee, was a Harvard Law School student who worked a few years ago as an intern in the Congressman's South Bronx office.


Standardizing Car Regulations For the Disabled
LEAD: ON Tuesday a committee is scheduled to meet in Washington in an effort to standardize state rules on identifying autos that transport people with mobility handicaps.
The committee of 15, convening at the Department of Transportation, includes representatives of the handicapped as well as officials from state and


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-23


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Winthrop, Me.; Main St. Renewal
LEAD: A BUILDING that for decades dominated Main Street in this central Maine city has been moved back 150 feet to make room for a parking lot, dramatically changing the streetscape and making some residents unhappy.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Englishtown  $148,000  27 Tennent Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; dining room, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $1,544.
Howell  $94,900  83 East Parkway Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 13-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, Florida room, w/w carpeting; taxes $1,548.


Hong Kong Boat People Fast To Protest Return to Vietnam
LEAD: More than 11,000 Vietnamese boat people in detention centers here staged a hunger strike today to protest repatriation to their homeland, officials said.


L.I. Officials Seek to Insure True Census Count
LEAD: WITH preparations for the 1990 census under way, Long Island officials fear that the Island will be shortchanged in Congressional representation and services, and want to insure that the Island's population is not undercounted.


Donna Zaccaro Wed to Paul Ullman
LEAD: Donna Anne Zaccaro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Zaccaro of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Paul Arthur Ullman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Ullman Jr. of St.
Louis.
Msgr.
Gerald J. Langelier and Rabbi Joseph R. Rosenbloom performed the interfaith ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New


Why Gorbachev Doesn't Care to Strike Back
LEAD: ACCORDING to the stereotypes Westerners hold dear, Mikhail S. Gorbachev should now be apoplectic over the hemorrhage of Communist power in Europe.
Poland falls into the clutches of Solidarity.
The Hungarian Communist Party shuns the word Communist, then fractures and quarrels over who gets to keep the bank account.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY-Binghamton; Student Charged With Vandalism Wins a New Post
LEAD: The former president of the Jewish Student Union at the State University of New York at Binghamton, who is awaiting trial on charges of painting anti-Semitic slurs at his own organization's headquarters, has been elected to the academic governing board of the university's undergraduate division.


RESIDENTIAL RESALES
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Sept. 30  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $900,000  161 West 22d Street  4-family, 4-story, attached loft building; four 2,000-sq.-ft. open units with terraces; 2,000-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the ground floor, 21- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $4,825 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Bankruptcy: The Facts
LEAD: As an attorney in Garden City whose firm has 14 years of bankruptcy experience, I read, with great interest, the article on Sept. 10 on the rise of personal bankruptcy filings on Long Island.
The increase in my business during the past year is consistent with that conclusion.
However, there were inaccuracies regarding personal bankruptcy.


Beirut General Warns Christians at Talks
LEAD: The commander of the Christian forces in Lebanon, Gen.
Michel Aoun, threatened retribution against Christian Lebanese negotiators today to try to keep them from making concessions to their Muslim counterparts in talks here on ending the 14-year civil war.


An Anniversary Show Of a Museum's Riches
LEAD: MUSEUMS get critical attention for their temporary shows but not for their permanent collections.
Though this is but a symptom of art's show-business condition, the Montclair Museum, for one, is not taking it lying down.


Rainy Days Slow Foliage Display
LEAD: THE annual explosion of colorful fall foliage is a little late in southern New England this year, and leaf watchers say the colors may be somewhat muted when they come.
The reason: a warm, wet September punctuated by Hurricane Hugo.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: Yes, Truman was a ''take charge'' President.
He took charge and dropped two nuclear bombs on Japan, when one probably would have been sufficient.
He took charge and started the nuclear-arms race by approving the production of the hydrogen bomb.
GARY CASTEEL  Knoxville, Tenn.


Plant Owners Fighting Plan to Clean Canyon Air
LEAD: The sunsets are sometimes a little redder and the great craggy walls are sometimes a little bluer when the particles of smog drift into the Grand Canyon from industries scattered across the American West and from polluted cities as far away as Los Angeles.


Tailgate 'Terrorists': What About Trucks?
LEAD: Terence Ripmaster, in a recent Opinion page article, and David Hull, in a letter to the New Jersey editor, both wrote about driving ''terrorists'' on the New Jersey Turnpike.
To my dismay, neither referred to my ''pet'' terrorizing experiences: tailgating by those behemoth 10, 12 or whatever-wheel trucks.


THE CRUSADES OF DR. ELDERS
LEAD: ON A HOLIDAY MONDAY, THE large, labyrinthine headquarters of the Arkansas Department of Public Health, in Little Rock, is virtually empty.
On call in the basement are a pair of communications specialists, whose job it is to dispatch trained personnel in the event of a medical emergency, toxic chemical spill or other threat to the commonweal.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Fort Greene
LEAD: WHEN Fort Greene residents want a night on the town, they can stay close to home.
At the Brooklyn Academy of Music and its Majestic Theater, there is everything from ballet to opera to jazz.
Sheila's Restaurant offers such musicians as the violinist Noel Pointer, and drama and comedy can be found at the Cecil Alonzo Theater, the Paul Robeson Theater and the Restoration Project Theater


Laura Watts Marries
LEAD: Laura Louise Watts, a doctoral candidate in chemistry, and Matthew Dunlap Mitchell, a doctoral candidate in biophysics, both at the University of Pennsylvania, were married yesterday at the University Lutheran Church of the Incarnation in Philadelphia by the Rev.
Jeffrey Merkel.
The bride, 27 years old, is a graduate of Bryn Mawr College.


Salvadorans Wonder How To Think About Peace
LEAD: VIOLENCE and suffering have been so central a part of El Salvador's experience that the national anthem reminds the people how ''painful and bloody is your history.'' Ten years ago today, though, a group of young and idealistic military officers launched a coup here ushering in a period of turmoil and destruction that has taxed even this country's remarkable ability to endure.


Blass's Defeat Marks End of an Era
LEAD: If the price of democracy is eternal vigilance, those eligible to vote in the First Legislative District of Suffolk County were asleep at the wheel on Primary Day, when they allowed well-heeled up-Island hustlers, with designs on the district, to move in with the money and move out with the election.


INSIDE
LEAD:  3 Drug Figures Sent to U.S.


'Blaming the Victim' In the War on Waste
LEAD: Assemblyman David C. Kronick's article, ''The Trashing of New Jersey'' (Opinion page, Sept. 17), is another in a series from many sources that improperly accuse New Jerseyites of being addicted to littering and other bad habits related to solid-waste control.
It is a cover-up for poor performance by New Jersey politicians who call themselves leaders.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. When we bought our 45-year-old house, it had been freshly painted, but a disk sander had been used on many places, leaving deep swirls on the wood shingles.
Last year, we hired a professional to repaint.
He sanded and applied one coat of oil-based primer, followed by two coats of oil paint.
Now a brown stain is seeping through the paint, especially in areas in direct sun.


HEARTS AND WRITERS
LEAD: I enjoyed Michael Frank's About Men article ''No Longer My Brother's Keeper'' (Sept. 17), but would offer him one comfort.
He compares himself, a writer, unfavorably with his brother, a doctor, and wonders ''Can  [ writing ]  ever accomplish something so essential - so magical - as shocking the life back into a man whose heart has stopped?


Can Chicago Save Opera From Itself?
LEAD: Opera in this century resembles the dissolute gentleman in British novels who not only lives off the interest on his inherited fortune but commits the deadly sin of dipping into principal as well.
That downward road, devotees of the genre know, is paved with momentary pleasures but leads to the poorhouse.


D. G. Zrike Wed To Miss Hudson
LEAD: Katherine Ann Hudson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fletcher L. Hudson of Germantown, Tenn., was married yesterday to David George Zrike, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond W. Zrike of Greenwich, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan and the Rev.
James P. M. Walsh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Church in


Pan Am Agents Held in Theft
LEAD: Four Pan American World Airways ticket agents at Kennedy International Airport were arrested Friday and charged with stealing up to $48,000 from the airline.
Bill Cahill, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the airport, said the agents sold tickets and kept the cash payments.


Lynda B. Leaman Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Richard Leaman Jr. of Malvern, Pa., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Lynda B. Leaman, and Kevin A. Macdonald, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Robert M. Macdonald of Hanover, N.H.


One Dies, 5 Hurt as Violent Storms Cross Upstate Counties
LEAD: Violent thunderstorms ripped across a wide swath of upstate New York this evening, bringing winds that reached 85 miles an hour, heavy rain and hail and leaving at least one person dead and five others injured.
Power was cut off to thousands of residents.


Susan Shagrin Plans to Wed
LEAD: November wedding plans for Susan H. Shagrin and Daniel J. Pitkowsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Pitkowsky of Berkeley Heights, N.J., have been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Sandra Zahn-Oreck of Washington and Don M. Shagrin of Los Angeles.
Miss Shagrin, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Guazzo, Perelson, Rushfield &amp; Guazzo.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: How many times have you dialed the telephone, heard a response from the other end, paused, laughed ruefully and said, ''Who is this?
I forgot whom I'm calling''?
The odds are that it has happened more than once.
And more than likely the reverse has also occurred: you've picked up the phone and heard someone else's rueful voice with the same query.


Jodi L. Picoult, Student, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Jodi L. Picoult and Timothy W. van Leer, both graduates of Princeton University, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Myron M. Picoult of Nesconset, L.I.
Mr. van Leer is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Karl van Leer of Lincoln, Mass.
The couple plan to wed in


After 25 Years, Pretoria Frees Sisulu
LEAD: Walter Sisulu, South Africa's second leading jailed black nationalist after Nelson Mandela, was returned to his home today by the police after 25 years in prison.


Pierce's Hearing, McCarthy's Ghost
LEAD: For the first time since the days of Senator Joseph McCarthy, ''taking the Fifth'' in Congressional investigations is under attack.


Hits Are Nice, but You Can't Win Without Scoring Runs
LEAD: Shawon Dunston is best known as a fine-fielding, hard-throwing shortstop of the Chicago Cubs, but during the recent National League playoff, he stood in the middle of the Cubs' clubhouse and played baseball philosopher, raising a series of interesting questions.


Need for Vocational Training Grows
LEAD: GOOD jobs are going begging.
And the shortage of workers needed to fill them is expected to become even more severe in the next decade, because the number of 18-year-olds entering the job market will drop by 8 percent, according to Census Bureau projections.


Correction
LEAD: An illustration on Sept. 24 in The Business World, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about German and Japanese investment in the United States, showed the West German flag upside down.
The top stripe should be black, the middle stripe red and the bottom stripe gold.


SNAPSHOTS OF HOPE AND HOPELESSNESS
LEAD: It was helpful for Mr.
Freedman to characterize some of the injustices engendered by the bureaucracy at 110 Livingston Street, but his gloom and doom portrayal of Seward Park High School missed the mark.
It is true that this school has a large non-English-speaking population, a reflection of the community it serves.


Into Namibia With Ballots And Pollsters
LEAD: A young campaign organizer just back from the northern region of Kavango burst into the office of the South-West Africa People's Organization here.


Dorsett Mark Is Broken
LEAD: The Texas A&amp;I tailback Johnny Bailey broke Tony Dorsett's 13-year-old National Collegiate Athletic Association career rushing record tonight with a 4-yard carry against Central State.
The run gave Bailey 6,085 yards, eclipsing the mark of 6,082 set by Dorsett at Pitt in 1973-76.


T. E. Lawrence's State of Mind
LEAD: To the Editor:


Faces and Cries From the AIDS Battleground
LEAD: During one of the interviews conducted for ''Common Threads,'' a documentary about the AIDS Memorial Quilt that will be shown at 10 o'clock tonight on Home Box Office, a gay man named Vito Russo compared himself to a soldier in the Vietnam War.
With his lover dead from the disease and himself infected, Mr.


From Apples and Pears, Elegant Autumn Desserts
LEAD: NOW is the time of year for the widest choice and highest quality of apples and pears.
The best apples for cooking are those that are not too sweet but that are firm and juicy, with plenty of flavor.
Use hard, crisp McIntosh, semi-sweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Bartlett and Bosc pears are both good for cooking and their elegant shape always makes an attractive dessert.


Marxist Thought Finds an Unlikely Godmother
LEAD: To the Editor:


Repairing Fluorescent Lights
LEAD: FLUORESCENT lights are thrifty.
They use less electricity than incandescent lights, and because they also generate less heat, their tubes last longer than incandescent bulbs.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.  $395,000  84 Frame Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, deck, workshop, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $6,625.
Cross River, N.Y.  $380,000  Waccabuc Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, family room, full basement w/wet bar, 2 decks, 2-car garage, 10.3 acres; taxes $7,326.


Showdown In Florida: Woman Vs. Lizard
LEAD: SOMETIMES, as you concentrate on something, you sense movement out of the corner of your eye.
That night, I was sitting quietly in the living room of our condominium in Boca Raton reading a novel.
Through the glass doors of the terrace, I could see red streaks in the sky as the sun set.


Nicaraguans at Rebel Camp Are Asked to Disband
LEAD: In their first face-to-face visit with Nicaraguan rebel troops, a special commission of international officials came to this rugged mountain camp today to urge the fighters to accept a recent regional agreement calling for the disbanding of their army.


PHILIP MARLOWE IS BACK, AND IN TROUBLE
LEAD:  POODLE SPRINGS  By Raymond Chandler and Robert B. Parker.  268 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons.


After 150,000 March, Pretoria Frees Sisulu


The New Bed and Breakfast
LEAD: FOR just about as long as they have been around, bed and breakfast inns have been synonymous with modesty in lodging.
For a small sum of, say, $25 to $50 a night, even in the early 80's a couple could get the basics: a firm bed, perhaps a shared bath, a hearty meal the next morning and the company of an innkeeper who lived on the premises.


Starting On the Road
LEAD: No one can doubt it any longer:


Fischer-Dieskau Recitals
LEAD: Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau will give two recitals at Carnegie Hall early next month, one devoted to Schubert and the other to Richard Strauss.
The German baritone's first program, on Nov. 3, will offer poems of Goethe set to music by Schubert; the Strauss recital will take place Nov. 5.
Hartmut Holl will be the accompanist.


What About the Book?
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  A Whale of a Story


4 Parade With Signs Admitting Their Guilt
LEAD: Four young men who pulled crab traps from the St.
Johns River on Memorial Day weekend began paying their debt to society today - by parading on a bridge with signs admitting their acts.


FEDERAL RESERVE MOVES TO PROVIDE CASH TO MARKETS
LEAD: Seeking to maintain calm in the nation's financial system, the Federal Reserve Board intends to meet any sudden demands for money that might result from the stock market's sharp plunge Friday, a top official of the nation's central bank said today.


John Rex Fuqua Is Wed To Duvall Clark Schultz
LEAD: Duvall Clark Schultz, a daughter of Ruth Duvall Clark of Tarboro, N.C., and Jackson Kermit Schultz of Enterprise, Ala., was married yesterday to John Rex Fuqua, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Fuqua of Atlanta.
The Revs.
Erric Douglas Remer and Stephen Marsh Price performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church in


In Memoirs, Nancy Reagan Criticizes Regan Role as Chief
LEAD: Nancy Reagan says the biggest mistake of her husband's Presidency was allowing Donald T. Regan and James A. Baker 3d to switch jobs in January 1985.


THE P.I. GOES TO A.A.
LEAD:  OUT ON THE CUTTING EDGE  By Lawrence Block.  260 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


Ready for Prime Time
LEAD: Ever since a ''Today'' dawned last August with a new female cast member, the show's longtime co-anchor, Jane Pauley, has been rumored variously to be miffed to the point of quitting or just making a mid-career reassessment.
For weeks, Ms.
Pauley said little to dampen the speculation that she would be moving on after she suddenly found herself sharing the set with Deborah Norville, a 31-year-old, million-dollar-a-year newsreader.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: I can't think what possessed Margaret Truman, a woman I much admire (''He Didn't Like Ike,'' by Harry S. Truman, Sept. 17).
Her article reveals much more about Truman than about Eisenhower.
Truman has always been known as a hothead, given to instant reactions, but these papers show him to be bitter and censorious as he played armchair quarterback during his retirement.


Correction
LEAD: A chart last week with an article about vending-machine sales misidentified the source of the data.
It was Vending Times, not Vending Today.


What Emerson Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Christmas cactus, jade plant and any other house plants that are lingering outdoors should be moved in, pronto; frost can be expected any time now and these plants could be ruined.
In the garden, continue planting, especially bulbs.
Rake leaves or blow them off the lawn and add to compost.


Felicia Pfeiffer Weds
LEAD: The marriage of Felicia Constance Pfeiffer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Pfeiffer Jr. of Glen Rock, N.J., to Michael David Angus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Angus of Woodbridge, Ontario, took place yesterday at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church in Stone Harbor, N.J.
The Rev.
Eugene Kernan officiated.


All (3) Eyes Were On Him
LEAD: Vasya Surin saw the aliens.
In a park in Voronezh, 300 miles southeast of Moscow.
Tass, the official Soviet news agency, said so, in a straight-faced report that conveniently, and perhaps not coincidentally, provided the Soviet public last week with plenty to ponder besides bare food shelves and chaotic politics.


How to Honor a Bride-to-Be
LEAD: THE eldest of my three daughters, a 19-year-old with a cheerful outlook, attended her first bridal shower on a recent Sunday.
The round trip to Manchester encompassed four hours.
She arrived home tired and slightly disappointed.


Confessions of A White House Speechwriter
LEAD: I FIRST SAW HIM AS A FOOT, a highly polished brown cordovan wagging merrily on a hassock.
I spied it through the door.
It was a beautiful foot, sleek, perfectly shaped.
Such casual elegance and clean lines!
But not a big foot, not formidable, maybe even a little . . . frail.
I imagined cradling it in my arms, protecting it from un-smooth roads.


3 Flown to U.S. To Be Charged As Drug Sellers
LEAD: As the latest drug war in Colombia was entering its ninth week, three people sought as low-ranking cocaine traffickers were flown here today from Bogota in a United States marshals' jet to face Federal charges in Florida and Michigan.


Recycling at Home, in Your Spare Time
LEAD: EVERYBODY is talking garbage.
Conversations on this delicate topic were once limited to direct dealers, but with recycling, it's everyone down to the dump.


Health Vigilantes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: What baseball needs today is a clean-cut look.
Getting rid of the long-haired and bearded image of the players would automatically remove the ''showy'' aspect of the game.


Business Survey Finds Confidence in State Down
LEAD: IN a survey of 1,200 state businesses, the Connecticut Business and Industry Association last week said that it had found a profound lack of confidence in the state government's economic policies.


In Audio and Video
LEAD: IT HAS BEEN SAID THAT THE field of electronics is emblematic of our age.
It reflects the technical imagination of our era and determines our mode of life, just as steam engines did in Victorian times.
Radio, recordings and television have become principal shapers of public consciousness, and during the 1980's, technical developments in these media both broadened and intensified their cultural role.


Italian Standards, Regional Specialties
LEAD: ANY evaluation of Roslyn Estates's Classico is a tug-of-war between fine food and slack service.
The food is a marvelous mix of exciting regional specialties and well-prepared Italian-American standards.


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: The world team championships in Perth, Australia, last month were the last with the current format.
When the next comparable event will be played in Yokohama, Japan, in 1991, more teams will be involved.
The event will again be bolstered by the technology of NEC, the Japanese computer giant, which now sponsors the Bermuda Bowl and the Venice


Veronica Schaaf Is Married to Wayne M. Bloom
LEAD: Veronica Louise Schaaf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bradford Perkins Schaaf of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Wayne Michael Bloom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Bloom of Taunton, Mass.
Judge Steven M. Honeg of Municipal Court in Upper Saddle River, N.J., officiated at the Central Unitarian Church in Paramus, N


Contras Said to Sell Arms to Salvador Rebels
LEAD: The rightist Nicaraguan rebels encamped in Honduras are selling their American-supplied arms and ammunition to leftist rebels in El Salvador, diplomats here say.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: According to President Truman, his successor pushed Castro into the arms of the Soviets.
He believes this could have been prevented if only Eisenhower had befriended Castro and showered him with financial assistance.


The Chamber Music Society: Inaugurating a Tradition
LEAD: ''You can believe i'm nervous.
Who wouldn't be?
I'm starting my tenure here as only the second music director ever for the society, after 20 years of success.'' Fred Sherry is a big man with a broad smile and a shock of prematurely gray hair.
He fills the smallish office of the director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center with the nervous, edgy energy proverbially associated with New Yorkers.


Mother Teresa Out of Hospital
LEAD: Mother Teresa has been discharged from a Calcutta hospital after more than a month of treatment for a heart problem, the Press Trust of India said today.
The agency quoted hospital officials as saying Mother Teresa, the 79-year-old Nobel Peace Prize winner, had been advised to rest for at least two weeks.


For the Ponies, Paradise Lost
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Say 'Be Careful,' Hope They're Safe
LEAD: I DIDN'T know her very well.
Christine was another teen-ager who lived in the neighborhood.
A 16-year-old girl who was friends with my stepdaughter.


Falcons' Running Defused by the Irish
LEAD: In the rarefied atmosphere of a jammed Falcon Stadium at the United States Air Force Academy tonight, the Notre Dame sophomore nicknamed Rocket explored the reaches of his personal wild blue yonder.


Selling Delivery Routes to Drivers to Spur Sales
LEAD: Bread, especially white bread, is extremely price-competitive and the rise in private-label brands has made it more so.


Martha Heintz, Designer, Weds Daniel W. Walsh
LEAD: At the Hamilton College Chapel in Clinton, N.Y., Martha L. Heintz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Clemens Heintz of Clinton, was married yesterday to Daniel Woodruff Walsh, the son of Allen T. Walsh of Kill Devil Hills, N.C., and the late Mrs.
Walsh.
The Rev.
Gerald Platz, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.


Looks That Will Sparkle For Holiday Parties
LEAD: For some parties, a ball gown is de rigueur.
For others, anything more formal than a shirt and pants would be de trop.
Most parties call for something in between, and in between those two extremes lies a wide world of fashion choices.


Images of an Optimistic, Self-Assured Past
LEAD: Of all the American photographers of the 1920's and 30's who were profoundly influenced by the spirit of modern art, Berenice Abbott remains one of the most underappreciated.
She also has been one of the most enduring; now 91, she has lived to see the esthetic principles she adopted more than 60 years ago rise and fall with a regular historical cadence.


Will Rice Be the Next Hot Variety?
LEAD: With some of the nutritional myths about the empty calories in white bread dispelled, white bread has staged a mild comeback since the 70's. ''Last year, we had a slight increase in our white bread sales after years of going down,'' said a spokesman for Interstate Bakeries. ''That's significant, because you still build the brand with white bread.


Ms. Handy Wed To an Inventor
LEAD: Helene Bredt Handy, a daughter of Ethel M. Woolverton of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Chalmers Handy of Little Compton, R.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Hume Reynolds, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Reynolds of Westwood, Mass.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; Had Your Fill of Football? Here's a Soup to Divert You
LEAD: Not everyone in a household wants to watch football games on Sunday.
For those looking for an excuse to wander in and out, nothing beats cooking.


Law Regulates Tanning Salons
LEAD: AN ordinance enacted by Glen Cove last month - it is the first of its kind on Long Island - regulates the use of tanning devices within the city's jurisdiction.


Rock's Icons: Hero Today, Homage Tomorrow
LEAD: The concern with roots that has affected (or infected) rock in recent years takes many forms.
Some young bands become obsessed with a certain period, style or attitude and become living time capsules, churning out rockabilly or 60's garage-punk or purist psychedelia while resisting the taint of more contemporary influences.


A Clear Choice Confronts the Voters In One New Jersey Assembly Contest
LEAD: In a year when Republican control of the New Jersey Assembly could vanish with the loss of only two seats, Democrats are hoping to upset two veteran Republicans in the Sixth District in Camden County.
Democrats are banking heavily on differences over abortion to give them a victory in the district, but Republicans, who now hold a 41-to-39 edge in the


The Good Old Days of Radio Serials
LEAD: ''HURRY UP, it's almost 5 o'clock.
We've got to get home.'' Was it hunger?
Was it Mom's command?
No, it was the radio serials.
Each evening, in 15-minute segments from 5 to 6, the sagas continued: The Lone Ranger galloped over the plain with the faithful Tonto, Superman swooped down to protect Lois Lane from villains, Captain Midnight broke codes with his ring, and Tom


Ms. Popularity
LEAD: There were trophies, flowers, hugs and smiles for Pam Shriver in Moscow yesterday, and she didn't even reach the third round.
Shriver was given the type of send-off usually reserved for Grand Slam tennis champions as she bade farewell to the Soviet capital.


A Squeeze on MarginsAs Grocers Compete In Bread
LEAD: Bob Hocutt moved at a stiff-legged gait through the bustling Winn-Dixie supermarket in the Riverdale section of Atlanta.
He pulled up at the voluminous bread aisle and scanned the endless piles of loaves. ''You have to check out the markets a lot in this business,'' said Mr.
Hocutt, the vice president of sales for Flowers Industries' Atlanta Baking Company.


Sculpture for Troubled Places
LEAD: A strange symbol of hope has been flowering in some of New York City's most troubled neighborhoods.
Sculpture.


Michigan Edges Michigan State
LEAD: Michigan's defense, led by Tripp Welborne, twice held off fourth-quarter Michigan State scoring threats today and the Wolverines beat the Spartans, 10-7.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  LITTLE ODESSA, by Joseph Koenig. (Ballantine, $3.95.) A Times Square stripper from Brooklyn's Russian emigre community is recruited by the F.B.I. for an investigation that climaxes with a Coney Island roller-coaster ride.
This is ''a highly readable, beautifully written book,'' Newgate Callendar said here in 1988.


Drexel's Uncertain Future
LEAD: One night late last month, Frederick H. Joseph strode onto a ballroom stage in the Vista International Hotel in lower Manhattan.
Before him, bright light from the ballroom's chandeliers spilled across the oval dining tables as hundreds of top executives of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. drank wine, savored smoked salmon and medallions of beef and prepared for an evening of dancing.


Review/Dance; Another Side of Lucinda Childs
LEAD: Lucinda Childs may have been offering a bit of dance history at the Joyce Theater on Thursday night when she performed ''Carnation,'' a solo she created in 1964 for the ground-breaking experimentalist Judson Dance Theater.
But it was vibrant history, and revealed a side of Ms.
Childs that we seldom see these days.


A '56 Encounter in East Berlin, Updated
LEAD: I WONDER where they are and what they are thinking now, the two men we shared a table with on May Day in East Berlin in 1959.
I looked for them these last weeks in the faces of the young families making their passage from Eastern Europe to the West, but it would be unlikely that I would recognize them on a television screen or in a newspaper photograph after 30 years.


On the Embryo Front in the Battle of the Sexes; No-Fault Divorce
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Viola; Neubauer, New Soloist, In Recital
LEAD: It was immediately clear back in 1984 why the New York Philharmonic should make Paul Neubauer its youngest section leader ever.
Indeed the question had to be how long the Philharmonic could hold on to him, and the answer seems to be five years; the 26-year-old violist has resigned his chair to concentrate on solo and chamber-music playing.


The Road to Critical Mass
LEAD: The sun had barely risen, and there was still a chill in the desert air; but already cameramen, actors and prop people were scurrying about the dusty set, a small shack and lone 100-foot tower built amid the arid wasteland of northern Durango.
As he waited for his crew to prepare the first shot of the day, the director, Roland Joffe, gently balanced a shiny metal hemisphere in each hand and ruminated.


MURDER AT THE SARACEN'S HEAD
LEAD:  DEATH AND THE CHASTE APPRENTICE  By Robert Barnard.  211 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $17.95.


Burke's Solid Play Helps Lift Devils
LEAD: Sylvain Turgeon and Pat Verbeek, two forwards traded for each other, made big early contributions for the Devils and the Whalers in tonight's game at the Civic Center.


Lounge Wear From Your Easy Chair
LEAD: A growing number of women are doubling their leisure comfort - and time - by ordering their at-home uniforms through mail-order catalogues.
Since a close fit is the antithesis of lounge wear, these garments are among the most frequently ordered by mail, representatives of the largest mail-order outfitters say.


Repairing Fluorescent Lights
LEAD: FLUORESCENT lights are thrifty.
They use less electricity than incandescent lights, and because they also generate less heat, their tubes last longer than incandescent bulbs.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Hicksville  $212,000  206 College Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,300.
Levittown  $157,000  20 Springtime Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; den, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,200.


Uniting Tapestry and Technology
LEAD: CONTEMPORARY tapestries by seven internationally known weavers looks surprisingly at home in a 100-year-old house and a bank in Port Washington.
The hues, patterns and textures of woven yarns enliven these plaster and concrete walls, just as the threads of medieval tapestries warmed the stones of ancient castles.


L.I. Teacher Stabbed to Death
LEAD: The body of a 52-year-old high school science teacher was found in his home Friday night, the Nassau County police said today.
He had been stabbed to death.
The teacher, Edward Slater, had been reported missing by officials of Great Neck North High School on Wednesday.


THE MAN WHO WALKED IN THE WOODS
LEAD:  FROM HIROSHIMA TO GLASNOST  At the Center of Decision: A Memoir.
By Paul H. Nitze  with Ann M. Smith and Steven L. Rearden.
Illustrated. 504 pp.
New York:  Grove Weidenfeld. $25.


Farace's Wife Is Held on Marijuana Charge
LEAD: The wife of a suspect wanted in the killing of a Drug Enforcement Administration agent was arrested yesterday on charges of conspiracy to distribute marijuana, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.


A Corner of Italy With Ancient Ruins, Grottoes and Vineyards
LEAD: TO PEOPLE who ''see'' Europe by hopping from one major art city to another, northern Italy's Friuli-Venezia Giulia region is nothing but a blurred landscape - flat at first, then mountainous - on the road or rail line from Venice to Vienna.
Yet this multiethnic district, about three-fifths the size of Connecticut, is one of the most interesting of the country's 21 regions.


Tropical Storm Loses Strength in the Gulf
LEAD: Hunreds of workers fled oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico late Friday and early today as Tropical Storm Jerry inched toward Texas and Louisiana, but the storm weakened and showed few signs of regaining strength.


FROM BAKERSFIELD TO BOGOTA
LEAD:  THE LAST RUN  An American Woman's Years  Inside a Colombian Drug Family - and Her Dramatic Escape.
By Kay Wolff and Sybil Taylor.  342 pp.
New York: Viking. $18.95.


Why Not Add To the Parthenon?
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Apples and Pears, Elegant Autumn Desserts
LEAD: NOW is the time of year for the widest choice and highest quality of apples and pears.
The best apples for cooking are those that are not too sweet but that are firm and juicy, with plenty of flavor.
Use hard, crisp McIntosh, semi-sweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Bartlett and Bosc pears are both good for cooking and their elegant shape always makes an attractive dessert.


On the Embryo Front in the Battle of the Sexes
LEAD: To the Editor:


C. D. Gates Wed To Dr. Bigelow
LEAD: Dr.
Natalie Suzanne Bigelow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bradley Bigelow of New York, was married yesterday to Courtlandt Dixon Gates, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Parker McNair Gates of New York.
The Rev.
Frederick Hoesli officiated at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


FASHION: On the Street; Flights of Fancy, And Warmth, Too
LEAD: You just never know what will pop up on jackets nowadays.
A bright young New York designer named Christian Roth has adopted a Warholian approach for his creations, decorating them with giant appliques of clothespins and three-dimensional bottle caps.


Lynda K. Jones, Teacher, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Lynda Kathryn Jones to Johan Willem Edward Maitland, a son of Caro Maitland of Houston and the late Edward Jan Maitland, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth J. Jones of Larchmont, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.


Great Act
LEAD: As a peripatetic vaudeville team they could be billed as ''The Great One and His Shadow,'' although there is some question about just who is shadowing whom: Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings, who has been closing in on the National Hockey League career scoring record of 1,850 points?
Or Gordie Howe, the holder of that record, who has been following Gretzky from arena to arena as


No '65 Blackout Looting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drug Cops, Not Drug Soldiers
LEAD: Drug agents, having penetrated the radio network of cocaine middlemen, spread the word that all should report to the jungle clearing at an appointed hour.
No one suspected the trap, and when the dealers arrived, local narcotics police and American agents were waiting to make quick arrests.
The cops kept violence to a minimum.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  SAMURAI EXHIBITION


Correction
LEAD: A theater picture caption in the Arts and Leisure Guide today about the play ''The Ambassadors'' at the South Street Theater misidentifies an actor.
He is David Adamson, not Anthony Chisholm.


Lotte Andersen and David Meister, Lawyers, Wed
LEAD: Lise Lotte Andersen, an associate at the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin, and David Meister, an associate at Obermaier, Morvillo &amp; Abramowitz, also a New York law firm, were married last evening at the Loft in New York.
Rabbi Robert Lippman officiated.


Race for Title Narrows to 2
LEAD: With four races left in the Nascar Winston Cup season, it appears that the title will go to either Dale Earnhardt or Rusty Wallace.


Randolph Township Journal Handicapped Driver Keeps the Able-Bodied Honest
LEAD: SITTING in a yellow wheelchair outside Pathmark in the K-Mart Shopping Plaza on Route 10 here, Pat Fletcher was engrossed in conversation.
As shopping carts bounced over cracks in the sidewalk and automobiles coasted by, Ms.
Fletcher talked above the noise about why she spends so much time at this shopping center.


Abortion: Two Bodies Are Involved
LEAD: In the interview with Bishop John McGann, your reporter asked the question: ''What about those who express a belief in a woman's right to abort as part of control over her own body?''


Teen-Ager Guilty in Rio Grande Raft Killing
LEAD: A 17-year-old youth was sentenced to 30 years in prison today for fatally shooting a rafter on the Rio Grande last year.


How to Blend Pros Into the Olympics
LEAD: A nation's Olympic program must have a single standard, regardless of the sport and its importance.
It is hard to visualize a highly visible, nationally and internationally recognized superstar with a $2 million-plus income being treated the same as an Olympic performer who may be a substitute on a much less visible or popular sport.


Freelance Exchange Part of National Group
LEAD: In reference to the recent articles ''Homeworkers Warned of Fraudulent Schemes'' and ''More On L.I.
Are Working at Home'' (Aug. 27) in which myself and my organization, The Long Island Freelance Exchange, were mentioned.
I would like to advise you of a few errors and exclusions regarding the organizations services and locations.


Heady Past Bore Giants and A's to Present
LEAD: The Giants and the Athletics are two of the oldest franchises and hallowed names in baseball history, but as San Francisco and Oakland they are 3,000 miles away from their origins and are meeting in a World Series for the first time since thier transcontinental migration.


U.S. Softens Position in Trade Talks With Japan
LEAD: Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, ended her first official visit to Japan today by softening an important American position and underscoring a basic shift in American trade policy that may make it more difficult to measure progress in opening Japan's markets.


The Next Wave From Vietnam: A New Disability
LEAD: WHEN Nguyen Van Be, once a colonel in the South Vietnamese army, emerged from 13 years in a re-education camp last year, he wrote to his wife in Washington, wondering how to fit into a world that had left him behind. ''He feels he got lost somewhere,'' says his wife. ''He feels like someone from the jungle.


Not-So-Terrible 2-Year-Olds
LEAD: Adjudicating and Stella Madrid, who won Grade I races half an hour apart two weeks ago at Belmont Park, came right back and did it again yesterday to prove themselves New York's leading 2-year-olds.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: I always had great respect for President Harry S. Truman.
But as one who knew President Dwight D. Eisenhower on a daily basis for 10 years, 8 of them in the White House, I categorically deny that he was ever ''surly'' or ''disagreeable.'' General Eisenhower was a gentleman who never stooped to innuendoes or lies.


The World Looks for One Way to Save the Elephants
LEAD: LIKE many Africans, the Zimbabwean farmers in the Nyami Nyami district on the shores of the Zambesi River long regarded the local elephants as a nuisance that trampled crops or as an easy source of meat and ivory.


'Proust Project' in New Haven
LEAD: IN ''The Proust Project: Remembrance of Things (Past): Part 1: Combray'' - now there's a title - images and sometimes Proustian lines waft through what is, so far, the writer and director Michael Rush's own vision of things past, present and future.


Some Prefer Golf
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A New 'Thespis,' Old-Favorite 'Boheme'
LEAD: ON the day after Christmas in 1871 a comic opera opened at the Gaiety Theater in London.
The reviews were mixed and the piece did not survive long but ''Thespis,'' or ''The Gods Grown Old,'' marked the first association of two men whose names would soon be irrevocably linked, William Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan.


Repairing Fluorescent Lights
LEAD: FLUORESCENT lights are thrifty.
They use less electricity than incandescent lights, and because they also generate less heat, their tubes last longer than incandescent bulbs.


Are We Speaking The Same Language?
LEAD: IF I had immigrated to New Jersey from a foreign-speaking country, I would have anticipated the need to learn a new language to make myself understood.
But after my moving here from Boston, which is, after all, part of the same country - no border check, no passport - it comes as a shock that I still need an occasional interpreter after nearly 30 years.


Sunday Concerts in Church Settings
LEAD: THERE are two good musical reasons for going to church today: a 4 P.M. choral program with organ at Saint Augustine's Catholic Church in Ossining and a 5 P.M. ''Concert in Color'' at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills.


Import What?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD: Virgin Islands Hotels Offer Money Back


Q and A
LEAD:  Right to an Apartment


NONFICTION
LEAD: ST.
JOSEPH'S CHILDREN: A True Story of Terror and Justice.
By Terry Ganey. (Lyle Stuart/Carol Publishing, $17.95.) Every parent's nightmare became reality for a family in St.
Joseph, Mo., in 1978.
Their 4-year-old son disappeared from a shopping mall and was found murdered hours later.
An innocent retarded man went to prison, writes Terry Ganey in ''St.


Body-Cavity Searches Barred by U.S. Court
LEAD: A Federal appeals court, calling body-cavity searches ''dehumanizing and humiliating,'' has ruled unconstitutional the Los Angeles police's policy of conducting such a search on anyone arrested on felony charges.


Pitt Finishes Well To Beat Navy, 31-14
LEAD: Alex Van Pelt threw two touchdown passes, including a 19-yarder to Ricky Turner that started a run of 24 consecutive points, and Pittsburgh erased a 7-0 Navy lead today for a 31-14 victory.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Sydney
LEAD: Mark Twain on a visit to Australia called Sydney Harbor ''a wonder of the world.'' The vast expanse of water with its coves and inlets extending from North Head to the Parramatta is the heart of Sydney.
The city wraps itself around the water's edge and along the promontories, which run like fingers on the hills above the shoreline.


45 Libraries Offer AIDS Programs
LEAD: PUPPET shows and theater are being used to lure children and adults to 45 libraries to learn more about AIDS.


Maryland Steam Ride
LEAD: SITUATED in the Allegheny Mountains where Maryland's panhandle squeezes down to just a skinny neck between Pennsylvania and West Virginia, gritty, red-brick Cumberland is very much a real city, not a preserved-in-amber Colonial Williamsburg.
It remains a railroad town, and the moaning air horns of C


Hong Kong Needs Britain's Guarantees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Modern Dance Didn't Always Tell Tales
LEAD: When Martha Graham's superb dancers begin a season on a high, and then proceed to better that exceptionally fine level of execution, it is all too easy to pay more attention to the dancing than the repertory.
Nonetheless, this depth of artistry would not be possible without profound works to perform.


CRIME/MYSTERY
LEAD:  TROPICAL FREEZE  By James W. Hall.  319 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


EVIDENCE SPARSE BUT GRISLY
LEAD:  THE WOODCHIPPER MURDER  By Arthur Herzog.
Illustrated. 274 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


That Last Step When the Tango Turns Deadly
LEAD: In a room that smells of smoke and sweat, a man dressed in a brown shirt, black pants and leather boots drags a woman along the floor by her hair.
In another part of the room, a man in a black hat pulled low over his eyes thrusts his knee between a woman's legs, forcing her back to arch and her bare arms to flare out.


John F. X. Condon, Announcer For New York Knicks, Dies at 75
LEAD: John F. X. Condon, the resonant voice of Madison Square Garden and the New York Knicks basketball team for 42 seasons, died of cancer Friday night at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Queens.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: Stack's, the coin auction house, will offer a rare Higley copper token in its sale of the Gilbert Steinberg collection, which is scheduled for Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at the Omni Park Central Hotel, 870 Seventh Avenue, New York City.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sept. 17 about the British theatrical producer Cameron Mackintosh incorrectly stated that he was associated with ''Evita.'' The Andrew Lloyd Webber-Tim Rice musical was directed by Harold Prince and produced by Robert Stigwood.


JUSTICE VS. JUSTICE
LEAD:  THE ANTAGONISTS  Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter and Civil Liberties in Modern America.
By James F. Simon.
Illustrated.  312 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Whose School Is It, Anyway?
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHUTTLE PROBLEM SOLVED, NASA SAYS
LEAD: An engine computer to replace the one that developed problems on the space shuttle Atlantis passed its tests today, and the space agency said preparations were being made to launch the shuttle on Tuesday.


DATA UPDATE: October 15, 1989
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Aug.89
July 89
Aug. 88
Nation
$94,900
$96,700
$91,500
Northeast
148,400
147,100
148,400
Midwest
72,300
73,400
69,800
South
87,400
87,200
83,400
West
139,400
146,500
126,900
(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Who Are the Refugees, And Who's Going to Pay?
LEAD: IN 1980, when Congress established a comprehensive policy on refugees, there was widespread agreement that the Federal Government should pay for their resettlement because the decision to admit them was made entirely by Federal officials.
But that consensus is coming under severe strain as the Federal Government cuts payments for refugees' health, education and welfare expenses.


TALKING: Parking Space; Protecting Rights in a Conversion
LEAD: IN New York City, where garage space rents for as much as a small apartment and a single space sells for more than $20,000, it is little wonder that the right to a rent-stabilized parking space, or at least the right to retain a place on a building's waiting list, has become an issue worth fighting for.


A BUILDING THAT SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO FLOUT THE RULES
LEAD: This may be a story about individuals taking on a huge corporation, or it may be a story about preserving the integrity of a celebrated monument, or it may be a story about how the very best buildings should sometimes be allowed to flout all the rules of architecture.
In truth, this story is all these things and more.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: I did not care particularly for Eisenhower and never voted for him, but fair is fair.
One must admire, for example, his astonishing farewell speech, by which he became the first at the top to warn against the military-industrial complex.
After leaving the White House, he became (with Truman) an honorary co-chairman of the Planned Parenthood Association, at a time when it was no less controversial than it is today.


Spain's Prosperity Comes a Measure of Pain
LEAD: Streets crowded with new cars and restaurants crowded with new rich, foreign capital pouring in and stock markets taking off, luxury apartments at Fifth Avenue prices and stylish young people in the latest designs.


POSTINGS: Greenbelt Addition; 99 Camping Years
LEAD: Because 74 acres near the Todt Hill residential section of Staten Island are now off limits to developers, thousands of needy youngsters for the next 99 years can look forward to going to the 18-acre nondenominational Henry Kaufmann Campgrounds within it.


David McCall Jr., A Trader, Is Wed To Ms. Stackpole
LEAD: At the Lawrenceville (N.J.) Presbyterian Church, Abigail Florence Stackpole, a foreign rights assistant at Harper &amp; Row Publishers in New York, and David Bruce McCall Jr., a trader at the First Boston Corporation in New York, were married yesterday by the Rev.
Carl D. Reimers.
The bride is a daughter of Mr.


Stewart Stops Giants in Series Opener
LEAD: This time, the Oakland Athletics were not bitten by a ninth-inning home run.
Kirk Gibson did not grab a bat, did not hobble out of the dugout and did not break the A's hearts with one dramatic swing.
This time, they held on.


A Word of Counsel On Career Counseling
LEAD: In my 10-year-old practice, Career Counseling Associates, I have continually advised people to avoid signing a contract (most having outrageous fees) for career counseling or ''possible'' employment.
Thank you for bringing to print the need to shop carefully for a counselor (''Career Changes Are a Reflection of Changing Times,'' Sept.


Susan J. Israel Is Wed To Daniel R. Scherlis
LEAD: Susan J. Israel and Daniel R. Scherlis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Scherlis of Baltimore, were married last evening in Chestnut Hill, Mass., at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
David Israel.
Rabbi Roland Gittelsohn officiated.


Jill Wolfe to Wed Mitchell Roberts
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Louis E. Wolfe of Plattsburgh, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Kathryn Wolfe, a marketing research project director at Hill, Holliday Advertising in Boston, and Mitchell Jonathan Roberts, a director of marketing and leasing at the General Investment and Development Company, a Boston real-estate concern.


DON'T SHARE YOUR AGENT WITH A GHOST
LEAD:  NAKED ONCE MORE  By Elizabeth Peters.  296 pp. New York:  Warner Books. $17.95.


Sandra Joy Horbach Wed to S. F. Skoler
LEAD: Sandra Joy Horbach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Horbach of Bellevue, Wash., was married in New York last evening to Steven Frederick Skoler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Skoler of White Plains.
Rabbi Charles G. Agin officiated at the Pierre.


Home Design/Magazine Part 2


Remembering the Relocation Camps
LEAD: MANY Americans have only recently begun to learn the full story of Japanese-American internment by the United States Government during World War II.
Scattered in the county are Japanese-American residents who were among the 110,000 people - the majority American citizens - forced from their West Coast homes into makeshift barracks and confined behind barbed wire for periods up to three years.


Janet Rich Wed To Mark Edwards
LEAD: Janet Wilson Rich and Mark Adrian Edwards, graduates of Harvard University, were married in Cambridge, Mass., yesterday at Memorial Church on the Harvard campus.
The Rev.
Daniel Morrissey, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


FICTION
LEAD: BLACK GIRL, WHITE GIRL.
By Patricia Moyes. (Holt, $15.95.) In her 18th novel featuring Detective Chief Superintendent Henry Tibbett, the veteran mystery writer Patricia Moyes moves her urban hero from the dreariness of winter in London to the decidedly sunnier island of Tampica, the languid, imaginary Caribbean paradise that also served as the setting for her 1977 novel, ''The Coconut Killings.


Votes in Congress
LEAD:  Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House  1.
Abortion: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for the Department of Health and Human Services that would allow the Federal Government to pay for abortions for poor women whose pregnancies result from rape or incest.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dartmouth; Alcohol Abuse Spurs Suspension Of a Fraternity
LEAD: Dartmouth College officials suspended recognition of one of its 31 fraternities last week following an investigation into alcohol abuse at initiation activities two years ago.


NEW PLAN OFFERED IN MINERS' STRIKE
LEAD: Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole said today that she would soon appoint a special mediator in a new effort to end the United Mine Workers' six-month-old strike against the Pittston Coal Group.


Miss Eckert Marries
LEAD: Mary Ellen Pamela Eckert and Kevin L. Potucek, graduates of Wichita State University, were married in New York yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Leroy Matz.
The bride, 30 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William G. Eckert of Wichita, Kan.
Mr.
Potucek, 30, is a son of the late Dorothy Bircher Potucek and the late Joseph Potucek Jr.


Six Are Injured in Fire Aboard Delta Airliner
LEAD: A Delta Air Lines airliner loading passengers caught fire here today, injuring six people and leaving a four-foot hole in the fuselage, officials said.


On Language; Parley in the Foothills
LEAD: THE &gt;SUMMIT USED to be 'way up there, at the top, the peak, the zenith.
From the Latin &gt;summus, ''highest,'' the word offered a view that was breathtaking.


Outdoors; Easing Limits on Striped Bass
LEAD: The Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission has voted to relax restrictions on recreational and commercial fishing for striped bass next year.


Star of TV and Powerboating
LEAD: Don Johnson, the actor, plans to defend his title as a world offshore powerboat champion next week in Atlantic City.
But it was not until the start four years ago of the ''Miami Vice'' television series, in which Johnson played the role of Sonny Crockett, that he became acquainted with offshore speedboats.


To Briton, a Play's the Thing, but Who Pays?
LEAD: What do you say to a complete stranger who brazenly accosts you, tells you that his name is Neal Foster and that he wants you to donate your free time to help him raise money?
If your name is Jack Lemmon, Dustin Hoffman, Alan Bennett or Dame Judi Dench, you say yes.


Review/Dance; Christine Dakin in Martha Graham's 'Maze'
LEAD: The Martha Graham Dance Company offered two quite different performances last Sunday afternoon and Tuesday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street), where the troupe is now in the second week of its three-week season.


Copters Lift Boston Commuters Over the Traffic
LEAD: At the height of the rush hour around Boston, a 12-mile drive from the western suburb of Waltham to Logan International Airport in East Boston can take an hour and a half or longer.
For passengers who use the Hub Express helicopter commuter service, it takes about eight minutes.


A Tape Cheers Czech Dissidents
LEAD: A purported tape recording of an address by the Czechoslovak leader before a closed meeting of Communist Party officials is providing amusement for his critics.


New Issues and Changing Electorate Reshape Virginia Governor's Race
LEAD: Jean Dursee does not think of herself as a pivotal person in this year's nip-and-tuck race for governor.


TRADITION WITH A TWIST: Paring It Down
LEAD: As a reaction to the cluttered English country-house style so popular five years ago, a new breed of traditionalists is making news with their pared-down interiors.
While firmly rooted in the foundations of good design, their rooms are surprisingly restrained.
Sparsely furnished and without a myriad of patterned fabrics and wallpapers, they are at once tailored and elegant.


Toward Smaller Lawns and Nurseries
LEAD: ON MANY A HOT SUMMER day, the crews of so-called landscaping services can be seen tending lawns on the street where I live.


New York Limits a Key AIDS Test
LEAD: To the dismay of many New York doctors and advocates for people with AIDS, a key laboratory test that can show whether an AIDS virus infection is progressing is all but unavailable in the New York State, although it is readily available elsewhere.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. When we bought our 45-year-old house, it had been freshly painted, but a disk sander had been used on many places, leaving deep swirls on the wood shingles.
Last year, we hired a professional to repaint.
He sanded and applied one coat of oil-based primer, followed by two coats of oil paint.
Now a brown stain is seeping through the paint, especially in areas in direct sun.


Girls' School
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa R. Bardack Weds Dr. Mitchell S. Nobler
LEAD: Lisa Rachel Bardack, a medical student at New York University, and Dr.
Mitchell S. Nobler, a resident in psychiatry at the New York State Psychiatric Institute at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, were married last evening at Larchmont (N.Y.) Temple.
Rabbi H. Leonard Poller officiated.


K. M. Brooks Jr. Weds Miss Rauscher
LEAD: Megan C. Rauscher, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Rauscher Jr. of Weston, Conn., and Kenneth M. Brooks Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brooks of Saratoga, Calif., were married yesterday in a ceremony performed by the Rev.
Jeffrey Dugan, an Episcopal priest, at Christ and Holy Trinity Church in Westport,


Prospects; Another Black Monday?
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average fell 190.58 points, to 2569.26, on Friday, the largest decline since the Oct. 19, 1987, crash.
The market began to fall on news that the big United Airlines buyout deal had fallen through.
This 6.91 percent decline in the value of the Dow came just four days after the market hit new highs.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: Truman was squarely on target.
I was a member of the regular Army and a World War II combat medic in the European Theater of Operation, twice wounded and much decorated.
I revered George C. Marshall and liked Ike, until the McCarthy incident.


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: Kids need heroes today more than ever.
With temptations like drugs and alcohol it is important for young people to have someone to look up to and admire.
Since the world of sports is so appealing to youth, I think it's O.K. for baseball to have showmen.
LORRAINE MYERS  Bellmore, N.J.


Woody Allen Counts the Wages of Sin
LEAD: Movies frequently raise questions about the moral structure of the universe, but rarely do they talk about it.
Woody Allen has chosen to talk about it in ''Crimes and Misdemeanors,'' which opened Friday.
Whether God exists, whether reality is pitiless, and religious belief merely wishful thinking, whether justice and love can prevail over might or even over daily routine - these are questions explicitly discussed and assumed to bear on at least one life-or-death decision.


Software Is the Next Target
LEAD: The American software industry finds itself at the crest of what can only be termed a golden age - it accounts for 52 percent of the world's software consumption and holds roughly 70 percent of a $50 billion world market.
By the year 2000, the world software market will be worth $1 trillion a year.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: If Truman were alive today, he would have even more reasons not to like Ike.
Eisenhower made the decisions to overthrow the Governments of Mossadegh in Iran and Arbenz in Guatemala.
As a result, the Shah was replaced by Khomeini and Central America is in turmoil.
GEORGE JOCHNOWITZ  New York, N.Y.


Driving His Way to Fame
LEAD: If it is no surprise anymore to find, say, a Japanese motor under the hood of an American car, perhaps it is not surprising to find a Honda in America's Automotive Hall of Fame.
Last week, Soichiro Honda, whose company was the first to use American workers to build Japanese cars, took his place with the likes of Henry Ford, Walter Chrysler and Alfred Sloane of General Motors in the Automotive Hall of Fame, which opened 50 years ago in Midland, Mich.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.32
7.33
7.81
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.60
8.62
7.75
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.42
6.42
6.05
Bank Rate Monitor


Waiting for Word Out in the Bullpen
LEAD: As the starting pitchers in last night's World Series opener, Dave Stewart of the Athletics and Scott Garrelts of the Giants were up on a platform Friday answering questions behind a microphone in the Oakland Coliseum interview area.
Their photos and quotes were in all the newspapers.
Their video and audio tapes were on television and radio.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the new television season refers incorrectly in some copies to the network on which the television series ''Doogie Howser, M.D.'' appears.
It is ABC, not NBC.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Your Scallops or Your Life


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Anne Childs and Charles Collins Wed
LEAD: Anne Carmichael Childs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Coffin Childs of Norfolk, Conn., was married in Norfolk yesterday to Charles H. Collins, a son of Nancy C. Collins of Easton, Md., and the late Francis Howard Collins 2d.
The Rev.
Bruce Anderson officiated at the Congregational Church of Christ.


Miss Powers Wed To A. F. Gallivan
LEAD: Mary Virginia Powers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Powers Jr. of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Francis Gallivan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Xavier Gallivan of Newburgh, N.Y.


CAMPUS LIFE: Illinois; Alcohol a Big Issue As 3 Are Charged In Fire at Stadium
LEAD: Three University of Illinois students have been charged with setting a fire last month that destroyed the Astroturf at the university's football stadium.


Stock Traders Expect a Revised UAL Bid With Less Cash
LEAD: Stock traders said yesterday that they expected a revised buyout bid for the UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, to be assembled quickly.
But they predicted that the buyout group, which includes the company's pilots union and management, might reduce the value of the bid by substituting securities for part of the cash.


How Bad Are Nets? Fitch Finds Out
LEAD: When Bill Fitch became the Nets' coach in August, he knew the team was far from being a contender.
Now Fitch is finding out exactly how far away the Nets are.


Bones Back Beastly Tale Of Old West
LEAD: A jury of 13 experts who dug up the common grave of five Colorado gold prospectors to find out who killed and ate them has agreed with the verdict handed down more than 100 years ago: Alferd Packer murdered his colleagues while they were marooned in the Rocky Mountains in the vicious winter of 1874.


Support for Student Aid Sought as Top Priority
LEAD: THE State Commissioner of Higher Education, Norma Foreman Glasgow, said last week that Connecticut should be prepared to increase its support for student aid and research.


HONDURAN ACCUSED IN THEFT OF U.S. AID
LEAD: Senior officers in the Honduran armed forces contend that their commander misappropriated millions of dollars in military aid sent by the United States.


Dune Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Child's Play in Paris
LEAD: WITH the birth of our son, Nicky, we said goodbye to our yearly trips to France.
There would be no more lingering over cups of cafe noir, no more walking along the Seine at 4 A.M., holding hands.
Under the heading of what our travel agent calls family vacations, Martin, Nicky and I have danced the Bunny Hop with Roger Rabbit, wrenched our backs on Tilt-a-Whirls, fed smelts to Shamu and been photographed in sepia tones dressed up like Belle Starr and the James gang.


28 CITIES ASSESSED BY A GALLUP POLL
LEAD: The American public as a whole views New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles as the best large cities in the country, but frequent visitors are most enthusiastic about Seattle, Boston and San Diego in addition to San Francisco and New York, according to a Gallup Poll.


The Public-Private Clash Over Beaches
LEAD: AT the southern tip of the village of Longport, on the Jersey Shore, the cross streets begin at 11th Street.
South of there, where First through 10th Streets once ran, lies the blue water of Great Egg Inlet, with the Atlantic Ocean beyond.


NONFICTION
LEAD: SINS OF THE FATHER: The True Story of a Family Running From the Mob.
By Nick Taylor. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) The ostensible reason why Sal Polisi, a low-level mobster and gambler from New York City, decided to become an informer for Federal authorities was to give his two teen-age sons a chance in life.


LEARNING FROM HISTORY: What Post-Modernism Means now
LEAD: While the post-modern architecture of the late 1970's and early 80's was based on historical forms, they were often presented in an exaggerated, somewhat humorous manner. ''Today, post-modernism is no longer a cartoon,'' says Mark Simon, a partner of Centerbrook, an Essex, Conn., architectural concern.


No Easy Way Out Of Energy Crisis
LEAD: Governor Cuomo's promise of Canadian electricity for Long Island is as phony as his promise of ''power cheap as Freeport'' and lower taxes.
A recent news item indicates that lack of rainfall and high local demand have reduced Hydro-Quebec export capacity.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article on page 16 of the Arts and Leisure section today by Rabbi Eugene B. Borowitz about the film ''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' renders a word incorrectly in some copies, in a sentence about the High Holy Days.
The passage should read: ''Of course I saw the film between Rosh ha-Shanah and Yom Kippur, the Jewish New Year time, when we Jews ponder God's judgment and mercy.


Congress Takes New Interest in the Airline Business
LEAD: THE years since deregulation of the airlines in 1978 have seen cut-rate fares and high-priced mergers, frequent flyer bonuses and aggravating delays, a doubling of flights and a hopscotch system of traveling along hub-and-spoke routes.
For better or worse, the change has never come so fast as this year, leading the Secretary of Transporation, Samuel K.


Susan I. Katz Is Wed To Gary W. Nathanson
LEAD: Susan Ivy Katz and Gary William Nathanson were married last evening by Rabbi James Perman at the Glen Oaks Country Club in Old Westbury, L.I.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph N. Katz and Dr. and Mrs.
Noel Nathanson, all of Great Neck, L.I.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner; West 73d, East 73d, and Downtown and Midtown
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Cavaliere


Carol E. Snow Weds Thomas S. Crane
LEAD: Carol Ellen Snow, a daughter of Jane Donaldson Snow of Naples, Fla., and the late Robert Bond Snow Jr., was married in Woods Hole, Mass., yesterday to Thomas Smith Crane, a son of Sylvia E. Crane of Princeton, N.J., and Woods Hole, and the late John O. Crane.
The Revs.
Richard S. Crowell and Robert Mayo, Episcopal priests, officiated at the Church of the


At Home Again, William Hurt Takes Stock
LEAD: ''I've been walking the edge for a long time,'' William Hurt says, ''thinking about whether acting is the right thing for me to be doing.
Sometimes things happen in my personal life which really make me question whether what I do is right for me.
It's not right that my privacy is invaded to the extent that it is.


Schoolchildren Ponder Over Where the Garbage Goes
LEAD: JENNIFER PERNEY said she hoped that whatever recycling was, it would help animals survive.


When It's Over
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A CONSPIRACY TO RULE THE WORLD
LEAD:  FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM  By Umberto Eco.
Translated by William Weaver.  641 pp.
New York:  A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $22.95.


JUILLARD DROPOUT MAKES GOOD
LEAD:  MILES  The Autobiography.
By Miles Davis with Quincy Troupe.
Illustrated. 431 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Gonzalez to Offer Advice To Bush on Latin America
LEAD: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez says he will argue that Nicaragua's coming elections offer an opportunity to break the current Central American deadlock when he meets President Bush at the White House on Thursday.


Physics Takes a Step, Leaves a Mess
LEAD: USING particle accelerators to advance through realms of higher and higher energies, scientists hope to reach a place on the far horizon where temperatures are close to those that existed at the beginning of time.
From this cosmic vantage point, the universe's perplexing variety of particles and energies would melt together, revealing themselves as splinters of one primordial superforce that shattered just after the Big


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: Good for Margaret Truman!
Publication of her father's manuscripts constitutes a long-overdue expose of Eisenhower as one of the weakest Presidents, and without moral courage.
RICHARD DRESSELHUYS  New York, N.Y.


Trading Places
LEAD: Members of the American Stock Exchange no longer conduct their business al fresco, but they still know which way the wind is blowing.
Last week the Amex acted on the longstanding dictum of weapons manufacturers, housing developers and others whose prosperity is tied to national policy: If you want something from Washington, hire somebody from Washington.


SNAPSHOTS OF HOPE AND HOPELESSNESS
LEAD: In the late 1960's, there was a shortage of teachers in New York City.
I had a degree in English and had completed the undergraduate education credit requirements, except student teaching, at Hunter College, at night, while working for an insurance company during the day.
I was enrolled in the Master of Arts in


THE HOMICIDAL MANIAC: A NOVELIST'S BEST FRIEND
LEAD: ''From the evidence coming across our desk, this is the Year of the Serial Killer.''


Maori Tales Told in Wood In Rotorua, New Zealand
LEAD: FOR the Maori (rhymes with ''dowry'') people of New Zealand, woodcarving is the highest form of art, embodying spiritual concepts that can only be brought to it by craftsmen who have been specially trained: tohunga (skilled man-priest-teacher) whakairo (carver).


CAMBODIAN REBELS SEEM BOGGED DOWN
LEAD: A modest offensive by troops of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a non-Communist Cambodian rebel faction, appears to have bogged down in northwestern Cambodia, diplomats say.


Review/Theater Humor and Dark Vision In 2 Portuguese Plays
LEAD: If there ever was a playwright who could find evil in a bright field of wild flowers or corruption in a baby's breath, it was that scourge of Brazil, Nelson Rodrigues.
There could hardly be a better introduction to his work than the two plays - ''Family Album'' and ''All Nudity Will Be Punished'' - that the Brazilian director Antunes Filho has combined under the title ''Nelson 2 Rodrigues.


Budget Tells Where Priorities Lie
LEAD: IN the next 60 days, Suffolk County will adopt a budget for 1990.
An annual budget is the most important statement of public policy that our elected officials develop as part of their public responsibilities.
It separates intentions and talk from action.
The budget consolidates both fiscal and social policies.


A Bumpy Journey to the Jets
LEAD: Kyle Mackey's father, Dee, caught Joe Namath's tosses in the 1960's.
But that was as close to being involved in the Jets' passing game as Kyle ever imagined he would get.


An Energy Glut in the Ground Imperils Ecological Hopes
LEAD: FOSSIL fuel reserves, almost always discussed with the modifier ''dwindling'' attached, are now growing rapidly.
The conventional wisdom of the 1970's was that the world was running out of oil, coal and natural gas.
But in the last three years governments and the companies that do the drilling and mining have found far more than has been extracted.


The Prescription for Bed Rest
LEAD: I AM at home, confined to my bed and recovering from an accident that injured two areas of my back.
Although the diagnosis revealed nothing broken - just a deep bone bruise and severe muscle sprain - my back disapproves when moving in various undefined directions.


When the Aged Need Care, Their Families Need a Hand
LEAD: A WOMAN in Middlesex County has worked for her company 10 years.
Over the last two years, she has spent much of her time caring for her widowed mother, who is partly paralyzed from a stroke.
Her mother has become confused, and she fears being left alone in the house they share.


Martha J. Brackenridge Plans Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Bruce Brackenridge of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Martha Jane Brackenridge and Austin Bartholomew Sayre 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sayre Jr. of Westfield, N.J.


Recycling: Family Recipe
LEAD: In response to your ''Recycling Recipe: Easy as Pie'' (Opinion, Oct. 1), may I offer our family's recipe.
Composting Kitchen Waste


STREETSCAPES: The Kingsbridge Armory; A Dropped Ceiling In a Moated Bastion?
LEAD: IT could have been in the Guinness Book of World Records, a 300 by 600 feet dropped ceiling, perhaps the world's largest.
The only trouble was it was planned for the vast drill shed of the Eighth Coastal Artillery Armory, in the Bronx, completed in 1917 and now a city landmark.


China Says Taiwan Is 'Buying Hearts' Abroad
LEAD: China has accused Taiwan of using its wealth to buy diplomatic recognition with foreign countries, as a new quarrel further strained relations across the Taiwan Strait.


Six Rescued After Boat Sinks
LEAD: Six men whose fishing boat had sunk 40 hours earlier were rescued by a Coast Guard cutter about 50 miles northwest of Maui on Friday.
The men survived by clinging to a makeshift raft of buoys and nets from their boat, which had sailed from Honolulu on Oct. 3.
They suffered only bruises and dehydration, the Coast Guard said.


From Apples and Pears, Elegant Autumn Desserts
LEAD: NOW is the time of year for the widest choice and highest quality of apples and pears.
The best apples for cooking are those that are not too sweet but that are firm and juicy, with plenty of flavor.
Use hard, crisp McIntosh, semi-sweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Bartlett and Bosc pears are both good for cooking and their elegant shape always makes an attractive dessert.


Where the Money Isn't
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. When we bought our 45-year-old house, it had been freshly painted, but a disk sander had been used on many places, leaving deep swirls on the wood shingles.
Last year, we hired a professional to repaint.
He sanded and applied one coat of oil-based primer, followed by two coats of oil paint.
Now a brown stain is seeping through the paint, especially in areas in direct sun.


MUSIC Carlos Kleiber: Genius Wrapped In an Enigma
LEAD: Carlos Kleiber: Enigma, maverick or genius?
Opinions about the most mercurial conductor of his generation range widely: He is unpredictable, unwilling to commit himself to future projects and reticent in dealing with the world at large.
Many artists say they hardly ever give interviews; Mr.
Kleiber has never been known to give one.


Nuclear Test Treaties, Ready to Ratify
LEAD: U.S.-Soviet differences over verification have long stalled ratification of two treaties to limit the size of underground nuclear explosions.
But Moscow proposed a reasonable compromise, leaving each side free to use its own preferred method of monitoring and allowing more on-site visits.
President Bush's acceptance of the offer has broken the deadlock.


After Years of Fighting, 2 Democrats Compromise
LEAD: For members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, meetings involving John D. Dingell, Henry A. Waxman and clean air have often been as uncomfortable as listening to parents quarrel at dinner.


ART VIEW
LEAD: Every so often there comes along an exhibition of theater material that, for the enthusiast, is touching, amusing and stimulating beyond all expectation.
One such is ''100 Years of Russian Ballet 1830-1930'' at Eduard Nakhamkin Fine Arts, 1055 Madison Avenue, at 80th Street.


Hype and High Prices in the 80's
LEAD: ONE DAY A WOMAN walked into Gerald G. Stiebel's art and antiques gallery and told him that she wanted to buy a Rembrandt. ''I was very impressed, even though she didn't look like the type,'' says Stiebel, who is president of Rosenberg &amp; Stiebel, New York dealers of Old Master paintings and drawings and French 18th-century furniture.


Lauren Fields Is Wed To Lawrence M. Talve
LEAD: Lauren Anne Fields, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon J. Fields of New York, was married in New York last evening to Lawrence Mark Talve, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Talve of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Susan Talve, a cousin of the bridegroom, and Cantor Jacob Yaron officiated at the Plaza.


Tigers Avenge Loss to Lions
LEAD: Having endured the ignominy last season of being the first team to lose to Columbia over a 5-year span encompassing 48 games, Princeton had a score to settle with the Lions today.
And the Tigers got even decisively, beating Columbia, 24-8, before 11,140 at Palmer Stadium.


POSTINGS: Victorian Vice No More; 20 Units for 23d
LEAD: In a city where everything from garment-industry lofts to grim 19th-century tenements has been renovated into fashionable, high-priced apartments, it may come as little surprise that developers have now turned their attention to a onetime bordello.
The building, at 140 West 23d Street, between Seventh Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, in the Chelsea neighborhood, has been renovated into Claret


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  McEnroe-Connors Matchup: John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors will battle for the 33d time in their careers after capturing semifinal matches yesterday in the Toulouse Grand Prix tournament in France.
McEnroe, the top-seeded player, breezed past fourth-seeded Horst Skoff of Austria, 6-1, 6-3, after second-seeded Connors rebounded from a first-set loss to beat Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet


LIVING ELEGANTLY IN A SMALL SPACE: Studio Setting
LEAD: Living in a studio is how I started out in the 1950's, when I was 25 and first came to New York,'' recalls Joseph A. C. Moore. ''So when my friends heard I was moving back into one, they thought I was mad.'' Like other New Yorkers, Moore, an ex-corporate executive turned antiques dealer and decorator, has learned to live elegantly in a small space - perhaps more elegantly than most.


B.P. as a Polluter
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHO MADE IT
LEAD: This has been the decade for home design.
Decorating became a hot topic, and so did those who do it.
Interior designers became celebrities in their own right: Appearing on television and in gossip columns, their faces were often as recognizable as their work.
On these pages are 15 of those who made it in the 80's.


'I Think We're Middle of the Road'
LEAD: GARY M. YOUNG'S portrait of the state of the arts in Connecticut would excite even the most jaded listener.
Last year alone, said Mr.
Young, the executive director of the Connecticut Commission on the Arts, the nonprofit arts industry generated $354 million.
In addition, the arts employed 12,300 people and attracted an audience of more than 8.5 million people.


October Turns Ugly Once More
LEAD: Stocks had a dizzying plunge on Friday, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping a scary 190.58 points and reviving painful memories of the 1987 stock crash that produced a 508-point plunge on Oct. 19.
Friday's heavy selling wiped out all the gains from an early October rally that, just last Monday, had taken the Dow to a new high of 2,791.41.


Deciding How to Cash In an Annuity
LEAD: For at least a decade, deferred annuities have been popular with investors.
Under these contracts, money you pay to an insurance company builds up, free of current income taxes.
The taxes are deferred until you reclaim your cash.


SNAPSHOTS OF HOPE AND HOPELESSNESS
LEAD: Samuel G. Freedman is right; teachers and administrators do work long hours in buildings that are often crumbling from within and under siege by lawless elements from without (''Snapshots of Hope and Hopelessness,'' Sept. 17).


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:  CLASSICAL  Bach: Lute Suites (BWV 995-97, 1006a)  Sharon Isbin, guitar.
Virgin Classics VC 7 90717-2; CD and cassette.
Sharon Isbin collaborated with the harpsichordist Rosalyn Tureck on the new editions of the four suites heard here, and she plays the music with authority.
Immediately striking are the clarity of her articulation and voicing, and her dramatic, high-contrast approach to dynamics and coloration.


Aggie Defense Stuns Houston
LEAD: Texas A&amp;M's defense, geared for speed, slowed Houston's explosive offense and the Aggies pulled off a 17-13 upset today behind the breakaway running of Darren Lewis and Robert Wilson.


Oct. 15, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Video Phones, in First Public Test, Link Two Campuses in California
LEAD: Students at two campuses of the University of California, at Berkeley and Los Angeles, have become the test market for a new public video-telephone booth called Phonavision.
Its developers claim that it is the world's first video telephone for the general public.


Surf's Up in Australia
LEAD: WHEN the surf is up on Sydney's beaches in the southern summer, paddling a surfboard into the lineup to catch a wave can bring on an inferiority complex of asphyxiating proportions.
Or it can inspire even the most mediocre of surfers to feats previously achieved only in the imagination.


Gay Couple's Move to Adopt Children With AIDS Stirs Debate
LEAD: THE impending adoption of two black boys with AIDS by a gay white male couple has prompted a debate in New Jersey that turns on issues of race, morality and a growing interest among homosexuals to be parents.


FICTION
LEAD: FREQUENT FLYER.
By Kinky Friedman. (Morrow, $16.95.) Perhaps because a marketing gimmick can be one of the keys to success in writing a series of mysteries, Kinky Friedman is at once the author and the protagonist of his detective novels.
In ''Frequent Flyer,'' his fourth whodunit, Mr.
Friedman's hero, Kinky, a rock musician turned occasional snooper and constant smart mouth, is once again a sort of urban Indiana Jones, operating out of a lower Manhattan loft where he lives in a perpetual haze of cigar smoke with his cat.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If we need to import this many people then we should make the decision to let them in the front door instead of through the back door in the middle of the night.
What we can't do is say we want a border that's closed to drugs but that is open to people.''
- William T. Veal, deputy
chief of the Border
Patrol's San Diego sector.


High Spirits at the Summit
LEAD: TO celebrate my birthday, some of my family gathered for the weekend at my son's country house in Vermont.
It was a special birthday because it marked the gateway to what we call the golden years.
From now on I can claim discounts on trains and buses and in certain stores.
I am also eligible for a Medicare card with its reassurance of health care.


Wendy M. E. Alling Wed To John T. Judy, Designer
LEAD: Wendy M. E. Alling and John Thomas Judy, graduates of Carnegie-Mellon University, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Tenafly, N.J., by the Rev.
John Croneberger.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 1 about the New Rochelle Art Association referred incorrectly to the illustrator of a 1923 sign, ''When a Feller Needs a Friend.'' He was Clare Briggs.


Anne Richmond Weds Stephen Black
LEAD: Anne Moloney Richmond and Stephen F. Black were married yesterday in the former Presidential reception rooms at Union Station in Washington.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Christopher R. Sherrill, an Episcopal minister.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Edwin J. Moloney of Demarest, N.J., and the late Mr.


Ms. Rose to Wed James H. Marrow
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Rose of New York and East Hampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Emily Rose, to Prof.
James H. Marrow, the son of Helen C. Marrow of Miami Beach and the late Jerome Marrow of New York.
A November wedding is planned.


Opposition in India Fears Electronic Vote Fraud
LEAD: The leader of India's political opposition, fearing electronic vote fraud in the coming national election, said today that he would oppose the use of computerized voting machines unless their design and programming could be checked by independent experts.


10,000 Sheep, Astray at Sea, Head for Europe
LEAD: It has not been the best of times for El Cordero, an Italian-owned freighter carrying 10,000 Australian sheep that has been scorned at ports throughout the Arabian Peninsula.


Clemson Shocked By Georgia Tech
LEAD: Jerry Mays scored two touchdowns and Scott Sisson kicked three field goals today as Georgia Tech stunned Clemson, 30-14, possibly dooming the Tigers' hopes of an unprecedented fourth consecutive Atlantic Coast Conference title.


TRACY ULLMAN MAKES A FACE
LEAD: TRACEY ULLMAN, THE PUCKISH 29-year-old British star of her own Sunday night television variety show, has played girls half her age and matrons twice her age; she's played a psychologist and a postal worker, a bitter Beverly Hills divorcee and a suicidal chorine.


Far-fetched Connections
LEAD: To the Editor:


Martinu Can Now Be More Than a Name
LEAD: The name of the Czechoslovak composer Bohuslav Martinu is well known, but probably relatively few American listeners can claim any real familiarity with his highly individualisticmusic, even though he lived in the United States for a dozen years (1941-53) and composed five of his six symphonies for American orchestras.


Dinkins's Money Base Keeps Getting Broader
LEAD: The business establishment in New York City and liberal and black Democrats outside the city have replaced unions and New York City blacks as the main sources of money for David N. Dinkins's campaign for mayor.


Town Fights With Neighbors Over Burning of Tons of Tires
LEAD: In this poor rural town near the Rhode Island border, officials say they have found a solution to their financial woes that would also help clean up much of the Northeast: a power plant that burns 10 million discarded tires a year.


Bush Keeping Chemical Arms Option
LEAD: In an effort to support the Pentagon's program to develop a new chemical bomb, President Bush has decided to retain the option to produce chemical weapons after a treaty to phase out such arms takes effect, Administration officials said today.


PERSPECTIVES: Charter Revision; Realigning the Powers in Land-Use Control
LEAD: IF New York City voters adopt the proposed Charter revision next month, they will be embracing a land-use regulation system that distributes oversight of the processes of urban change broadly.


CLICHES OF THE 80'S
LEAD: Years from now, purveyors of style will easily be able to date rooms decorated in the 1980's.
Indeed, in every decade, certain design trends become not simply signatures of their time but veritable cliches.
The ubiquitous English country style, for example, ushered in an overabundance of clutter and chintz, while the post-modern interior brought back neo-classical columns and busts.


Vicenza
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed your excellent and informative article on Palladio in the Veneto (''A Palladian Journey in Vicenza,'' Travel, Aug. 13).
Your readers might want to pack along Caroline Constant's ''Palladio Guide,'' which covers all of his built works.
This compact book is an ideal traveling companion for Palladio buffs, and includes maps as well as architectural drawings.


THE SHAMUS IS A SLOB
LEAD:  PEEPER  By Loren D. Estleman.  215 pp. New York:  Bantam Books. $16.95.


Karen A. Handel Plans a Wedding
LEAD: Karen A. Handel and Michael S. Baker, graduates of Boston University, plan to be married next month, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Handel of West Hartford, Conn., have announced.
Mr.
Baker is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis K. Baker of Cumberland, R.I.


SNAPSHOTS OF HOPE AND HOPELESSNESS
LEAD: Mr.
Freedman left a misimpression that the Board of Examiners did not offer an examination for high school social studies instructors for nearly five years.
Unfortunately, the Board of Examiners does not have the authority to decide if an examination should be given.
That, by law, is the Chancellor's responsibility.


CAMPUS LIFE: Colby; A Student Turns Tipster and Loses His Bookstore Job
LEAD: Colby College's bookstore administrators say that a former employee, Jeffrey Winkler, was wrong: Mr.
Winkler, class of '89, should never have given information about textbooks sold at the college-owned bookstore to the competing Iron Horse Bookstore.


East Germany Tries to Keep Soul-Searching in the Party
LEAD: AFTER swirling through the Soviet Union, Poland and Hungary, the Gorbachevian winds of change have turned to huffing and puffing at the formidable bastion of East Germany.
They haven't blown the house down, to be sure, but after a remarkable month of mass flight and mass protest, the Communist leadership is feeling the heat.


Police Recruit Kills Himself
LEAD: A young recruit who worked three years to qualify for the Milwaukee police force shot himself to death at a firing range after failing his final chance at a marksmanship test.
The recruit, Daniel Morales, 21 years old, was firing at the third and final target at the Police Training Academy when he turned his .357 revolver to his head and shot himself, a police spokesman said.


VENGEANCE IS HIS, AGAIN
LEAD:  THE KILLING MAN  By Mickey Spillane.  238 pp. New York: E. P. Dutton. $17.95.


Penn State Wins A Big Game Big
LEAD: After his team lost to Pitt and was crushed by Florida State in the last two games, the Syracuse head coach, Dick Mac Pherson, said he was glad the Orangemen's game with Penn State was here in the Carrier Dome.


India's Parliamentary Ways Are Yielding to Other Forces
LEAD: AS the political crisis enveloping Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi deepened last week, with newspapers reporting that efforts to cover up kickbacks from a Swedish arms deal reached higher and higher in his administration, there was one place that the hottest topic in this parliamentary democracy was barely discussed at all.


'Smoke on Mountain,' Gospel Musical
LEAD: IF you haven't been hankering after a bluegrass, Bible Belt gospel sort of musical, circa 1938, ''Smoke on the Mountain'' at the McCarter Theater, through next Sunday, isn't likely to challenge your predispositions.


CBS Trims 30 Minutes From 'Pat Sajak Show'
LEAD: CBS announced on Friday that ''The Pat Sajak Show'' would be shortened to one hour beginning on Oct. 30.
The 90-minute program, which was introduced nine months ago to compete with NBC's ''Tonight'' show with Johnny Carson, is currently broadcast weeknights from 11:30 P.M. to 1 A.M.
In its new format, it will end at 12:30 A.M.


Helsinki's Russian Flavors
LEAD: MOST major cities are dotted with restaurants where the locals go when they want something ethnic.
London has its Indian restaurants, Tokyo its Italian spaghetti parlors, and in Paris, Vietnamese food gives the extra kick to the French palate.
In Helsinki, Russian restaurants provide exotic cuisine for natives when they're looking for a change from the tame and often prosaic


Rewriting the Rules of Retailing
LEAD: There is no happier sound to the merchant's ear than that of a constantly ringing cash register.


Review/Music; Baroque Bill By 4 Nations Ensemble
LEAD: The Four Nations Ensemble, an early-instruments band directed by the harpsichordist Andrew Appel, describes the boundaries of its repertory as late Renaissance and Viennese Classics.
For its Wednesday-evening program at Weill Recital Hall, the group tightened its focus slightly on the middle ground, offering Baroque works from Germany, Italy, England and France.


Review/Theater; 'Midsummer Night's Dream'
LEAD: There is, of course, no such thing as a foolproof play, but ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' comes about as close as anything written in the last 400 years.
Shakespeare's confection of farce and fantasy can survive virtually any conceit or time warp visited on it and provide a measure of mirth in at least one of the three plots.


Milford Does Battle With Drugs
LEAD: FED UP with drug abuse and the crimes associated with it, DeForest Smith, a Milford real estate broker, has declared ''all-out war'' against drugs in his city.
He has enlisted the aid of the police department, the schools and the business community, and his efforts have led to a drug-tip hot line that will offer callers cash rewards.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: Because of editing errors, a Posting on Oct. 8 about Deer Crossing at Warwick, a New York residential development, mislocated it and the developer's office.
Both are in Orange, not Rockland, County, and near New Milford, an Orange County, not Bergen County, N.J., community.


HE DIN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: A number of people have asked me what I and my colleagues at the Eisenhower World Affairs Institute thought of the article ''He Didn't Like Ike.''


A COURT UPHOLDS DRUG CONVICTIONS
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Manhattan last week upheld the 1987 convictions of 15 men in the ''pizza connection'' narcotics trial, but overturned another defendant's guilty verdict on racketeering and conspiracy charges.


A's First Games Designated Crucial
LEAD: For two games, at least, the 86th World Series will be on even terms.


TIMID PROGRAMMING, TEPID TELEVISION
LEAD: If television reflects reality, however hazily, we the people would seem to be mired in growing confusion.
While news and ''reality'' shows adopt questionable dramatization devices, entertainment formats drift ever further into inane diversions.
Meanwhile, daytime shows like ''Geraldo'' are insisting that the land is being overrun by child molesters and Satanists.


'Broadway Bound,' Simon's Third 'BB'
LEAD: CONTINUING what has become a Long Island theater tradition, the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale is producing the latest Neil Simon play as soon as the rights are released to the regional theaters.


Residents Try to Reroute a Train Platform
LEAD: NEARLY everyone in this long-established commuter village recognizes the local dependence on the railroad, which has rolled through the center of town since 1844.
But now some angry residents say the railroad has gone too far - 170 feet too far.


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: I've been a big fan of one of baseball's greatest showmen, Rickey Henderson, for many years, and I'd like to explain why.
I had the opportunity to watch him for about six hours one day at a baseball card show.
Also present were Jim Kaat, Don Mattingly and Pete Rose.
It was mobbed, and lines were endless.


CHOOSING SIDES IN NICARAGUA
LEAD:  MEMOIRS OF A COUNTERREVOLUTIONARY  By Arturo Cruz Jr.  266 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $19.95.


Tierney Finn, Actress, Weds
LEAD: Tierney Finn, an actress, and Mark Fitzmartin, a television commercial producer for Fernbach Productions in New York, both graduates of New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, were married yesterday in Holy Trinity Chapel at N.Y.U.
The Rev.
Raymond Raferty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Fall Benefits: Alzheimer's To Tappan Zee
LEAD: A informal but festive opening was held Wednesday evening for the new and enlarged Children's Museum of Manhattan.
Bette Korman, the museum's founder and executive director, thought it all up.
Laurie Tisch Sussman, chairman of the museum, raised the money, and her family gave and renovated the four-story building at 212 West 83d Street.


Stacy Elise Silk Is Married to Michael Feldman
LEAD: The marriage of Stacy Elise Silk, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark Silk of West Hartford, Conn., to Michael Alan Feldman, a son of Dr.
Richard N. Feldman of Rocky Hill, Conn., and the late Bonnie Wood Feldman, took place in Hartford last evening.
Rabbi Harold Silver officiated at the Hartford Club.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: Doctors in Stuttgart, West Germany, said that while it was still too early to know for sure, it appeared likely that Adriana Duffy, the Puerto Rican gymnast who broke her neck in a practice accident Thursday night, would remain paralyzed. ...
The Los Angeles Raiders released the veteran defensive end Pete Koch yesterday in order to clear a roster spot for the running back Bo Jackson, the Kansas City Royals outfielder, who is expected to play in today's game against the Kansas City Chiefs.


The Mideast, As Seen by James Baker
LEAD: FOR nine months, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has been trying to jump-start the Middle East peace process with an approach that forces the parties to the conflict to take the lead and leaves America serving as a catalyst in the background.
The next few weeks should determine whether Israelis and Palestinians will latch onto this approach as an original route to change or a novel way to keep things the same.


Elizabeth Simard Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth Kasson Simard and Edward Stillman Richardson were married yesterday at the United Congregational Church of Rowayton, Conn., by the Rev.
John S. Livingston.
Mrs.
Richardson, 25 years old and a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Simard of Rowayton, graduated from Moravian College.
She is a promotion supervisor at Woman's Day magazine in New York.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:  Your Scallops or Your Life


Secret Beijing Report Assails Ousted Party Leader
LEAD: A secret Government report has been issued bitterly attacking the ousted Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang, for economic mismanagement.
It is a new step in the campaign to hold Mr.
Zhao responsible for China's economic and political problems.


Paris Talks Seek Attention for Plight of Kurds
LEAD: Kendal Nezan, a soft-spoken refugee from Turkey and chairman of the Kurdish Institute, is dismayed that the world's millions of Kurds and their 1,000-year-old culture have become orphans of history.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: There is no better sign of the perpetual invention in chess than the longevity of the Marshall Gambit.


HEARTS AND WRITERS
LEAD: I can't tell you how many times my heart has been jolted by a beautifully written sentence or my life has been affected by the magic of words.
Surely, there must be a reason why doctors such as Anton Chekhov and William Carlos Williams were writers, too.
Clearly, they realized the power of medicine to shock life back into a stopped heart and the power of language to make that same heart stop, for a few seconds, to feel the power of the written word.


Works in Progress; Once and Future Luxury
LEAD: IT IS ONE OF THOSE HOTELS with a historical roster of famous guests.
Edison and Marconi, Enrico Caruso and Sarah Bernhardt, Will Rogers and Mark Twain, Andrew Carnegie and J. P. Morgan, William Jennings Bryan and Oliver Wendell Holmes, not to mention royalty from several nations, 10 American Presidents, Winston Churchill, Nikita Khrushchev and Madame Chiang Kai-shek: all stayed at San Francisco's Palace Hotel (now the Sheraton Palace) between Oct.


LESSONS FROM THE 80's; CREATING THE LOOK: Tradition With a Twist
LEAD: If there is any one lesson we've learned in this decade, it's how to shop.
Indeed, the growing interest in the decorative arts -spawned by an increase in museum shows, books and lectures on the subject, the rising popularity of antiques and crafts shows, and the much publicized boom in the auction market - has heightened consumer awareness of the wide variety of objects that are available.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: By all accounts, historians today have Eisenhower in an almost dead heat with Truman in the Presidential ratings.
You would never know this from reading Margaret Truman's footnotes.
ALAN SCHNEIDER  New York, N.Y.


Miss Sullivan Becomes Bride
LEAD: At St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Bronxville, N.Y., Mariellen Margaret Sullivan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry F. Sullivan of Chicago and Amagansett, L.I., was married yesterday to Noble Olds Carpenter Jr., a son of Mr.
Carpenter of Canton, Ohio, and the late Ann L. Carpenter.
The Rev.


Next for Yogi Berra, Master of Words
LEAD: To the Editor:


Back in Business
LEAD: He may have been forced to resign as basketball coach at the University of Kentucky after it was found that his program was riddled with rules violations, but that doesn't mean that Eddie Sutton is no longer a welcome figure in the world of college basketball.


Airport Buses
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently had occasion to accompany an elderly friend to the Carey Bus Terminal at Park Avenue and 42d Street and was appalled at the lack of basic facilities at what is the only pickup and dropoff station on the East Side of New York, for travelers going to Kennedy International Airport and La


Shore Confronts New Trends in Tourism
LEAD: AS local and state tourism officials and oceanfront communities finish their assessments of last summer and start to plan budgets for next year, the talk is focusing on a trend that has been changing the face of the Jersey Shore in this decade.


29 Reversed Votes on Easing Abortion Curbs
LEAD: Twenty-nine House members voted one way in a vote relaxing restrictions on Federal financing of abortion on Sept. 9, 1988, then voted the opposite way on a virtually identical proposal on Wednesday.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Should the Jets Have Benched O'Brien?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


NONFICTION
LEAD: ROEMER: Man Against the Mob.
By William F. Roemer Jr. (Donald I. Fine, $19.95.) Of his many awards and commendations, the former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent William F. Roemer Jr. writes that ''the best testament'' came from the organized-crime boss Jackie Cerone, who crowned Mr.
Roemer ''the nemesis of Chicago organized crime.


Shakespeare: The Black Hole
LEAD: To the Editor:


Words or Less
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pope Praises Mauritius for Democracy and Religious Freedom


'TERRIBLE, THE WAY IT WAS IN FAMILIES'
LEAD:  THE OTHER SIDE  By Mary Gordon.  386 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


A Beatles Movie Script Goes Onstage Instead
LEAD: ''When i first read 'Up Against It!' I was terrified at the thought of trying to put it on the stage,'' said Kenneth Elliott of the film script Joe Orton wrote for the Beatles in 1967.
Misgivings behind him, Mr.
Elliott will be directing the first professional stage performances of ''Up Against It!


Louisiana Warden Dismissed Over Security
LEAD: The warden of the Louisiana State Penitentiary has been dismissed because he operated a cockfighting business at the prison and failed to maintain security and to report escapes, the head of the state's corrections department said on Wednesday.


Transactions
LEAD:  Football


POSTINGS: From Classes to Co-ops; Restoring a Landmarked Public School
LEAD: Those who cherish New York City's architectural treasures have long bemoaned the deterioration of buildings like the former P.S. 9 in Brooklyn, a Renaissance Revival edifice on Vanderbilt Avenue and Sterling Place in Prospect Heights.


Architecture Eases Into the 90's
LEAD: THE MOST IMPORTANT legacy of the 1980's in architecture may not be a design at all, but a book.
It is a slim book, and unlike many other important works, it did not transform the thinking of an age.
Rather, it summed up a whole set of impulses, and gave coherence to a time.


Sheila McGovern Weds
LEAD: Sheila Mary McGovern, a daughter of Anne Marie McGovern of Washington and Walter Collins McGovern of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Richard Kendrick 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kendrick 3d of Sewickley, Pa.
The Rev.
John O'Connor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in Washington at the Notre Dame Chapel of Trinity College.


An Industry Coalition Frays
LEAD: THE battle over strengthening the Clean Air Act is placing enormous strain on the industry coalition that has worked together in the 1980's to lobby successfully against stronger air pollution laws.


California Grown
LEAD: Fourteen members of the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland Athletics were not far from their hometowns when the all-California World Series opened last night.


Bush's Critics Say He's Crossed the Line, But Public Still Sees Him as Presidential
LEAD: A new buzz word has shoved aside ''ethics'' and ''credibility'' in the endless political chatter that lubricates life in the capital.


Poland Says Germans Get Right to Go West
LEAD: East Germany has agreed to allow almost 1,000 of its citizens who have taken refuge in Poland to emigrate to the country of their choice, Poland said today.


The Budget Follies, Cont'd.
LEAD: No scandal in Congress this year is more outrageous than the budget mess.
Both houses and both parties have failed in their duty to cut the deficit.
President Bush did no better.
Putting aside all the hogwash and politicking, it is clear that they're all creating problems, not solving them.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. When we bought our 45-year-old house, it had been freshly painted, but a disk sander had been used on many places, leaving deep swirls on the wood shingles.
Last year, we hired a professional to repaint.
He sanded and applied one coat of oil-based primer, followed by two coats of oil paint.
Now a brown stain is seeping through the paint, especially in areas in direct sun.


From Apples and Pears, Elegant Autumn Desserts
LEAD: NOW is the time of year for the widest choice and highest quality of apples and pears.
The best apples for cooking are those that are not too sweet but that are firm and juicy, with plenty of flavor.
Use hard, crisp McIntosh, semi-sweet Cortlands or tart greening apples.
Bartlett and Bosc pears are both good for cooking and their elegant shape always makes an attractive dessert.


Army Stops Holy Cross
LEAD: After beating up on Ivy League teams the previous three Saturdays and prolonging its unbeaten stretch this season to five games, Holy Cross stepped up to a higher plateau today and tripped.
The Crusaders lost to Army, 45-9, on one of those soft autumn afternoons at Michie Stadium that belong in a painting.


Chabrol Offers A Cool-Eyed Look At a Stormy Issue
LEAD: Abortion is not the stormy issue in France it is in the United States, which is one reason Claude Chabrol, the French director, has been able to make a movie that deals with it not as a moral dilemma, but as a fact of life.
In ''Story of Women,'' abortion is unpleasant, troublesome, even physically dangerous, but for some women it sometimes is the only choice available.


Congress Skirts And May Revise Law on Deficit
LEAD: Just as Congress completes one of its most embarrassing failures to meet the requirements of the deficit-reduction law, lawmakers in both parties appear to be focusing seriously on ways to change the statute.


Borland Seeks Best of Both Worlds
LEAD: Bucking a trend, the Borland International Corporation says it can write a spreadsheet program that has more features than Lotus 1-2-3 Release 3 or Microsoft Excel and can also run nicely on a low-end office personal computer.
Borland's program, Quattro Pro, was announced this month, although it will not be ready for sale until the end of the year.


Markets to Test Safeguards If Stock Prices Fall Further
LEAD: In the wake of Friday's market plunge, the nation's financial exchanges are bracing for what could be the first test of procedures that would temporarily halt trading if stock prices declined steeply.
The plans for such a halt were adopted after the 1987 crash.


Buyers Mull Special Brands For Buyers Like Seniors
LEAD: There are plenty of loaves at the bread aisle at the Food Emporium at 68th Street and Broadway in New York: Wonder Bread, Pepperidge Farm, Arnold, Taystee, Home Pride, Country Hearth, Oatmeal Goodness.


Taxes and Housing Enliven Debates
LEAD: THE race for County Executive entered the homestretch last week with the major-party challengers tangling repeatedly over two issues: the rising taxes needed to balance the county budget and the county's role in providing affordable housing.


A Trattoria-Pizzeria With a View
LEAD: THOUGH the surroundings at Doc's are minimal - a small frame house with plain pine floors, mismatched chairs painted apple green, framed posters and butcher-paper table covers - the pizzeria has head-on views of scenic Lake Waramaug and classical music as a backdrop to dinner.


Correction
LEAD: A question-and-answer article on Sept. 3 about the selling of medical practices misstated the subject area in which Dr.
Madeleine Pelner Cosman earned her doctorate.
It was in English and comparative literature, not medical law.


Center Stage for Sets from Bridgeport Firm
LEAD: CHANDELIERS that collapse, a chair that dumps bodies, and a town house interior that folds up are the products of Atlas Scenic Studio Ltd.


The Home Office of Tomorrow
LEAD: LAST SUMMER, FRANCIS Fukuyama, a deputy director of the U.S.
State Department, asserted that history is dead and that class struggle had been quashed by the ideological - and technological - triumph of the West.
The idea of an end to progress, though provocative, may have seemed less naive if Fukuyama had limited his analysis to home-office electronics.


SNAPSHOTS OF HOPE AND HOPELESSNESS
LEAD: As a sociologist and alumna of Seward Park High School, I was particularly interested in Samuel G. Freedman's article.
It led me to take down my copy of the yearbook for my graduating class and look at the snapshots of me and my classmates.


'There Was a Silent Majority Out There'
LEAD: IN his seven years in the Florida State House of Representatives, Robert J. Shelley has been a strong opponent of abortion and has cast votes to restrict it, including one last year to require girls younger than 18 years old to obtain the consent of a parent or a judge before having an abortion.


FICTION
LEAD: DEAD BY MORNING.
By Dorothy Simpson. (Scribners, $16.95.) The ninth mystery in this British writer's Luke Thanet detective series has classic ingredients: a dead body discovered in curious circumstances, lots of suspects and a tight-lipped village guarding its secrets.
Two days after his return to the English hamlet where he grew up, the Martindale family's long-absent black sheep, Leo, lies dead in a ditch, the ostensible victim of a hit-and-run accident.


June Balyk, Banker, Is Wed
LEAD: June Virginia Balyk, a daughter of Edward Joseph Balyk of Union, N.J., and the late Helen Agnes Balyk, was married yesterday to Scott Vincent Martin, the son of Dr.
Daniel S. Martin of New York and Bette Finch Martin of Miami.
Judge Megdalia Maldonado of Civil Court in New York officiated at the Parc Vendome in New York.


Q and A
LEAD:  Wimbledon


Repairing Fluorescent Lights
LEAD: FLUORESCENT lights are thrifty.
They use less electricity than incandescent lights, and because they also generate less heat, their tubes last longer than incandescent bulbs.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: If Ike was as bad as Truman says, why did he try to persuade him to be the Democratic candidate for President?
THEODORE R. KUPFERMAN  New York, N.Y.


LESSONS FROM THE 80'S
LEAD: The 1980's have been an extraordinary time for home design.
Many trends have come and gone: The English country style swept the nation with cluttered rooms done in chintz and ribbons.
Post-modern buildings, boasting pediments and oversize columns, began cropping up in all major cities.
Deconstructivism, the hard-edged architectural movement that originated in California, was later immortalized in an exhibition at The Museum of Modern Art in New York City.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  GILBERT &amp; SULLIVAN


PASTIMES: Gardening; Will the Wild Bulbs Be Saved?
LEAD: The majority of hardy bulbs that home gardeners are planting this fall can be bought without guilt.
Tulip, hyacinth and daffodil bulbs that provide the spring splendor are raised by the billions as a crop, mainly in the Netherlands, and shipped to markets worldwide.


THE REGION: Superintendent Elena J. Scambio; Remaking Jersey City Schools: The State's Agent Digs In
LEAD: A WEEK ago, as Elena J. Scambio, newly installed by the state to overhaul the troubled Jersey City school system, was marching here in the Columbus Day Parade, she noticed that the band from Dickinson High had no uniforms, while a band from nearby Union City was in snappy attire.


Wine; GOING FOR THE GOLD
LEAD: SOME YEARS AGO, I SPENT A LOT of time knocking around as a judge at wine competitions.
It seemed like the thing to do - a chance to learn something, to taste a lot of wines and see the country.
That's pretty much the way it worked out, too.


Marines Are Assigned To Aid Border Patrol
LEAD: The Immigration and Naturalization Service says that as many as 50 marines will be deployed along the border with Mexico to help the United States Border Patrol to detect illegal aliens trying to enter the country.


Bolar: A Drug Company Under Siege
LEAD: FOR more than a year, the Food and Drug Administration and the House of Representatives Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations have been reporting evidence of unethical behavior at generic drug companies.


Helping Out
LEAD: As any number of disabled jockeys and exercise riders can attest, riding thoroughbreds is a dangerous occupation fraught with potental injuries requiring expensive rehabilitation programs and equipment.
That's why as soon as the ninth race has been run at Santa Anita race track in California today, the track's jockeys will assemble for a softball game.


HE DIDN'T LIKE IKE
LEAD: Wonderful Harry S. Truman.
Reading his private writings, I couldn't help smiling.
How splendidly refreshing!


Amy Daniel Weds Dennis Metnick
LEAD: Amy Alice Daniel and Dennis Metnick were married yesterday by Judge Harvey W. Sherman of Suffolk County Criminal Court at the Young Men's Philanthropic League in New York.
The bride, 35 years old, is a daughter of William Moody of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Mimi Feiffer Moody of New York.
Her husband, 45, is the son of Mrs.


Question Of the Week; Are Baseball's Showmen Too Showy?
LEAD: Of course.
And the showiest of all are the Mets, whose players find it necessary to take a curtain call after every home run hit at Shea.
The Met ''sluggers'' could all learn a lesson from Roger Maris, who had to be coaxed out of the dugout at Yankee Stadium to take a bow after his 61st.
ROBIN RUBINSTEIN  ERIC S.


Patricia Hayashi, Lawyer, Weds Michael F. Bartok
LEAD: Patricia C. Hayashi, an associate at the New York office of the Minneapolis law firm of Dorsey &amp; Whitney, was married yesterday evening to Michael F. Bartok, an associate general counsel at Paramount Communications in New York.
Rabbi Alfred Lansberg officiated at Temple Emanu-El in Edison, N.J.


Court Grants a Delay In an Iran-Contra Trial
LEAD: The Justice Department has obtained a delay of at least another month in the Iran-contra trial of a former intelligence agent, Joseph F. Fernandez.


Coalition Is Alive and Well
LEAD: Your article on Oct. 1, 1989, ''Coalition Disbands After Primary,'' may be misleading.
Our coalition, the Long Island Committee for Reasonable Government, is alive and well.
However, it is apparent that misconceptions exist.


Wing Biddle Wed To Miss Urstadt, A Bank Executive
LEAD: The wedding of Catherine Cary Urstadt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Urstadt of Bronxville, N.Y., and Willing Legendre Biddle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Biddle of Princeton, N.J., took place yesterday at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The Rev.
Frank Goodwin, an English Baptist minister, performed the ceremony.


CAMPUS LIFE: University of Dayton; New Prohibition On Tapped Kegs Stirs Controversy
LEAD: A new policy on alcohol at the University of Dayton prohibits tapped kegs in campus housing and other campus centers and at off-campus activities sponsored by the university unless students get permission from the university.


Susan D. Ginkel, a Banker, To Wed Christopher H. Lee
LEAD: A November wedding is planned by Susan DeLand Ginkel, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, and Christopher Hoiles Lee, a vice president of Shearson Lehman Hutton, both in New York, the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred O. Ginkel of Muskogee, Okla., have announced.
Miss Ginkel, 34 years old, graduated cum laude from Bucknell University.


Cameron Adams to Wed John Soroko
LEAD: Cameron Colket Adams and John Jeming Soroko are planning a November wedding, the prospective bride's parents, David Adams 4th of Bethlehem, Pa., and Mrs.
Robert John Connell of Buck Hill Falls, Pa., have announced.
Mr.
Soroko is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Soroko of Philadelphia.


'Blaming the Victim' in The War on Waste
LEAD: Assemblyman David C. Kronick states in ''The Trashing of New Jersey'' that the worst crime in America is the trashing of America, particularly New Jersey.
He effectively states the problem and in simple, complete form suggests the solution.
Finally he appeals to the public, the parents and the schools through education to sweep


Leah H. Haggerty And Peter Clark Exchange Vows
LEAD: At St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I., Leah Hilary Haggerty and Peter Stokes Ives Clark were married yesterday by Canon John W. Davis, assisted by the Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee.


NONFICTION
LEAD: RAYMOND CHANDLER'S LOS ANGELES.
By Elizabeth Ward and Alain Silver. (Overlook, Cloth, $25; Paper, $19.95.) Perhaps no detective in fiction is so indelibly associated with a city as is Philip Marlowe with Los Angeles.
In the variegated communities that make up the West Coast metropolis, Marlowe walked those ''mean streets .


A's Show They Have Pitching Edge
LEAD: Before the World Series began, the San Francisco Giants conceded that the Oakland Athletics had the edge in pitching.
Nothing changed their minds tonight.


THE LITTLE FLOWER AND HOW HE GREW
LEAD:  FIORELLO H. LA GUARDIA AND THE MAKING OF MODERN NEW YORK  By Thomas Kessner.
Illustrated. 700 pp.
New York:  McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. $24.95.


Senior's 7 Passes Fuel 7 Touchdowns
LEAD: Scott Scesney threw for a school-record seven touchdown passes, four of them to Denis McDermott, as undefeated St.
John's overtook the previously unbeaten Merchant Marine Academy, 65-45, yesterday at Tomb Memorial Field, Kings Point, L.I., clinching its first Liberty Conference title.


Review/Dance; Some Graham Stars Create Choreography
LEAD: The Martha Graham Dance Company presented the season's third program of choreography by some of its members on Friday evening; Steve Rooks, Jacqulyn Buglisi and Maxine Sherman were represented.


The Big Race To Drive Jaguar
LEAD: British car maker Jaguar P.L.C. has almost no money, tiny production facilities, few dealers and dwindling sales - but it has something the world automotive giants are itching to get their hands on: a brand name that denotes class.


Review/Music; Trio Doppler From Italy
LEAD: The Trio Doppler - two flutists and one pianist - come from Italy and played for the first time in New York on Thursday night at Weill Recital Hall.
Their music was understandably esoteric and understandably of limited quality.
The great composers, needless to say, have not expended a great deal of their time on such an unusual and limited combination of instruments.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing; There's No Need to Skip Town to See Fall Colors
LEAD: With the peak of the fall foliage season in the metropolitan region about a week away, leaf peepers who are stuck in New York City do not have to turn green with envy (or red or orange) when friends tell them about their excursions into the country to view the splendors of autumn.


DIAMONDS ARE NOW AND FOREVER IN OAKLAND
LEAD: Babe Ruth is at the World Series, and so is Pete Rose, and so is Jackie Robinson, and so is A. Bartlett Giamatti.


Nelson Is on the Air But Prefers a Field
LEAD: Karl Nelson is a man of many talents.


Mandarich Hoping to Be Village Hero
LEAD: When Tony Mandarich strapped his helmet to his head and jogged onto the white-lined turf for a third-down play last Sunday, the Green Bay Packer fans at Lambeau Field shouted ''Tony!
Tony!'' and clapped in anticipation.


Lauretta Georgen Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Lauretta Marie Georgen, a daughter of Mrs.
W.
Donald Georgen of Morristown, N.J., and the late Mr.
Georgen, was married yesterday to John Charles Godbout, a son of Mrs.
Thomas G. Godbout of Detroit and the late Mr.
Godbout.
Msgr.
John F. Corr and the Rev.
Patrick E. Brown officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N


Review/Piano; Russian and French Works By Donna Amato, in Debut
LEAD: For the program of her New York debut recital at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening, Donna Amato chose Russian and French piano works that revel in chromaticism.
But her approach was often so heavy - either because she prefers a forceful touch or because she misjudged the volume of sound it takes to fill the intimate hall - that the opportunities the music affords for subtle coloristic interplay were often squandered.


Losing Streak Isn't Any More
LEAD: Fitchburg State ended the nation's longest current college losing streak at 36 games today with a 33-7 victory over Southeastern Massachusetts.


A GASTRONOME, A MAGICIAN AND A FIRST LADY: DETECTIVES AND THEIR DAY JOBS
LEAD: Homicide cops get a pension, and hard-boiled private eyes don't expect to live long enough to retire.
But amateur detectives who hope to survive in their competitive genre find it helps to have a steady day job.


Across the River, 2 Touchdown Artists
LEAD: If you are exiting from the Holland Tunnel in New Jersey, a right turn takes you to Hoboken and a left to Jersey City.
In either direction lies one of the top high school running backs in New Jersey.


New Jersey Election Bogs Down in Mud
LEAD: Just after the Presidential and United States Senate elections last year, politicians in both parties here promised they would try to avoid debasing this year's political campaign with mudslinging.
But in recent days New Jerseyans have watched their race for governor tumble into what political analysts now say is the most mean-spirited contest in memory.


Society Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
27,713,000
26,456,000
Per share
1.17
1.11
9mo net inc
83,768,000
74,171,000
Per share
3.52
3.10
Society's loan loss reserve of $94,128,000 at Sept. 30 was up from $76,721,000 a year ago.


Results Plus
LEAD:  Tennis  No. 222 Loses to Lendl: Ivan Lendl, ranked No. 1 in the world, outclassed Lars Wahlgren of Sweden, ranked 222d, in straight sets in Sydney yesterday, 6-2, 6-2, 6-1, to win the Australian indoor championship.
Wahlgren, 23, had not made it past the first round of any major tournament this year and was playing in his first Grand Prix final.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Saatchi Goes For a Change Of Direction
LEAD: REVIEWING the most tumultuous period in the 19-year history of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, a leading European advertising executive said, ''Someone has to reinvent that company.''


Syria Acknowledges Its Pilot Intended to Defect to Israel
LEAD: A Syrian military spokesman said today that the Syrian pilot who defected to Israel in a Soviet MIG-23 jet fighter on Wednesday ''was a traitor who sold himself and his weapon to the enemy,'' the Damascus radio reported.


Falconbridge Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falconbridge Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
579,000,000
525,000,000
Net inc
b55,000,000
87,000,000
Share earns
.80
1.19
9mo rev
1,900,000,000
1,500,000,000
Net inc
b314,000,000
217,000,000
Share earns
4.70
2.80


Nassau Man Is Electrocuted
LEAD: A 32-year-old man was electrocuted today when he tried to move a live telephone wire from the road near his home in this Rensselaer County town, the police said.
The victim, Peter Brewster, was pronounced dead at Albany Memorial Hospital shortly after the 8:30 A.M. incident, said Ray Payne, a County Sheriff's Deputy.


Dinkins Stance Hardens On Attacks by Giuliani
LEAD: After days of being buffeted by attacks from his Republican opponent, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor, yesterday went on the offensive, challenging Rudolph W. Giuliani to get off the ''low road'' and rise from the ''depths of negative and divisive politics.''


Skaneateles Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skaneateles Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
416,000
396,000
Per share
.40
.39
9mo net loss
124,000
b1,075,000
Per share
-
1.05
b-Net income


Review/Dance; A Graham-Noguchi Foray Deep Into Greek Myth
LEAD: Martha Graham's ''Cortege of Eagles'' from 1967 was one of her strangest collaborations with the sculptor Isamu Noguchi.
The entire work is a startling cinematic flyby of images - both enhanced and obfuscated by geometric forms used as props and masks.


Silver Lining for Business Chiefs
LEAD: Almost 150 past and present chief executives of American businesses gather here twice a year for a meeting of the Business Council and rarely do they have an event like Friday's stock market plunge to talk about.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Systems Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
401,797,000
380,061,000
Net inc
21,301,000
19,559,000
Share earns
.68
.63
9mo sales
1,192,654,000
1,050,981,000
Net inc
59,796,000
54,187,000
Share earns
1.92
1.75


STEPS ARE TAKEN TO CALM INVESTORS IN STOCK MARKETS
LEAD: The financial community and Government officials yesterday took steps to deal with volatile Wall Street trading expected today, seeking to assure investors that the markets are ready for any reaction to Friday's collapse.


Jury Spurns Insanity Defense In Ax Killings
LEAD: A jury rejected an insanity defense today in the second phase of the trial of an 18-year-old man convicted of first-degree murder in the ax slayings of his parents and two siblings.


Landmark Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Graphics (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,331,000
9,207,000
Net inc
1,826,000
b1,214,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Shares outst
8,273,000
5,653,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $314,000, or 5 cents a share.


In Italy's Courts, Inspiration From 'Perry Mason'
LEAD: Prosecutors have been enthroned on special daises in courtrooms up and down Italy since time immemorial.
Beginning Oct. 25, they will be seated in a humbler position, opposite defense counsel and on the same level.
The symbolic lowering of the state accuser's place by a few inches is part of a reform of the Italian criminal justice system that the news media, lawyers, magistrates and even legislators are calling the Perry


Elliott Abrams Remains Reckless on Panama
LEAD: To the Editor:


Onbancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onbancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,817,000
2,011,000
Per share
.46
.33
9mo net inc
8,053,000
5,306,000
Per share
1.32
.87


Sports World Specials; 800 Number
LEAD: An account of the Perfect Swing Trainer in this space last week omitted the company's telephone number.
It is (800) 456-8082.


Dividend Meetings


Salvadoran Foes Meet Today In a New Set of Negotiations
LEAD: The rightist Government and the leftist guerrillas are to sit down here on Monday for what is intended as a series of substantive discussions on how to end the nine-year Salvadoran civil war.


GRI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GRI Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,415,000
18,931,000
Net inc
1,246,000
1,769,000
Share earns
.55
.79
9mo rev
47,999,000
61,548,000
Net loss
3,639,000
b5,494,000
b-After a loss of $6,556,000 from an accounting adjustment.


Irish Bruised but Still Unbeaten
LEAD: Long before the exhilaration of New Year's Day and the final arguments over an unofficial national college football championship, before conference titles are secured and the machinery of the bowl selection process is played out, there is the painful business of dealing with a long season and withstanding its punishing consequences.


Dash to New Life Ends in Youth's Suicide
LEAD: Mark Henry Whalen, his friends and family say, was a troubled 16-year-old, devastated by the death of his mother four years ago and tormented by the drugs he had turned to for solace.
If he could only get to Florida, Mark often told his friends, he would be able to get his life in order.


Arrow Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Bank Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,531,000
1,251,000
Per share
.64
.62
9mo net inc
4,309,000
3,448,000
Per share
1.79
1.43


Tribune Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tribune Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Revenue
590,678,000
575,124,000
Net inc
62,723,000
51,636,000
Share earns
.77
.69
9mo rev
1,786,747,000
1,710,121,000
Net inc
174,821,000
147,463,000
Share earns
2.21
1.94


Marine Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,361,000
2,039,000
Per share
.39
.34
9mo net inc
6,966,000
5,785,000
Per share
1.16
.96


Life With No Phone: Long Lines and Kind Friends
LEAD: For the last 10 weeks, Rommel Nobay has been denied his inalienable rights to life, liberty and a jangling, working telephone.


Bryn Mawr Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bryn Mawr Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,001,000
1,036,000
Per share
.92
.96
9mo net inc
3,161,000
2,641,000
Per share
2.91
2.44


Neworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,405,000
2,511,000
Per share
.35
.54
9mo net inc
5,955,000
7,206,000
Per share
1.41
1.55


Mark Controls Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Controls Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
19,160,000
15,791,000
Net inc
565,000
582,000
Share earns
.12
.12
Shares outst
4,906,646
4,909,212
9mo sales
58,134,000
48,874,000
Net inc
2,237,000
b2,697,000
Share earns
.46
.54
Shares outst
4,886,501
4,936,199


Sports World Specials: GOLF; Ryder on the Rebound
LEAD: Upset he was not selected for the 1987 European Ryder Cup team, Christy O'Connor Jr. of Ireland rebounded in Ryder Cup play last month to become something of a folk hero in his own country, particularly in County Galway and County Clare on the West Coast.


Ms. Halkerston Weds Scott Witt
LEAD: The marriage of Merrill-Anne Halkerston and Scott Alan Witt took place yesterday at the Tappan Hill restaurant in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Cantor David Benedict officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Beverly Halkerston of Sydney, Australia, and Keith Halkerston of Henley-on-Thames, England.
Her husband is a son of Mr.


Mr. Jax Fashions reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mr. Jax Fashions
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,313,000
25,057,000
Net inc
1,599,000
2,067,000
Share earns
.23
.30
9mo rev
52,496,000
51,991,000
Net inc
1,361,000
2,602,000
Share earns
.20
.38


Florida National Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida National Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,124,000
10,586,000
Per share
.19
.40
9mo net loss
38,320,000
b29,418,000
Per share
-
1.11
b-Net income  The company said latest 9 months' results were hurt by an extraordinary large loan-loss provision of $57 million, taken in the first quarter, and because of year-to-date other real estate expenses totaling $14.7 million.


Ex-Aide at Sumitomo Joins Drexel in Tokyo
LEAD: Toshihiko Yamamoto, the former head of the mergers and acquisitions department at the Sumitomo Bank, has joined the Tokyo office of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,306,000
4,639,000
Per share
.64
.69
Shares outst
6,695,674
6,704,696
9mo net inc
13,882,000
13,391,000
Per share
2.07
1.99
Shares outst
6,697,145
6,725,130


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: * Bank of California, San Francisco, named James C. Wills senior vice president.


F.D.A. Sets Bolar Curb
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said Friday that it planned to withdraw approval for the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company to sell a generic drug used to treat urinary tract infections and that it wanted the company to withdraw the product from drugstores.


Salem Carpet Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Carpet Mills (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
117,559,000
104,256,000
Net inc
2,026,000
2,486,000
Share earns
.25
.31
9mo sales
315,858,000
304,216,000
Net inc
5,108,000
5,365,000
Share earns
.63
.67


Jets Hit the Bottom In Loss to Saints
LEAD: On a day when their coach was trying to find a spark by switching quarterbacks, the Jets seemed to have lost their will.
They were routed, 29-14, by the Saints in one of their most dismal performances of the 1980's.


Ellen M. Gordon Wed To John Lynch on
LEAD: Ellen M. Gordon, an investigator for the New York City Board of Education, and John D. Lynch, a clerk for the United States Postal Service in Westbury, L.I., were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
John Gordon, a brother of the bride, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Independent Bankgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bankgroup (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,220,153
1,087,819
Per share
.61
.55
9mo net inc
3,701,835
2,825,165
Per share
1.86
1.42


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Sugar Shortfall Seen
LEAD: The amount of sugar available for export from some nations in the coming year will be reduced by strong local demand and bad weather conditions, delegates to the annual meeting of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean Sugar Exporters said last week.
The group said in a report that world sugar consumption for the year that began Sept.


Pulitzer Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulitzer Publishing (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
94,610,000
94,408,000
Net inc
3,214,000
3,132,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Shares outst
10,466,000
10,472,000
9mo rev
292,025,000
284,991,000
Net inc
13,181,000
11,991,000
Share earns
1.26
1.15
Shares outst
10,467,000
10,472,000


Chemfix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemfix Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,600,000
7,700,000
Net inc
224,000
233,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Yr rev
23,700,000
23,800,000
Net inc
274,000
b1,100,000
Share earns
.03
-


Actually, Prohibition Was a Success
LEAD: History has valuable lessons to teach policy makers but it reveals its lessons only grudgingly.


African Rebels' Living Encyclopedia: Walter Max Ulyate Sisulu
LEAD: When Walter Max Ulyate Sisulu emerged from his small stucco house in Soweto today after savoring his first few hours of freedom, he told journalists that he had never despaired that he would die in prison, where he spent the last 26 years.


Washington Times Gets Aggressive as Its Big Losses Continue
LEAD: The Washington Times is reaching for a new foothold in its uphill battle for readers in the nation's capital, with sensational articles like its front-page reports on Representative Barney Frank's relationship with a male prostitute.


Louisville Journal; Keepers of the Flame Stoke Freedom's Fire
LEAD: The descendants of the patriots who fought at places like Bunker Hill and Trenton and Yorktown met here this weekend to check on the fires of freedom.


Cornelia L. Van R. Strong, Volunteer, 86
LEAD: Cornelia L. Van R. Strong, a member of several American historical organizations, died on Thursday at the Francis E. Parker Memorial Home in New Brunswick, N.J.
She was 86 years old.


Gas Company Talks Continue Beyond Deadline for a Strike
LEAD: Negotiators for the Brooklyn Union Gas Company and 2,200 workers met last night and into this morning to try to resolve issues of pay and health benefits.


Dexleigh Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dexleigh Corp
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
84,133,000
89,366,000
Net inc
13,720,000
11,541,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Results are in Canadian dollars.


NBC's Streak Likely to Be Broken
LEAD: NBC's record tenure at the top of the the weekly television ratings will almost certainly end this week, as a resurgent ABC is helped by its World Series broadcasts.


American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,300,000
25,300,000
Net inc
4,500,000
6,000,000
Share earns
.18
.25
9mo rev
76,500,000
75,200,000
Net inc
14,600,000
18,100,000
Share earns
.60
.74


Cesare Zavattini, 87, Screenwriter Who Worked With De Sica, Dies
LEAD: Cesare Zavattini, an Italian screenwriter who collaborated on two Academy Award-winning films with the director Vittorio De Sica, died on Friday at the age of 87.


Michal Zymierski, 99, Postwar Polish Aide
LEAD: Michal Zymierski, a Polish independence fighter who became a member of the first postwar Communist Government, died today.
He was 99 years old and died in Warsaw, the state press agency said.


Campeau Aids Suppliers With Letters of Credit
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation, the owner of the Federated Department Stores and the Allied Stores, is preparing $80 million worth of letters of credit that would provide suppliers with additional security so that Campeau stores can obtain goods for the Christmas season.


Aero Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
10,003,634
10,113,249
Net inc
63,171
234,319
Share earns
.01
.03
6mo sales
19,323,962
20,195,321
Net inc
116,583
537,015
Share earns
.01
.07


Ex-First Lady Assails Regan In New Book
LEAD: Nancy Reagan says the biggest mistake of her husband's Presidency was allowing Donald T. Regan and James A. Baker 3d to switch jobs in January 1985.


New Orleans Tries to Erase a Symbol
LEAD: For years, philosophical questions have been raised about the gray granite obelisk in the middle of this city's main shopping street.


Old Kent Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
21,881,000
18,076,000
Per share
.83
.69
9mo net inc
63,392,000
55,452,000
Per share
2.40
2.12
Year-ago figures were restated to reflect the acquisition of Unibancorp Inc.


Powerful Arms of Drug War Arousing Concern for Rights
LEAD: From bulldozers that knock down suspected crack houses in Los Angeles to proposed blacklists of drug dealers in Baltimore, the nation's war on drugs is employing an imaginative array of new weapons that have stirred debate about civil rights.


Sports World Specials:BASEBALL; The Measure of a Myth
LEAD: It is doubtful that many myths have been debunked as often or as conviningly as the whopper about Abner Doubleday inventing the game of baseball in Elihu Phinney's pasture in Cooperstown, N.Y., in 1839. (Among other things, aside from the fact that Doubleday's own diaries make no mention of baseball, there is considerable evidence, first developed by the sports historian, Robert W.


Williams (A.L.) Corp(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams (A.L.) Corp(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
199,588,000
93,376,000
Net inc
38,656,000
b12,781,000
Share earns
.57
.29
9mo rev
580,982,000
271,154,000
Net inc
114,489,000
b66,219,000
Share earns
1.69
1.55
Shares outst
67,580,000
42,858,000


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,475,180
1,255,100
Per share
.38
.34
Shares outst
3,850,825
3,639,758
9mo net inc
4,481,161
2,753,626
Per share
1.17
.73
Shares outst
3,819,699
3,780,907


Wall Street Trader Stays Cool During a Weekend of Anxiety
LEAD: William Silver, a quick-witted trader on the American Stock Exchange, is reasonably confident that the performance of the financial markets today will not match the collapse of Monday, Oct. 19, 1987.


Century Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
974,000
1,010,000
Per share
.17
.18
9mo net inc
2,870,000
2,629,000
Per share
.50
.46


Frisch's Restaurants Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frisch's Restaurants Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 17
1989
1988
Revenue
45,151,444
46,547,327
Net inc
865,517
b1,467,243
Share earns
.17
.28
b-Included a credit of $951,064, or 18 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Bush's Ties to Congress Show Strain
LEAD: As relations between the White House and Congress grow more combative, President Bush's personal ties to Capitol Hill show signs of strain, and complaints about the Administration's handling of Congress are growing louder, even from members of his own party.


Maxtor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxtor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Revenue
117,101,000
81,456,000
Net inc
4,776,000
1,069,000
Share earns
.23
.05
Shares outst
20,842,000
19,819,000
6mo rev
225,552,000
161,825,000
Net inc
6,960,000
3,055,000
Share earns
.34
.15
Shares outst
20,711,000
20,066,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Lintas Wins Brut
LEAD: Lintas New York benefited last week from its relationship with Chesebrough-Pond's, winning the advertising account for Faberge's Brut Cologne and Aftershave and Brut 33 Fragrance and Men's Toiletries.
The agency would not disclose the budget of the account; it is the second piece of business Lintas has received from Faberge since Chesebrough-Pond's acquired the company last August.


Bank South Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank South Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
12,240,000
11,081,000
Per share
.36
.33
9mo net inc
33,455,000
30,751,000
Per share
.99
.91


Pinnacle Financial Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Financial Services Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
871,000
724,000
Per share
1.14
.95
Shares outst
764,536
301,288
9mo net inc
2,414,000
1,819,000
Per share
3.16
2.38
Shares outst
764,536
301,288


Sports World Specials: HOCKEY; One Growing Presence
LEAD: Considering that girls have been playing ice hockey about as long as boys have, often teaching the game to their younger brothers on the local pond while learning it from their older ones, it is somewhat surprising that women's hockey has only recently begun to emerge as a full-fledged sport.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.  Monday
Inventory/Sales ... Aug.  Tuesday
Industrial Production ... Sept.
Capacity Utilization ... Sept.
Merchandise Trade ... Aug.  Wednesday
Housing Starts ... Sept.  Thursday
Consumer Prices ...


As Lebanon Talks Falter, Frustration of Saudi Hosts Grows
LEAD: Saudi Arabia expressed frustration today over the Lebanese peace talks being held here.
Its semi-official press said Lebanese politicians appear more interested in preserving their sectarian fiefdoms than in settling the conflict that has torn their country since 1975.


Primerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,470,000,000
244,900,000
Net inc
78,300,000
33,100,000
Share earns
.80
.74
Shares outst
98,800,000
45,900,000
9mo rev
4,110,100,000
712,200,000
Net inc
193,100,000
94,300,000
Share earns
1.98
2.11
Shares outst
99,100,000
45,900,000


'Murphy Brown' Stays on Top of the News
LEAD: The writer was a relative newcomer to situation comedy, a high-stakes, high-pressure world that eats talented writers for breakfast and often spits them out by noon.
The beautiful film actress was nobody's idea of the star of a half-hour series.


The 7 Political Prisoners Set Free With Sisulu
LEAD:  Ahmed Kathrada


Whatever Happened to Tiny, Tasty Fruit?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Area Divided Against Itself Is Having Fun at the Series
LEAD: Mike and Sheila Verna, who have season tickets for both the Oakland Athletics and the San Francisco Giants, still cannot decide which team they want to win the World Series.


Books of The Times; Larry McMurtry Tries Crowding
LEAD:  Some Can Whistle  By Larry McMurtry  348 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Evans &amp; Sutherland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans &amp; Sutherland (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
37,005,000
31,546,000
Net inc
2,519,000
c2,701,000
Share earns
.29
-
9mo sales
96,611,000
88,348,000
Net inc
b5,656,000
c331,000
Share earns
.66
-


Rangers Defeat Penguins, 4-2
LEAD: With no teammates around and thus no pass to consider, Tomas Sandstrom had no option but to shoot.
And Wendell Young, the Pittsburgh goalie, was unable to stop the puck.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC and FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE- 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE and BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Help for the Parents Of Soccer Aspirants
LEAD: By all reckonings, soccer is a youth-participation giant.
In 1988, the Sports Industry Council of America says, 7.1 million children 12 years old or under played soccer, ranking it second in popularity to basketball, which it trailed by a mere 500,000 children.


Marcos Is Buried 5,000 Miles Away From Home
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former President of the Philippines who was ousted in 1986 and lived here in exile until his death on Sept. 28, was buried today in a flower-covered shed more than 5,000 miles from his homeland.


Southeast Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeast Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
30,378,000
4,610,000
Per share
.92
.11
Shares outst
32,427,000
29,758,000
9mo net inc
95,732,000
50,370,000
Per share
2.96
1.56
Shares outst
31,203,000
29,536,000


Oilers Rally To Beat Bears
LEAD: Lorenzo White's 12-yard touchdown run with 1 minute 46 seconds left, after Allen Pinkett had run for 60 yards, lifted the Houston Oilers to a 33-28 victory over the Chicago Bears today.


In Brooklyn, a Quiet Community Resists Racism


Professionals Watching the 'Junk Bond' Market
LEAD: Professional investors say they will be watching the ''junk bond'' market closely this morning.
If this $200 billion market of high-yield, high-risk securities continues to suffer sharp selloffs with poor trading liquidity, the stock market is likely to decline further, traders say.


Security Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
7,629,000
6,522,000
Per share
.66
.56
9mo net inc
20,648,000
17,458,000
Per share
1.76
1.53


Special House Election in Mississippi To Test G.O.P.'s Southern Strength
LEAD: For the last 16 years, Mississippi's Fifth Congressional District has been a bulwark of the Republican Party's Southern strength, as native conservatism and popular Presidential candidates have built a political force that has won offices down to the county level.


All American Television reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* All American Television
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,926,000
11,567,000
Net inc
b635,000
245,000
Share earns
.33
.13
b-Included a gain of $98,000, or 5 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Entire Town in Ohio Is Evacuated in Gas Leak
LEAD: All 6,500 residents of this city were evacuated late Saturday night when a frozen-pizza plant leaked deadly ammonia gas.
The authorities allowed them to return to their homes early today, but people with breathing problems were told to wait.


Abortion Debate Clouds Research on Fetal Tissue
LEAD: Over the objections of two Federal panels that say experiments with fetal tissue hold promise for treating diabetes and Parkinson's disease, the Bush Administration is planning to extend a 19-month-old ban on financing such research.


Council Leader Prepares to Take On No. 2 Role in Ruling New York City
LEAD: Peter F. Vallone is getting ready to become the second most powerful official in the government of New York City.


Classical Stations Do Their Best To Survive
LEAD: Only 41 of nearly 9,000 commercial radio stations in the United States play classical music, and when one of them - KFAC-FM in Los Angeles -was recently sold for $55 million, analysts of the radio industry predicted there would be one less.
Most classical music stations are profitable, they said, but not profitable enough for takeover artists.


Review/Opera; Domingo in Met 'Trittico'
LEAD: There were two major cast changes in the Metropolitan Opera's current run of ''Il Trittico,'' along with a number of minor ones.
Placido Domingo sang Luigi in the first of these three one-act operas, ''Il Tabarro,'' and Juan Pons played the title role in the last, ''Gianni Schicchi.''


INSIDE
LEAD:  An East German Novelty  Founded only a month ago, New Forum, East Germany's premier opposition group, provided a rallying cry in the streets before it had time to take shape as a movement.
Page A6.
Gretzky Is No. 1  Wayne Gretzky, the 28-year-old star of the Los Angeles Kings, broke Gordie Howe's N.H.L.


Aluminum Co of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,834,400,000
2,561,300,000
Net inc
219,000,000
226,300,000
Share earns
2.46
2.56
9mo sales
8,216,600,000
7,148,700,000
Net inc
780,200,000
642,700,000
Share earns
8.79
7.27


Loiborsoit Journal; The Proud Masai's Fate: Finally, to Be Fenced In?
LEAD: For the first time in his life, Mengoru Aladaru, a 31-year-old Masai tribesman accustomed to wandering the vast, brown and dusty expanses with his cattle, planted and harvested corn this year.


At the Book Fair, a Hot Story Is the Takeovers
LEAD: A prime topic of conversation at this year's Frankfurt Book Fair, publishing's biggest and most important annual event, is not authors and books, but mergers and acquisitions.


Jack Henry &amp; Associates reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jack Henry &amp; Associates
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,682,000
8,730,000
Net loss
b1,272,000
c1,059,000
Share earns
-
.29
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $970,000.
c-Net income  The company blamed the loss for fiscal 1989 on a contract dispute with Unisys Corp.


Autumn Jubilee Is a Bonanza for Browsers


Andrew Tyler, 71, Retired Judge; Cleared After Perjury Conviction
LEAD: Andrew R. Tyler, a longtime civic leader in Harlem and a retired Justice of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, died Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital after a lengthy illness.
He was 71 years old and lived in Yonkers.


Teen-Ager in Bensonhurst Case Says Threats Sent Her Into Hiding
LEAD: A Brooklyn teen-age girl whose friendships with black and Hispanic men apparently led to the racially motivated killing of a black youth in the Bensonhurst section has said that death threats have prompted her to go into hiding with a round-the-clock police guard.


Communications Transmision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Transmision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
99,600,000
112,400,000
Net loss
b11,400,000
1,900,000
b-Included $8.7 million, or 100 percent of the loss reported by its ALC Communications Corp. unit.


Learonal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
32,493,000
40,089,000
Net inc
1,195,000
1,274,000
Share earns
.29
.29
Shares outst
8,812,950
9,162,497
6mo sales
69,353,000
80,361,000
Net inc
5,221,000
5,203,000
Share earns
.59
.57
Shares outst
8,916,507
9,162,497


Review/Music; Brooklyn Hears Factory Sounds From Germany
LEAD: Pohl Musik brought a remarkable instrument to the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday night.
The Klangmaschine, invented for the group by Christof Schlager, looks like two ventilator tubes and a large electric fan hooked up to a podium-like control panel; its metallic innards produce enough buzzes, rasps, huffs, clanks, scrapes and siren noises to stand in for a factory.


Laura Preisser Weds Timothy Grozier
LEAD: At the chapel of Our Lady of Good Counsel Academy in White Plains, Laura K. Preisser, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas J. McGoldrick of Eastchester, N.Y., and the late Walter J. Preisser, was married yesterday to Timothy L. Grozier, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Grozier of Sedona, Ariz.
The Rev.
Vincent G.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
319,000
3,140,000
Per share
.04
.39
9mo net inc
6,545,000
9,528,000
Per share
.82
1.19
Gateway made a special $3 million provision for loan loss reserves in its latest third quarter for Gateway Bank, in addition to the $350,000 previously planned.





Intel Reports Profit Drop
LEAD: The Intel Corporation, a semiconductor maker, said Friday that its third-quarter profit fell to about half of the amount of a year ago, depressed by a one-time charge related to the end of a joint venture.


Critic's Notebook; Doors of Art Opening (Ignore the Squeaks)
LEAD: With the opening of the 20th Sao Paulo Bienal on Saturday, doors have opened that have previously been closed.
Martin Puryear is the first black artist to represent the United States at a major international art exhibition.
His nine abstract sculptures here form one of the handsomest installations in a show in which the United States shares the spotlight with Latin America and Europe.


GV Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GV Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
440,781
554,640
Net loss
1,293,372
920,418
Shares outst
5,134,279
3,999,801
9mo rev
2,871,323
2,332,036
Net loss
2,736,373
2,726,806
Shares outst
4,842,638
3,982,078


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Untenable is a dirtier word than slaughtered.
Slaughtered means you have more innings left to play.
Untenable means the game is over.''  -William Silver, a trader on the American Stock Exchange.  [ A1:4. ]


Airman Linked to Soviet Spies
LEAD: The American military authorities in West Berlin said they questioned a United States airman today after he was seen with two Soviet military officers who were trying to obtain military secrets from him.
American officials in West Berlin said the two Soviet officers, both majors, were detained and questioned on Saturday night before being handed over to Soviet officials in East Berlin.


Vitro to Buy Anchor for $820 Million
LEAD: Vitro S.A. and the Anchor Glass Container Corporation announced yesterday that they had signed an agreement for Vitro to acquire Anchor in a deal valued at about $820 million.
The agreement ends a bitter two-month struggle by Anchor to remain independent.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
25,456,000
b21,913,000
Per share
1.15
1.02
9mo net inc
71,849,000
61,282,000
Per share
3.26
2.88
b-Included a net gain of $1.2 million, or 6 cents a share, from the sale of residual positions in equipment leases to a single lessee.


Marilyn Church,Artist, Is Married
LEAD: Marilyn B. Church, the courtroom artist for WABC-TV in New York, was married yesterday to Alan S. Applebaum, president of the Apple Food Sales Company, importers in Leonia, N.J.
Acting Justice Leonard N. Cohen of State Supreme Court officiated at the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York.


Cost of Halting TV Signal Thieves
LEAD: The satellite television industry, which for years has complained about the number of Americans watching without paying, says it has finally found a way to stop them.


First Commerce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commerce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,998,000
6,006,000
Per share
.57
.49
9mo net inc
20,551,000
17,200,000
Per share
1.68
1.39


Hurricane Batters Galveston, Tex., Leaving 2 Dead
LEAD: Hurricane Jerry roared into the Texas coast tonight, killing at least two people as it tore down power lines, trees, balconies and signs and spun off tornadoes that inflicted scattered damage.
It quickly lost its punch over land and was downgraded to a tropical storm.


Poe &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poe &amp; Associates
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,179,000
8,690,000
Net inc
1,553,000
938,000
Share earns
.40
.25
9mo rev
30,361,000
27,525,000
Net inc
3,574,000
3,725,000
Share earns
.93
1.00


Brajdas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brajdas Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
15,904,600
16,887,665
Net loss
372,130
b695,585
Share earns
-
.23
Shares outst
2,883,370
2,999,139
6mo sales
31,546,873
33,165,492
Net loss
366,402
b1,687,326
Share earns
-
.57
Shares outst
2,907,483
2,954,716


New U.S. Prosecutor Ushers In a Low-Key Style
LEAD: Otto G. Obermaier, who is to be sworn in as the new United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York at 4 P.M. today, has something to say: ''I have no message to deliver and I will have no message to deliver.
The prosecutor's office speaks in the courtroom.''


West Mass Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Mass Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
204,000
253,000
Per share
.16
.19
9mo net inc
527,000
653,000
Per share
.41
.49


Chicago School Choice


CUNY Science Courses Teetering on 'Disaster'
LEAD: A City University of New York task force has concluded that the university's programs in science, engineering, technology and mathematics are ''teetering on a brink of disaster'' and require ''forceful and dramatic'' action to insure their survival.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  Released South African prisoners called for the release of Nelson Mandela.
They also said they would continue to work for the banned African National Congress.
A1


Quick Effect of Budget Cuts Is Unlikely
LEAD: Without a political miracle before 11:59 P.M. on Monday, President Bush will sign an order triggering $16.2 billion in automatic spending cuts across an array of domestic and military programs.


Compaq's Dramatic 'Notebooks'
LEAD: In a development that will make small ''notebook'' computers that weigh four to seven pounds comparable in performance to many desktop machines, the Compaq Computer Corporation plans to introduce on Monday two laptop computers.


Critcare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Critcare Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,473,871
2,966,364
Net loss
b169,151
c8,732
Shares outst
5,822,235
6,250,328
b-After a non-cash pretax charge of $178,650 related to the company's investment in the rehabilitation of a historic structure in Milwaukee.


Panthers Win Pulling Away
LEAD: The Navy-Pitt series, so prominent a part of Eastern football for so long, came to an end on Saturday and it was a sour termination.


2 Killed in Jet Fighter Crash
LEAD: A military jet on a training mission crashed today at Carswell Air Force Base here, killing the two people on board, a base spokesman said.
The F-16 fighter had flown from Dallas Naval Air Station to Carswell, said the spokesman, First Lieut.
Stephen Norton.
He said there was ammunition aboard but did not elaborate.


Desoto Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desoto Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
103,259,000
99,848,000
Net loss
10,169,000
2,602,000
Shares outst
4,053,000
4,000,000
9mo rev
323,422,000
322,028,000
Net loss
8,560,000
b4,801,000
Share earns
-
1.20
Shares outst
4,041,000
3,993,000


Ancient Eastern Rituals
LEAD: Shomyo, the ritual chanting of the Buddhist sutras, and goma, a Tantric Buddhist fire ritual that originated more than 3,000 years ago in India, were performed at the Asia Society (725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street) on Friday evening by 10 Japanese priests of the Tendai sect.
In addition to choral chanting, the music in the majestic 70-minute ceremony, which has never before been seen on tour in the United


Sports of The Times; British View of 'Humm-Baby!'
LEAD: TWO gentlemen happened to drop down from Mars, that is, London - about the same thing in this case - just as the World Series was getting rolling here in the Bay Area.


Craig Concedes Giants Are 'Struggling'
LEAD: Roger Craig held an unusual clubhouse meeting of his San Francisco Giants moments after they had lost their second successive game in the 86th World Series and told them: ''Keep your heads up.
They've got to win two games, we've got to win four.''


Century Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,879,000
43,603,000
Net loss
14,409,000
2,198,000
Share outst
65,226,000
65,151,000


Alar Scare Unfounded, Apple Growers Say
LEAD: Fears that New York's 1989 apple crop would take a rotten turn without the help of Alar, a growth-promoting chemical, were largely unfounded, growers and agricultural officials say.


Sogo Weighs Buying Saks
LEAD: The Sogo Company, a Japanese department store concern, is considering acquiring the New York-based retail chain Saks Fifth Avenue, a Sogo spokesman said last week.


U.S. Is Urged to Rejoin Unesco if It Adopts Changes
LEAD: A panel of distinguished Americans has recommended that the United States rejoin the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization if that body adopts changes it is now considering.
The changes were proposed by its new Director General but are being resisted by third-world countries.


Nancy E. Gold Is Married to Dr. J. Kirk Fitzhugh
LEAD: The marriage of Nancy E. Gold, a lawyer, and Dr.
J.
Kirk Fitzhugh, a biologist, took place yesterday in New York at the Top of the Tower lounge in the Beekman Tower hotel.
Justice Francis X. Egitto of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated.
The bride is the daughter of Alice A. Gold of Bayside, Queens.


Bond Activity Hinges On Stocks
LEAD: Much as it was two years ago, near-term developments in the credit markets are completely dependent on how stock market investors react this week to Friday's stunning 190.58 drop in the Dow Jones industrial average.


Publishing
LEAD: SINCE shortly after the Frankfurt Book Fair began in 1949, it has been the most important annual gathering for the book publishing world.
This year's fair, which ends today, attracted many American publishers, but their reasons for attending are much different from what they were only a decade ago.


Fingers Are Crossed, Breaths Are Held
LEAD: Share prices began sliding in Japan and Europe earlier this month, then spread to the United States with a sharp drop that provoked memories of 1987.
News Analysis, page D1.


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,912,900
2,745,600
Per share
.33
.32
9mo net inc
8,341,600
7,427,500
Per share
.94
.87


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge is a difficult game of chance: you must operate with skill to take full advantage when fortune smiles.


Jean Coutu Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jean Coutu Group
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
106,580,000
94,398,000
Net inc
6,517,000
4,807,000
Share earns
.25
.18
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Rights and Wrongs of Blaming Japan
LEAD: Frustration with Japan in the United States and resentment of America in Japan are near the flash point.
Many Americans are upset about recent shifts in the global balance of economic power, shifts that seem to threaten American jobs and international influence.
Yet to put all the blame on Japanese behavior is to deflect attention from important domestic causes.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
15,899,000
15,199,000
Per share
.48
.46
9mo net inc
46,955,000
43,189,000
Per share
1.42
1.31


Washington at Work; Helms Keeps the Capital Pot Boiling
LEAD: As well-mannered as a church-going schoolboy, as full of homespun charm as a Chamber of Commerce president, Senator Jesse Helms is the kind of guy who fetches coffee for his aides and allows misguided tourists to use the special elevator reserved for senators.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
297,651,000
273,266,000
Net inc
b46,538,000
c96,594,000
Share earns
8.61
18.41
9mo sales
886,293,000
828,190,000
Net inc
b149,845,000
c205,298,000
Share earns
27.86
38.78


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,003,000
5,337,000
Per share
.60
.54
Shares outst
10,068,000
9,951,000
9mo net inc
16,871,000
14,962,000
Per share
1.68
1.50
Shares outst
10,055,000
9,952,000


In the Mud, on Imported Sod, Golf Is Introduced to Moscow
LEAD: They came from another world, pioneers armed with silvery sticks, and on a greensward at the foot of the Lenin Hills today they performed a ritual as alien as the pointy-headed spacelings reportedly sighted last week in the Russian provinces.
They played golf.
On nine fairways snuggled ingeniously amid the high-rise tenements and hastily carpeted with squares of imported sod, they introduced the sport of Scottish kings, American presidents and country-club capitalists.


National Community Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
12,200,000
11,100,000
Per share
1.17
1.07
9mo net inc
35,900,000
30,700,000
Per share
3.44
2.96


Chicago Picks Chief for New School Plan
LEAD: A new superintendent has been picked to run the school system here, the nation's third largest, just days after parents were elected to run their children's schools.


Aspen Air Deal Off
LEAD: Giant Group, the masonry company controlled by the investor Burt Sugarman, ended negotiations to buy Aspen Airways Inc., a regional airline based in Denver.
No reason was given for the collapse of the deal last week, but analysts speculated that Mr.
Sugarman might not have been able to obtain favorable financing terms.


Elliott Abrams Remains Reckless on Panama; Reagan Rejected Idea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan's Banks: A Caution Flag
LEAD: The growing presence of Japanese banks in the United States could invite a backlash, Gerald Corrigan, president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, warned last week.


Handicappers Gape At Tactile's Upset
LEAD: Belmont Park handicappers shook their heads in surprise when a 12-to-1 shot named Tactile beat a moderate group of 3-year-old fillies in the Gazelle Handicap at Belmont Park on Aug. 30.
Yesterday, their mouths dropped in amazement after Tactile beat the nation's top 3-year-old filly and four other top-notch older fillies to win the $283,500 Beldame Stakes at Belmont Park.


Franklin Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Electric (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,529,000
42,031,000
Net inc
b2,736,000
c3,165,000
Share earns
.88
.88
Shares outst
3,113,000
3,603,000
9mo sales
133,703,000
127,521,000
Net inc
b8,880,000
c9,173,000
Share earns
2.99
2.52
Shares outst
2,972,000
3,637,000


10,000 Visitors Tour the White House Rose Garden


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Jon Hyde has been appointed an executive vice president of J. Walter Thompson/U.S.A.


Campaign Matters; Republican Feud Splits a Party And the Vote
LEAD: It was a Republican dinner, but the state's leading Republican, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, seemed to be about as welcome as rain at a picnic.
And he seemed as eager to be there as a wet picnicker.


Iomega Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iomega Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
27,698,000
26,178,000
Net inc
3,029,000
1,868,000
Share earns
.18
.11
Shares outst
16,752,819
17,193,250
9mo sales
78,542,000
85,026,000
Net inc
6,301,000
7,597,000
Share earns
.37
.45
Shares outst
16,947,950
17,010,979


Don't Start Breathing Any Sighs of Relief About Asbestos
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vermont Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,032,000
2,013,000
Per share
.61
.62
Shares outst
3,452,225
2,954,401
9mo net inc
6,255,000
5,345,000
Per share
1.87
1.65


Investigators Begin Their Study of Fire Aboard a Delta Jet
LEAD: Federal inspectors arrived today to investigate a fire that gutted much of a parked Delta Airlines Boeing 727 and nearly severed its fuselage.


Still Uneasy After Beijing Turmoil
LEAD: When Communist authorities cracked down on protesters on June 4, the blood was shed 1,200 miles from here, in Beijing.
But the greatest financial aftershocks occurred in Hong Kong, sending many Chinese managers rushing to emigrate and leaving gaps in the middle and upper ranks of corporations.


Fernandez Meets Leader Of Principals
LEAD: In a park bench encounter, Joseph A. Fernandez, the incoming Schools Chancellor, met for the first time yesterday with Donald Singer, the head of New York City's principals union, in an effort to gain by persuasion rather than legislation the authority to transfer ineffectual principals.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Markets


The Tools a Writer Used for Building An Industrial Novel
LEAD: In his novel ''Sybil,'' Benjamin Disraeli wrote of a Britain that consisted of two nations ''as ignorant of each other's habits, thoughts and feelings as if they were inhabitants of different planets.'' He had in mind the rich and the poor of the Victorian era; but he might have been talking prophetically about the subtler splits of the 1980's.


As a Student of Hitting, Will Clark Is Phi Betamax Kappa
LEAD: BEFORE the recent National League playoff games, Will Clark studied videotapes of himself batting against the Cubs' pitchers.
Throughout the season, he had checked tapes of every other opposing team's pitchers.
Before the World Series opener Saturday night, the Giants' first baseman watched tapes that his parents and relatives in New Orleans had taken of him swinging against Dave Stewart of the Athletics during a two-game spring-training stop there earlier this year.


Time to Seek Reconciliation With China; Attacking Corruption
LEAD: To the Editor:


Walker Dazzling In Debut
LEAD: Herschel Walker was supposed to see only limited duty today in his first game as a Minnesota Viking.


Abortion Rebuff Chips At a Governor's Image
LEAD: In the early 1980's, when Gov.
Bob Martinez of Florida was still Mayor Martinez of Tampa, he was regarded as a man of action, the kind of public official who climbed on the tailgate of a city truck to tell striking sanitation workers to return to their jobs or lose them.


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Paul Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,149,000
5,683,000
Per share
.42
.48
9mo net inc
15,741,000
15,606,000
Per share
1.28
1.31


Robinson, Starting at Zero, Begins Trek With Spurs
LEAD: BASKETBALL fans in San Antonio have been waiting for David Robinson with festive anticipation, like children waiting for Santa Claus.


Trustco Bank Corp of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustco Bank Corp of N.Y.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,302,000
1,967,000
Per share
.77
.65
9mo net inc
6,956,000
5,699,000
Per share
2.32
1.91
Trustco said sales of securities in its investment portfolio produced realized net gains of $124,000 in the third quarter, and losses of $1.2 million for the 9 months of 1989.


Sports World Specials: GOLF; Highest-Priced Ball
LEAD: A claim that an anonymous Connecticut buyer paid an anonymous British seller $11,550 for a single golf ball would seem calculated to raise eyebrows.


Gretzky Gets Record
LEAD: He was called the Great Gretzky even before he played his first game in the National Hockey League.
Tonight, in just his 11th season and before the adoring fans of his former team, he became the greatest scorer in N.H.L. history.


UAL Group Continues to Seek Cash
LEAD: Executives and investment bankers at the UAL Corporation spent the weekend trying to complete the financing for a $6.75 billion buyout proposal, but it could not be determined whether they were making progress.


New Way to Go Over Hill or Dale
LEAD: rrAn amphibious hovercraft designed for use on land, water or ice is being recommended for fishing, camping, boating, and winter outings on snow or ice.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,991,000
9,102,000
Per share
.74
.75
9mo net inc
27,975,000
b27,727,000
Per share
2.31
2.29
b-After a credit of $1,282,000, or 10 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Plasma-Therm reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasma-Therm
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,122,924
5,405,811
Net inc
425,196
206,169
Share earns
.05
.03
9mo sales
18,846,256
15,439,139
Net inc
924,402
430,509
Share earns
.12
.05


First Chicago Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b23,300,000
c114,400,000
Per share
-
1.73
9mo net inc
b235,800,000
375,800,000
Per share
3.33
6.13
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $60.4 million from the sale of a business for the quarter and 9 months.


Intel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
771,438,000
784,939,000
Net inc
71,998,000
142,711,000
Share earns
.38
.78
Shares outst
189,233,000
183,607,000
9mo rev
2,231,858,000
2,147,429,000
Net inc
268,321,000
367,121,000
Share earns
1.43
2.05
Shares outst
187,662,000
178,997,000


Joel Burris Weds Pamela Esterman
LEAD: At the Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J., Pamela R. Esterman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Esterman of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Joel G. Burris, a son of Mrs.
Bernard Abrams of South Orange, N.J., and H. Barry Burris of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Harvey S. Goldman officiated.


Beijing Party Calls for Purge in Capital
LEAD: The Communist Party organization in the capital called today for a purge of its members, and suggested that the party would put more emphasis on ideological loyalty and less on expertise when making personnel decisions.


Review/Theater; Ruby Dee in 'Glass Menagerie' in Capital
LEAD: Imagine a television sitcom writer adapting a Tennessee Williams play for a network executive: ''We've got this mother, named Amanda, she's a terrible nag; she drives her children crazy.
The son, Tom, he's a stand-in for a henpecked husband; he's constantly rolling his eyes because Amanda won't get off his back.


Connecticut Campus Reports Bias Incidents
LEAD: Seven incidents of harassment aimed at Jews, Asians, blacks and homosexuals at the University of Connecticut have been reported to campus police since school began 40 days ago, school officials say.
University police and administrators say the number of reports represents an increase over past years.


Tandem Offers New Computer
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. will introduce a series of computers Monday that it said would provide performance comparable with the International Business Machines Corporation's largest machines at less than half the cost.


Elizabeth Graham, Graduate Student, Is Married to Adam Marc Lindemann
LEAD: Elizabeth Ashley Graham, a daughter of Robert C. Graham Jr. of Stamford, Conn., and the late Christine D. Graham of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Stamford to Adam Marc Lindemann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Lindemann of Greenwich.
Helen Baum, a justice of the peace in Stamford, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's great-uncle and great-aunt Mr.


Delchamps Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delchamps Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
234,703,000
221,834,000
Net inc
2,963,000
2,772,000
Share earns
.42
.40


Athletics Praise Duncan
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics drew more attention to their pitching coach, Dave Duncan, after their 5-1 victory tonight in the second game of the World Series.


Kentucky Hails the Pitino Era
LEAD: By 11:59 Saturday evening, the collective frustration that had been building since last spring was about to explode in Memorial Coliseum, where 10,000 University of Kentucky fans had gathered to usher in a new college basketball season.


Papal Trip's Last Stop: An Island Gem
LEAD: Normally, papal trips to third world countries are journeys among strongmen and marches through gut-wrenching poverty.
So it was a decided change for Pope John Paul II this weekend when he brought his ministry to this palm-flecked island nation.


Volunteer Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volunteer Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
562,000
774,000
Per share
.26
.35
9mo net inc
1,625,000
2,198,000
Per share
.76
1.00


Butler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
164,397,000
179,579,000
Net inc
3,664,000
5,817,000
Share earns
.80
1.29
9mo sales
437,008,000
472,536,000
Net inc
9,016,000
11,452,000
Share earns
1.98
2.54


Dallas Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dallas Semiconductor (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
23,176,000
15,511,000
Net inc
3,252,000
b2,992,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
25,157,000
24,686,000
9mo sales
60,669,000
41,414,000
Net inc
8,142,000
b7,672,000
Share earns
.33
.31
Shares outst
24,986,000
24,685,000


Advanced Medical Products Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Medical Products Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,250,000
4,277,000
Net inc
b239,000
c796,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax benefit of $98,000.
c-Net loss  Share earnings reflect a reverse stock split.


FREED PRISONERS CALL ON PRETORIA TO LET MANDELA GO
LEAD: Hours after eight of South Africa's most prominent political prisoners returned home from years in confinement, seven of them called today for the release of Nelson Mandela and said they would continue to work for the banned African National Congress.


Storms Damage New York Towns
LEAD: Tall trees came down and grounded airplanes went up as a series of vigorous thunderstorms whirled through the western half of upstate New York this weekend in a rare display of fall fury.
Many towns were making repairs today.


Hong Kong Builds for the Future: Big Airport Project Is Under Way
LEAD: Everyone knew the project would be impressive, but when the Government last week announced plans to develop a huge new airport and container shipping port served by a whole new town and linked by a high-speed rail system, a six-lane highway and a new bridge and tunnel, the pure scope of the project was stunning.


Diligent Enemy of Apartheid
LEAD: Walter Sisulu said he never despaired in prison, convinced that ''sooner or later they would have to cave in.'' Man in the News, page A6.


Question Box
LEAD:  A Series a Decade  Q, Counting a sports decade as the 10-year span from the zero year to the ninth one, like 1930-39, which major league teams have appeared in the World Series in each decade of the 20th century?
A.
None, because no team has won a pennant in each such decade.
In fact no team has managed to get into the World Series in more than seven of the nine decades since Series play began in 1903.


Dover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
515,292,000
493,798,000
Net inc
33,167,000
33,113,000
Share earns
.53
.51
9mo sales
1,579,541,000
1,452,456,000
Net inc
107,388,000
108,452,000
Share earns
1.69
1.65
Shares outst
63,521,000
65,856,000


Outdoors: Stalking A Tasty, Elusive Tree-Loving Prey
LEAD: ALTHOUGH a long-anticipated woodcock hunt turned into something else, I was not distressed.
The would-be woodcock venture took shape when Bud Leavitt of Bangor, Me., asked me if I would make a few remarks at a fund-raising dinner in his city for a salmon-conservation group that is opposing a hydroelectric dam on the Penobscot


Yugoslav Inflation Aim
LEAD: Yugoslavia's Government said Thursday that it wants to reduce annual inflation of almost 1,200 percent by lowering interest rates and defending the value of its currency, the dinar.


After Having Fought a War, Cadet Learns to Be a Soldier
LEAD: The only warning was a loud swish.
Yama Zikria remembers hitting the ground.
The mortar's explosion rained dirt and rocks on him.
Bullets slammed the wall behind his head.


The Roots Of a Selloff
LEAD: The October slide in stock prices began in Japan and Europe, touched off by rising interest rates, and then spread to the United States with a sharp, startling one-day drop that provoked memories of 1987.


Congress Should Listen As Well as Talk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prince of Perks
LEAD: 'Twas a famous victory for the taxpayers - or so it seemed.


Lindberg Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,375,442
19,805,000
Net inc
291,350
614,628
Share earns
.06
.13
9mo sales
60,245,111
62,073,010
Net inc
2,210,226
2,872,731
Share earns
.47
.61


D'Amato Says Ex-H.U.D. Aide Violated a Trust
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato yesterday condemned the former administrator of the New York office of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development for using Mr.
D'Amato's name in lobbying for Federal financing for projects in New York and Puerto Rico.


U.S. Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
10,459,000
10,327,000
Per share
1.05
1.02
9mo net inc
26,338,000
24,970,000
Per share
2.62
2.44


SOVIETS REDUCING ARMS FOR MANAGUA
LEAD: After a decade as the largest supplier of weapons for the Sandinista army, the Soviet Union now appears committed to reducing its military aid to Nicaragua in order to strengthen its relations with Washington, diplomats here say.


Reisterstown Fedl Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reisterstown Fedl Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,228,000
898,000
Per share
1.01
.75
Year net inc
4,493,000
3,232,000
Per share
3.72
2.74


L.J. Hooker Gets Offer For Its U.S. Real Estate
LEAD: A group of British and American investors said yesterday that it had offered $409 million in cash for all the American real estate operations of the L. J. Hooker Corporation.


Kerkhoff Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerkhoff Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,023,000
6,757,000
Net inc
59,000
923,000
Share earns
.02
.32
Shares outst
3,117,000
2,890,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mercantile Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
909,000
789,000
Per share
.34
.34
Shares outst
2,643,729
2,340,944
9mo net inc
2,634,000
1,806,000
Per share
1.00
.77
Shares outst
2,639,549
2,340,780


Market Place; 2 Shifts Since '87, But Just One Helps
LEAD: THE one-time institutional fad of ''portfolio insurance,'' much in evidence when the stock market collapsed two years ago, is almost forgotten.
And that factor could help to stem the stock market's slide.


Abortion Rights Urged At San Francisco Rally
LEAD: Tens of thousands of supporters of abortion rights, buoyed by recent political victories, marched in San Francisco yesterday in the largest demonstration on the abortion issue in California this year.
In New Jersey, a smaller demonstration in favor of the right to choose abortion was held in Trenton.


East German Movement Overtaken by Followers
LEAD: It is a sign of the novelty of resistance in East Germany that the premier opposition grouping, founded only a month ago, provided a rallying cry in the streets even before it had time to become a movement.


Giants Beat Redskins
LEAD: Bill Parcells of the Giants has a reputation as a conservative football coach.
Today, the conservative almost became a radical.


How It Happened; Bottom of Lineup Sparks A's
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants encountered fowl play in the fourth inning tonight, but it was two balls that went fair in the same inning that battered them into a 2-0 deficit in the World Series.


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data Processing (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
403,357,000
396,137,000
Net inc
37,060,000
34,440,000
Share earns
.51
.45
Shares outst
72,772,000
76,362,000


Elderly Take Fear of Eviction From Home to Appeals Court
LEAD: Like many of the 520 elderly residents of the Cobble Hill Nursing Home in Brooklyn, Catherine Rizzuto fears she may soon have to find another place to live.


Time to Seek Reconciliation With China
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,015,994
594,245
Net inc
403,987
b228,995
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
5,089,747
1,009,243
Net inc
752,755
b868,017
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
21,654,000
19,733,000
Per share
.98
.91
9mo net inc
61,806,000
55,995,000
Per share
2.80
2.56


U.S. Debates Israel Buying I.B.M. Military Computer
LEAD: The United States Government is considering a proposal by the International Business Machines Corporation to sell a powerful computer to Israel for military use, several people in the Administration say.
The sale would be the first of its kind to a country other than a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Y.&amp;R. Pleads Not Guilty
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court in Hartford on Friday to charges that it bribed Jamaican Government officials to obtain the country's tourism advertising account in 1981.


Japan to Seek U.S. Imports
LEAD: Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry is planning measures to increase imports from the United States, starting April 1, a ministry official said last week.


Reviews/Music; Orpheus's Tasks, From Easy to Not So Easy
LEAD: When some freelance musicians formed Orpheus in 1972, their central belief was that they could perform the chamber-orchestra literature without a conductor.
In 17th- and 18th-century works, and in some light Romantic scores, that can be easy enough, provided the players keep an eye on the concertmaster (and the concertmaster is good with cues).


Tokyo Stocks Regain Some of Early Losses
LEAD: In the first international response to the steep stock market tumble in New York on Friday, prices fell sharply in light trading today at the opening of trading here, but by the end of the morning session they recouped about a third of their initial losses.


49ers' Surge Keeps Cowboys Losers
LEAD: Not even Herschel Walker could have saved the Dallas Cowboys from a loss today to the National Football League's ultimate road warriors, the San Francisco 49ers.


A's Roar For 2-0 Lead As Bay Foes Go Quietly
LEAD: Two nights have passed, and there seems little left to the 86th World Series but the formalities of the champagne and the toasting.
It is not over yet, not by any measure, but in two games, the Oakland Athletics have made one thing clear: Their biggest battle is likely to be with their own overconfidence.


Review/Television; The Networks vs. Cable: A Chance Juxtaposition
LEAD: Tonight at 9 on NBC, the made-for-television movie is ''Roxanne: The Prize Pulitzer.'' Tonight at 8, 10 and 12 on cable's TNT (Turner Network Television), the made-for-television movie is ''Cold Sassy Tree.'' The chance juxtaposition illustrates dramatically why the networks, chasing questionable formats, may continue to lose audiences to cable.


Convicted in New York, Colombian Is Arrested
LEAD: The authorities have captured a man convicted in New York five years ago of drug trafficking, news reports said today.


The Editorial Notebook; Panama 'Rashomon'
LEAD: Victory finds a hundred fathers but defeat is an orphan, John F. Kennedy reminded us after the failed effort to oust Fidel Castro in 1961 at the Bay of Pigs.
Mr.
Kennedy assumed the mantle of orphan and took the responsibility for the disaster.
But when the President hides, Washington simply starts churning out paternity suits.


Teco Energy Co reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy Co (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,056,400,000
1,031,500,000
Net inc
b124,200,000
116,100,000
Share earns
2.19
2.05
b-Included a writeoff of assets by a coal mining subsidiary of about $6.3 million.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
38,552,000
31,196,000
Per share
.78
.64
Shares outst
49,530,000
49,252,000
9mo net inc
112,167,000
88,974,000
Per share
2.27
1.81
Shares outst
49,460,000
49,213,000


Qaddafi and Mubarak Seek to Heal Rift
LEAD: Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi drove across 120 miles of desert from Libya to meet President Hosni Mubarak today on his first visit to Egypt in 16 years.
He sought to end a longstanding feud with Cairo that ranks among the longest in the Arab world.


Bear Stearns Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bear Stearns Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
580,439,000
478,920,000
Net inc
22,062,000
20,513,000
Share earns
.23
.20
Shares outst
91,714,697
93,263,440


Marcos, Even in Death, Remains a Force in Philippine Politics
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ADT Ltd., said that Laidlaw Transportation Ltd., Burlington, Ontario, Canada, a transportation and waste management company, now holds 253.1 million ADT common shares, representing 29.4 percent of the issued common shares.


In East Berlin, Satire Conquers Fear
LEAD: By the late hours of this autumn Sunday, the nondescript suburb of Rummelsburg had taken on the air of a rock and folk festival.
That proved only part of it.


Tokyo Closes Higher, But Traders Still Wary
LEAD: Taking their cue from Monday's advance in New York, stock prices here moved up strongly today, recovering much of their losses from the previous session.


Great Bay Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,091,000
914,000
Per share
.35
.27
Shares outst
3,160,547
3,441,433


Mercury Finance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercury Finance (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,600,000
3,600,000
Per share
.35
.28
9mo net inc
12,500,000
9,400,000
Per share
.97
.73


Brokerages To Clients: Stay Calm
LEAD: Major brokerages as well as smaller money-management firms did their best yesterday to reassure their clients that the stock market would weather the current storm on Wall Street.


MARKET RECOVERS HALF OF ITS LOSSES, LED BY BLUE CHIPS
LEAD: The stock market overcame a shaky opening yesterday and roared back on heavy volume to regain about half the losses recorded in the heavy selling late Friday.


BMB Compuscience reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMB Compuscience
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
500,862
536,212
Net inc
b100,044
b81,878
Share earns
.04
.03
b-Included tax credits of $23,010, or 1 cent a share, for the latest first quarter and $30,000, or 1 cent a share, for the year-earlier period.


NCR Corp N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,390,647,000
1,407,386,000
Net inc
93,139,000
103,129,000
Share earns
1.23
1.26
Shares outst
75,773,000
82,117,000
9mo rev
4,168,201,000
4,185,742,000
Net inc
264,625,000
289,701,000
Share earns
3.40
3.49
Shares outst
77,845,000
83,078,000


Nissan Head For U.S. Units
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company of Japan today named Yoshikazu Hanawa chairman of its two main American subsidiaries, the sales and marketing arm and the manufacturing unit.


After 22 Years, Manhattan-Hoboken Ferry Service Is Back


Washington at Work; Beset by Critics Hungry for Dynamic Leader, Dogged Mitchell Lashes Back
LEAD: George J. Mitchell was billed as a made-for-television Senate majority leader, a smooth spokesman for a party shut out of the White House and dependent on Congress for its chance at prime time.


USBancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USBancorp Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,706,000
564,000
Per share
.56
.11
9mo net inc
4,802,000
1,506,000
Per share
1.55
.25


Arnold Jacobsen, Surgeon, 91
LEAD: Arnold Jacobsen, the retired head surgeon for the Workmen's Benefit Fund of the U.S.A.
Inc. in Manhattan, died Saturday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 91 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.


For Traders, an Early Start to a Hectic Day
LEAD: As the world watched to see whether Wall Street would replay the stock market debacle of October 1987, brokers and traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange overcame their nervousness yesterday in trading that pushed the Dow Jones industrial average nearly 90 points higher.


General Public Utilities Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Public Utilities Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
773,259,000
781,729,000
Net inc
105,133,000
85,155,000
Share earns
1.87
1.45
9mo rev
2,204,937,000
2,161,169,000
Net inc
240,633,000
248,774,000
Share earns
4.24
4.13
Shares outst
56,721,000
60,227,000


Washington Water Power reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Water Power (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
567,493,000
549,313,000
Net inc
72,905,000
76,029,000
Share earns
2.74
2.69
Shares outst
22,316,000
22,274,000


Merrill Lynch Net Falls 37.5%, While 3 Rivals Fare Better
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, which operates the nation's largest brokerage and investment firm, yesterday reported a 37.5 percent decline in profits for the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with the third quarter of last year.


Treasury Prices Decline Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply in heavy trading yesterday, as dealers unloaded issues when the stock market began to recover.


Bridge
LEAD: A practical approach to trading policy recommends ''taking the cash and letting the credit go.'' But there are times at the bridge table when one can earn considerable credit for working out how to take the cash.


Bush Signs Order Triggering Outlay Cuts as Deficit Deadline Passes By SUSAN F. RASKY
LEAD: President Bush signed an order today triggering $16.1 billion in automatic spending cuts from an array of domestic and military programs because Congress failed to meet a deadline for adopting its own deficit reduction plan.


When in Rome, Montana
LEAD: On a visit to Rome last week, a New York woman felt reassured to realize that her jacket was made in Italy, and so were her slacks, shoes and purse.
She thought she'd look as though she belonged.
What she saw as she walked outside was a tide of blue denim.
The Via dei Condotti looked like an American campus, awash in jeans, jean jackets and institutional T-shirts and sweatshirts, many bearing bold legends in


Worst Fear For Funds Is Averted
LEAD: For the mutual fund industry, the much-feared crush of redemptions did not materialize yesterday.


Guber-Peters Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guber-Peters Entertainment (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,908,000
4,578,000
Net inc
b5,824,000
c6,899,000
Share earns
.50
-
Shares outst
11,584,000
11,076,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $2,146,000, or 16 cents a share, from the repurchase at a discount of $9,937,000 principal amount of the company's outstanding convertible debentures.


Amid Slowdown, L.I. Weighs Cost Of Boom-Time Pledges
LEAD: As its economy slows and its property taxes soar, Long Island is engaged in a wrenching examination of many of the region's public commitments of the last decade, like environmental protectionism.


Magazines Plot Invasion Of Salons
LEAD: EVER vigilant in the search for new magazine markets to conquer, two publishers have opened a battle for supremacy in another venue uncrowded by specialty journals: beauty parlors.


Torchmark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
54,922,000
47,280,000
Per share
1.02
.82
9mo net inc
159,999,000
142,677,000
Per share
2.94
2.45


Ivory Trade Is Banned To Save the Elephant
LEAD: The African elephant was classified as an endangered species today in an effort to halt poaching by ivory hunters, who have drastically reduced its numbers.


GZA Geoenvironmental Techologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GZA Geoenvironmental Techologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,181,000
7,023,000
Net inc
692,000
592,000
Share earns
.24
.23
Shares outst
2,872,000
2,554,000
6mo rev
15,491,000
13,475,000
Net inc
996,000
872,000
Share earns
.37
.34
Shares outst
2,709,000
2,541,000


TRW Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRW Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,792,000,000
1,654,000,000
Net inc
60,000,000
68,000,000
Share earns
1.00
1.12
9mo sales
5,421,000,000
5,270,000,000
Net inc
199,000,000
205,000,000
Share earns
3.27
3.38


Baby's Grieving Parents Sue to Keep Respirator On
LEAD: Deep in their hearts Carlotta and Luis Alvarado know that their new baby will never open his eyes or leave his incubator at Elmhurst General Hospital.
Even if his respirator is kept on, they know that his heart will probably stop pumping.


2 Florida Players Made Ineligible
LEAD: Kyle Morris, the University of Florida quarterback, and Shane Matthews, his backup, have been declared ineligible for the rest of the season for betting on football games, the university said today.


Bats Found to Adjust Their Squeaks for Motion
LEAD: IT has long been known that bats find their prey by listening for echoes from their high frequency squeaks.
Now scientists have found that bats alter the frequency of the squeaks they emit so that the echoes return at the frequency to which the bats are most sensitive.


DEALS
LEAD:  FOOTBALL  DALLAS (NFC) - Released Ron Burton, linebacker.
Announced Michael Irvin, wide receiver, will undergo knee surgery and miss the remainder of the season.
DENVER (AFC) - Appointed Mike Shanahan quarterback coach.
GREEN BAY (NFC) - Announced Shawn Patterson, defensive end, will undergo knee surgery and miss the remainder of the season.


Much Fuss, Over What?; For Those Confused, A Few Explanations
LEAD: Has a stock market that falls 190 points one day and rises 88 the next chance it gets simply lost its head?


Talking Business with Callahan of Greiner Engineering; Proposals to Fix Public Works
LEAD: A recent spate of water-main breaks in New York City has provided another sign of the widespread deterioration of the nation's infrastructure, including roads, bridges and airports.
Postponing maintenance of the country's public works has produced problems that some experts believe could cost $3.3 trillion to solve.


How to Make Antilock Brakes Standard
LEAD: To the Editor:


Allstar Inns L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allstar Inns L.P.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,478,000
12,440,000
Net loss
498,000
b97,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
34,362,000
33,732,000
Net loss
2,679,000
530,000
b-Net income


Comerica Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
9,110,000
b28,867,000
Per share
-
1.74
9mo net inc
48,564,000
83,548,000
Per share
2.88
5.06
b-Net income  Comerica said the third quarter results included a $59 million addition to its loan loss reserve for Latin American loans.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.62
8.62
8.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.20
7.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.18
7.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
7.81
8.67
30-YR.


An Arrest Will Free Former Rape Suspect
LEAD: A New Jersey man was wrongly jailed on charges of raping two women at the Penta Hotel in Manhattan last spring and another man has been arrested and charged with the attacks, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said yesterday.


Careers; Executive Pay Called Too High
LEAD: ''IT is getting worse,'' Peter G. Scotese said recently of the spiraling total pay for top executives. ''I think it is out of control.''


Video Sales Gaining on Rentals
LEAD: On Nov. 15 Warner Brothers' summer hit, ''Batman,'' will go on sale in stores across the country, and the price will not be $89.95, as such a newly released film might have sold for in years past, but $24.98.


Soviets Give Kin Wallenberg Papers
LEAD: More than 45 years after Raoul Wallenberg disappeared into the Soviet prison system after saving thousands of Jews from the Nazis, the Soviet authorities gave his family some of his personal belongings: a blue Swedish diplomatic passport embossed with the royal crown, some money and several notebooks.


Chess
LEAD: Jonathan Speelman of Britain won the seventh game of his semifinal world championship candidates match with Jan Timman of the Netherlands in London to pull even at 3 1/2-3 1/2.
Timman won their second game, and the others were all drawn.


Gendex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,274,000
4,889,000
Net inc
625,000
476,000
Share earns
.21
.16
6mo sales
14,537,000
9,036,000
Net inc
1,162,000
779,000
Share earns
.39
.26


China Prepares Session Of Central Committee
LEAD: China announced today that a widely expected Central Committee meeting would be held late this month or early next month to discuss the country's economic difficulties and other matters.


DMI Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMI Furniture (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
10,372,000
9,956,000
Net inc
376,000
317,000
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo sales
45,781,000
41,768,000
Net inc
2,632,000
1,765,000
Share earns
.43
.31


Men-Only Golf Course Hours Lead to Harassment Charge
LEAD: A female golfer testified today that a group of men surrounded her with their golf carts to try to block her from playing during male-only hours at a Long Island country club last year.


Boeing and Airbus Get Gulf Air Orders
LEAD: Gulf Air said it plans to borrow $400 million to buy six new 767-300 airliners from the Boeing Company and also buy 12 A320 aircraft from Airbus Industries for a total of $1 billion.
A spokesman for the airline said it was inviting bids from offshore banks for the financing.


Fleet Seeks Buyer
LEAD: The Fleet Aerospace Corporation of Ontario, Canada, said it was actively trying to sell its 88 percent stake in Fleet Aerospace Inc., of Gardena, Calif.
Fleet said its decision was part of a strategic restructuring.
It said Fleet Aerospace Inc. lost $138,000, on sales of $19.5 million, in the quarter ended June 30.


Justice Marshall, on 'Afro-American': Yes
LEAD: In the midst of a nationwide debate over how to refer to Americans of African descent, one Supreme Court Justice declared his stand today.


Closing by Pauley
LEAD: Pauley Petroleum Inc. said it intends to close its Newhall Refining Company refinery at the end of the year, offer the site for sale and lay off about 70 people.
The company said the refinery, in Santa Clarita, Calif., had suffered significant losses in recent years and that the market for its products, including asphalt, fuel oil and jet fuel, was expected to remain weak.


Keane Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keane Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,546,000
14,855,000
Net inc
899,000
735,000
Share earns
.35
.29
9mo rev
53,552,000
43,859,000
Net inc
2,609,000
2,068,000
Share earns
1.01
.80
The company said revenues for 1988 are restated to reflect the reclassification of customer pass through expenses to revenue and direct costs.


Patients Under 50 Fare Best With Parkinson's
LEAD: PEOPLE who develop Parkinson's disease when they are 50 years old or younger and begin treatment with the main drug used to fight the disease are less likely to develop severe long-term effects of the illness than those who become afflicted with the disease later in life, researchers have found.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
234,231,192
208,512,893
Net inc
14,891,342
10,519,819
Share earns
.72
.51
Shares outst
20,541,800
20,402,594
9mo rev
660,512,764
554,855,033
Net inc
40,275,997
27,163,609
Share earns
1.96
1.33
Shares outst
20,506,844
20,383,227


Dow Is Fought In Telerate Bid
LEAD: A group of institutional investors, who hold just under 5 percent of the outstanding shares of Telerate Inc., said that Dow Jones &amp; Company's $18-a-share offer for the New York-based computerized financial information network was ''grossly inadequate.'' In a letter dated Oct. 6 to


Bay Financial reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bay Financial (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
44,339,000
41,061,000
Net loss
b61,962,000
b22,525,000
b-Included provisions for possible investment losses of $32,360,638 for the latest year and $5,330,606 for the year-earlier period.


Sales Far Outpace Rise Of 0.3% in Inventories
LEAD: Business sales far outpaced inventory accumulation in August, the Commerce Department said today in a report that suggested unsold goods were not piling up and the economy was in fairly strong shape.


100,000 Protest in Leipzig In Largest Rally in Decades
LEAD: More than 100,000 East Germans demanding reforms marched peacefully through the streets of Leipzig tonight.
The demonstration, the largest since an uprising in 1953, was reported without condemnation for the first time by the East German press.


Gretzky's Style Fits The Big Moment
LEAD: Now Wayne Gretzky really is in a world of his own.


Roger Ailes: Master Maker of Fiery Political Darts
LEAD: If you believe Roger Ailes, the Republican media consultant, the Democrats are - there they go again - soft on crime and drugs and maybe a bit crooked, too.


Kansas Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
167,481,000
174,099,000
Net inc
32,100,000
46,139,000
Share earns
.94
1.32
9mo rev
427,173,000
407,692,000
Net inc
56,337,000
70,123,000
Share earns
1.62
1.88
Shares outst
34,352,000
36,886,000


Last of 4 Offers Plea In $4.4 Million Theft
LEAD: A 55-year-old Union City man pleaded guilty yesterday to helping plan a $4.4 million armored car robbery last year and to helping commit the robbery with two military cadets.


Visit to a Large, Hot Planet: Galileo Heads for Jupiter
LEAD: Scientists hope the Galileo spacecraft's planned explorations of Jupiter, probing deep into the planet's hot, dense hydrogen atmosphere, will yield important clues to primordial conditions in the solar system and also insights about the ''big bang'' that may have created the universe.


Comptek Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptek Research Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
11,201,000
12,203,000
Net inc
339,000
232,000
Share earns
.16
.10
6mo sales
21,727,000
24,237,000
Net inc
647,000
507,000
Share earns
.30
.23


American Business Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
94,543,000
90,505,000
Net inc
3,043,000
3,036,000
Share earns
.43
.43
9mo sales
290,526,000
265,240,000
Net inc
9,504,000
9,220,000
Share earns
1.33
1.29


Giants Turn to Improvisation to Preserve Victory Over Redskins
LEAD: The Giants' tight ends have prototype size: 6 feet 4 inches and 245 pounds for Mark Bavaro, 6-3 and 240 for Zeke Mowatt, 6-5 and 245 for Howard Cross.
Mark Ingram, a wide receiver, is just 5-10 and 188.


Sealright Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealright Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
52,580,000
49,491,000
Net inc
5,179,000
4,073,000
Share earns
.70
.55
9mo sales
149,557,000
134,871,000
Net inc
12,798,000
10,346,000
Share earns
1.74
1.41


Anti-Semitic Ads Investigated
LEAD: The bias unit of the Middlesex County Prosecutor's office has begun an investigation into anonymous anti-Semitic advertisements that appeared Friday in the classified section of the student newspaper at North Brunswick Township High School.


Charles Schwab reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charles Schwab (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,600,000
2,700,000
Per share
.16
.10
Shares outst
27,700,000
27,600,000
9mo net inc
12,800,000
6,800,000
Per share
.46
.25
Shares outst
27,800,000
27,600,000


First Indiana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
811,000
1,783,000
Per share
.28
.71
9mo net inc
2,256,000
4,074,000
Per share
.84
1.56


Barry's Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry's Jewelers (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
32,426,000
31,138,000
Net inc
152,000
145,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
5,007,446
4,996,629


Trans-Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans-Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,932,750
6,114,466
Net inc
122,113
c314,809
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
22,182,104
18,665,362
Net inc
b757,875
c131,057
Share earns
.27
-
b-Included $250,000 of income from sale of land previously held for investment.


Union Reaches Pact With Gas Company
LEAD: Brooklyn Union Gas and a union representing 2,200 members agreed early yesterday on a contract giving workers a 13.6 percent raise on a three-year contract, averting a strike in Brooklyn and Queens.


U.N., Under U.S. Pressure, Disavows Envoy's Statement
LEAD: Responding to United States criticism, the United Nations distanced itself today from comments by one of its envoys, who urged Nicaraguan rebels to accept an accord calling for their disbanding and implied that United States policy was anachronistic.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,188,000,000
2,158,000,000
Net inc
180,000,000
258,000,000
Share earns
.77
1.07
Shares outst
227,500,000
233,400,000
9mo sales
6,747,000,000
6,300,000,000
Net inc
693,000,000
676,000,000
Share earns
2.98
2.76


Dauphin Deposit Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dauphin Deposit Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b12,171,000
10,350,000
Per share
.94
.80
9mo net inc
b32,982,000
30,182,000
Per share
2.54
2.33
b-Included a one-time after-tax gain of $1,908,000 from Pa.


High-Tech Sales Talk By Texas Instruments
LEAD: At 435 pages, Business Week magazine's annual issue on chief executives is already a hefty publication.
But 140,000 Business Week subscribers will receive an even bigger copy of the magazine - fattened by what the magazine calls the first talking advertisement.


Earnings of Japanese
LEAD: The average employee of a Japanese company earned $27,000 last year, but on average, a man earned more than twice as much as a woman, according to a Government study.
The average annual income for Japan's 38 million corporate employees, including bonuses, was up by $915, or 3.5 percent, from the previous year, the National Tax Agency said Saturday.


Review/Ice Dancing; Torville And Dean And Russian All-Stars
LEAD: The Russians drink their tea in glasses; the English prefer teacups, although they used to sip from saucers.
It comes as no surprise that there are differences in style between the first-class Soviet skaters on one hand and Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean of Britain on the other, who have all teamed up in a fabulous new ice show called ''Torvill and Dean and the Russian All-Stars.


Home Federal S&amp;L of Upper East Tenn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal S&amp;L of Upper East Tenn
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,370,000
2,296,000
Share earns
.53
.52
9mo net inc
6,870,000
6,727,000
Share earns
1.54
1.51


Mr. Dinkins's Example
LEAD: George Bush's low-road Presidential campaign of 1988 has left its muddy mark on New Jersey's gubernatorial campaign.
By the standards of that race, if ''standards'' is the word, the New York mayoral election seems pure as the driven snow - a phenomenon of possible importance beyond the city limits.


Fresh Look Is Taken at the State of the Economy
LEAD: The decline in the stock market Friday, the rebound today and the nervousness about what it all might mean led politicians, economists and business executives today to reappraise the state of the American economy and the Government's economic policies.


Giants Just Happy To Return Home
LEAD: And now: the night, the fog, the wind and the chill of Candlestick Park.


Some North America Plants May Be Shut Down by G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it had notified workers in the United States and Canada last week about pending shifts in vehicle production during the next few years that are likely to lead to the closing of several North American plants.


Grove Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grove Bank for Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
360,000
403,000
Per share
.24
.27
9mo net inc
1,284,000
1,123,000
Per share
.87
.76


Books of The Times; After 'Eleni,' Life of a Woman's Children in America
LEAD:  A Place for Us  By Nicholas Gage  419 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company.


Rebels Reject Salvador Government Offer at Talks
LEAD: The Salvadoran Government opened critical talks here today with guerrilla representatives by proposing an end to all hostilities in two days and the demobilization of the rebels in three months.


General Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Computer
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,975,000
2,064,000
Net loss
814,000
b588,000
b-Included a tax loss of $390,000.


Prague Reportedly Charges Two Editors With Subversion
LEAD: Two editors of Czechoslovakia's leading independent newspaper have been arrested and charged with subversion, human-rights advocates in Prague say.


Justice Is Cited For Long Delays In Case Rulings
LEAD: The New York State Commission on Judicial Conduct has censured Justice Edward J. Greenfield of State Supreme Court in Manhattan for what it said were his ''unreasonable and inexcusable'' delays in deciding court business.


Sierra Blanca Journal; Highway Was Born And Town Is Dying
LEAD: No matter where you stand in this dying town, you can see Interstate 10.
The elevated highway runs along the southern edge of Sierra Blanca, and the trucks barrel past day and night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE VOLATILE MARKETS  The stock market overcame a shaky opening and roared back on heavy volume to regain about half its losses of Friday.
Prices were buoyed both by corporations buying their own shares and by institutions buying shares they considered cheap.  [ Page A1. ]  Stock prices in Tokyo climbed today, recovering much of their loss of Monday.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
5,579,648
4,933,269
Net inc
722,276
524,518
Share earns
.36
.26
Shares outst
2,023,452
1,998,751
6mo sales
10,709,889
9,275,906
Net inc
1,314,084
959,580
Share earns
.65
.48
Shares outst
2,018,965
1,997,523


National Heritage Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Heritage Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
22,154,000
19,668,000
Net loss
b1,604,000
c1,279,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
17,194,000
16,875,000
Yr rev
84,954,000
83,608,000
Net inc
742,000
7,725,000
Share earns
.04
.46
Shares outst
16,957,000
16,900,000


Dinkins's Records Under Review
LEAD: The New York City Department of Investigation said yesterday that it was beginning a review of financial disclosure forms filed by David N. Dinkins, the Manhattan Borough President and the Democratic candidate for mayor.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Agree To Hear Plea On Miranda
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the police must warn drunken-driving suspects of their constitutional rights against self-incrimination before asking them questions aimed at testing their mental functioning.


Israel Says Officer's Error Let Syrian Fly In
LEAD: An army inquiry completed today found that a Syrian MIG-23 fighter-bomber was able to penetrate Israeli airspace unchallenged last week because of an error by the air defense officer on duty at the time.


Biogen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,548,000
9,800,000
Net inc
1,692,000
361,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
23,465,000
22,224,000
9mo rev
28,590,000
23,846,000
Net inc
1,624,000
b1,440,000
Shares outst
23,419,000
22,233,000


National Pizza To Buy Skipper's
LEAD: The National Pizza Company said it had signed an agreement to acquire Skipper's Inc. of Bellevue, Wash.
Skipper's operates 216 seafood restaurants in the Western United States and in British Columbia.


Thornburgh Accused Of Deliberate Delays
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Iran-contra investigation today accused Attorney General Dick Thornburgh of deliberately sidetracking ''with no legitimate reason'' the criminal case against a former Central Intelligence Agency official.


Texas Plant Comes Under Scrutiny As Cover-Up of Problems Charged
LEAD: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission today opened a special inspection of the Comanche Peak nuclear power plant in Texas amid charges that some high-ranking commission officials had covered up problems at the $9 billion plant.


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westamerica Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,004,000
1,520,000
Per share
.39
.30
9mo net inc
5,128,000
3,900,000
Per share
1.00
.76


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,800,000,000
2,600,000,000
Net inc
b41,000,000
c65,623,000
Share earns
.34
.58
9mo rev
8,537,102,000
7,073,886,000
Net inc
b148,377,000
c187,355,000
Share earns
1.27
1.67


INSIDE
LEAD:  Bush Readies Veto Of Abortion Financing  President Bush is prepared to veto a bill that would expand Federal financing of abortions.
Page A16.


W.W. Williams Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* W.W. Williams Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Revenue
21,288,000
26,728,000
Net inc
497,000
514,000
Share earns
.52
.52
Shares outst
979,328
973,271
9mo rev
64,538,000
78,970,000
Net inc
1,331,000
1,132,000
Share earns
1.36
1.16
Shares outst
979,328
973,271


Security Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
185,100,000
167,900,000
Per share
1.55
1.47
Shares outst
113,900,000
111,300,000
9mo net inc
548,900,000
469,400,000
Per share
4.67
4.13
Shares outst
113,300,000
110,600,000


How to Make Antilock Brakes Standard
LEAD: To the Editor:


Governors Ignored Poverty's Role in Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Binks Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Binks Manufacturing (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
54,472,000
54,196,000
Net inc
2,175,000
1,953,000
Share earns
.74
.69
9mo sales
150,765,000
141,716,000
Net inc
b6,762,000
c5,989,000
Share earns
2.36
2.10


Robeson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robeson Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Sales
13,759,246
13,223,555
Net loss
870,589
203,231
6mo sales
24,597,561
18,619,360
Net loss
1,245,989
888,841
Shares outst
2,475,030
2,062,525


SENATE TAKES UP FLAG AMENDMENT
LEAD: The second stage of the political battle over flag burning came to the floor of the Senate today as lawmakers began debating a constitutional amendment intended to outlaw it.


Northern Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
26,500,000
25,500,000
Per share
1.45
1.53
Shares outst
16,989,809
15,440,149
9mo net inc
80,800,000
67,300,000
Per share
4.44
4.02
Shares outst
16,856,414
15,416,620


Views Last a Lifetime
LEAD: The political and social attitudes that people form during early adulthood are unlikely to change for the remainder of their lives, a recent study found.


Amcore Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcore Financial Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,034,000
2,302,000
Per share
.40
.45
9mo net inc
6,481,000
6,522,000
Per share
1.26
1.29


Seneca Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seneca Foods
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
65,868,000
76,863,000
Net inc
1,157,000
b421,000
Share earns
.34
-
Yr sales
310,364,000
304,909,000
Net inc
5,032,000
3,146,000
Share earns
1.47
.92
b


Fighting Fire With Money
LEAD: Two years ago the stock market crashed.
Hysterical analysts warned of economic turmoil reminiscent of the 1930's.
But no such catastrophe occurred, due in large part to timely intervention by the Federal Reserve Board.
Sensibly, the Fed is prepared to step in once more to protect the larger economy of Main Street from the latest debacle on Wall Street.


Schools and Police Battle Over Search
LEAD: For weeks, the dismissal of a local high school English teacher for sexual misconduct passed with little notice.


LEADER FALLS BACK IN BRAZILIAN RACE
LEAD: One month before Brazilians vote for a new President, the race looks increasingly like a tossup.


IBP Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBP Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,307,667,000
2,299,618,000
Net inc
11,680,000
23,148,000
Share earns
.25
.49
9mo sales
6,884,515,000
6,687,162,000
Net inc
21,627,000
39,568,000
Share earns
.46
.84


Grand Jury Indicts 5 In Mob-Union Case
LEAD: A Federal grand jury has indicted the reported acting boss and four members of the DeCavalcante crime family, the authorities said yesterday.


Critics Challenge Reliance on DrugsIn Psychiatry
LEAD: THE movement among psychiatrists to rely more and more on using drugs to treat mental disorders is coming under strong attack.
Critics contend that scientific studies evaluating the effectiveness of psychiatric drugs have been systematically biased, exaggerating the medications' potency.


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
58,813,000
56,571,000
Net inc
274,000
1,627,000
Share earns
.03
.21
Shares outst
9,756,000
7,856,000
9mo rev
177,121,000
161,145,000
Net inc
2,321,000
4,949,000
Share earns
.27
.63
Shares outst
8,695,000
7,915,000


KLLM Transport Sv reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLLM Transport Sv (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
29,754,000
24,827,000
Net inc
700,000
568,000
Share earns
.28
.22
9mo rev
86,637,000
71,139,000
Net inc
1,764,000
2,200,000
Share earns
.69
.86


Funeral Service Held For Suicide Victim
LEAD: A 16-year-old Connecticut youth, distraught by the death of his mother, was buried yesterday, five days after the police say he shot himself at the end of a nine-day crime spree that took him to southern New Jersey.


Compaq Does It Again
LEAD: EVERY once in a while a new computer comes along that leaps ahead of other machines in its class.
This time, once again, it comes from the Compaq Computer Corporation.
The company yesterday introduced two new notebook computers, the LTE and the LTE/286, which are the first to combine desktop computer performance in a lightweight package that can be slipped into a briefcase.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamptons Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
278,000
342,000
Per share
.34
.42
9mo net inc
843,000
603,000
Per share
1.04
.74


Pacific Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Western Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,607,000
1,650,000
Per share
.29
.14
Shares outst
12,558,000
11,533,000
9mo net inc
9,048,000
b5,333,000
Per share
.74
.46
Shares outst
12,152,000
11,532,000


Court to Rule on Bid to Undo Merger
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to resolve a major dispute in Federal antitrust law: whether a state or a private party can sue to undo a merger on the ground that the newly combined company poses a threat to competition.


Central Fidelity Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
13,528,000
12,646,000
Per share
.88
.82
9mo net inc
40,030,000
36,848,000
Per share
2.60
2.38


Engraph Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engraph Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
50,849,000
37,684,000
Net inc
2,003,000
1,454,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
13,628,000
12,186,000
9mo sales
153,629,000
112,048,000
Net inc
6,261,000
5,272,000
Share earns
.49
.44
Shares outst
12,733,000
12,043,000


Beverly Hills's Teachers Strike Over Better Pay and Benefits
LEAD: Teachers struck today for more money and better benefits in the first walkout against the school system of this wealthy community.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


U.S. OFFERS TO AID GORBACHEV'S PLAN TO REVAMP SYSTEM
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said last night that the United States was prepared to provide Moscow with advice and technical assistance to help it restructure the Soviet economy and society.


AMR Bid Withdrawn By Trump
LEAD: Donald J. Trump yesterday withdrew his $120-a-share offer for the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, and said he would review his options.


Critic's Notebook; Was She or Wasn't She? A Diary Of Hemingway's (Probable) Muse.
LEAD: Tracking down details about the real person behind a fictional character is a tantalizing game.
When disguising an actual person, a novelist has to make personality adjustments for the sake of the story.
If the writing is going well, the author stands aside, and with a growing sense of wonder watches as the characters take over, speak for themselves and assume lives of their own.


Issues for the 5 Boroughs
LEAD: Following are the two questions for the proposed changes in the City Charter that will be on the Nov. 7 ballot:


Dollar Is Generally Lower In a Nervous Trading Day
LEAD: The dollar finished moderately lower yesterday against most major foreign currencies in what dealers described as extremely nervous trading on both sides of the Atlantic.
The dollar managed to recover most of the earlier losses as the stock market began to rebound.


Car Bomb in Colombia Kills 4 at Newspaper
LEAD: A car bomb exploded today in a northeastern Colombian city and killed four employees of a newspaper that had joined in a condemnation of cocaine traffickers.


Gandalf Technologies Inc reports earnings for 13wks to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gandalf Technologies Inc (OTC)
13wks to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
47,480,000
42,993,000
Net inc
1,831,000
c3,179,000
Share earns
.15
.26
Shares outst
12,153,875
12,140,861
Yr rev
167,369,000
160,648,000
Net inc
b377,000
c9,403,000
Share earns
.03
.78
Shares outst
12,150,051
12,104,463


M. King Hubbert, 86, Geologist; Research Changed Oil Production
LEAD: M. King Hubbert, an award-winning scientist whose work in physics and geology brought radical changes in the petroleum industry, died Wednesday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
Dr.
Hubbert, who was 86 years old, had been undergoing treatment for a pulmonary embolism.


Governors Ignored Poverty's Role in Education; Not Very Jeffersonian
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wedtech Sentencing


General Building Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Building Products (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,750,000
21,913,000
Net loss
333,000
b77,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
3,958,750
4,016,750
9mo sales
66,922,000
56,517,000
Net loss
1,956,000
b276,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
3,970,814
4,016,750


Doctor's Killer Uses Insanity Defense
LEAD: Steven Smith raped, robbed and murdered Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant in her office at Bellevue Hospital on Jan. 7, his defense lawyer conceded yesterday as Mr.
Smith's trial began.
But the lawyer, Marvyn Kornberg, contended that his client was insane at the time and therefore not criminally responsible.


Danilo Kis Dead at 54; Wrote of the Holocaust
LEAD: Danilo Kis, a Yugoslav-born writer and essayist whose works blended fact and fiction to describe the horror of the Holocaust and Stalin's forced-labor camps, died of cancer on Sunday, friends said today.
He was 54 years old and had lived in Paris 10 years.


Abitibi-Price Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abitibi-Price Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
816,400,000
813,400,000
Net inc
13,600,000
44,500,000
Share earns
.18
.61
9mo sales
2,456,800,000
2,448,900,000
Net inc
68,700,000
143,000,000
Share earns
.92
1.98


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


David Lean, 81, Is at It Again, Working on Brando and Conrad
LEAD: Sir David Lean is working again.
The 81-year-old English director of such film classics as ''The Bridge on the River Kwai'' and ''Lawrence of Arabia'' - who makes movies only infrequently nowadays - is casting his next film.
And he thinks he has persuaded Marlon Brando to play a brutish South American general.


Governors Ignored Poverty's Role in Education; The Forgotten Experts
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Electric Power Co reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power Co (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,990,000,000
4,758,000,000
Net inc
612,188,000
555,847,000
Share earns
3.16
2.87
The company said earnings and share earnings would have been $624,710,000 and $3.23, respectively, without the write-off of previously disallowed costs of Zimmer Plant in November 1987.


Lawmakers Agree to Bar Smoking On Virtually All Domestic Flights
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators agreed tonight to ban smoking on all commercial airline flights within the continental United States and on most flights to Alaska and Hawaii.


Nobel Fever: The Price Of Rivalry
LEAD: THE Nobel Prize is coveted by scientists as the ultimate key to fame, influence and material success.
But some scientists also see it as a growing temptation to squander scientific gifts on petty competition or even, in rare cases, to lie and cheat.


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
595,983,000
547,995,000
Net inc
41,598,000
37,820,000
Share earns
.96
.86
Shares outst
43,298,259
44,034,887
9mo sales
1,644,748,000
1,505,889,000
Net inc
89,104,000
82,366,000
Share earns
2.07
1.87
Shares outst
43,118,643
44,045,354


Franco, 51, Zairian Band Leader And Creator of the Soukous Style
LEAD: Franco, a Zairian guitarist and band leader who was one of Africa's most popular and influential musicians, died on Thursday in a Brussels hospital after a long illness.
He was 51 years old.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KeyCorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
36,142,000
32,312,000
Per share
.85
.78
9mo net inc
100,568,000
85,311,000
Per share
2.34
2.09


Diebold Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diebold Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
110,218,000
115,815,000
Net inc
8,853,000
9,217,000
Share earns
.67
.70
9mo sales
341,522,000
333,415,000
Net inc
25,281,000
b26,610,000
Share earns
1.92
2.02


Reynolds Metals Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,511,100,000
1,475,400,000
Net inc
123,700,000
137,200,000
Share earns
2.10
2.56
Shares outst
59,000,000
53,500,000
9mo sales
4,604,800,000
4,106,900,000
Net inc
398,900,000
342,100,000
Share earns
6.93
6.40
Shares outst
57,500,000
53,400,000


'Junk Bonds' End Up After Big Early Drop
LEAD: The ''junk bond'' market closed up, on average one-half point, or $5 for every $1,000 face amount, yesterday.
Prices of the high-yield, high-risk bonds fell sharply in the morning, but then bargain-hunting institutional investors bought junk issues of widely known companies like Duracell, Kroger and


Badger Meter Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Meter Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,169,000
18,900,000
Net inc
649,000
588,000
Share earns
.42
.39
9mo sales
54,977,000
53,497,000
Net inc
1,966,000
1,756,000
Share earns
1.28
1.17


Puzzled About New Charter? There Are 2 Basic Questions
LEAD: New York City's voters will be asked on Nov. 7 whether they want to approve the most thorough overhaul of municipal government in almost a century.


Loctite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
114,914,000
106,437,00
Net inc
14,423,000
11,935,000
Share earns
.80
.66
Shares outst
17,995,000
17,949,000


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 2
1989
1988
Revenue
51,798,000
36,934,000
Net inc
7,936,000
5,480,000
Share earns
.21
.15
Shares outst
38,312,000
37,444,000
9mo rev
148,575,000
98,165,000
Net inc
22,660,000
14,552,000
Share earns
.59
.39
Shares outst
38,248,000
37,506,000


By Design; Beware the Bow
LEAD: You would think a bow would solve everything.
After all, this pretty, perky toss-and-tie of fabric is supposed to be synonymous with femininity.
That is why ties have been used for ages to decorate every possible piece of fashion - accessories, suits, blouses, sweaters, dresses, ball gowns - not to mention the unmentionables underneath.


Jet Coaching Change 'Not Even Discussed'
LEAD: Although the Jets are reeling from a third straight loss and a 1-5 record, they will not make any coaching changes, their president, Steve Gutman, said today.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary on Oct. 7 about Irving Newman, a former neighborhood aide to three New York City mayors, misstated one aspect of his career.


Kisio Rests, But Not Easily
LEAD: There were games last season, Kelly Kisio realizes now, that he should never have played in.
With one hand cracked in places and his back crying in pain, Kisio pulled on his uniform anyway because he feared he would never be able to shed the guilt if he didn't.


Wallach Gets 6 Years for His Wedtech Role
LEAD: E. Robert Wallach, a longtime friend of former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, was sentenced to six years in prison and fined $250,000 yesterday by a Federal district judge who chastised him for selling ''your influence on the back stairs of the White House'' in the Wedtech case.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Carpenter Technology Corp., Reading, Pa., an industrial-products manufacturer, named Robert W. Cardy executive vice president.


International Business Mahines Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,305,000,000
13,714,000,000
Net inc
877,000,000
1,247,000,000
Share earns
1.51
2.10
9mo rev
42,248,000,000
39,679,000,000
Net inc
3,167,000,000
b3,459,000,000
Share earns
5.43
5.83
Shares outst
582,800,000
593,000,000


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,396,266,000
1,365,782,000
Net inc
220,509,000
134,087,000
Share earns
3.98
2.43
Shares outst
50,306,000
46,715,000
The company said the year-ago 12- month period included a charge of $91.3 million after taxes for write-off of a portion of the company's investment in the Wm.


Doctors Debate Value Of Test That Gauges Health of a Newborn
LEAD: LUSTY cries immediately after birth count for a lot in the struggle for a healthy life.
Using the strength of an infant's wails, as well as other signs, pediatricians can rapidly assess the status of a newborn in a test that is known throughout the world as the Apgar score.


Square D Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
410,839,000
402,860,000
Net inc
b30,729,000
c34,389,000
Share earns
1.24
1.30
9mo sales
1,237,495,000
1,132,843,000
Net inc
b90,530,000
c92,923,000
Share earns
3.61
3.44
Shares outst
25,074,000
27,051,000


Soviet Coach Dismissed
LEAD: The coach of the Soviet national weight lifting team was dismissed yesterday, one month after Hafiz Suleymanov, a world champion in the 123-pound category, defected to Turkey.
The Soviet news agency Tass said the executive committee of the Soviet Weight Lifting Federation voted 27-2 tordahl to become a free agent after this season.(


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Banc-Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,395,000
3,912,000
Per share
.58
.52
9mo net inc
12,770,000
11,055,000
Per share
1.69
1.49


TRW Earnings Decline 11.8%
LEAD: TRW Inc. said today that earnings declined 11.8 percent in the quarter ended Sept. 30, although revenues were up 8 percent.


Using Art as a Sword to Defend Brazil's Forests
LEAD: Twisted tree trunks, singed bark, ashen limbs and burned stumps have been on display here in a chic Ipanema art gallery - totemic monuments to the destruction taking place in Brazil's distant Amazon rain forest.


Hibernia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
17,164,000
14,793,000
Per share
.64
.58
Shares outst
26,818,000
25,383,000
9mo net inc
47,738,000
40,862,000
Per share
1.79
1.62
Shares outst
26,654,000
25,211,000


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GYMNASTICS  Soviet Team in Lead: The Soviet Union, led by Svetlana Boginskaya, took the lead at the halfway point yesterday in the women's competition at the world championships in Stuttgart, West Germany.
The United States was a surprise, holding fourth place.(AP)  RACING  Whiz Along Wins: Whiz Along, ridden by Julie Krone, closed strongly to a one-length victory yesterday in Belmont Park's closing day feature, the $45,000 Cheriepe Handicap for horses 3 years old and up.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Castellanos Latina Advertising of Los Angeles has signed an affiliation agreement with HDM Worldwide.


Entronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entronics Corp
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,687,552
1,267,710
Net inc
80,618
120,671
Share earns
.02
.03


Yeltsin Makes the News Again, but Ruefully
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the maverick Moscow politician who recently toured the United States, told the police late last month that he had been the victim of an assassination attempt, but later recanted his story, according to a bizarre report today by the Soviet Interior Minister.


Copper Prices Fall Sharply; Grains and Soybeans Rally
LEAD: Copper futures fell sharply yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, while precious metals gained and grains and soybeans rallied, and energy futures sagged.


Kremlin Leader Lashes at Press, Raising Its Fears
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has sharply rebuked some of the leading practitioners of glasnost, and accused the liberated press of sowing division and discontent.


Carmen Cavallaro, Pianist, 76
LEAD: Carmen Cavallaro, a pianist who performed the sound track for the movie ''The Eddy Duchin Story'' in 1956, died of cancer on Thursday at Mount Carmel East Hospital here.
He was 76 years old and had lived in Columbus for 15 years.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,815,000
8,576,000
Per share
1.11
1.09
9mo net inc
26,485,000
24,028,000
Per share
3.34
3.06


United Investors Management Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Investors Management Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
60,794,000
49,976,000
Net inc
15,503,000
11,255,000
Share earns
.41
.30
9mo rev
174,694,000
147,649,000
Net inc
40,304,000
30,350,000
Share earns
1.07
.80


Topics of The Times; Disconnected Thoughts
LEAD: While a Federal Communications Commission study confirms that Americans are spending more and more time on the telephone, a telephone workers' strike has put thousands in the Northeast on hold.
Unable to get installations and repairs, they tell horror stories about business deals lost, love affairs ruined and hours spent weighted down with quarters, in search of a working pay phone.


Alliant and Intel In Joint Effort
LEAD: The Alliant Computer Systems Corporation, Littleton, Mass., and the Intel Corporation said they had developed a new software standard for use with the Intel i860 microprocessor in computers based on parallel processing.
In addition, Intel said it would purchase about $3 million worth of newly issued


Upjohn Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upjohn Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
715,328,000
651,806,000
Net inc
96,018,000
89,555,000
Share earns
.52
.49
9mo sales
2,206,957,000
2,035,756,000
Net inc
293,625,000
272,766,000
Share earns
1.59
1.47
Shares outst
185,212,000
186,026,000


Expos Withdraw Offer
LEAD: The Montreal Expos said yesterday they have withdrawn a reported three-year, $9 million contract offer to the star pitcher Mark Langston while keeping the door open for future negotiations.
Langston is eligible to file for free agency following the World Series.(AP)


Market Place; Balancing Stocks With the Futures
LEAD: IF one tag on an item says the price is $2 and another says $1.80, it is hard to know what the real price is.
But few buyers are willing to pay $2, no matter how much they think it is really worth.


Boeing to Resume Bargaining With Strikers
LEAD: Negotiations between the Boeing Company and striking members of the machinists' union will resume on Wednesday, exactly two weeks after the walkout by 57,800 workers began, a Federal mediator said today.


Farace's Wife Free On $250,000 Bail
LEAD: The wife and brother-in-law of Constabile (Gus) Farace, who is the prime suspect in the murder of a Federal drug agent, were freed on $250,000 bail each yesterday on charges of distributing marijuana.


DS Bancor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DS Bancor Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,039,000
902,000
Per share
.47
.41
9mo net inc
3,299,000
2,192,000
Per share
1.48
.99


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,814,000
12,548,000
Per share
.81
.63
9mo net inc
44,838,000
36,777,000
Per share
2.35
1.83


Birtcher Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birtcher Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,201,000
1,469,000
Net inc
277,000
221,000
Share earns
.06
.05
Shares outst
4,832,000
4,805,000


Ceradyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ceradyne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,849,000
6,283,000
Net loss
845,000
865,000
Shares outst
6,073,000
6,057,000
9mo sales
17,537,000
19,137,000
Net loss
3,097,000
2,589,000
Shares outst
6,060,000
5,900,000


Thomas J. Spenker, 74, Ex-Insurance Chief
LEAD: Thomas J. Spenker, retired president of the J. C. Penney Insurance Companies, died of heart failure Sunday at his home in Riverside, Conn.
He was 74 years old.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-15  The U.S. is ready to help Moscow with advice and technical aid to restructure the Soviet economy and society, Secretary Baker said.
Page A1  Excerpts from Baker's speech A14  President Gorbachev rebuked some of the leading practitioners of glasnost in a meeting on Friday.


Benjamin Signs With Italian Team
LEAD: Benoit Benjamin spurned a new contract with the Los Angeles Clippers and signed yesterday with the defending Italian league champion Philips Milan.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
510,100,000
462,900,000
Net inc
51,500,000
36,800,000
Share earns
1.34
.97
9mo sales
1,503,200,000
1,351,100,000
Net inc
139,800,000
b268,500,000
Share earns
3.66
7.03


Aztec International Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aztec International Ltd
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,003,000
770,000
Net inc
79,000
b38,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
1,642,000
1,382,000
Net inc
17,000
b220,000
b-Net loss


I.B.M. Profits, at Low End Of Expectations, Drop 29.7%
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation yesterday reported a 29.7 percent decline in earnings for the third quarter of 1989.
The earnings were at the low end of the range that the company indicated it expected in its surprise announcement last month that profits would be sharply lower.


Neighbors in West Use Small Claims Court to Combat Drugs
LEAD: In a novel use of Small Claims Courts to fight drug dealers, residents of Berkeley and San Francisco have won substantial judgments against the owners of two buildings that became hubs of drug-related activity.


U.S. Energy Official Joining First Chicago
LEAD: Martha O. Hesse, chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for the last three years, has accepted a top post at the First Chicago Corporation and is to be succeeded by Martin Lewis Allday, a Texas lawyer and longtime friend of President Bush.


Arbitrage Losses Put At Up to $100 Million
LEAD: Wall Street traders appear to have weathered the worst market slide in two years, although rough Wall Street estimates suggested yesterday that a handful of arbitrage firms might have lost as much as $100 million or more on two airline stocks.


Both Sides in Illinois Try to Settle Suit on Abortion Standards
LEAD: Barely seven weeks before the United States Supreme Court is to hear arguments on Illinois's abortion clinic regulations, the two sides in the lawsuit began direct negotiations here today aimed at settling the matter out of court.


Calvin Klein Executive To Head Jordache Jeans
LEAD: David D. Warren has been named president of the Jordache Jeans division of Jordache Enterprises Inc., filling a post that has been vacant since July.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Birds and Hurricanes  Q. What do birds do in a hurricane?
A.
A number of authorities agree that birds do not get any special storm warnings before a hurricane that allow them to avoid it.


People
LEAD: *
Rick Carpenter, Jaci Sisson and Mark Monteiro have been named senior vice presidents and creative directors of DDB Needham/Los Angeles.


'Weak' Hurricane Leaves 3 Dead; Galveston to Weigh Driving Ban
LEAD: Hurricane Jerry was a relatively small, weak storm when it hit shore here Sunday night, and some people decided to take their chances out along the city's sea wall, where 80 mile-an-hour winds whipped the water.


Golden West Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
41,817,000
36,016,000
Share earns
.66
.57
Shares outst
62,936,937
62,797,980
9mo net inc
117,079,000
101,852,000
Share earns
1.86
1.62
Shares outst
62,886,542
62,771,286


Making The Best Of Winter
LEAD: What little humor surrounded closing day at Belmont Park yesterday was of the sort heard among men on their way to the gallows.
It won't be so bad, the horseplayers wryly told one another: after just 29 weeks at Aqueduct, a mere 1,566 races, Belmont will be running again.


Stakes Sold In Magazines
LEAD: Dale W. Lang said last week that he had finished acquiring control of Ms. and Sassy magazines.
He said he would begin publishing Ms. without advertising.


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beeba's Creations (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
35,394,930
27,108,302
Net inc
1,065,703
b3,687,999
Share earns
.22
-
Yr sales
128,558,208
102,403,551
Net inc
4,071,789
b4,080,438
Share earns
.89
-


Amcast Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcast Industrial (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
80,703,000
79,162,000
Net inc
2,514,000
2,370,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Yr sales
329,477,000
312,262,000
Net inc
8,017,000
9,369,000
Share earns
1.12
1.30


Protein Databases reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Protein Databases
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
287,017
295,620
Net loss
316,409
367,805
9mo rev
1,069,972
782,444
Net loss
1,012,607
1,159,891


Shirt Shed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shirt Shed Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
18,342,000
9,324,000
Net inc
633,000
b264,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
6,642,687
6,242,219
Yr sales
51,913,000
37,596,000
Net inc
2,202,000
c1,865,000
Share earns
.34
.30
Shares outst
6,444,197
6,171,819


Paine Webber Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
444,878,000
450,734,000
Net inc
16,832,000
b20,928,000
Share earns
.41
.50
Shares outst
26,483,000
29,045,000
9mo rev
1,274,843,000
1,308,151,000
Net inc
41,098,000
41,848,000
Share earns
.85
.77
Shares outst
27,358,000
29,097,000


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melamine Chemicals (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,731,000
9,293,000
Net inc
1,483,000
1,599,000
Share earns
.27
.29


20-Car Pileup Kills 5 at Lyons
LEAD: Five people were killed and 23 seriously injured early today when 20 cars plowed into a burning truck on a highway in southeastern France.


Motorola Unit Sale
LEAD: Motorola Inc. said it would sell its Tegal Corporation subsidiary to a management group led by Elliott Philofsy, Tegal's president.
Terms were not disclosed.
Tegal, based in Petaluma, Calif., supplies plasma etch and strip systems to the semiconductor industry.
Motorola said financing would be provided by Nazem &amp; Company, a New York investment company.


Gold Monkeys Learn How to Live in Wild In Brazilian Preserve
LEAD: IN a flash of orange fur, a golden lion tamarin suddenly appeared, hopping and swinging easily through the green forest foliage.
Nine others followed, browsing for fruit and insects, keeping balance with foot-long prehensile tails.


Notre Dame Is Atop Times List
LEAD: With a convincing 41-27 victory over Air Force at Falcon Stadium that stretched its winning streak to 18 games, Notre Dame finally reached No. 1 in The New York Times's computerized rating of the nation's top college football teams.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Bear Stearns Cos.
$22,100,000
+
7.8
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.
14,900,000
+
41.9
Humana Inc.
66,700,000
+
14.6
I.B.M. Corp.
877,000,000
-
29.7
IBP Inc.
11,700,000
-
49.4
Loctite Corp.
14,400,000
+
21.0
Louisiana-Pacific Corp.


Bond's Companies Sell Mining Stakes
LEAD: Dallhold Investments, a private company owned by the Australian investor Alan Bond, said it was selling a 58 percent stake in Bond International Gold Inc., one of the largest miners of high-quality gold, to Lac Minerals for $333.3 million.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Ogilvy &amp; Mather has focused on elephant poaching, asking consumers not to buy ivory products, in a pro bono campaign for the World Wildlife Fund.
The print and television ads emphasize that at the current rate of slaughter, elephants will be extinct in 25 years.
The ads are being broadcast in 22 local markets.


Citibank's Progress On UAL Deal
LEAD: Domestic and international banks have told Citibank that they are willing to lend more money than needed to finance a $6.75 billion leveraged buyout of the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, a top Citibank official said last night.


Brenton Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenton Banks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,201,291
1,684,858
Per share
.92
.70
9mo net inc
6,687,454
5,865,835
Per share
2.79
2.41


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We now have a historic opportunity with the Soviet Union.


In a Wild Finish, Rams Suffer Their First Loss
LEAD: Frank Reich of the Buffalo Bills threw an 8-yard touchdown pass to Andre Reed with 16 seconds left tonight to cap a wild final three minutes that gave the Bills a 23-20 victory over the Los Angeles Rams.


K Mart to Purchase Pace Warehouse Clubs
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation, the nation's second-largest retailer, agreed yesterday to acquire Pace Membership Warehouse Inc., a Colorado-based chain of 41 warehouse clubs, for $23 a share in cash, or $322 million.


Our Towns; When Drivers Earn Far More Than Secretaries
LEAD: Not long after he became president of Hofstra University in the mid-70's, James M. Shuart decided that a good way to enhance the school's image - and increase its enrollment - would be to have a million-volume library.


Watts Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watts Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
67,710,000
55,270,000
Net inc
6,961,000
6,220,000


Elephant Is Declared Endangered Species
LEAD: In a move against poaching of African elephants for their ivory, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species added the species to their list.
Ivory hunters have drastically reduced the number of elephants that survive in the wild.


Out, Out, Brief Hope
LEAD: The Arab states have stamped out a faint, brief hope that they might take one small step toward real peace in the Middle East.


Excerpts From Baker's Remarks on Soviet Union
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an address by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, delivered tonight before the Foreign Policy Association in New York, as provided by the Federal News Service:





Guber-Peters Has Profit
LEAD: The Guber-Peters Entertainment Company said yesterday that its net income for the three months ended Aug. 31 was $5.8 million, or 50 cents a share, compared with a loss of $6.9 million a year earlier.
Revenue more than doubled, to $10.9 million, compared with $4.6 million a year earlier.
The current figures reflect an extraordinary gain of $2.1 million after taxes from the repurchase at a discount of a $9.9 million principal amount of the company's outstanding convertible debentures.


Pretoria May Be Looking to Freed Blacks for Aid
LEAD: In its treatment of the eight political prisoners released on Sunday, the white minority Government appears to be sending signals that it wants the cooperation of the freed men in promoting some form of negotiations with this country's black majority.


For Artists and Musicians, Creativity Can Mean Illness and Injury
LEAD: RECENT surveys of musicians and artists have revealed virtual epidemics of occupationally induced ills, from crippled hands that practiced too hard to outright poisoning and severe allergies provoked by the materials used to create artworks.


Can New York Afford This New City Charter?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choice Drug Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Choice Drug Systems
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,844,411
3,887,515
Net inc
854
b79,857
6mo sales
9,630,536
7,593,900
Net inc
82,072
b174,561
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Former State Senator Begins a Fraud Trial
LEAD: Former State Senator Richard Schermerhorn went on trial in Federal court yesterday with his lawyer contending that the Government picked on him because of his position.


A Reprint May Lead to Rediscovery Of Author
LEAD: Paul Bowles, an American composer turned writer, has lived in Morocco for more than 40 years and has not written a novel since 1966.
But the 78-year-old author, who has long had a core of devoted followers, is about to be discovered by the larger public.


Review/Music; Chamber Society's Debut With Sherry as Its Leader
LEAD: Fred Sherry begins his stewardship at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center with several obstacles placed, perhaps unfairly, in his path.
One is the simple idea of change -the uprooting of a very specific and intimate bond that the society has built with its audiences for the past 20 years.


Burr-Brown Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,697,000
42,368,000
Net inc
2,048,000
3,212,000
Share earns
.21
.33
9mo sales
129,726,000
132,845,000
Net inc
7,139,000
8,693,000
Share earns
.74
.89


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
969,000
884,000
Per share
.45
.41
9mo net inc
2,871,000
2,640,000
Per share
1.33
1.22


UST Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,686,005
7,624,790
Per share
.52
.60
Shares outst
12,857,046
12,814,211
9mo net inc
20,513,466
b20,460,538
Per share
1.60
1.60
Shares outst
12,850,185
12,786,789


Hospital Stops Using Generic Drugs
LEAD: A hospital in New Haven said today that it had suspended the use of more than 150 different generic drugs, including some frequently used prescription medicines, as a result of allegations of unethical conduct by some generic drug manufactuers.


First City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
28,800,000
23,600,000
Per share
1.19
.97
9mo net inc
83,100,000
b
Per share
3.47
b
b-Not available; First City began doing business April 20, 1988.


One More Scandal For British Royalty
LEAD: A relative of Queen Elizabeth II who is 24th in line to the throne has created a new royal scandal by publicizing her dispute with her parents over her out-of-wedlock pregnancy.


Enviropact Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enviropact Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,855,217
5,460,544
Net loss
1,994,394
470,910
Shares outst
2,950,146
3,331,400
Yr rev
19,979,810
18,283,976
Net loss
2,485,882
b225,564
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
3,032,080
3,278,802


Humana Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Humana Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,078,792,000
904,329,000
Net inc
66,730,000
58,212,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Yr sales
4,087,994,000
3,435,397,000
Net inc
255,987,000
b227,121,000
Share earns
2.56
2.30


Coast Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coast Distribution (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
36,480,000
38,358,000
Net inc
1,539,000
1,608,000
Share earns
.35
.34
Shares outst
4,466,553
5,043,747
9mo sales
108,576,000
106,591,000
Net inc
3,732,000
3,376,000
Share earns
.80
.73
Shares outst
4,892,853
4,983,747


Lomas Mortgage Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas Mortgage Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,739,000
4,941,000
Per share
.55
.57
9mo net inc
13,710,000
16,212,000
Per share
1.58
1.86


Desjardins Deragon Langlois reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desjardins Deragon Langlois
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,523,000
3,767,000
Net loss
376,000
696,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Bush Plans to Veto Measure Expanding Aid for Abortion
LEAD: President Bush is preparing to veto a measure that would broaden the circumstances under which Federal money is provided for abortions, White House officials said today.
They said efforts to reach a compromise with members of Congress had broken down.


Guardsman Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardsman Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,195,000
36,186,000
Net inc
1,997,000
1,757,000
Share earns
.35
.32
9mo sales
143,426,000
105,132,000
Net inc
5,455,000
5,021,000
Share earns
.97
.92


Campaign Trail; Dinkins, in High Hopes, Has Scout for City Hall
LEAD: Last week, David N. Dinkins went to Washington to meet the people he'll need to know if he is elected mayor of New York City.
Yesterday, he raised that ''if'' almost to ''when'' by naming the head of a team to lead his anticipated transition to City Hall.


Christmas Tree Outlook
LEAD: The Agriculture Department is predicting another record season for Christmas tree farmers, despite the preference of many Americans for artificial trees.
A record 34.3 million Christmas trees were sold in 1988, and an Agriculture Department report says the market is expected to exceed 35 million this year.


Quotron's Error on Dow Adds to Jitters
LEAD: Quotron Systems Inc., the nation's leading provider of electronic stock quotes, compounded market jitters among its clients yesterday when its computers incorrectly calculated the Dow Jones industrial average and transmitted that information to customers for at least a half-hour.


Taxes Short Of Forecast, Regan Says
LEAD: Revenues from New York State's major taxes were more than $200 million below projections for the first six months of the fiscal year, according to a report issued today.
The report renewed debate over whether the state can afford a scheduled $400 million tax cut next year.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,815,100,000
b233,600,000
Per share
-
1.25
9mo net loss
1,429,200,000
b743,700,000
Per share
-
4.00
b-Net income  The loan loss provisions for the latest periods totaled $2 billion for the quarter and $2.045 billion for the 9 months, compared with $20 million and $100 million for the same year-ago periods, respectively.


Review/Television; 'Some Girls' and Teen-Age Pregnancy
LEAD: ''Intercom,'' the soberly inclined PBS series, introduces us tonight to a few of the adolescents who give West Virginia one of the nation's highest rates of unplanned teen-age pregnancy. ''Some Girls,'' at 11:30 P.M. on Channel 13, treats its five subjects as individuals rather than as data, helping us to understand why they are likely to have babies before they have husbands.


Airline Takeover Bill Clears a House Panel
LEAD: A bill to forestall airline acquisitions moved ahead on Capitol Hill today, over the objections of the Bush Administration.


For Hapless Dallas, It's Lonely at the Bottom
LEAD: The Detroit Lions and the Dallas Cowboys entered the sixth week of the season as the National Football League's only teams without a victory and as the brunt of brutal jokes.
The Lions were able to escape the doghouse, while the Cowboys were left still pawing at the door.


ACC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACC Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,217,712
9,950,671
Net inc
379,100
bc341,432
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
29,494,143
27,975,852
Net inc
977,812
c80,795
Share earns
.30
.03
b-Net loss


Farley to Sell Some Cluett Operations
LEAD: William F. Farley, who agreed to acquire the big textile maker West Point-Pepperell Inc. early this year for $3 billion, moved a step closer yesterday to completing that deal.


Exchanges' Computers Overcome the Volume
LEAD: Crushing volume in the first hours of trading on the nation's financial exchanges yesterday gave the new computer systems their first test in live trading.
And industry officials said the systems in the various exchanges, put in place after the Oct. 19, 1987, market crash, held up with only minor problems.


Chemicals in A-Plant Pose Blast Risk
LEAD: In an effort to squeeze more waste into giant tanks at a nuclear weapons plant in Washington State, engineers in the 1950's added chemicals that created the risk of an explosion, according to a Government study completed five years ago but not made available until now.


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Depot (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
83,421,000
36,503,000
Net inc
1,623,000
b588,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Shares outst
15,655,000
12,038,000
9mo sales
210,747,000
83,296,000
Net inc
4,839,000
b3,426,000
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
14,571,000
10,476,000


NCNB Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
143,584,000
58,882,000
Per share
1.45
.69
Shares outst
95,730,000
85,305,000
9mo net inc
310,910,000
188,174,000
Per share
3.30
2.22
Shares outst
89,617,000
84,910,000


In Command, Athletics Fighting Complacency
LEAD: Maybe there is just the slightest temptation to think that the heavier part of their workload is done.
In a way, it is.


There Is Still Life in Roger Craig
LEAD: Extraordinary measures are in order for the San Francisco Giants.
Down two games to none to their brothers across the Bay, the Oakland Athletics, in the four-of-seven-game World Series, some business of an ingenious nature must be devised, and hastily.
If anyone is capable of helping pluck the Giants from the hot water they find themselves currently and collectively immersed in, it is their manager, the crafty and resourceful, not to say poetic, Roger


British Talks With Thomson
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said that it was considering a possible merger of its missile division with France's Thomson-CSF to form the largest European contractor for guided-weapons systems.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Source Consumer Products, to Christopher Thomas/Muller Jordan Weiss, with a budget of $1 million.


Genetics Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,365,000
6,259,000
Net loss
4,613,000
4,457,000
9mo rev
33,344,000
15,312,000
Net loss
4,613,000
4,457,000


Is Mr. Bush Serious on Civil Rights?
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh says the Bush Administration is having trouble finding a new civil rights chief for the Justice Department after its first choice, William Lucas, was roughly rejected.
Meanwhile the Administration also allows the U. S. Commission on Civil Rights to flounder without a new chairman.


20 Are Wounded in East Jerusalem Rioting
LEAD: Five policemen and 15 Arabs were reported wounded today and at least 40 Palestinian students were arrested in the first riots in East Jerusalem since the spring.


Telemedia Plans to Start Eating Well Magazine
LEAD: Telemedia Publishing U.S.
Inc., the company that acquired New England Monthly magazine earlier this year, announced last week that it would introduce in July a bimonthly magazine on food and health called Eating Well.


A Young Noriega Fan Ruffles Her Neighbors
LEAD: A schoolgirl's friendly visits with her Panamanian pen pal, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, have her neighbors and her Congressman shaking their heads. ''If it was my daughter, she wouldn't be going,'' said Virginia Paulson, a Councilwoman here, after the 11-year-old girl, Sarah York, left last week for her second trip to Panama.


Miss America Pageant, Beyond Congeniality
LEAD: To the Editor:


This Year, Series 'Travel Day' Means An Easy Hop for Everyone Concerned
LEAD: In less time than it takes most people to travel from home to the airport, the commissioner of baseball changed headquarters today on World Series travel day.


ISI Systems Backs Memotec Deal
LEAD: ISI Systems Inc., a maker of computer software based here, said it had signed a definitive agreement to be acquired by Memotec Data Inc. of Montreal.
The company said Memotec would start a $20-a-share tender offer for all ISI shares held by the public within five days.
The deal is conditioned on receipt of at least 15 percent of ISI's shares not held by the company's chairman and president, Charles C.


Viola Deal Completed
LEAD: The Mets completed the Frank Viola trade yesterday, sending Jack Savage, a minor league relief pitcher, to Minnesota.
Savage, 25 years old, was 3-2 with six saves for Class AAA Tidewater of the International League last season.(AP)


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,325,000
8,974,000
Net loss
1,371,000
382,000


Congressman Enters Connecticut Primary
LEAD: United States Representative John G. Rowland entered the race for the 1990 Republican gubernatorial nomination today, attacking Gov.
William A. O'Neill for the state's constantly changing budget picture and trying to clear up questions about his stance on abortion.


In Central Park Rape Testimony, Officer Tells of Murder Statement
LEAD: One of the first youths arrested in the Central Park rape case said minutes after his capture, ''I know who did the murder!
I know who did the murder!'' and offered to lead the police to the suspect's home, a police officer testified yesterday.


Handholding in Books
LEAD: WORDPERFECT, now in version 5.0, is the most popular word-processing program for I.B.M.-compatible computers.
Its 484-page manual and 398-page workbook document such a host of features that new users are bound to be intimidated.


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Products (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
151,036,000
113,895,000
Net inc
1,395,000
5,054,000
Share earns
.14
.48


In London, Simplicity (Mostly) Reigns
LEAD: No sooner had the lights dimmed on the runways in Milan than the fashion action began here.


BellSouth Alters Bid for Lin
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it would revise its bid for Lin Broadcasting, according to papers filed by Lin with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The papers did not disclose the structure of the new bid.


Morgan Posts a Loss; Other Banks Record Gains
LEAD: As expected, J. P. Morgan &amp; Company announced yesterday that it had reported a loss of $1.82 billion for the third quarter.
Meanwhile, the Security Pacific Corporation yesterday reported a 10 percent increase in third-quarter profits; the NCNB Corporation's profits more than doubled, with half its profits coming from its Texas operations, and the First City Bancorporation of Texas reported a 22 percent increase in profits.


American Telecommunicaions Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telecommunicaions Corp
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,512,035
5,516,981
Net inc
b753,036
c3,748,205
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
6,752,982
6,618,326
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $47,023 and an extraordinary credit of $1,777,083, or 26 cents a share, which included $255,500 gain from tax-loss carryforwards and $1,521,583 gain from settlement of lawsuit against former long-distance carrier.


Berkshire Gas Co reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Berkshire Gas Co (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,644,000
6,977,000
Net loss
259,000
289,000
Yr rev
37,274,000
34,992,000
Net inc
1,769,000
1,757,000
Share earns
1.05
1.14
Shares outst
1,595,075
1,444,738


California Water Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Water Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
35,958,000
33,876,000
Net inc
5,343,000
5,151,000
Share earns
.93
.91
Shares outst
5,689,000
5,660,000
9mo rev
89,856,000
88,005,000
Net inc
10,905,000
11,511,000
Share earns
1.90
2.01
Shares outst
5,683,000
5,650,000


Washington Federal Savings (D.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings (D.C.)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b593,000
b342,000
Per share
.20
.11
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $200,000, or 7 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $144,000, or 5 cents a share, for year- ago period.


C.I.A. Seeks Looser Rules On Killings During Coups
LEAD: William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, called today on the President and Congress to consider giving the Central Intelligence Agency greater latitude in supporting potentially violent efforts to overthrow foreign dictators.


Cornel Wilde, 74, a Performer and Film Producer
LEAD: Cornel Wilde, an athletic actor who was expert in fencing and horsemanship but who won stardom with his portrayal of the tubercular composer Frederic Chopin in the 1945 film ''A Song to Remember'' died of leukemia yesterday in Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, three days after his 74th birthday.


Devils Reduce Defense Surplus By Trading Kurvers to the Leafs
LEAD: The Devils traded a piece of their present for a bit of the future yesterday when they sent Tom Kurvers to the Maple Leafs for Toronto's first draft choice in 1991.


Scott O'Dell, a Children's Author Of Historical Fiction, Dies at 91
LEAD: Scott O'Dell, who wrote ''Island of the Blue Dolphins'' and 25 other books for children, died of prostate cancer on Sunday at the Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 91 years old and lived in Waccabuc, N.Y.
His latest book, ''My Name Is Not Angelica,'' is to be published Oct.


Gibson (C.R.) Co (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibson (C.R.) Co (A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
16,088,000
13,589,000
Net inc
1,081,000
764,000
Share earns
.28
.20
9mo sales
41,639,000
35,444,000
Net inc
2,191,000
1,723,000
Share earns
.58
.46


Topics of The Times; Ferries vs. Gridlock
LEAD: Yesterday a new ferry service began shuttling rush hour commuters between New Jersey's rail hub in Hoboken and Battery Park City in lower Manhattan - the first such crossing in 22 years.
The new Hoboken ferry is a crucial component of a sound regional strategy to cope with the explosion in trans-Hudson commuter traffic.


McGill Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGill Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
27,400,000
24,386,000
Net inc
1,814,000
1,507,000
Share earns
1.25
1.04


Ohio Edison Co reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Edison Co (NYSE)
12mo to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,142,300,000
2,027,468,000
Net inc
b248,241,000
323,027,000
Share earns
1.44
1.88
b-Reflected a write-off of $128 million for certain nuclear construction costs.


States Face Deadline Today on Plans to Handle Toxic Waste
LEAD: The states, under pressure of a Federal deadline Tuesday, are submitting plans showing how they propose to dispose of hazardous wastes during the next 20 years.


Turbulence in London
LEAD: After all the pushing and shoving in Milan, store buyers and fashion editors seemed relieved to be in London.
But the English fashion scene is far from sedate, and the backstage business is quite as turbulent as Seventh Avenue.


Man Kills Wife and Children, Then Dies in Burning Home
LEAD: A man shot and killed his estranged wife and their two children today, then set fire to the house and killed himself, the police said.


Oslo Journal; In Ibsen's Land, Skateboard Is a Social Problem
LEAD: Bard Houik knew he was breaking the law but could not help himself.


Hughes to Buy Perkin-Elmer Unit
LEAD: The Hughes Aircraft Company, a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said it had signed an agreement to acquire the Electro-Optics Technology division of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.


Cyberoptics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,013,200
628,000
Net inc
96,000
54,000
Share earns
.04
.02
9mo rev
2,914,000
1,545,900
Net inc
321,400
118,600
Share earns
.13
.05


2 Koreas Move Toward an Accord for Visits
LEAD: South Korea and North Korea tentatively agreed today to allow visits between divided families for only the second time since 1945, but they remained divided on conditions for the exchanges.


South Carolina National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,521,000
14,118,000
Per share
.67
.65
9mo net inc
44,879,000
41,051,000
Per share
2.07
1.89


Summit Health Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Health Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
90,900,000
90,300,000
Net loss
b9,800,000
c10,200,000
Yr rev
375,800,000
358,900,000
Net loss
b8,400,000
c6,600,000
b-Included after pretax loss of $15.5 million on sale of assets.


Poland Passes a Bill to Offset Inflation
LEAD: The Polish Parliament enacted legislation today to compensate workers for roaring inflation, but support for the bill was not overwhelming, and some deputies contended that the measure would merely generate further pressure on prices.


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temple-Inland (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
479,900,000
454,600,000
Net inc
55,600,000
53,000,000
Share earns
2.01
1.90
Shares outst
27,608,000
27,870,000
9mo sales
1,419,100,000
1,328,800,000
Net inc
163,000,000
151,700,000
Share earns
5.89
5.44
Shares outst
27,667,000
27,869,000


Goldome reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldome (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
7,300,000
24,500,000
9mo net loss
271,500,000
56,000,000
the company had a gain of $11.5 million in the latest third quarter and 9 months from the sale of a business.


U.S. Suspends Richco Grain
LEAD: The Agriculture Department has suspended a United States grain exporting company from taking part in its export subsidy programs because of reported links with the fugitive trader Marc Rich.


Hofstra Clerical Workers Return to Offices
LEAD: Clerical workers at Hofstra University returned to work Monday after reaching a contract settlement late Friday evening that ended a six-week strike.


Di Giorgio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Di Giorgio Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
279,006,000
258,464,000
Net inc
2,098,000
2,478,000
Share earns
.40
.47
9mo sales
844,099,000
758,087,000
Net inc
6,624,000
6,894,000
Share earns
1.28
1.17
Shares outst
5,191,000
5,881,000


Treasury Notes and Bonds Drop
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped in moderately active trading yesterday, as dealers ignored a bigger-than-expected increase in the nation's trade deficit and focused instead on movements in stock prices and the dollar.


Goodrich (B.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodrich (B.F.) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
601,300,000
618,100,000
Net inc
b40,100,000
c60,700,000
Share earns
1.50
2.32
9mo sales
1,846,000,000
1,731,700,000
Net inc
b145,400,000
c158,500,000
Share earns
5.50
6.02


Danbury, Conn.
LEAD: IT'S ham and eggs and Harley-Davidsons every Sunday morning at the Marcus Dairy Bar, a family restaurant here where up to 800 motorcyclists convene in fair weather to share breakfast and tales of the road.


Minnesota Remains Only Unbeaten Team in the N.H.L.
LEAD: The Minnesota North Stars, a team that recently was an embarrassment and affront only to itself, continued their unexpected defiance of all competition this autumn by defeating the Islanders, 6-3, tonight at Nassau Coliseum.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It was an unbelievable thing.
The light towers were shaking.
I was stunned, stunned.''  - Mike Krukow, a pitcher for the San Francisco Giants, who was warming up for the World Series game when the earthquake hit.  [ A1:6. ]


Soda by Any Other Name
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Change in Leadership Is Expected in Turkey
LEAD: Turkey seemed headed for new Government leadership today when Prime Minister Turgut Ozal announced that he would run for President in an election that starts in Parliament this week.


Liquor Barn Sold In $40 Million Deal
LEAD: Liquor Barn, which has been under Federal bankruptcy court protection for nearly a year, has been purchased for $40 million by an investor group.
The assets of Liquor Barn Northern California and Liquor Barn Southern California were purchased by LBI Holdings, which plans to operate the 68-outlet chain, the nation's largest liquor retail chain, under the same name with new management.


Democrat Wins a House Seat in Mississippi
LEAD: State Senator Gene Taylor, a Democrat, won an overwhelming victory over his Republican opponent, Tom Anderson, in a special Congressional election today, giving the Democrats all five House seats from the state for the first time in 17 years.


P.L.O., Irked, Balks at U.S. Peace Plan
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization has registered strong objections to the newest United States ideas on Middle East peace, leaving Washington's diplomacy bereft of evident support from either the Israeli Government or Palestinian leaders.


Study Finds High Turnover in Child Care Workers
LEAD: People who care for children in day care centers are leaving their jobs in growing numbers and the turnover is hurting the children's development, according to a study released yesterday.


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacMillan Bloedel (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
818,000,000
824,400,000
Net inc
65,400,000
70,500,000
Share earns
.60
.66
9mo sales
2,487,000,000
2,472,400,000
Net inc
207,100,000
256,600,000
Share earns
1.92
2.40


Integra Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integra Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
18,200,000
17,800,000
Per share
.72
.70
9mo net inc
52,900,000
48,000,000
Per share
2.10
1.89
The company attributed the increase in net income for the first 9 months in part to a one-time, after-tax increase in non-interest income of $4.8 million, or 19 cents a share, resulting from a change in the method of calculating Pennsylvania shares tax applicable to banks.


Bearings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bearings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
156,585,000
143,470,000
Net inc
4,163,000
3,702,000
Share earns
.57
.48
All share earnings data for the quarter ended Sept. 30, 1988 have been restated to reflect the 3-for-2 stock split in June 1989.


Manufacturers Hanover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b789,000,000
c198,000,000
Per share
-
3.77
9mo net loss
b580,000,000
c742,000,000
Per share
-
14.28
b-Included an addition of $950 million to reserve against LDC debt, and a gain of $16 million from the sale of an interest in a foreign leasing company.


Ashton-Tate Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashton-Tate Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
53,916,000
75,714,000
Net loss
19,369,000
b11,739,000
Share earns
-
.45
Shares outst
26,148,000
26,163,000
9mo rev
203,208,000
219,985,000
Net loss
27,647,000
b34,311,000
Share earns
-
1.32
Shares outst
26,330,000
26,083,000


Officer Is Cleared in Shooting
LEAD: A grand jury concluded today that a white Vineland police officer acted properly when he shot and killed a black man whose death sparked two days of rioting and looting by blacks and Hispanics, prosecutors announced.


Broadbeach Sells Its Stake in McGill
LEAD: The private Los Angeles investment firm Broadbeach Associates Inc. has sold all but a small portion of its 7 percent stake in the McGill Manufacturing Company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the group gave no reason for the sale of the shares.
In August, Broadbeach had offered to acquire McGill for $62 a share, or $89.8 million.


Gerber Seeking Day-Care Buyer
LEAD: The Gerber Products Company said it would try to sell Gerber Children's Centers Inc., its child-care subsidiary that owns and operates 115 centers in 12 states.
The centers had revenues of more than $30 million for the year ended last March 31.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-12  East Berlin showed new signs that it is open to change.
A Politburo member told workers on Monday that Communists are committed to a dialogue for the ''renewal of socialism.'' Page A9


EATING WELL
LEAD: ''THE bottom line is that fat tastes good,'' said the chef at the Golden Door spa, as she tested the doneness of a broiling chicken breast with a practiced index finger. ''It's what emulsifies the sauces.
It's what fills you up and gives you a feeling of satiety.
So to switch from that you are taking a gamble.


Hubbell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
164,292,000
150,990,000
Net inc
19,055,000
17,078,000
Share earns
.70
.62
9mo sales
494,358,000
459,376,000
Net inc
59,131,000
52,844,000
Share earns
2.17
1.92


Polaroid Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polaroid Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
437,700,000
436,300,000
Net inc
29,900,000
b54,100,000
Share earns
.40
-
Shares outst
53,032,000
70,035,000
9mo sales
1,366,600,000
1,329,700,000
Net inc
98,500,000
b15,100,000
Share earns
1.27
-
Shares outst
59,364,000
64,624,000


Victor Norton, 86, Ex-Chairman of Amerace
LEAD: Victor Thane Norton, retired chief executive and chairman of the board of the Amerace Corporation, died of congestive heart failure Saturday at his summer home in Riverside, Conn.
He was 86 years old and also lived in Lighthouse Point, Fla.


Third Day Without a Verdict In Rep. Garcia's Bribery Trial
LEAD: The jury in the bribery trial of Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee, deliberated for its third day yesterday without reaching a verdict.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The  Markets


Washington Talk; Powell To Court: A Caution With Love
LEAD: During his 15 years on the Supreme Court, Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. rarely spoke from the bench.
When he did, he phrased his questions gently, his voice barely above a whisper.


New Drug Shows Stunning Success In Organ-Transplant Operations
LEAD: Researchers have discovered a powerful new drug that has had stunning success in preventing rejection of transplanted organs in its earliest tests among more than 100 recipients at the University of Pittsburgh.


Review/Opera; More Zeffirelli on the Grand Scale In the Met's New 'Traviata'
LEAD: At one time, Franco Zeffirelli was an opera director of artistic significance.
His productions for Maria Callas and for Joan Sutherland in the 1950's showed off their great if dissimilar talents to advantage.
His ''Falstaff'' at the old Metropolitan Opera House in 1964 raised staging standards there.


Smith Corona Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Corona Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
152,200,000
132,200,000
Net inc
16,900,000
13,800,000
Share earns
.54
.40
The company said 1988 included a $2.2 million pretax charge, or $1.5 million after taxes, related to a supplemental performance plan for certain key employees based on an increase in the value of the company.


CBS Not the Real Target of Faked-Film Charges
LEAD: To the Editor:


National Mine Service Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mine Service Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
15,925,000
14,923,000
Net inc
1,061,000
643,000
Share earns
.22
.13
6mo sales
31,448,000
28,798,000
Net inc
1,876,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.39
.25


63 Killed by Storms in China
LEAD: A series of three typhoons killed 63 people, and injured 712 in Hainan province in the South China Sea, the official New China News Agency said today.
Fifteen people were reported missing, the agency said.
The typhoons hit the island from Oct. 2 to 13, according to the agency.


Senate Votes, 64 to 35, to Send Money to the Opposition Parties in Nicaraguan
LEAD: In the last gasps of the debate over America's effort to overturn the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, the Bush Adminstration won Senate approval tonight to send $9 million to assist opposition parties in the election next February and to support international observers.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
463,474,000
457,746,000
Net inc
13,265,000
3,986,000
Share earns
.74
.23
9mo rev
1,424,269,000
1,340,531,000
Net inc
45,268,000
29,327,000
Share earns
2.54
1.66


McDonald's Offers McRib Sandwich
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation is adding McRib, a pork rib sandwich, to its menu, hoping to sell 80 million in a monthlong trial run.
The sandwich will feature a four-ounce portion of pork from the front shoulder of the hog and should sell for about $1.79, said David Green, McDonald's vice president of marketing.


Honeywell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honeywell Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
1,726,200,000
1,728,700,000
Net inc
74,400,000
b41,400,000
Share earns
1.73
-
9mo sales
5,173,700,000
5,218,400,000
Net inc
212,100,000
47,900,000
Share earns
4.92
1.13
Shares outst
43,107,905
42,400,826


Sim Var, Ex-Cambodian Premier, 85
LEAD: Sim Var, founder of the Cambodian Democratic Party and a former Prime Minister, has died in Paris, according to a statement issued on Saturday.
He was 85 years old.


Microsoft Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsoft Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
235,161,000
176,393,000
Net inc
49,588,000
36,582,000
Share earns
.87
.65


Review/Music; 'Pictures' by 4 Saxophones
LEAD: Mussorgsky's wonderful ''Pictures at an Exhibition'' are fated to be heard in all sorts of arrangements.
Vladimir Horowitz's embellishment of the keyboard original and Ravel's kaleidoscopic orchestration are the best known, but guitarists, organists and orchestrators reckless enough to invite comparison with Ravel and even rock bands have taken their shot at the work.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
D.
H.
Blair &amp; Co., an investment firm, appointed Norman Solomon senior vice president of corporate finance.


GTE Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTE Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,353,536,000
4,000,562,000
Net inc
367,557,000
312,713,000
Share earns
1.06
.91
9mo sales
12,799,630,000
12,150,694,000
Net inc
1,025,556,000
898,432,000
Share earns
3.01
2.62


McGraw-Hill Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGraw-Hill Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
452,185,000
416,690,000
Net inc
64,115,000
58,756,000
Share earns
1.31
1.21
9mo rev
1,270,944,000
1,194,587,000
Net inc
b146,056,000
130,535,000
Share earns
2.99
2.69


Lydia W. Malbin, 91, a Collector of European Art
LEAD: Lydia Winston Malbin, an art collector and patron who assembled a major collection of modern European art, died on Saturday at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Collective Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collective Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,133,000
3,033,000
Per share
.25
.35
Shares outst
8,709,151
8,652,846


Bridge
LEAD:  Suit combinations have a chameleon-like quality: depending on circumstances, there can be half a dozen or more ways to play the same combination.
Beginners who learn just one procedure for a given holding are left with a long way to go on the road to expertise.


Court Rejects 5 Challenges to Times Square Plan
LEAD: Five court challenges to the Times Square redevelopment plan were thrown out yesterday, and state officials predicted that construction would begin by early next year.


About New York; Baby Boy's Case: Poignancy In Sea of Flotsam
LEAD: A legal notice in the Sept. 30 issue of The New York Amsterdam News first surprises, then grabs and does not let go.
At the top is a picture of a boy in sneakers, smiling slightly and looking very small in a big chair.


Alaska to Restrict Tankers Without Approved Cleanup Plans
LEAD: The state of Alaska will bar oil tankers from the port of Valdez next month unless their owners equip them with oil spill cleanup plans approved by the state.


Canadian Pacific Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Pacific Forest
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
707,600,000
766,600,000
Net inc
45,100,000
92,600,000
Share earns
1.03
2.11
9mo sales
2,160,400,000
2,256,300,000
Net inc
183,100,000
241,200,000
Share earns
4.17
5.49


Baybanks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baybanks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
16,665,000
22,168,000
Per share
1.04
1.39
9mo net inc
56,356,000
65,166,000
Per share
3.52
4.10


Robert L. Myers, 66, an Industrial Chemist
LEAD: Robert L. Myers, a chemist involved in industrial research and development, died of renal failure and other complications last Thursday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.


Norwest Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
60,100,000
53,900,000
Per share
.64
.57
9mo net inc
175,900,000
155,300,000
Per share
1.87
1.66


Review/Television; Van Cliburn Competition: Both Glossy And Serious
LEAD: In a sense, a circle is completed with tonight's broadcast of ''The Eighth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition: Here to Make Music,'' on Channel 13 at 9 and on Channel 49 at 9:30.
Held in Fort Worth from May 27 to June 11, the competition is big, bold and flashy, eagerly inviting press and television coverage.


Warner-Lambert Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner-Lambert Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,107,966,000
1,031,362,000
Net inc
106,922,000
87,679,000
Share earns
1.58
1.29
Shares outst
67,690,000
67,795,000
9mo sales
3,152,349,000
2,910,538,000
Net inc
320,356,000
262,756,000
Share earns
4.73
3.86
Shares outst
67,736,000
68,107,000


Dinkins's Stock: Claims of Inattention vs. Claims of Smear
LEAD: The cable television stock that has emerged as a point of controversy in David N. Dinkins's mayoral campaign in New York City dates from 1972, when he invested $5,000 in a fledgling communications company.


Control Data's New Computer
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation today announced a new high-end mainframe computer, the Cyber 2000, which it said had twice the power of its current top model, the Cyber 990.


Editors' Note
LEAD: The Our Towns column yesterday reported on a strike by clerical workers at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I.
It focused on the concerns of clerical workers, almost all of them women, who contended that their salaries were unfairly set far below those of men in maintenance and other jobs comparable to theirs.


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,336,000
1,897,000
Per share
.22
.29
Shares outst
6,126,918
6,621,229
9mo net inc
4,683,000
5,343,000
Per share
.76
.80
Shares outst
6,162,987
6,680,395


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Avenue Magazine Starts A Japanese Edition
LEAD: Judy Price is starting a Japanese edition of Avenue magazine, the life- styles publication she founded 15 years ago.
Japan Avenue is scheduled to begin publication in April.


Housing Group Must Forfeit $700,000
LEAD: The Department of Housing and Urban Development said today it had reversed itself and would order a partnership that includes President Ronald Reagan's former chief campaign lawyer to forfeit nearly $700,000, much of it to be repaid to the Government.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, some copies of Science Times yesterday omitted page C12, which included the continuation of an article about occupational illness among artists and musicians.
Readers wishing copies may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.


Net Up 22.2% At McClatchy
LEAD: McClatchy Newspapers' net income increased 22.2 percent in its third quarter from the corresponding period last year.


2-Year College Viewed As Vital to Life in City
LEAD: Urban community colleges have the potential to improve the quality of life substantially in cities and spread equality of opportunity among their residents, but they need more government money and greater coordination of effort, a new report says.


Seidman Assails Regulator In Lincoln Savings Case
LEAD: L. William Seidman, the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, said today that the Government should have moved three years sooner to take disciplinary action against the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif.


Patriots Turn to Grogan
LEAD: Now that the younger Tony Eason and Doug Flutie have failed their opportunities to hold the starting quarterback job with the faltering New England Patriots (2-4), it is the turn of Steve Grogan, a 36-year-old and 14-year-veteran, to take over and attempt to revive the team's dormant offense.
Grogan, who in the off season underwent surgery to remove a herniated disk from his neck, said: ''If I'm not producing, there are guys on the bench who can play.


Ashton-Tate Reports Loss
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Company, as expected, reported a loss today, as revenues in its third quarter declined from a year ago.


Gunmen Kill Judge in Colombia
LEAD: A judge was killed in Medellin today in what an anonymous caller said was ''the first retaliation'' for the extradition of accused drug traffickers to the United States.


Equimark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,047,000
5,521,000
Per share
.48
.47
9mo net inc
b15,750,000
13,611,000
Per share
1.31
1.13
b-Included special bank shares tax of $640,000 for the quarter and $1,920,000 for the 9 months.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Cranberry Everything


McMahon May Be Out
LEAD: Jim McMahon, the San Diego quarterback, may not play against the Giants Sunday because of injuries he suffered in last Sunday's 17-16 loss to Seattle, Coach Dan Henning said Monday.
McMahon is bothered by a sprained ankle and bruised knee, but his most severe injury is a dislocated left shoulder he popped back in place by himself during the Seattle game, Henning said.(


UAL's Share Price Drops $24.875, to $198
LEAD: Stock in the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, fell another $24.875 yesterday, to $198, as speculators and option traders sold their shares, uncertainty continued about the financing for a buyout of the airline and the machinists' union renewed its efforts to block such a deal.


McGraw-Hill, Scripps Gain
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. reported yesterday that third-quarter earnings gained 9 percent from a year ago, while another large media company, the E. W. Scripps Company, said quarterly earnings jumped 34.3 percent.


Michael Carmine, 30, Stage and Film Actor
LEAD: Michael Carmine, an actor, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 30 years old.


Rains Force 2d Delay in Launching of Shuttle
LEAD: Thick clouds and showers forced at least a one-day postponement today of the launching of the space shuttle Atlantis, the second delay for the mission to send a spacecraft on its way to Jupiter.


Ringside Memorials for Three Crash Victims
LEAD: When Tim Witherspoon, the former World Boxing Association heavyweight champion, fights Anders Eklund tomorrow night at Trump Plaza, a bell will toll before the match in memory of the three Trump organization executives - Mark Etess, Stephen Hyde and John Benanov - who died in a helicopter crash Oct.


Now Is the Time to Vote for a New Charter for New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grainger (W.W.) Inc(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grainger (W.W.) Inc(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
438,366,000
408,118,000
Net inc
28,839,000
29,782,000
Share earns
1.05
1.07
9mo sales
1,278,902,000
1,150,924,000
Net inc
b86,729,000
82,941,000
Share earns
3.18
2.98


Beverly Hills Hires Strike Substitutes
LEAD: Substitute teachers were hired to keep classes open during the first teachers' strike in this city, although discipline problems were reported in some classrooms.


Review/Recital; A Prize-Winning Pianist
LEAD: Adrienne Krausz, a 22-year-old pianist from Hungary, was the winner of the World Piano Competition of Cincinnati this year, and as part of her prize she was presented in her New York debut recital on Sunday evening at Alice Tully Hall.


Book Notes
LEAD:  'Satanic Verses'


Cyril Mathew, Sri Lanka Politician, 77
LEAD: Cyril Mathew, a former Sri Lankan Industries Minister and an ardent crusader for Sinhalese nationalism, died of a heart attack on Monday.
He was 77 years old.


Morgan Stanley Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
582,418,000
423,801,000
Net inc
101,127,000
52,438,000
Share earns
2.54
1.31
Shares outst
38,043,877
36,859,953
9mo rev
1,748,105,000
1,609,243,000
Net inc
294,386,000
286,342,000
Share earns
7.40
7.41
Shares outst
37,874,529
37,243,626


Multimedia Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multimedia Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
112,860,000
107,952,000
Net inc
7,694,000
4,455,000
Share earns
.62
.36
9mo rev
340,177,000
322,218,000
Net inc
23,121,000
13,784,000
Share earns
1.86
1.13


Assembly Plant For Subaru-Isuzu
LEAD: Subaru-Isuzu Automotive Inc., formed by two relatively small Japanese auto makers, has formally opened an auto assembly plant.
Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., which owns a 51 percent share of the operation, will produce its Subaru Legacy sedans and station wagons here, while Isuzu Motors Ltd., which owns 49 percent, will turn out pickup trucks and sports utility vehicles.


Anti-Incinerator Stand Brings a Blessing
LEAD: No election issue this year moves the Satmar Hasidic community of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn more than the incinerator the city proposes to put in the nearby Brooklyn Navy Yard.
That was why on Monday night in the middle of the Succoth holidays, David N. Dinkins -who has called for a moratorium on incinerators - found himself enveloped in the community's warm, almost crushing embrace.


Southwestern Bell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,208,700,000
2,234,600,000
Net inc
295,300,000
323,300,000
Share earns
.98
1.08
Shares outst
300,500,000
300,500,000
9mo rev
6,406,800,000
6,266,500,000
Net inc
795,600,000
754,900,000
Share earns
2.65
2.51
Shares outst
300,600,000
300,600,000


Hope in the Elephant Graveyard
LEAD: The African elephant has now been officially classified as an endangered species.
That's remarkably good news.
No less remarkable is that it took so long to see the obvious.


Soviets Conditionally Readmitted To World Psychiatric Association
LEAD: The Soviet Union was conditionally readmitted tonight to the World Psychiatric Association after its delegation publicly acknowledged that there had been abuses of psychiatry for political reasons.


Review/Pop; After 25 Years, Kinks Retain Their Scale and Informality
LEAD: The Kinks aren't playing at stadiums like their contemporaries, the Who and the Rolling Stones - just middle-sized theaters like the Beacon, where the British band performed on Monday night.
And their shows aren't elaborate spectacles, but amiable, scrappy, slightly disheveled concerts that reaffirm the band's perseverance and moxie.


Seagate Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
378,892,000
303,220,000
Net inc
23,432,000
b52,807,000
Share earns
.45
-
Shares outst
51,783,000
49,718,000
b-Net loss


Now Is the Time to Vote for a New Charter for New York City; A Halt on Waterfront
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soybean and Corn Prices Up On Talk of Communist Deals
LEAD: Rumors of more United States trade with Communist nations sent futures traders scurrying to buy soybeans and corn yesterday, eclipsing stock-index futures as the the center of action in the commodity pits.


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,152,304,000
1,116,328,000
Net inc
174,723,000
185,447,000
Share earns
.85
.90
Shares outst
205,662,918
205,350,418
9mo rev
3,488,007,000
3,210,040,000
Net inc
442,808,000
444,224,000
Share earns
2.16
2.16
Shares outst
205,455,729
205,350,418


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Bell (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
223,271,000
191,424,000
Net inc
22,996,000
23,428,000
Share earns
.37
.36
Shares outst
59,721,000
62,632,000
9mo rev
673,177,000
543,271,000
Net inc
71,611,000
67,023,000
Share earns
1.14
1.05
Shares outst
60,037,000
62,738,000


Dollar Ends Mixed in U.S. After Declining in Europe
LEAD: The dollar recovered from an early loss yesterday and finished mixed in United States trading after falling against most major currencies in trading in Europe following the news of a bigger-than-expected United States trade deficit.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Flames 8, Nordiques 8: Calgary tied a National Hockey League record by scoring two goals, both short-handed, in four seconds and also had three goals in a 27-second span in the third period in Quebec to tie Nordiques.
With the Flames' Gary Roberts off for roughing in the final minute, Calgary (4-1-2) pulled its goaltender, Mike Vernon, and sent five attackers against the Nordiques.


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
357,599
575,216
Per share
.39
.63
9mo net inc
1,061,387
1,144,519
Per share
1.17
1.25


Aristech Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aristech Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
230,400,000
278,000,000
Net inc
21,900,000
41,600,000
Share earns
.64
1.11
Shares outst
32,509,381
37,359,034
9mo sales
773,800,000
806,700,000
Net inc
67,000,000
b153,300,000
Share earns
1.93
4.07
Shares outst
33,506,632
37,625,320


Market Trims Losses After Morning Plunge
LEAD: After tumbling on Friday and recovering somewhat on Monday, the stock market closed yesterday with moderate losses.
In the morning, the benchmark


Gatx Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gatx Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
185,000,000
152,600,000
Net inc
17,800,000
13,100,000
Share earns
1.66
1.40
Shares outst
9,651,000
9,537,000
9mo rev
514,300,000
429,400,000
Net inc
50,500,000
38,000,000
Share earns
5.12
4.07
Shares outst
9,631,000
9,531,000


Market Place; 'Witching Hour' Next Street Focus
LEAD: THE witches of Wall Street are gathering for a minor convention this Friday afternoon.
And while forecasting what will happen is perilous at best, the talk among traders is that when all is said and done, the witches will have pushed up prices in major stocks, at least for a period.


EARTHQUAKE IN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
LEAD: This New York Times report on the earthquake in California was reported and written by Dave Anderson, Katherine Bishop, Murray Chass, Joseph Durso, Jane Gross and George Vecsey in San Francisco; Seth Mydans and Richard W. Stevenson in Los Angeles; Allan R. Gold, Andrew Rosenthal and Philip Shenon in Washington; Sandra Blakeslee in Topanga, Calif., and James Barron, Constance L.


A Precedent-Setting Cabernet
LEAD: IN 1974, Stag's Leap Wine Cellars made its first Cask 23, a reserve cabernet sauvignon made only in the best years from outstanding fruit.
The wine became a Napa Valley benchmark because of its quality, and has long been a collector's item.
The 1985 Cask 23 was released Oct. 1, and its price apparently has acquired near-benchmark status.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airbus Industrie, a consortium of European aircraft manufacturers, said it had received 99 firm orders and 74 options for its proposed short-to-medium range A321 airliner.


Harvard Scholar May Get Rare Tenure Bid
LEAD: A Harvard University expert on Vietnamese history says she has been offered tenure, nearly two decades after Harvard made its last such appointment in the history department.


Gerber Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
290,651,000
273,946,000
Net inc
b26,491,000
c21,995,000
Share earns
.70
.56
Shares outst
37,682,000
39,582,000
6mo rev
554,538,000
513,209,000
Net inc
b53,308,000
c40,413,000
Share earns
1.41
1.02
Shares outst
37,862,000
39,568,000


VIOLENT QUAKE HITS NORTHERN CALIFORNIA; HUNDREDS DEAD; DISASTER SCOPE UNCLEAR; HIGHWAY AND BAY BRIDGE'S DECK COLLAPSE
LEAD: A devastating earthquake rocked the San Francisco Bay area at rush hour last night, killing at least 200 people, collapsing a mile-long span of an Interstate highway and wrecking part the Bay Bridge to Oakland.


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,050,000
4,044,000
Per share
.58
.58
9mo net inc
12,428,000
11,246,000
Per share
1.79
1.62
Results for all periods restated to include results of Chesapeake Bank Corp., which merged with Jefferson on Sept.


Bruno's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruno's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
531,174,000
467,363,000
Net inc
12,806,000
b13,975,000
Share earns
.16
.17
Shares outst
81,557,000
81,524,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $3,577,000, or 4 cents a share, from an accounting adjustment.


Abortion Opponents Dealt Setback in Illinois
LEAD: In a setback to opponents of abortion, a legislative committee decided today that the Illinois House of Representatives would not consider legislation to restrict abortions at its current two-week special session.


Maytag Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maytag Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
796,500,000
490,700,000
Net inc
29,300,000
b37,600,000
Share earns
.28
.49
Shares outst
106,100,000
76,600,000
9mo sales
2,290,000,000
1,410,000,000
Net inc
91,700,000
b106,000,000
Share earns
.89
1.38
Shares outst
103,100,000
76,600,000


McClatchy Newspapers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McClatchy Newspapers Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
94,876,000
88,284,000
Net inc
8,759,000
7,208,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
28,531,000
28,457,000
9mo rev
279,126,000
261,274,000
Net inc
23,597,000
19,226,000
Share earns
.83
.68
Shares outst
28,517,000
28,158,000


Probert Gets 3 Months
LEAD: Bob Probert, the former Detroit Red Wing, was sentenced by District Judge Patrick Duggan today to three months in prison and fined $2,000 for smuggling cocaine into the United States from his native Canada.


Pretoria Eases Stand on Talks With Rebel Group
LEAD: The senior official entrusted with organizing multiracial negotiations on South Africa's future today softened the Government's longstanding refusal to talk to the outlawed African National Congress.


A Judicial Dispute Spills Into the Bellevue Murder Trial


Executive Search Finds A New Chief for Zemex
LEAD: The Zemex Corporation, a producer of industrial minerals, metal powders and tin, said yesterday that Gerard E. Wood had been named its new president and chief executive.


Bank Revamping
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation said it would undertake a retructuring program that includes the sale of 53 branches and the consolidation of a number of departments.
The result will be the loss of 800 jobs throughout New England, the bank said.
The company said it also plans to close loan production offices in Chicago, New York and Philadelphia and to sell $250 million of subordinated debt.


South Korea Offers Plans To Ease U.S. Trade Surplus
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea told President Bush today that his nation would take significant steps to curb its trade surplus with the United States by the mid-1990's.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: LAMB is the most popular meat in most of the Mediterranean region, including the Middle East and North Africa, so it is no surprise that some of the best lamb recipes come from those regions.
It is not always easy to identify a particular dish as being, say, of Moroccan origin as opposed to Tunisian.


Federal Express Drops Ads
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation has canceled much of its prime-time advertising on the ABC television network, after a report by ABC News that was sharply critical of it.


Mr. Jaruzelski Smiles
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, who resigned as Communist Party leader to become President of Poland, speaks enthusiastically now about the coalition entrusted with guiding his country through a profound transformation to freedom.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.68
8.62
8.34
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.50
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.52
7.54
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
7.96
8.66
30-YR.


A Casualty of the Continuing Soviet Ethnic Unrest


Baltimore Accepts Post Despite Faculty Outcry
LEAD: Dr.
David Baltimore, the Nobel laureate whose selection as president of Rockefeller University was opposed by many senior faculty members, has accepted the position.


Arab-Sicilian Food: Tale of 1,001 Years
LEAD: Many people in this university town know Clifford Wright only as a scholar and an author of thoughtful studies of United States policy in the Middle East.
But friends, family and fortunate dinner guests know him as an enthusiastic cook, an engaging host, a tireless researcher of old recipes and an energetic student of a sumptuous cuisine that he calls Arab


Adults Play Hard At Nongame Games
LEAD: ADULT Americans are spending their leisure time at home playing games at a pace not seen since the 1950's when television was just emerging as a home-entertainment force.
And the games they seem to enjoy playing most are those that play down the competitive element - nongame games, as one expert calls them.


Report Shows No Evidence Waldheim Mistreated British P.O.W.'s
LEAD: A narrowly focused British Defense Ministry report has found no evidence that Kurt Waldheim interrogated British prisoners of war or was responsible for the harsh treatment or execution of British commandos in Greece in 1943 and 1944, when he was an intelligence officer with the German Army.


Rise in Babies Hurt by Drugs Is Predicted
LEAD: If current drug abuse patterns continue, 5 percent of all newborn babies in New York City could require admission to intensive-care wards by 1995, state health officials say.


Profit Up 35.5% At Microsoft
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation yesterday reported strong gains in revenues and earnings at a time when other software companies have reported losses or lower earnings.


Yields Offered by Banks For Deposits Fell in Week
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions fell in the week ended yesterday.


Broncos Add Shanahan
LEAD: Mike Shanahan, who was dismissed as coach of the Los Angeles Raiders Oct. 3, has rejoined the Denver Broncos as the quarterbacks coach.
Coach Dan Reeves, who has been coaching the quarterbacks, said he didn't think he had enough time to devote to them anymore.
Before joining the Raiders in 1988, Shanahan was an assistant coach in Denver for four seasons, serving as offensive coordinator.


U.S. Economists Are Ready to Advise the Soviets
LEAD: American officials said today that they were prepared to advise the Soviet Union on how to revive its stagnant economy by decontrolling prices, cutting Government subsidies, encouraging private enterprise and permitting the exchange of rubles for gold and foreign currencies.


Bills' Defense and an Unheralded Passer Foil the Rams
LEAD: For five games, the Buffalo Bills' Blizzard Defense had the strength of a brief flurry.
But Monday night, in a stunning, come-from-behind victory, it froze the high-powered Rams and handed Los Angeles its first loss this season.


Eastland Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastland Financial Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
15,697,000
b2,063,000
Per share
-
c
9mo net loss
12,415,000
b4,176,000
Per share
-
c
b-Net income  c-Per share earnings not available; the company went public in July 1988.


Exchange Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exchange Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,313,000
7,128,000
Per share
.49
.42
9mo net inc
23,532,000
16,364,000
Per share
1.39
.98
Year-ago 9 months included $2,043,000 negative effect of an accounting change.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
United States Mint, to Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising, for its numismatic contract, with a budget of $5 million.


Would New Charter Create Throne Room at City Hall?
LEAD: For much of New York City's history, the mayor has been the dominant figure in municipal government.
Whether he would be made stronger under the proposal from the Charter Revision Commission is at the heart of the debate over the city's future.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article on Monday about the special election yesterday for the Fifth Congessional District seat in Mississippi carried misplaced lines and paragraphs in some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.


Incinerator Delay: Impact Is Debated
LEAD: A proposal by David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor, to delay the garbage-burning incinerator planned for the Brooklyn Navy Yard might jeopardize the project seriously or have almost no effect on its already tortured route through governmental bureaucracy.


Fab Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fab Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
47,590,000
36,122,000
Net inc
3,218,000
2,415,000
Share earns
.98
.69
Shares outst
3,282,406
3,516,527
9mo sales
126,516,000
107,034,000
Net inc
8,104,000
6,580,000
Share earns
2.46
1.87
Shares outst
3,288,769
3,520,216


RHNB Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RHNB Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
671,461
752,008
Per share
.29
.33
9mo net inc
1,717,949
1,486,588
Per share
.75
.65


ABC Ends Reign by NBC
LEAD: ABC received far less power than expected from Jose Canseco and Will Clark but still put an end to the longest winning streak in television history as it won the weekly Nielsen ratings race.
NBC had been first 68 weeks in a row.


VF Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VF Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
695,392,000
672,350,000
Net inc
51,965,000
53,650,000
Share earns
.80
.79
Shares outst
64,678,000
68,196,000
9mo sales
1,869,303,000
1,911,146,000
Net inc
135,745,000
135,469,000
Share earns
2.03
1.99
Shares outst
67,018,000
68,139,000


Judge and Officer Trade Insults at Murder Trial
LEAD: To the head of the New York court officer's union, Justice James J. Leff of State Supreme Court is a ''psycho'' who should be locked up.
To Justice Leff, the union head, Dennis W. Quirk, is a snoop who was ''aptly named.''


Walter Farley, 74, A Writer of a Series On a Black Stallion
LEAD: Walter Farley, whose 20 ''Black Stallion'' novels about the friendships between horses and children charmed young readers for nearly 50 years, died of heart failure yesterday at a hospital near his home in Venice, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Venice and on a farm near Earlville, Pa.


'Apartment Zero' and Its Strange Tenant
''Apartment Zero,'' opening today at the Eighth Street Playhouse, is set in Buenos Aires in 1988 and is about a young man named Adrian LeDuc who is obsessed by movies.
He runs a movie theater devoted to old American films.
When first met, Adrian is in the projection booth of the Cine York, wiping away a tear as he watches the closing scene of ''A Touch of Evil.''
The apartment he has shared with his mother, now hospitalized and dying of what appears to be terminal neuroticism, is filled with framed 8-by-10 glossies of such stars as Montgomery Clift, Elizabeth Taylor and Charles Laughton.
Adrian relates to life only through films.


Net Rises At Morgan Stanley
LEAD: Largely because of one major deal, the Morgan Stanley Group Inc., the Wall Street investment banking firm, doubled its net income for the third quarter over the corresponding period last year.


Lukens Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lukens Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
166,805,000
157,331,000
Net inc
11,648,000
8,509,000
Share earns
1.31
1.00
9mo sales
489,063,000
449,703,000
Net inc
27,700,000
23,785,000
Share earns
3.17
2.79


Review/Music; Orfeo, a Spanish Early-Music Ensemble
LEAD: We should all begin to brace ourselves for the second coming of Christopher Columbus.
The blessed event - the 500th anniversary of Columbus's rather considerable discovery - is still more than two years away, yet the first rumblings of celebration are beginning to be heard.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
358,000,000
394,000,000
Per share
.99
1.13
9mo net inc
1,282,000,000
1,111,000,000
Per share
3.62
3.17
The latest 9 months included an after-tax gain of $77 million from the sale of premises in Japan in the first quarter.


Books of The Times; Families to Whom Wartime Is Incidental
LEAD:  Voices in the Evening  By Natalia Ginzburg  Translated by D. M. Low. 171 pages.
Arcade/Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95.


Merck &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,632,800,000
1,468,800,000
Net inc
390,500,000
311,800,000
Share earns
.99
.79
Shares outst
395,400,000
396,000,000
9mo sales
4,789,400,000
4,405,400,000
Net inc
1,127,500,000
899,500,000
Share earns
2.85
2.28
Shares outst
396,300,000
395,300,000


Corestates Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corestates Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
50,198,000
45,014,000
Per share
1.27
1.15
Shares outst
39,546,000
39,298,000
9mo net inc
147,949,000
129,414,000
Per share
3.75
3.30
Shares outst
39,487,000
39,247,000


Real Estate; New Office Projects for Mitchel Field
LEAD: NOW that some controversies between local officials and developers over leases and development rights at Mitchel Field have been resolved, a new spurt of office building is under way at the former military base in Nassau County.


President Picks Hispanic Woman To Become U.S. Surgeon General
LEAD: Dr.
Antonia Novello, a pediatrician and an expert on AIDS in children, has been chosen to be the Bush Administration's nominee for Surgeon General of the United States, Administration officials said today.


Face It, the Dollar Coin Seems Doomed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corning Inc reports earnings for 16wks to Oct 8
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Inc (NYSE)
16wks to Oct 8
1989
1988
Sales
715,000,000
625,400,000
Net inc
b76,500,000
c123,900,000
Share earns
.80
1.37
40wk sales
1,828,300,000
1,578,500,000
Net inc
b187,700,000
c159,100,000
Share earns
2.03
1.76


COMPANY ENDS USE OF APPLE CHEMICAL
LEAD: The only manufacturer of an apple-ripening agent found to cause cancer in laboratory animals has all but ended the chemical's use by halting most overseas sales of it.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
FKB Group P.L.C., the British marketing and sales promotion company, has acquired Audio Visual Medical Marketing Inc., a health care marketing agency in New York.
Terms were not disclosed.


Capital Gains Cut Would Further Roil Markets; How to 'Soak the Rich'
LEAD: To the Editor:


A&amp;W Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A&amp;W Brands (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
31,880,000
30,347,000
Net inc
2,446,000
1,708,000
Share earns
.26
.18
Shares outst
9,057,000
9,027,000
9mo sales
87,710,000
81,522,000
Net inc
7,199,000
5,106,000
Share earns
.78
.55
Shares outst
9,049,000
9,014,000


Desperate Jets Sign Receiver
LEAD: The Jets, who were down to only two wide receivers who had ever caught a pass in an National Football League game, today signed Phillip Epps, an experienced speedster who had spent his career with Green Bay.
The Packers cut Epps before the season.


A UAL Rumor Is Proved False
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation traded as low as $194 a share yesterday morning, in part because of a rumor that Kellner, DiLeo &amp; Company, a large arbitrage firm, had sustained heavy losses and was being forced to liquidate a large position in UAL to repay creditors.


First Security Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
11,323,000
9,114,000
Per share
.92
.74
9mo net inc
31,572,000
24,192,000
Per share
2.56
1.97


Du Pont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont Canada
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
328,700,000
316,900,000
Net inc
14,900,000
21,400,000
Share earns
.48
.68
9mo sales
1,076,000,000
1,040,000,000
Net inc
b78,100,000
b102,600,000
Share earns
2.50
3.25


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
103,359,000
68,952,000
Net inc
3,499,000
bc2,146,000
Share earns
.41
-
Shares outst
9,715,120
8,469,991
9mo sales
346,448,000
265,321,000
Net inc
13,135,000
c3,274,000
Share earns
1.54
.39
Shares outst
9,240,440
8,957,568


Home Loan Bank Board Offering
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board yesterday priced at par a four-part bond offering totaling $2.27 billion through various securities dealers.


First Midwest Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,247,000
3,883,000
Per share
.45
.33
9mo net inc
17,815,000
10,633,000
Per share
1.52
.91


Miroslaw Dzielski, 47, Polish Political Leader
LEAD: Miroslaw Dzielski, a Polish political leader who espoused entrepreneurship and market-economy principles in his native country, died of bladder cancer on Sunday at the hospital of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
He was 47 years old and lived in Cracow, Poland.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the New Jersey Weekly last Sunday about the Cranberry Festival in Chatsworth gave an incorrect date for one day of the two-day event.
It is scheduled for Saturday and Sunday, not Friday; the rain dates are Oct. 28 and 29, not Oct. 27.


Eastern Air Is Rebuilding At Fast Pace
LEAD: Top executives of Eastern Airlines said yesterday that because a substantial number of striking workers were returning, they expected the airline to emerge from bankruptcy by early next year at 85 to 90 percent of its former size.


Soviets Abstain in U.N. Vote on Israel
LEAD: The Soviet Union abstained today in a vote to accept the Israeli delegation's credentials instead of joining Arab countries in seeking Israel's expulsion from the General Assembly.


White House Backs Call For C.I.A. Role in Coups
LEAD: The White House today endorsed calls for more latitude for the Central Intelligence Agency in supporting potentially violent efforts to overthrow foreign dictators, joining what is likely to become a heated debate on the issue between Congress and the Executive Branch.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Grey Advertising Fills Deputy Creative Post
LEAD: Grey Advertising yesterday appointed Stephen A. Novick the deputy creative director of its New York office.
Mr.
Novick, 49 years old, an executive vice president who has been the agency's director of broadcast production for 18 years, will report to Richard M. Karp, Grey's head of creative services.


James Kirby Jr., Law Professor, Is Dead at 61
LEAD: James C. Kirby Jr., a law professor who taught at five schools and an expert on legal ethics, died of a heart attack Saturday at his home in Nashville.
He was 61 years old.
For the last 11 years he had been on the faculty at the University of Tennessee Law School in Knoxville, where he served as acting dean in 1980 and 1981.


Ethyl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
613,701,000
521,241,000
Net inc
54,788,000
c62,202,000
Share earns
.45
.51
Shares outst
119,813,000
120,969,000
9mo rev
1,786,749,000
1,515,063,000
Net inc
b168,741,000
c172,165,000
Share earns
1.40
1.42
Shares outst
120,257,000
120,977,000


Profit Posted At Affiliated
LEAD: Affiliated Publications Inc., parent company of The Boston Globe, reported last week that it had earned $8.5 million in the third quarter, compared with a loss a year earlier.


Dominion Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
23,601,000
20,927,000
Per share
.62
.54
Shares outst
37,656,564
38,212,883
9mo net inc
70,170,000
61,982,000
Per share
1.83
1.60
Shares outst
37,764,436
38,121,369


Trade Deficit Widened by Import Surge
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit grew sharply in August, to $10.8 billion, as imports surged to a record and exports showed a small decline, the Commerce Department reported today.


Let Him Eat Cake
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Defeated Hopeful in Delaware Sues Governor on Funds Use
LEAD: The Democrat who lost the race for lieutenant governor in Delaware last year has sued the Republican Governor, Michael N. Castle, accusing him of illegally diverting campaign money to his own choice for the post.


Graphs of Industrial Production from April '88-Sept. '89 (source: Federal Reserve Board) (NYT); total output as a percentage of capacity from April '88-Sept. '89 (source: Federal Reserve Board) (NYT); Industrial Output Shows First Drop in Six Months
LEAD: Industrial production slipped by one-tenth of 1 percent in September, the first drop in six months, the Federal Reserve said today in a report that reflected continued weakness in the economy's manufacturing sector.


Reviews/Music; Alessandra Marc Makes Her Met Debut as Aida
LEAD: Alessandra Marc's debut as Aida on Saturday afternoon was one of those events that pose critical questions for the Metropolitan Opera and what might be called the vocal-operatic establishment.


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,707,894
8,403,924
Per share
.69
.66
9mo net inc
25,432,602
24,437,224
Per share
2.00
1.92


Affiliated Banc Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Banc Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,004,000
1,368,000
Per share
.27
.35
Shares outst
3,709,000
3,938,000
9mo net inc
1,283,000
3,710,000
Per share
.34
.94
Shares outst
3,792,000
3,932,000


Chambers Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chambers Development (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,185,000
35,373,000
Net inc
7,331,000
4,781,000
Share earns
.27
.19
Shares outst
27,025,000
23,155,000
9mo sales
129,470,000
100,706,000
Net inc
19,431,000
b15,636,000
Share earns
.78
.68


Suburban Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
120,000
109,000
Per share
.09
.08
9mo net inc
438,000
189,000
Per share
.36
.12


Whitman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,022,900,000
896,700,700
Net inc
b53,600,000
c77,900,000
Share earns
.43
.72
Shares outst
102,600,000
107,500,000
9mo sales
2,838,100,000
2,464,200,000
Net inc
b119,000,000
c150,700,000
Share earns
.90
1.62
Shares outst
102,600,000
107,700,000


Area of Quake Was Pegged as Risky
LEAD: The earthquake that shook Northern California tonight occurred on a segment of the San Andreas fault that geologists had identified two years ago as one of those most at risk of a major quake in the near future.


MCI Profit Jumps 58.7%; GTE's Net Also Rises
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation and the GTE Corporation reported sharply higher third-quarter earnings yesterday.
Another telephone company, the Southwestern Bell Corporation, said its profits had fallen, mainly because of one-time factors.


Campaign Trail; Giuliani Combines Street Grit And Glitz
LEAD: From the mean streets of the Bushwick section of Brooklyn to a posh dining room with glittering chandeliers in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani devoted most of yesterday to the issues of drugs and crime.


Lessons
LEAD: rrGov.
Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey has a theory: Woodrow Wilson left the presidency of Princeton University to run for governor because he was worn out by academic politics.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Winifred Barnes has joined Wunderman Worldwide as senior vice president and management supervisor.


Rumbling Near Sunset Dashes Vision of Baseball
LEAD: At 5:03 P.M. yesterday, Candlestick Park was filled with the light of the setting sun.
The only rumble was from the 58,000 fans watching the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland Athletics warming up for the third game of the World Series.


Bagels Done the Old Way
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Next Inc. Is Offering Improvements in Its Work Station
LEAD: Next Inc., the company founded in 1986 by Steven P. Jobs, the former chairman of Apple Computer Inc., announced two significant developments yesterday.
It said that it would add an accelerator to its computer work station to resolve complaints about slow performance and that it would offer a lower-cost version of the work station for use on computer networks.


Large Loral Order
LEAD: The Loral Corporation said it had received a $325 million order, the largest in its history, to equip the Turkish Ministry of Defenses fleet of F-16 aircraft with ALQ-178 rapport III electronic countermeasures systems.
The General Dynamics Corporation makes the F-16.
Loral, a New York-based high-technology company specializing in military electronics, said deliveries would run from October 1991 through mid-1995.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Roger Ailes, the Republican media consultant, misattributed a quotation from his 1988 book ''You Are the Message'' (Dow Jones-Irwin).
It was Mr.
Ailes, not President Ronald Reagan, who wrote this passage, referring to what Mr.
Ailes calls ''the like factor'': ''I call it the magic bullet because if your audience likes you, they'll forgive you just about everything else you do wrong.


Viacom to Sell a 50% Stake In Showtime TV Service
LEAD: Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell a 50 percent stake in Showtime, the nation's second-largest pay television service, to Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator, for $225 million.


Calmat reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calmat (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
188,188,000
183,137,000
Net inc
16,535,000
18,234,000
Share earns
.53
.58
9mo rev
517,360,000
503,702,000
Net inc
b46,866,000
44,041,000
Share earns
1.51
1.41


Granite State Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granite State Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
439,999
397,000
Per share
.19
.19
Shares outst
1,864,723
2,099,962
9mo net inc
1,277,000
1,002,000
Per share
.54
.48
Shares outst
1,935,470
2,099,962


Merchants National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
12,720,000
11,188,000
Per share
.87
.78
9mo net inc
37,969,000
32,878,000
Per share
2.59
2.28


Unnecessary, or Worse, for Airlines
LEAD: Should the public worry about attempted airline takeovers, like Donald Trump's aborted bid for American Airlines?
Such takeovers inevitably saddle new management with huge debt.
That, in turn, raises fears that the company will go bankrupt or else skimp on safety.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
from '88
Aristech Chemical Corp.
$ 21,900,000
-47.4
Ashton-Tate Co.
(19,400,000)
-
Corning Inc.
76,500,000
-38.3
Gerber Products Co.
26,500,000
+20.5
GTE Corp.
367,600,000
+17.6
B.F. Goodrich Co.
40,100,000
-33.9
Honeywell Inc.


Out of Bounds
LEAD: Joe Schmelzer, a junior linebacker at Pacific University in Forest Grove, Ore., has been suspended for the rest of the season by Bob Bonn, the athletic director, for a play deemed out of bounds in a game last Saturday against Linfield.


Dow Ends With Drop Of 18.65
LEAD: After a turbulent morning that saw share prices briefly plunge, the stock market closed yesterday with moderate losses.


BRITAIN MAY FREE 4 CONVICTED IN '75
LEAD: The British Government took steps today that could lead to the release of four people who were convicted in 1975 in the bombing of an English bar, in which five people were killed.


Economic Scene; The Morning Line On the Next Nobel
LEAD: TRYGVE who?
It is a safe bet that most economists under age 50 barely recognized the name of the latest winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, announced last week in Sweden.
Trygve Haavelmo's critical contributions to the infant discipline of econometrics in the 1940's are now ancient history.


Capital Gains Cut Would Further Roil Markets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shaken by Charges of Corruption, Gandhi Calls for Vote Next Month
LEAD: Ending weeks of speculation, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi called today for general elections to be held next month, two months ahead of schedule.


A Prosperity Agenda for the 90's
LEAD: The mayoral candidates make a lot of noise about fighting drugs and crime, but they have yet to tell us how to pay for it.
With New York's economy deteriorating, we need a mayor who understands the connection between economic growth and social priorities.


Night, Not Despair, Falls Over a Shaken City
LEAD: The night promised renewed dreams.
The World Series was back in San Francisco and the only thing that people had on their minds was to hurry home, flash on the television and cherish a rare joy, Then, as if the city had been hurtled into some twilight dimension, San Francisco's quirky charms crumbled, and its people too frightened to show fear.


Nicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
173,000,000
144,900,000
Net inc
3,700,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.11
.02
9mo rev
987,300,000
915,400,000
Net inc
73,500,000
68,700,000
Share earns
2.43
2.24


Life Term in Family Ax Slaying
LEAD: A teen-ager has been sentenced to life in prison for killing his parents, brother and sister with an ax at the family's rural home here a year and a half ago.
The punishment was imposed Monday on David Brom, now 18 years old, by Judge Ancy Morse of Olmsted County District Court, who said the case was an ''extreme and monumental tragedy'' caused by a ''pathetically sick, depressed mind.


Hawaiian Electric Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawaiian Electric Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
240,039,000
194,983,000
Net inc
18,598,000
15,846,000
Share earns
.88
.79
Shares outst
21,026,000
20,125,000
9mo rev
657,008,000
536,869,000
Net inc
50,949,000
42,870,000
Share earns
2.44
2.32
Shares outst
20,887,000
18,459,000


Tokyo Stocks Rise In Morning Session
LEAD: Stock prices in Tokyo continued to climb this morning, despite a decline yesterday in the United States market.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scripps Howard Broadcasting (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
69,923,000
64,915,000
Net inc
2,869,000
2,450,000
Share earns
.28
.24
9mo rev
217,026,000
195,171,000
Net inc
12,050,000
8,295,000
Share earns
1.17
.80


Salvador Foes at Peace Talks Say No to Each Other's Ideas
LEAD: The Salvadoran Government and rebels held their second day of talks here today, with the guerrillas calling for a purge of senior officers of the armed forces.
The idea was promptly dismissed by the Government.


Rangers Skate To a Tie In Chicago
LEAD: Their start to the season had been undeniably fast, and the schedule laid out what appeared to be a roadmap to added momentum.
But the Rangers lost a step without losing the game last night in a 3-3 tie with the Chicago Blackhawks at Madison Square Garden.


MOMENTUM SHIFTS ON FLAG MEASURE
LEAD: Amid signs that many senators were having sobering second thoughts about potential harm to the Bill of Rights, Democratic leaders said today that they had the votes to defeat a proposed constitutional amendment to outlaw flag burning.


Heritage Loss At $1.6 Million
LEAD: National Heritage Inc., a company that provides long-term nursing care and whose largest investor is the troubled Southmark Corporation, has reported that unaudited results for the fourth quarter ended June 30 showed a loss of $1.6 million on revenues of $22.2 million.
National Heritage said on


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,045,100,000
940,600,000
Net inc
212,400,000
171,400,000
Share earns
.73
.60
Shares outst
292,862,000
286,774,000
9mo sales
3,391,600,000
3,027,400,000
Net inc
714,200,000
585,300,000
Share earns
2.45
2.04
Shares outst
292,642,000
288,492,000


Chargers Trade Banks And Acquire Nelson
LEAD: Chip Banks, the linebacker who is seeking immediate employment instead of the promise of a future job, was traded yesterday from the San Diego Chargers to the Indianapolis Colts in exchange for unspecified conditional draft picks.


School-Building Agency Changes the Old Rules
LEAD: A new agency responsible for rebuilding New York City's crumbling schools has adopted procedures it says will speed a $4.3 billion construction program and reduce corruption.


First Tennessee National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,066,000
13,226,000
Per share
.89
.84
Shares outst
15,833,858
15,746,978
9mo net inc
16,033,000
38,443,000
Per share
1.01
2.46
Shares outst
15,831,884
15,635,782


Innocence Abroad: Memories of '39 Fair
LEAD: In 1939, the French Pavilion opened at the World's Fair in New York, bringing the best in French cooking to the United States.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the fair, and Pierre Franey remembers his days as a young assistant fish cook at the Pavilion.


Chaos and Uncertainty For the Rescue Teams
LEAD: When 500 of the nation's earthquake specialists gathered in Sacramento in August to prepare for a shock like the one that hit Northern California today, they warned that the first hours would be a time of chaos and uncertainty.


Olin Corp(S) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp(S)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
580,000,000
540,000,000
Net inc
b24,000,000
19,000,000
Share earns
1.15
.90
9mo sales
1,909,000,000
1,685,000,000
Net inc
b93,000,000
77,000,000
Share earns
4.52
3.62


Dr. Edgar Bacon, Dentist, 86
LEAD: Dr.
Edgar Bacon, a dentist in Manhattan for 50 years, died of a heart attack Sept. 28 at the Munson Medical Center in Traverse City, Mich.
He was 86 years old and lived in Old Mission, Mich.


Failing the Fizzies Test
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Rohm &amp; Haas Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
623,000,000
619,800,000
Net inc
32,600,000
49,800,000
Share earns
.49
.75
Shares outst
66,602,000
66,530,000
9mo sales
2,037,700,000
1,940,400,000
Net inc
155,000,000
187,800,000
Share earns
2.33
2.82
Shares outst
66,588,000
66,569,000


Recognition Deal Reached
LEAD: Recognition Equipment Inc., the troubled data capture systems maker, said today that it had agreed to an arrangement in which its longtime suitor, the Prospect Group, would increase its ownership of the company.


Dexter Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dexter Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
207,309,000
207,098,000
Net inc
10,467,000
b1,473,000
Share earns
.42
.06
Shares outst
24,897,000
24,845,000
9mo sales
649,742,000
631,762,000
Net inc
34,495,000
b26,884,000
Share earns
1.39
1.08
Shares outst
24,885,000
24,840,000


Union Bank (Calif.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Bank (Calif.)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
35,570,000
12,689,000
Per share
1.05
.92
Shares outst
31,277,000
13,770,000
9mo net inc
103,097,000
35,473,000
Per share
3.05
2.59
Shares outst
30,998,000
13,670,000


Review/Dance; First Impressions of Freud
LEAD: A recorded voice declared, ''First impressions are generally the truest.'' But the production that XXY Dance/Music presented Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater could be cited as evidence against that contention.


So Down on Wall Street
LEAD: I love bad news as much as the next person so long as it's not about me, but there's no bad news I enjoy half as much as bad news from Wall Street.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times yesterday about competition for Nobel Prizes misstated the year in which Godfrey N. Hounsfield and Allan M. Cormack won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
It was 1979.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,712,000
2,592,000
Per share
.45
.42
9mo net inc
8,300,000
b7,526,000
Per share
1.37
1.22
b-After an extraordinary credit of $669,000, or 11 cents per share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Alltel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alltel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
314,275,000
264,690,000
Net inc
37,040,000
32,742,000
Share earns
.55
.51
Shares outst
66,171,000
63,100,000
9mo rev
901,511,000
794,012,000
Net inc
113,621,000
105,900,000
Share earns
1.72
165
Shares outst
65,125,000
62,960,000


C.F.T.C. Head Argues Against Dual-Trading Ban
LEAD: Wendy L. Gramm, who heads the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, tried to stop Congress today from banning the practice of dual trading, saying instead that her agency would restrict the practice by Thanksgiving.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Sometimes Lightning Strikes Thrice
LEAD: ''Originality,'' Rosser Reeves, the legendary creative chief of the Ted Bates agency, once said, ''is the most dangerous word in advertising.'' That may explain why New York magazine and Jim Beam bourbon have introduced print advertising campaigns whose themes and graphic styles are virtually identical - and strikingly similar to an ad for HG magazine that made its debut in


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Billy Joel at 40


Home Fedl Savings Bank of Ga.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Fedl Savings Bank of Ga.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
100,964
b532,501
Per share
.06
.30
9mo net inc
559,453
b962,331
Per share
.31
.54
b-Included non-interest income derived from the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


James Rosenwald, 83, a Securities Analyst
LEAD: James B. Rosenwald, a securities analyst who specialized in Japanese insurance companies and banks, died Sunday at his home in Kings Bay Estates, Tobago, West Indies, after a series of strokes.
He was 83 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Profits Soar at Three Drug Concerns
LEAD: Three big pharmaceutical companies reported yesterday that they had large increases in net income for the third quarter.


Simmons Raises Stake in Lockheed
LEAD: Harold C. Simmons, the Dallas financier and corporate raider, raised his stake in the Lockheed Corporation to 10.62 percent, from 10.43 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Simmons also denied published reports quoting him as saying he intended to sell his Lockheed shares.


Dow's Next Step? Up or Down; Forecasts as High as 3,100
LEAD: With a single question hanging on the lips of every investor - What now? - the inevitable parade of analysts and economists rushing forth with answers has begun.


Cavazos Presses Parental Choice in Public Schools
LEAD: Secretary of Education Lauro F. Cavazos came to a highly praised, innovative school district in East Harlem this week to press the Bush Administration's view that giving parents more say in choosing public schools would be a major step toward improving education.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


WINE TALK
LEAD: SOONER or later it happens to everyone: that moment in the dead of night when you jolt awake and realize to your horror that you have no idea what wine goes with marinated artichoke hearts.


First-Rounders Fizzle For Unlucky Clippers
LEAD: The Los Angeles Clippers are probably the most frustrated franchise in the National Basketball Association.
Not only have they missed the playoffs for 13 seasons, a league record, but they have been equally unlucky with their first-round draft choices.


South Carolina Coast Spared From New Damages
LEAD: Fair weather and a new barrier of sand spared South Carolina's hurricane-scarred beaches from further damage from unusually high tides on Monday.


Allergies and Flexibility
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Of Citizens, and Poachers
LEAD: A Federal district judge, upholding a law enacted in the nation's early years, has concluded that commercial fishermen living in the United States are poachers if they do not have American citizenship.


INSIDE
LEAD:  East German Leaders Show Openness to Change  In television and newspapers, East German Communist leaders showed an openness to change for their nation.
One predicted some decisions ''very soon, very quickly.'' Page A9.
Bush Says He'll Veto Bill on Abortion Funds  After efforts at a compromise failed, President Bush told Congress he intended to veto a bill that would allow Federal financing of abortions for victims of rape and incest.


Dinkins Explains Carson Cash, in Part
LEAD: Trying to defuse the issue of payments made to Robert (Sonny) Carson, a convicted kidnapper and a civil rights advocate, officials of David N. Dinkins's mayoral campaign produced some receipts for the money yesterday but were unable to account fully for $7,100 given to Mr.
Carson and an organization he heads.


Pepsico Sees Profits Rise
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. reported strong growth yesterday in profits across the board in its soft-drink, snack foods and restaurant businesses, with the exception of its Kentucky Fried Chicken chain.


U.S. Planning for Cuts Of Its Forces in Europe
LEAD: The commander of American and allied forces in Europe, Gen.
John R. Galvin, has begun planning to reduce the United States military presence in Western Europe over the next 10 years.


Ford Doubles Stake In Jaguar as Stocks Fall
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company snapped up millions of shares in the British luxury car maker Jaguar as stock prices tumbled worldwide, the company disclosed today.


Dow's Next Step? Up or Down;  Predictions of More Upheavals
LEAD: Some money managers and analysts are reading the same tea leaves as their more hopeful colleagues but divining a decidedly different message: that the stock market is unstable and will head down.
These doomsayers argue that the plunge is not an isolated incident, but a signal that the underpinnings of the market have shifted as the economy worsens.


Site for Series Left in Doubt
LEAD: Hours after tonight's third game of the World Series was called off because of the earthquake, there was confusion as to when, or where, the series might be resumed.


A Wonder Chip's New Wonders
LEAD: The next generation of microprocessors is expected to be so powerful that it will make obsolete costly, specialized computers designed for scientific and engineering work.


Bush Tells Congress He Will Veto Bill on Abortion
LEAD: Unable to find a strategy that would allow him to modify his position on abortion without alienating his right-to-life constituency, President Bush told Congress tonight that he would veto legislation that would allow Federal financing of abortions for victims of rape and incest.


Leslie Fay Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leslie Fay Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
256,169,000
220,216,000
Net inc
13,487,000
13,156,000
Share earns
.71
.69
Shares outst
19,089,000
19,083,000
9mo sales
614,518,000
517,503,000
Net inc
23,366,000
17,574,000
Share earns
1.22
.92
Shares outst
19,086,000
19,083,000


Sunshine Mining's New Silver Supply
LEAD: The Sunshine Mining Company, a silver mining and metal exploration concern, said it would acquire a 45 percent interest in a new silver mine near Libby, Mont., from the privately held Montana Reserves Company for a total of about $90 million.
Sunshine will pay about $38 million in cash and assume $32 million of the mine's existing obligations and a 15-year, $20 million note.


General Housewares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Housewares (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
32,868,000
31,594,000
Net inc
1,014,000
600,000
Share earns
.34
.21
Shares outst
2,967,000
2,886,000
9mo sales
84,078,000
66,376,000
Net inc
1,505,000
b530,000
Share earns
.51
.21
Shares outst
2,947,000
2,585,000


Arnold Billig, 70; Led Probation Officers
LEAD: Arnold Billig, founder and president of the United Probation Officers Association of the City of New York, died of a heart attack Saturday at a restaurant in Savannah, Ga.
He was 70 years old and was en route from his home in Queens to his winter home in Delray Beach, Fla.


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer-Daniels-Midland (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
117,169,000
91,301,000
Share earns
.63
.49
Shares outst
187,447,000
185,843,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding are adjuste for a 5 percent dividend in September.


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Fork Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,096,000
4,206,000
Per share
.55
.54
Shares outst
9,346,281
7,860,339
9mo net inc
15,310,000
9,138,000
Per share
1.65
1.50
Shares outst
9,305,431
6,103,692


Just in Time, a Defense Of Fruitcake
LEAD: IT is the gift most people hate to receive.
Others call it a bad joke.
But these days, as the time to prepare holiday fruitcake draws near, defenders of this centuries-old confection are fighting back, proclaiming that fruitcake has suffered a bad name long enough.


Ludwig Gluskin Dead; Music Director Was 90
LEAD: Ludwig Gluskin, who was a drummer for the orchestra leader Paul Whiteman and also led his own jazz group before becoming music director for CBS Radio and for CBS-TV, died of kidney failure on Friday.
He was 90 years old.


Bush Pledges Support; Skinner Is en Route to Site
LEAD: President Bush, pledging to ''do everything we possibly can'' to aid victims of the earthquake that struck San Francisco this evening, activated a Federal disaster team late tonight and sent the Secretary of Transportation to California to assess the damage.


United Savers Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Savers Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
8,361,000
b2,151,000
Per share
-
.47
9mo net loss
16,086,000
b6,185,000
Per share
-
1.34
b-Net income


Banc One Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
91,819,000
88,416,000
Per share
.70
.68
9mo net inc
270,307,000
252,640,000
Per share
2.07
1.94


Dime Savings Bank of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of N.Y.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,050,000
c18,278,000
Per share
.09
.80
9mo net inc
b17,565,000
c65,081,000
Per share
.77
2.86
b-After an extraordinary credit of $7,120,000, or 31 cents per share, representing the federal income tax benefit arising from utilization of net operating loss carryforward.


First Pennsylvania Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Pennsylvania Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
17,315,000
14,014,000
Per share
.11
.33
9mo net inc
54,911,000
44,085,000
Per share
1.02
1.04
The per share figures for the latest periods reflected preferred stock dividends of $13,028,000 for the quarter and $16,158,000 for the 9 months, compared with $1,565,000 and $4,695,000 for the year-ago periods, respectively.


A 'Reform' That RICO Doesn't Need
LEAD: An embarrassed Senator Dennis DeConcini recently backed away from a major provision of a bill he is sponsoring to alter RICO, the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act.
It turns out that the provision would, in the name of ''reforming'' this useful law, have protected one of Mr.
DeConcini's prominent constituents.


Review/Theater; A Woman From 4 Viewpoints at the Circle Rep
LEAD: The image that lingers from Joe Pintauro's new play, ''Beside Herself,'' is that of four women in white negligees, each representing the same heroine at a different age, as they comb out their hair and prepare for sleep.
The setting is a cozy house in the woods on an isolated island; the light is the dim glow of a harvest moon.


Larnaca Journal; Lebanese Go Home, Not Believing in Tomorrow
LEAD: The motor-vessel Baroness left here for Lebanon the other night across a darkened Mediterranean.
The cargo included some 300 passengers, many hundreds more suitcases, a man named Anthony Azzi and his new white BMW sedan with its telephone and air-conditioning system.


Citicorp Net Declines; Hanover Reports Loss
LEAD: Citicorp, Manufacturers Hanover and Wells Fargo reported sharply varying quarterly results yesterday, reflecting their different stances on troubled third world loans.


Pepsico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pepsico Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,901,600,000
3,129,800,000
Net inc
269,300,000
c241,600,000
Share earns
1.02
.91
9mo sales
10,452,600,000
8,507,500,000
Net inc
b699,300,000
c574,500,000
Share earns
2.64
2.18


Scott Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,249,300,000
1,150,500,000
Net inc
145,900,000
170,700,000
Share earns
1.99
2.22
9mo sales
3,772,300,000
3,441,000,000
Net inc
303,900,000
320,000,000
Share earns
4.00
4.18


Havel Donating Prize To Help Fellow Writers
LEAD: Vaclav Havel, the dissident Czechoslovak playwright, has said he will donate a $13,000 literary award to an organization to help banned authors get their work published in the Eastern bloc.


East Germany Signals It May Allow Some Change
LEAD: The East German Communist leadership, long regarded as rigidly orthodox, gave new signs today that it is increasingly open to change.


Intergraph Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
211,543,000
207,158,000
Net inc
16,387,000
22,494,000
Share earns
.31
.40
Shares outst
53,673,000
56,875,000
9mo rev
616,419,000
585,339,000
Net inc
56,342,000
63,007,000
Share earns
1.03
1.11
Shares outst
54,817,000
56,811,000


Capital Gains Cut Would Further Roil Markets; I.R.A., but Different
LEAD: To the Editor:


MCI Communciations Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communciations Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,667,000,000
1,356,000,000
Net inc
165,000,000
104,000,000
Share earns
.62
.38
Shares outst
255,000,000
262,000,000
9mo rev
4,761,000,000
3,706,000,000
Net inc
b450,000,000
224,000,000
Share earns
1.69
.78
Shares outst
253,000,000
280,000,000


7 Are Killed in Philadelphia Row House Fire


New York Fears Burden And Quits Waste Plan
LEAD: New York said today that it had withdrawn from a group of Northeastern states working on a regional plan for disposing of toxic wastes because environmental officials here thought New York was being asked to take too much waste.


Weyerhaeuser Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyerhaeuser Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Sales
2,574,407,000
2,359,588,000
Net inc
b166,836,000
144,869,000
Share earns
.78
.69
9mo sales
7,539,657,000
6,945,507,000
Net inc
b469,786,000
410,266,000
Share earns
2.21
1.95


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: In its first public offering since 1974, the Tennessee Valley Authority priced a $4 billion offering of notes and bonds yesterday through an underwriting syndicate led by the First Boston Corporation.


With Eye to '90 Elections, Bush Assails Democrats
LEAD: President Bush, continuing an early round of campaigning for the 1990 Congres=sional elections, assailed Congressional Democrats tonight as political ''chameleons'' who ''cloak their out-of-step ideas in the language of moderation.''


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 13
Oct. 6
Oct. 14
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
225.3
225.8
220.2
Distillate stocks
120.3
121.8
130.0
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.3
5.2
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.2
2.4
Crude stocks
342.8
337.1
327.1
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
8.0
Refinery utilization (%)
87.4
88.3
83.8


Integrated Cancels Talks on Core Sale
LEAD: Integrated Resources Inc. said it had called off talks to sell its core financial businesses to an unidentified buyer, and it raised its estimate of second-quarter losses above the previously announced $600 million mark.
But Integrated said a group of its senior executive officers had advised the company that it intends to make a proposal to buy three of the five principal financial businesses.


Computer Network At NASA Attacked By Rogue Program
LEAD: A rogue computer program attacked a worldwide network of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on Monday, inflicting no damage but forcing officials to disconnect the network from sensitive military and space systems.


Help Who?
LEAD: We are prepared to provide technical assistance in certain areas of Soviet economic reform. . . .
We want perestroika to succeed. . . .
Such words would have been unutterable in official Washington even a few months ago.
Such thoughts would have been unimaginable just a few years ago.
To Ronald Reagan, the Soviet Union was the evil empire.


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
15,145,000
14,215,000
Per share
1.16
1.10
9mo net inc
45,976,000
39,809,000
Per share
3.56
3.10


Soviet Gymnasts Take Team Title
LEAD: The Soviet Union, helped by a perfect mark from Valentin Mogilny, swept the gold medal in the men's team competition at the world gymnastics championships today.


DEALS
LEAD:  BASKETBALL  KNICKS (NBA) - Waived Steve Babiarz, guard.
Named Bob Salmi video coordinator.
PORTLAND (NBA) - Traded Richard Anderson, forward, to the Charlotte Hornets for Robert Reid, guard-forward.


Police Officer Dies in Fall From Building


A $27 Million Loan by Sotheby's Helped Alan Bond to Buy 'Irises'
LEAD: When Vincent van Gogh's ''Irises'' was sold at auction for $53.9 million in 1987 at Sotheby's in New York, it became the world's most expensive painting.
Now, nearly two years later and on the eve of a new auction season, ''Irises'' has become the center of a controversy over how works of art are promoted and sold in today's marketplace.


Phelps Dodge Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phelps Dodge Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
597,000,000
511,400,000
Net inc
115,400,000
94,300,000
Share earns
3.26
2.93
Shares outst
35,400,000
30,900,000
9mo rev
1,933,400,000
1,633,600,000
Net inc
407,700,000
279,600,000
Share earns
11.58
8.70
Shares outst
35,200,000
30,900,000


Generic Drug Maker Gets Permanent Head
LEAD: Par Pharmaceutical Inc., a generic drug maker that is being investigated by the Government as part of a broad examination of the industry, named Kenneth I. Sawyer yesterday to the posts of president and chief executive.
He had been serving in those jobs on an interim basis since last month.


GORBACHEV SEEKS TO OUST AN EDITOR
LEAD: The editor of the Soviet Union's best-selling newspaper said today that he had been called to Communist Party headquarters and told to resign for publishing a political popularity poll that angered President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


DELUGE OF CALLS DISRUPTS SERVICE
LEAD: Long-distance telephone communication into the San Francisco area was disrupted last night when millions of people across the country tried to reach relatives and friends after hearing of the earthquake that struck there.


The Me-Me Host
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Dennison Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dennison Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
192,599,000
176,456,000
Net inc
7,002,000
8,466,000
Share earns
.44
.54
9mo sales
569,490,000
523,775,000
Net inc
b23,416,000
c23,171,000
Share earns
1.47
1.47


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The American Diabetes Association has released a print and television campaign by Goldsmith/Jeffrey in New York to enhance public awareness about the disease.


Citicorp Auction
LEAD: Interest rates declined sharply at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper for the second consecutive week, to their lowest in more than two months.
The bank holding company sold $50 million in 91-day paper at an average rate of 8.292 percent, down from 8.483 percent.
The rate was the lowest since Aug.


Stock Slide Forces Closing Of a Chicago Options Firm
LEAD: The Fossett Corporation, a medium-sized options trading firm here, is the first firm forced out of business by the plunge in stock prices on Friday.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


Dance Theater of Harlem
LEAD: Dance Theater of Harlem is to perform a three-week season at Davis Hall at City College, Convent Avenue and 133d Street, Friday through Nov. 4.
The troupe will present revivals of ''Fete Noire,'' by Arthur Mitchell, company director; ''The Beloved,'' by Lester Horton; ''Mirage,'' by Billy Wilson, and Frederic Franklin's staging of the second act of ''Swan Lake,'' with new costumes and sets, as well as works by Bronislava Nijinska and John Butler.


E.W. Scripps Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E.W. Scripps Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
304,254,000
293,242,000
Net inc
18,041,000
13,389,000
Share earns
.23
.17
9mo rev
920,056,000
878,749,000
Net inc
58,294,000
b47,595,000
Share earns
.74
.64


Struggle on Manhattan Roof Ends in Officer's Fatal Fall
LEAD: A young police officer struggling with a robbery suspect on a rooftop in midtown Manhattan died early yesterday after he fell into a shaft between buildings and lay there helplessly for more than 40 minutes before rescuers were able to remove him, the police said.


Korean Surplus Estimate
LEAD: A South Korea trade group predicted today that the country's trade surplus would fall this year to $1.69 billion, in contrast to the Government's forecast of $4 billion and last year's $8.89 billion.
Korea Foreign Trade Association officials cited the appreciation of the won by more than 30 percent since 1986, rising labor costs and increases in the prices of overseas raw materials.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I thought I had a flat tire.


Wang Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wang Laboratories Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
596,800,000
684,000,000
Net loss
62,100,000
b13,100,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
163,886,000
165,483,000
b-Net income  Latest-quarter results included a $12.9 million pretax restructuring charge; year-ago quarter results included a $3.1 million loss from discontinued operations.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Egon Krenz; East German With New Job
LEAD: On his first visit to West Germany in June, Egon Krenz and the members of his delegation spoke knowledgeably of choice foods, fine wines and the privileges of power, three topics most of their compatriots can only dream about.


The Reagans' Host: A Japan Media Giant
LEAD: When Ronald and Nancy Reagan arrive here on Friday for an eight-day stay in Japan, the Government will naturally roll out the carpet, but their main host will be a communications empire that permeates daily life in Japan although it is scarcely known abroad.


Dollar Ends Weaker in U.S. While Gold Prices Advance
LEAD: The dollar ended weaker yesterday against key foreign currencies after a mixed performance overseas.


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
25,125,000
22,516,000
Per share
.57
.52
9mo net inc
72,311,000
64,704,000
Per share
1.66
1.50
The per share amounts have been adjusted for 15 percent stock dividend distributed July 31.


Review/Television; How the Networks Coped With Scant Information
LEAD: For the first hours after the earthquake Tuesday, all that television viewers could be certain of was that something serious had happened.
What it meant for the cities hit and for their people was anything but clear.


Giants' Rookie Rejoins Practice
LEAD: After six weeks of doing everything except play football, Bob Kratch did today what he wanted to do most.
He played football, or at least took part in a Giants practice.


DENG CONCILIATORY OVER CRACKDOWN
LEAD: Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, has told an American visitor that Chinese officials made mistakes and bear responsibility for the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June.


Review/Dance; The Merger Of Nikolais And Louis
LEAD: Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis have fused their two separate dance troupes into a new company called Nikolais and Louis Dance, which made its New York debut on Tuesday night.


More Research Sought On Cold-Fusion Claim
LEAD: Leading scientists said recent experiments on low-temperature nuclear fusion have produced enough interesting results to justify more research.


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,191,000
2,489,000
Per share
.48
.23
9mo net inc
14,611,000
8,074,000
Per share
1.36
.75


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
314,400,000
208,700,000
Net inc
11,300,000
5,100,000
Share earns
.61
.28
6mo rev
626,000,000
410,700,000
Net inc
25,100,000
10,200,000
Share earns
1.36
.56
Shares outst
18,400,000
18,100,000


Manville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
549,822,000
545,865,000
Net inc
40,397,000
c53,494,000
Share earns
.30
.44
9mo sales
1,622,699,000
1,540,057,000
Net inc
b144,148,000
c15,368,000
Share earns
1.11
.13


AMR Tells Trump It's Not for Sale
LEAD: In its first public comment on takeover overtures from Donald J. Trump, the board of the AMR Corporation said today that the company ''has not been, and is not, for sale.''


Talbot Rantoul, 77, Designer and Educator
LEAD: Talbot Rantoul, a carpet designer and former president of the Rhode Island School of Design, died Monday at a nursing home in Providence, R.I.
He was 77 years old and lived in Chilmark, Mass., and Ojai, Calif.


Straining Phone System Survives 20 Million Calls
LEAD: The nation's telecommunications network was flooded Tuesday night by an estimated 20 million attempted telephone calls from people concerned about friends and family after the earthquake in the Bay area.


Second Chance for Deer Management Permits
LEAD: Hunters whose early applications for deer management permits in New York were rejected, may try again if they wish.


Wings Stop Stars
LEAD: Steve Yzerman had two goals and an assist as the Detroit Red Wings beat Minnesota, 4-3, tonight and handed the North Stars their first loss of the season.


Hungary Purges Stalinism From Its Constitution
LEAD: Parliament purged Hungary's Constitution of its Stalinist elements today to create a Western-style basic law for a return to multi-party democracy.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BellSouth Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,545,000,000
3,456,700,000
Net inc
b404,400,000
419,600,000
Share earns
.84
.89
9mo rev
10,381,100,000
10,019,700,000
Net inc
b1,272,100,000
1,246,200,000
Share earns
2.67
2.61
Shares outst
481,500,000
469,800,000


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valmont Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
186,388,000
158,100,000
Net inc
4,146,000
3,723,000
Share earns
.71
.66
Shares outst
5,822,000
5,651,000
9mo sales
575,458,000
475,064,000
Net inc
14,398,000
10,334,000
Share earns
2.49
1.86
Shares outst
5,792,000
5,555,000


Secondary Stocks Rise; Volume Dips
LEAD: Secondary stocks showed more strength than blue chips yesterday as the market regained stability after last Friday's tumble.
The American Stock Exchange composite index was up 2.91 points, or eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 378.07, and the Nasdaq composite index, the primary measure of over-the-counter stock movement, rose 3.35 points, or seven-tenths of 1 percent, to 463.28.


Seadrift Journal; In Texas, Shrimpers Lament: 'It's Over'
LEAD: Kathy Yarborough was sitting on a broken chair in the little office at Froggies fish house, smoking cigarettes, chatting with friends and happily letting the afternoon pass.
Then her 2-year-old son, Donny Paul, intruded by announcing his ambition.


Review/Theater; Fighting Trash With Trash In a Nihilistic Puppet Show
LEAD: Almost as soon as the Smiths, a family of six from the Bronx, have been shown a cozy new suburban home in Garden City, L.I., their allergies begin to act up.
First they begin to sneeze.
Soon their quarrelsome twin sons have developed itchy rashes, and before long Grandma is suffering from schizophrenic seizures.


Seacoast Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Banking Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,261,000
1,182,000
Per share
.36
.34
9mo net inc
3,325,000
3,336,000
Per share
.95
.95


Critic's Notebook; Louisville Delves Deeply Into Russian Theater
LEAD: Several hundred stage directors, teachers and scholars specializing in Russian studies, including visitors from the Soviet Union, took part this weekend in a marathon of plays, lectures and panels at the Actors Theater of Louisville.
The events were a climax to a citywide ''Classics in Context'' celebration of the arts in Russia, initiated by Jon Jory, artistic director of the


Mosbacher Sees a Free-Trade Pact With Mexico
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher predicted today that the United States and Mexico would eventually negotiate a free trade agreement similar to one that went into effect with Canada on Jan. 1, and said the two countries had already discussed the subject informally.


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
285,592,000
275,328,000
Net inc
b7,394,000
1,337,000
Share earns
.33
.06
Shares outst
22,425,000
22,413,000
b-Included $3,613,000 after-tax gain from sale of 37 stores in September 1989.


Ameritrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
30,000,000
22,500,000
Per share
.78
.56
9mo net inc
88,200,000
77,400,000
Per share
2.37
1.93
Ameritrust said its 1988 results included after-tax gains of $10 million, or 25 cents a share, for the sale and leaseback of buildings; $7.6 million, or 19 cents a share, for the settlement of certain pension obligations, and $1 million, or 2 cents a share, for the sale of the payment service division.


Network Equipment Technoloies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Equipment Technoloies Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
47,751,000
32,157,000
Net inc
5,188,000
3,699,000
Share earns
.36
.27
6mo rev
89,513,000
62,416,000
Net inc
10,036,000
7,150,000
Share earns
.70
.52


National Banc of Commerce Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,667,000
1,161,000
Per share
.27
.31
Shares outst
6,199,964
3,696,950
9mo net inc
4,478,000
3,202,000
Per share
.80
.87
Shares outst
5,607,880
3,696,583


SPORTS PEOPLE: TRACK and FIELD; Owens Finalists Named
LEAD: Five of the nation's top track and field performers were announced as finalists yesterday for the annual Jesse Owens Award, which will be presented on Dec. 1 in Washington during the convention of The Athletics Congress, the governing body in the United States for track and field.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,138,566,000
893,231,000
Net inc
49,198,000
56,130,000
Share earns
.50
.57
Shares outst
99,344,011
98,809,117
9mo rev
3,200,188,000
2,569,547,000
Net inc
128,090,000
134,209,000
Share earns
1.29
1.36
Shares outst
99,214,561
98,778,810


Bensonhurst Suspect Remains Free on Bail
LEAD: A judge refused yesterday to jail or increase the bail of the man who is accused of being a leader of the whites in the fatal Bensonhurst racial attack.


Meredith Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
195,721,000
190,505,000
Net inc
9,317,000
10,659,000
Share earns
.50
.56
Shares outst
18,667,000
19,151,000


Freed Rebels Talk of Decades in Pretoria's Prisons
LEAD: Walter Sisulu and two of his freed colleagues from the outlawed African National Congress talked today about their 26 years in prison and how their captors had tried at first to break them with hard labor, midnight searches, informers and humiliation.


International Minerals &amp; Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Minerals &amp; Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
311,400,000
217,600,000
Net inc
7,500,000
b28,800,000
Share earns
.27
1.03
Shares outst
21,502,000
24,309,000
b-Included an after-tax gain of $17.5 million, or 72 cents a share, from an affiliated company's stock offering.


Nashua Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
228,021,000
240,320,000
Net inc
6,419,000
8,072,000
Share earns
.67
.84
9mo sales
713,542,000
739,617,000
Net inc
13,670,000
24,071,000
Share earns
1.43
2.50


Dr. Oscar Falnes, 91, Professor of History
LEAD: Dr.
Oscar J. Falnes, an educator and specialist in Scandinavian intellectual and cultural history, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.


Contrans Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contrans Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
50,361,000
52,479,000
Net inc
b545,000
748,000
Share earns
.03
.47
Yr rev
174,339,000
174,375,000
Net inc
b2,265,000
c16,474,000
Share earns
.12
-


Yellow Freight System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yellow Freight System (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
565,806,000
537,537,000
Net inc
11,487,000
26,742,000
Share earns
.40
.93
Shares outst
28,775,000
28,772,000
9mo rev
1,660,380,000
1,492,788,000
Net inc
45,708,000
50,166,000
Share earns
1.59
1.75
Shares outst
28,774,000
28,725,000


Small University Gains Control Of the Barnes Foundation
LEAD: With the recent election of two new trustees, control of the Barnes Foundation, which owns one of the world's most important collections of late-19th- and early-20th-century art, has passed to Lincoln University, a small, predominantly black liberal-arts college in Oxford, Pa.


Cabaret Convention Ponders a Disturbing Future
LEAD: Is there a place for cabaret in today's age of mass entertainment?
That is the question being pondered this week on the stage of Town Hall, where a Cabaret Convention is holding a series of discussions and gala concerts that will continue through Sunday.


Expert T.L.C. for Linen and Lace
LEAD: FINDING a person skilled at restoring lace and linen is a tough task. ''Young women today don't care to do this,'' said Betty LaCasse, who for most of her 60-plus years has been mending holes in bed linens and re-creating missing lace on wedding veils.


Republic New York Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b155,400,000
c38,700,000
Per share
-
1.12
9mo net loss
69,800,000
c119,600,000
Per share
-
3.52
b-Included addition of $200 million to allowance for loan losses.


Kroc Says Padres Won't Be Moved
LEAD: Joan Kroc, who has announced that the Padres are for sale, gave assurances today that no sale discussions would be conducted with anyone who even intimates the possibility of moving the franchise.


Debt Limit Increase Is Sought
LEAD: The Treasury Department has formally notified Congress that it would like to have an increase in the national debt ceiling in place by Oct. 24 to permit planning for Treasury bond auctions and avoid a default on Government obligations when the current ceiling expires on Oct. 31.


Bush Acts Quickly to Get Federal Aid to California
LEAD: The Bush Administration, declaring a major disaster in Northern California, mobilized Government resources today to aid the victims of the California earthquake.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-19  Erich Honecker was ousted as the East German Communist Party faced strong demands for change.
He led the country for 18 years.
His 52-year-old heir apparent, Egon Krenz, was named to replace him.
Page A1  Man in the news: Egon Krenz, the new leader of East Germany, was described by several West German officials as a tough, cynical politician, interested mostly in advancing his own career.


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
21,054,000
28,733,000
Per share
1.42
2.01
9mo net inc
58,724,000
58,338,000
Per share
4.00
4.10
Last year's third quarter earnings included the sale of Bankoh's Waikiki building.


Alaska Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alaska Air Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
268,920,000
241,450,000
Net inc
23,505,000
23,307,000
Share earns
1.48
1.47
Shares outst
15,505,000
15,807,000
9mo rev
693,210,000
617,898,000
Net inc
40,450,000
31,403,000
Share earns
2.55
1.99
Shares outst
15,891,000
15,783,000


Tapestries Depict Life In Chile
LEAD: ISLA NEGRA, a village on the central Chilean coast, is known on two counts: as the home of the poet and Nobel laureate Pablo Neruda and for the striking tapestries made by its women.
The work of the Bordadoras de Isla Negra (Embroiderers of Isla Negra), executed in brilliantly colored wool yarns on sackcloth, has achieved international recognition.


Review/Chamber Music; 2 Sounds' Common Ground
LEAD: Marin Alsop and her Concordia chamber orchestra usually include classical works inspired by jazz on their programs.
Fred Hersch, a jazz pianist and composer, likes to dabble in the classics.
Mr.
Hersch and his band, and Ms.
Alsop and hers, got together for a Town Hall concert on Sunday afternoon, and found a good deal of common ground, although perhaps not as much as they had hoped.


More Austerity Seen for China
LEAD: A tough austerity policy this year slowed China's runaway economy, but it will take at least three years to put it back on course, the Government says.
The People's Daily quoted


Lebanese Christians Get Arab League Offer
LEAD: The Arab League commission, mediating an end to the Lebanese civil war in talks in Taif, said today that Christian legislators in Parliament should settle for a commitment by the Arab League to obtain a Syrian troop withdrawal from Lebanon.


A 'Time of Drift' Now for a Quieter Koch
LEAD: Inside City Hall these days there is an unnatural if not unexpected quiet.
Mayor Edward I. Koch still arrives early, but his public schedules are usually short.
And as his weeks in office dwindle and his commissioners announce their departures, the question has become, ''How's he doing?''


Shamir Faulted on Mideast Remarks
LEAD: The Bush Administration, increasingly frustrated by what it calls obstructionist moves by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, publicly criticized him today for making remarks that were disappointing and ''unhelpful'' to the Middle East peace process.


9.1% Stake Held In Enzo Biochem
LEAD: An investment group led by J. Morton Davis, the chairman and sole shareholder of the New York brokerage firm D. H. Blair &amp; Company, said it holds a 9.1 percent stake in Enzo Biochem Inc.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Mr.
Davis said the group might seek to gain control of Enzo Biochem but that it had no immediate plans to do so.


Southtrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
18,373,000
17,243,000
Per share
.69
.65
9mo net inc
53,618,000
49,641,000
Per share
2.02
1.88


F&amp;M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,560,000
2,300,000
Per share
.34
.30
9mo net inc
7,450,000
6,810,000
Per share
.98
.90


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPA Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,016,000
24,107,000
Net loss
b7,279,000
c7,475,000
Yr rev
85,917,000
102,263,000
Net loss
b9,635,000
c6,274,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $376,000 and $1,005,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Parent &amp; child
LEAD: RECENT national surveys estimate that 2 million to 6 million children under the age of 13 regularly care for themselves without adult supervision after school or on weekends.
For almost all parents of such latchkey children - ''children in self-care,'' as some researchers call them - the decision to leave them alone is unwanted but unavoidable.


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherry Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
48,321,000
53,750,000
Net loss
3,212,000
b1,894,000
Share earns
-
.42
6mo sales
97,741,000
109,779,000
Net loss
4,205,000
b4,313,000
Share earns
-
.95


Pfizer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
1,438,500,000
1,382,900,000
Net inc
217,500,000
216,800,000
Share earns
1.29
1.29
9mo sales
4,177,500,000
4,017,200,000
Net inc
594,000,000
649,700,000
Share earns
3.52
3.86


Hugo's Victims Send Supplies to Bay Area
LEAD: A month after being devastated by Hurricane Hugo, this city began sending relief supplies and assistance today to the residents of the San Franciso area.


Bank of New England reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New England (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
42,700,000
72,300,000
Per share
.61
1.04
9mo net inc
121,600,000
207,700,000
Per share
1.73
3.00


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,835,000
1,716,000
Per share
.47
.44
9mo net inc
5,112,000
4,863,000
Per share
1.30
1.25


Currents; It Isn't Lace at All, It's Painted Furniture
LEAD: PENWORK is an intricate decorating technique that involves painting patterns in white gesso on dark varnishes or black paint.
It reached its peak in England and Scotland in the mid-1820's.
Some of the finest examples of the genre have been assembled in a charming exhibition, ''Penwork, the Triumph of Line,'' which runs through Nov.


Campaign Trail; Dinkins Says His Staff Was Wrong To Vote on Broadcasting Company
LEAD: Claiming a busy schedule, David N. Dinkins decided to forgo scheduled trips to Chicago and Detroit yesterday and instead sent surrogates to fund raisers in his honor in both cities.


Notes Offered By Lockheed
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation is offering $300 million in notes due 1999 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Sumitomo Bank Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank Calif.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,960,000
6,250,000
Per share
1.09
.89
Shares outst
8,201,898
7,034,717
9mo net inc
24,640,000
17,770,000
Per share
3.23
2.53


G.E. to Eliminate 450 Appliance Jobs
LEAD: The General Electric Company said it would eliminate about 450 jobs in the next three years in the home laundry manufacturing operations at its major appliance plant here.
G.E. said it would shift some manufacturing work to subcontractors to cut costs.
The affected jobs will be eliminated through attrition.


Merrimack Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimack Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
461,000
1,204,000
Per share
.12
.30
9mo net loss
7,323,000
b3,316,000
Per share
-
.82
b-Net income


Noxell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noxell Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
142,475,000
131,672,000
Net inc
12,628,000
11,800,000
Share earns
.31
.29
9mo sales
424,695,000
399,051,000
Net inc
41,508,000
38,823,000
Share earns
1.03
.96


Market Place; Lessons Learned In 2 Hectic Years
LEAD: TWO years ago today, John J. Phelan Jr. was plunged into a new world of finance, as markets throughout the world crashed in what was the worst day in the history of stock trading.


Knicks Lose To Suns by 9
LEAD: Eddie Johnson scored 18 of his 38 points in the first half to lead the Phoenix Suns to a 115-106 exhibition victory over the Knicks tonight at the University of Dayton Arena.


Fabric of Liberty
LEAD: America's flag will still fly proudly over the Capitol if the Senate votes today against a constitutional amendment that purports to protect Old Glory from desecration.
It will wave for those who see the flag as a symbol of all freedoms - including the freedom to insult it.
And it will salute the bravery of senators who resist this tampering with the Bill of


J. G. Hangin, 68, Professor, Dies
LEAD: John Gombojab Hangin, a university professor in the United States and an expert on Mongolian language and culture, died of heart disease Oct. 9 in Ulan Bator, the capital of Mongolia, where he was doing research.
He was 68 years old and lived in Bloomington, Ind.


Sovran Reports Rise in Profits
LEAD: The Sovran Financial Corporation, which plans to merge with the Citizens and Southern Corporation to create the nation's 14th-largest banking company, today reported a rise of 11.8 percent in its third-quarter profit.


Standard Motors Pdts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Motors Pdts (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
110,245,000
104,347,000
Net inc
3,950,000
2,665,000
Share earns
.30
.20
9mo sales
323,246,000
303,494,000
Net inc
12,499,000
6,589,000
Share earns
.95
.50


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,359,000
b27,942,000
Per share
.40
-
9mo net inc
11,192,000
b15,470,000
Per share
1.04
-
b-Net loss


Commodities Firm Fined
LEAD: A commodities trading firm agreed to pay a $500,000 fine and withdraw from membership in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to settle charges of improper record-keeping and violating margin requirements, exchange officials said today.


Preston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preston Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
155,170,000
154,963,000
Net inc
161,000
2,713,000
Share earns
.03
.47
9mo rev
464,177,000
442,424,000
Net inc
3,371,000
6,498,000
Share earns
.58
1.12


Landmark Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancshares Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,676,000
3,360,000
Per share
.55
.52
Shares outst
6,636,000
6,316,000
9mo net inc
10,661,000
8,585,000
Per share
1.62
1.44
Shares outst
6,455,000
5,808,000


Cuomo Offers Help to Victims
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo offered New York's help today to victims of the earthquake in Northern California.
The Governor said the state would supply equipment and other help if it is needed.


Milton Friedman, 75, a Labor Arbitrator
LEAD: Milton Friedman, a labor-management arbitrator and mediator, died of pneumonia yesterday at University Hospital at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.


East Germany: What Hasn't Changed
LEAD: Erich Honecker, the builder of the Berlin Wall, was ousted as East Germany's boss after it became obvious he symbolized an intolerable status quo in a country clamoring for change.
But the wall still stands; so does the suffocating political and economic system it is meant to protect.


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
68,385,000
67,868,000
Share earns
.52
.53
Shares outst
128,282,593
128,053,939
9mo net inc
177,444,000
188,704,000
Share earns
1.37
1.48


First City to Sell Card Business
LEAD: The First City Bancorporation of Texas said today that it had agreed in principle to sell its credit card business, First City Bank-Sioux Falls, to the Bank of New York Company for $180 million in cash.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Blue Arrow P.L.C., London, an employment agency, said it would adopt the name of its main operation, Manpower Inc., based in Milwaukee, as part of a move to strengthen its position in the U.S. market.


MNC Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNC Financial Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
55,240,000
48,522,000
Per share
.89
.84
9mo net inc
153,207,000
132,987,000
Per share
2.50
2.30


WCRS Sets Big Shift to Media Buying
LEAD: THE British advertising company whose holdings include the American agency Della Femina, McNamee WCRS, yesterday substantially withdrew from the advertising business while at the same time acquiring complete control of the largest media-buying company in Europe.


Valley Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Capital
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b8,800,000
6,700,000
Per share
.81
.60
9mo net inc
27,200,000
19,500,000
Per share
2.45
1.75
b-Included non-recurring after-tax gain of $2,009,000, or 19 cents a share.


People
LEAD: *
William Morrissey has joined McCann Direct, a subsidiary of McCann-Erickson, as executive vice president and worldwide director.


First Home Federal S&amp;L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Federal S&amp;L Assn
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
431,643
719,168
Share earns
.30
.50
9mo net inc
1,371,926
1,653,398
Share earns
.94
1.14


Bush And the Zealots
LEAD: George Bush does not come across as a hard-edged character.
In manner he usually seems what his political origins would indicate, a man of moderation.


Maxxam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxxam Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
647,700,000
58,400,000
Net inc
37,900,000
b11,500,000
Share earns
3.98
1.37
9mo sales
1,796,400,000
166,000,000
Net inc
71,600,000
b22,500,000
Share earns
8.11
3.07


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column in Business Day on Oct. 9, about the indictment of Young &amp; Rubicam on charges of bribery to foreign officials, referred incorrectly to a Spanish colloquialism for bribe.
The term is mordida - literally, bite.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
487,700,000
470,000,000
Net inc
29,000,000
25,700,000
Share earns
.65
.59
Shares outst
44,338,000
43,214,000
9mo sales
1,459,800,000
1,422,800,000
Net inc
84,400,000
73,100,000
Share earns
1.94
1.69
Shares outst
43,401,000
43,197,000


Currents; Old Friends, New Shops
LEAD: FOR years Christian Jussel, Garrick Stephenson and Janet Mavec discussed putting their respective East Side antiques shops under one roof.
Starting today they are finally together, on the second floor of the Revlon International Building, 625 Madison Avenue (58th Street).


Wang Loses $62.1 Million
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. today reported a $62.1 million loss for the first quarter, ended Sept. 30, and predicted losses would continue for much of the next year as it restructured in an attempt to bring about a turnaround.


Cyprus Minerals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyprus Minerals Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
463,500,000
326,600,000
Net inc
68,200,000
35,100,000
Share earns
1.68
.80
Shares outst
38,365,000
38,940,000
9mo rev
1,352,800,000
914,000,000
Net inc
210,900,000
104,600,000
Share earns
5.12
2.59
Shares outst
39,006,000
38,835,000


Planners Approve a Lab Atop F.D.R. Drive
LEAD: A proposal by Rockefeller University to build a 12-story biomedical laboratory building over the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive was approved unanimously yesterday by the New York City Planning Commission.


Trinova Will Lay Off 1,500 in Revamping
LEAD: The Trinova Corporation announced today that it would lay off 1,500 employees in its second restructuring in two years.


A Life of Study of the Venerable Bead
LEAD: How many beads does the world's leading bead expert have in the collection he keeps in a tool chest by his bed in the basement of his home here? ''I don't know,'' said the authority, Peter Francis Jr., a puckish 44-year-old. ''Well, maybe half a million.
Certainly not a million.''


Jet 'Prevent-Offense' Isn't a Laughing Matter to Walton
LEAD: Joe Walton, his job secure and in control of a 1-5 Jets team whose defense outscores the offense, tried cracking jokes today.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
American Home Products
$ 266,200,000
+10.6
Ameritech
289,100,000
+2.8
AMR Corp.
137,000,000
-8.8
BellSouth Corp.
404,400,000
-3.6
Champion International Corp.
102,100,000
-16.6
Consolidated Rail Corp.


G.M.'s Chief Sees Market Share Rise
LEAD: Roger B. Smith, the chairman of the General Motors Corporation, said he expects G.M.'s share of the United States market to rise to more than 40 percent by the turn of the century, up from the current 35.5 percent.


Leafs Seek Inquiry
LEAD: The Toronto Maple Leafs, stung by Tom Kurvers's refusal to play for the team, yesterday asked the National Hockey League to look into the trade that they thought gave them the Devils' defenseman in return for a first-round draft pick in 1991.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,013,000
1,320,000
Per share
.20
.21


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
26,489,000
15,603,000
Net inc
3,033,000
201,000
Share earns
.36
.03
Shares outst
8,483,000
7,648,000
6mo rev
49,700,000
29,642,000
Net inc
5,035,000
495,000
Share earns
.61
.06
Shares outst
8,281,000
7,633,000


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,646,000,000
2,409,000,000
Net inc
178,000,000
114,000,000
Share earns
2.03
1.19
Shares outst
87,500,000
95,800,000
9mo sales
7,733,000,000
6,942,000,000
Net inc
504,000,000
338,000,000
Share earns
5.58
3.41
Shares outst
90,400,000
99,200,000


Newhall Land &amp; Farming reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newhall Land &amp; Farming (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
73,816,000
70,102,000
Net inc
28,433,000
21,597,000
Share earns
1.44
1.08
Shares outst
19,815,000
19,829,000
9mo rev
141,143,000
138,464,000
Net inc
39,922,000
43,568,000
Share earns
2.02
2.19
Shares outst
19,789,000
19,852,000


Computer Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
29,737,000
34,158,000
Net inc
b1,853,000
41,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
20,277,000
19,897,000
9mo sales
91,219,000
91,701,000
Net inc
b4,929,000
c11,532,000
Share earns
.24
-
Shares outst
20,236,000
19,890,000


Chemical Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,682,000
2,242,000
Per share
.91
.78
9mo net inc
7,801,000
6,234,000
Per share
2.70
2.19


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
668,616,000
622,005,000
Net inc
51,007,000
50,374,000
Share earns
.92
.92
Yr sales
2,641,823,000
2,431,866,000
Net inc
b222,137,000
213,747,000
Share earns
4.04
3.90
Shares outst
54,941,350
54,857,772


Mozart Opera To Open Season In Brooklyn
LEAD: The Brooklyn Academy of Music's second opera season will open at the academy's Majestic Theater on March 15 with a production of Mozart's ''Finta Giardiniera'' from the Theatre de la Monnaie in Brussels.
The company is to announce the season today.


2 on S.I. Run a Neck-and-Neck Race
LEAD: Two of Staten Island's most prominent politicians - Ralph J. Lamberti and Representative Guy V. Molinari -are waging a vigorous battle for the office of borough president.


Poetry, Not Chintz, in New York's First French Show House
LEAD: Forget Fine French Furniture, Art Deco and Provencale.
Le Style Francais - the French style - has just landed in town, and it is anything and everything but what you might expect.
The occasion is the French Designer Showhouse, the first to be held in the United States.


Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
517,000,000
468,100,000
Net inc
10,100,000
b19,000,000
Share earns
.35
.73
Shares outst
24,600,000
24,000,000
9mo rev
1,533,200,000
1,354,400,000
Net inc
51,900,000
b26,100,000
Share earns
1.93
1.02
Shares outst
24,500,000
24,000,000


Review/Dance; Vivona Troupe Changes Roles, Sexes and Clothes
LEAD: Diane Vivona's ''How to Fit a Square Peg in a Round Hole and Other Stories,'' performed on Saturday night at Playlab, took a carefree look at modern androgyny.
The humor was bright, the cast engaging and the performing accomplished.
But it was only in the next-to-last number that the piece became as focused as one might have expected.


Salvador Peace Talks End Without an Accord
LEAD: The Salvadoran Government and guerrilla commanders ended three days of talks in a convent here today without signing any major agreement.


Animal Rights Activists Endanger Medical Research; Vigilant Protocol
LEAD: To the Editor:


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,281,000
1,255,000
Per share
.31
.29
9mo net inc
6,785,000
3,509,000
Per share
1.64
.82


An Arab-American Group Says Dinkins Shuns Its Help
LEAD: A group of Arab-Americans in New York City say David N. Dinkins's mayoral campaign has spurned their offers of help because of exaggerated fears of alienating Jewish voters.


Cryer's Career Revived by 'Teddy Z'
LEAD: Jon Cryer has to wait for a table at the Columbia Bar and Grill, which is exactly the kind of chic, overpriced restaurant where Teddy Zakalokis - the rising young agent he portrays on the new CBS situation comedy, ''The Famous Teddy Z'' - might do lunch.


6 Face Welfare Fraud Charges in Jersey City
LEAD: Six people have been charged with official misconduct and welfare fraud in a Jersey City case, the Attorney General's office said yesterday.


First Fedl Savings Bank of Tenn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fedl Savings Bank of Tenn.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
288,118
b339,296
Per share
.56
.67
b-Included $95,140 after-tax gains on the sale of a portion of its Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. preferred stock.


Viacom International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viacom International (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
345,528,000
311,561,000
Net loss
21,669,000
39,968,000
9mo rev
1,050,567,000
903,134,000
Net inc
160,224,000
b114,487,000
Share earns
2.67
-


Bid for Connaught Extended 10 Days
LEAD: A Swiss-United States group extended its bid of $764 million (Canadian) bid for Connaught Biosciences Inc., as the Canadian vaccine company fought a court battle to let a higher, friendly bid proceed from France's Institut Merieux S.A.


Thatcher Calls Sanctions 'Irresponsible'


Buckeye Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buckeye Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,100,000
39,100,000
Net inc
9,300,000
9,100,000
Share earns
.77
.75
9mo rev
117,500000
115,100,000
Net inc
25,400,000
24,400,000
Share earns
2.09
2.01


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
74,721,000
81,049,000
Net inc
b6,245,000
c11,493,000
Share earns
.42
.76
Shares outst
15,142,000
15,186,000
9mo rev
221,766,000
242,482,000
Net inc
b19,218,000
c29,768,000
Share earns
1.27
1.96
Shares outst
15,164,000
15,216,000


THE CALIFORNIA QUAKE: The Highway Collapse; The Desperate Struggle for Lives Along I-880
LEAD: Disbelieving rescue workers and loved ones converged around crumpled Interstate Highway 880 today, filled with the desperate hope that a few more lives could be saved.
But they could do little.
What they found only confirmed their most horrible first impressions of the unreal sight of one roadway lying upon another.


Panel Clears Two Officers In Strangling
LEAD: A second grand jury has refused to bring any criminal charges against two white police officers in the 1986 death of a black man in Middletown, N.Y., the special state prosecutor handling the case announced today.





How Agencies Fared in Quake
LEAD: Advertising people in San Francisco responded to the earthquake that occurred Tuesday with a characteristic mixture of ingenuity and good humor.
A dozen employees of Hal


Cache Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cache Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,499,000
6,310,000
Net inc
211,000
171,000
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo sales
24,147,000
17,565,000
Net inc
478,000
325,000
Share earns
.01
.01


NEW MARS FINDINGS FROM SOVIET CRAFT
LEAD: Observations by a Soviet spacecraft reveal that magnetic forces surrounding Mars are controlled by ''winds'' of electrified gases from the Sun, not from magnetism generated by the planet.
The finding could explain why Mars has lost most of its atmosphere over the last billion years.


Lotus Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lotus Development (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
153,906,000
116,763,000
Net inc
22,977,000
14,285,000
Share earns
.54
.31
Shares outst
42,262,000
45,989,000
9mo sales
406,075,000
356,170,000
Net inc
38,547,000
49,937,000
Share earns
.92
1.08
Shares outst
42,091,000
46,191,000


Hanna (M.A.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna (M.A.) (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
290,191,000
275,618,000
Net inc
b21,660,000
c24,916,000
Share earns
.78
1.06
Shares outst
27,735,412
21,534,851
9mo rev
838,093,000
777,781,000
Net inc
b71,346,000
c70,142,000
Share earns
2.82
2.97
Shares outst
24,527,166
21,484,548


China's Grain Harvest
LEAD: Despite higher prices and investment, China's grain harvest will fail to match the 1984 record for the fifth straight year, according to an official report issued today.
The Economic Information newspaper said the 1989 harvest would be more than last year's 394 million tons, but would fall short of the record of 407.3 million in 1984 because of natural disasters in the northeast and Inner Mongolia.


Morrison Knudsen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Knudsen Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
589,000,000
515,055,000
Net inc
7,897,000
b51,150,000
Share earns
.69
-
9mo rev
1,620,535,000
1,390,737,000
Net inc
21,481,000
b97,848,000
Share earns
1.88
-


Europe Court Backs Raids
LEAD: The European Court of Justice Tuesday upheld the European Commission's right to raid companies suspected of price fixing and rejected complaints by chemicals companies that their privacy had been violated.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.68
8.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.51
7.52
7.42
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.53
7.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
8.00
8.70
30-YR.


DFSoutheastern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DFSoutheastern (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,331,000
2,713,000
Per share
.72
-
9mo net inc
8,460,000
6,316,000
Per share
1.82
-
DFSoutheastern completed its conversion to a stock thrift from a mutual thrift institution in September 1988; accordingly, 1988 per share earnings is not available.


Rescuers Find Parallels To Recent Disaster Drill
LEAD: Federal disaster relief officials said today that they were finding what they called eerie similarities between the earthquake on Tuesday and the scenario they enacted in a major drill just over two months ago.


Queens Recalls Student With Future in Space
LEAD: At Bayside High School in Queens, ''We teach our students to reach for the stars,'' said Dorothy Laird, a longtime assistant principal there.
But she readily conceded that she and her colleagues had never conceived that a student of theirs two decades ago would follow that lesson literally.


Times Co. Profit Bolstered By Special Gain in Quarter
LEAD: The New York Times Company yesterday reported third-quarter earnings of $210.8 million, or $2.68 a share, compared with $26.7 million, or 33 cents a share, in the comparable period last year.
Revenues came to $415.3 million, up 6.4 percent from $390.5 million a year ago.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Brand Fashion Outlet, to Romann &amp; Tannenholz Advertising, with a budget of $2 million.


United Fedl Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Fedl Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,347,000
1,310,000
Per share
.26
-
Shares outst
5,176,672
-
6mo net inc
2,840,000
2,801,000
Per share
.55
-
Shares outst
5,176,672
-
Year-ago per share earnings and shares outstanding were not available; the company converted to a stock form of ownership on Feb.


Who's Egon Krenz? He's No Gorbachev
LEAD: Who is Egon Krenz?
As of yesterday, the 52-year-old is the new No. 1 in East Germany, after General Secretary Erich Honecker resigned for ''health reasons.'' Is Mr.
Krenz another Mikhail Gorbachev?
Or is he a German version of Konstantin Chernenko, the tired old apparatchik who took over in Moscow after the deaths of Leonid Brezhnev and Yuri


Recent Tests Said to Justify More Cold Fusion Research
LEAD: Recent experiments on low-temperature nuclear fusion have produced enough interesting results to justify more research into the phenomenon, leading scientists said today.


Series May Resume Tuesday at Candlestick
LEAD: Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, announced tonight that pending additional structural surveys of Candlestick Park baseball planned to resume the World Series there next Tuesday.


Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
754,000
688,000
Per share
.09
.08
Shares outst
8,701,394
8,449,660
9mo net inc
2,245,000
1,700,000
Per share
.26
.20
Shares outst
8,657,379
8,378,901


Ex-Official Admits He Stole Money From New York City
LEAD: A former New York City official in the Department of General Services pleaded guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court to charges of using his position to steal more than $1 million in city money.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Stock Market Stabilizes; Pressure on 'Junk Bonds'


Illinois Tool Works Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Tool Works Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
546,924,000
482,790,000
Net inc
40,887,000
35,014,000
Share earns
.76
.67
9mo rev
1,613,544,000
1,440,224,000
Net inc
122,319,000
105,712,000
Share earns
2.29
2.01


Chambers Development reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chambers Development (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,185,000
35,373,000
Net inc
7,331,000
4,781,000
Share earns
.28
.21
Shares outst
27,025,000
23,155,000
9mo sales
129,470,000
100,706,000
Net inc
19,431,000
b15,636,000
Share earns
.78
.68
Shares outst
25,025,000
23,155,000


Faberge Shifts a Line
LEAD: Another Faberge account defected from Bozell yesterday, as Faberge's parent company shifted a line of hair care products to J. Walter Thompson/New York.
Chesebrough-Pond's, the unit of Unilever N.V. that acquired Faberge last August, switched its men's toiletries products from Bozell to Lintas New York last week.


Export Fine Set By Japan Court
LEAD: A Japanese court has fined an air-conditioner maker 2 million yen ($14,000) after finding it guilty of illegally exporting strategic chemicals to the Soviet Union, a court official said today.


Viacom Posts Loss in Quarter
LEAD: Viacom International Inc., the cable and entertainment company that owns Showtime Networks Inc. and MTV Networks, reported yesterday that despite sharply higher revenues and operating earnings it had a net loss in the third quarter.


Puritan-Bennett reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puritan-Bennett (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
58,393,000
51,250,000
Net inc
3,984,000
3,455,000
Share earns
.35
.31
9mo sales
168,924,000
150,524,000
Net inc
12,434,000
10,142,000
Share earns
1.10
.91


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
521,312,000
457,798,000
Net inc
15,644,000
10,521,000
Share earns
1.01
.70
Shares outst
15,464,599
15,066,575
6mo rev
985,940,000
896,783,000
Net inc
30,909,000
17,042,000
Share earns
2.01
1.13
Shares outst
15,358,069
15,059,306


Salvador's Armed Forces Accused By a Medical Team From the U.S.
LEAD: The Salvadoran military has conducted a nationwide campaign of killings, harassment and torture against doctors and health-care workers and attacked guerrilla field hospitals in violation of the Geneva convention, a team of American medical specialists says.


Santa Cruz Grieves and Tries to Cope With Loss of Much of Business Area
LEAD: Fifteen miles south of the epicenter of the California earthquake, the scene today in the streets of Santa Cruz was a surrealistic mixture of festivity and grief.


Two 'Junk' Offerings Postponed
LEAD: Investment bankers at two Wall Street firms said yesterday that they were postponing two ''junk bond'' offerings totaling more than $1.2 billion because of volatile conditions in the high-risk, high-yield market.


Grenade Explodes in Bogota, Killing the Man Carrying It
LEAD: A man was killed today when a grenade he was carrying exploded near Colombia's congress building a few hours after the introduction of a guerrilla amnesty bill that excludes pardons for drug traffickers, the police said.


Moscow Journal; Wanted by the Opposition: A Full Campaign Chest
LEAD: In July, when a minority faction of the Congress of People's Deputies opened the first political fund in the nation, they invited supporters to dig into their wallets and pull out contributions.


Shearson Profit Is At $66 Million
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. yesterday reported third-quarter earnings of $66 million, or 64 cents a share, in contrast to a net loss of $3 million for the 1988 quarter.
Revenues rose 26.9 percent, to $3.3 billion from $2.6 billion.


China Weighs New Restrictions on Study Abroad
LEAD: China is circulating confidential documents that would impose tough new restrictions on young people planning to study abroad, including a requirement that they first work for up to seven years after graduation from college, officials say.


East Germany Removes Honecker And His Protege Takes His Place
LEAD: Confronted with increasing demands for change, the East German Communist Party today ousted Erich Honecker, its hard-line leader of 18 years, and named his 52-year-old protege to replace him.


Spectrum Control Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spectrum Control Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,258,000
7,140,000
Net loss
744,000
1,004,000
9mo sales
23,175,000
22,588,000
Net loss
665,000
b1,281,000
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $886,000.


California Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
31,333,000
26,731,000
Net inc
1,394,000
1,186,000
Share earns
.17
.14


Modine Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Mfg (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1989
1988
Sales
110,609,000
106,792,000
Net inc
5,163,000
7,482,000
Share earns
.35
.49
Shares outst
15,055,000
15,127,000
6mo sales
216,457,000
207,273,000
Net inc
11,523,000
14,534,000
Share earns
.77
.96
Shares outst
15,050,000
15,136,000


Review/Dance; Premiere Honors a German Choreographer
LEAD: Susanne Linke's ''Hommage a Dore Hoyer,'' which received its American premiere on Tuesday night in the Lepercq Space of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, was both powerful in its own right and a poignant tribute to a major figure in modern dance who is largely unknown in America.


Envirosafe Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Envirosafe Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,120,000
13,252,000
Net inc
804,000
1,148,000
Share earns
.21
.30
9mo rev
29,019,000
28,949,000
Net inc
1,339,000
1,444,000
Share earns
.35
.38


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Travel Related Services Co. named Louis M. Laguardia senior vice president of human resources and Margaret M. Gagliardi senior vice president of compensation, benefits and staffing.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
205,702,000
188,358,000
Net inc
12,448,000
14,286,000
Share earns
.60
.70
Shares outst
20,652,000
20,546,000
9mo sales
607,066,000
534,378,000
Net inc
37,287,000
36,113,000
Share earns
1.81
1.76
Shares outst
20,594,000
20,541,000


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
107,884,000
84,964,000
Net inc
13,986,000
8,505,000
Share earns
.96
.58
9mo sales
251,759,000
201,394,000
Net inc
29,261,000
17,116,000
Share earns
2.01
1.17


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
22,552,000
24,096,000
Per share
.57
.63
9mo net inc
68,385,000
64,343,000
Per share
1.75
1.66


Parker Hannifin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
610,626,000
595,654,000
Net inc
23,361,000
b47,590,000
Share earns
.48
.54
b-Included an accounting adjustment of $21,698,000, or 44 cents a share, which reflected cumulative effect of accounting changes on prior- year periods.


Barbara Bush Given Award By Religious Freedom Group
LEAD: The Appeal of Conscience Foundation presented its annual awards last night to Barbara Bush, Roger Smith, chairman of General Motors, and Chingiz Aitmatov, a Soviet author.


Georgia Gulf reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
251,239,000
278,708,000
Net inc
46,065,000
53,052,000
Share earns
1.85
1.85
Shares outst
24,891,744
28,644,092
9mo sales
861,288,000
777,025,000
Net inc
150,747,000
139,182,000
Share earns
5.89
4.85
Shares outst
25,576,721
28,697,298


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
321,200,000
292,700,000
Net inc
13,200,000
14,900,000
Share earns
.52
.64
9mo sales
915,700,000
840,000,000
Net inc
35,900,000
b61,900,000
Share earns
1.49
2.66


Close to Home
LEAD: ''THIS street is getting very lively,'' I said, impressed by the snappy dressers and snappier restaurants I'd seen on what had once been a desolate stretch of the Upper West Side. ''Too lively,'' my hostess replied. ''I just had my wallet stolen.''


Pacific Board Option Move
LEAD: Trading in all options on individual stocks listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange will be moved temporarily to other exchanges because of the earthquake Tuesday in San Francisco.


U.S. Drug Strategy Is Attacked at House Hearing
LEAD: Administration officials defended their anti-drug strategy for Latin America today before Congressional critics who complained that it was ill conceived and too heavily weighted toward military over economic aid for cocaine-producing countries.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Dow Chemcial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemcial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,250,000,000
4,150,000,000
Net inc
589,000,000
632,000,000
Share earns
3.29
3.36
9mo sales
13,336,000,000
12,383,000,000
Net inc
2,060,000,000
b1,763,000,000
Share earns
11.41
9.32


Arvin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arvin Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
376,280,000
294,943,000
Net inc
4,546,000
c8,329,000
Share earns
.12
.40
Shares outst
18,896,000
18,795,000
9mo sales
1,144,008,000
941,758,000
Net inc
b14,619,000
c5,443,000
Share earns
.53
.16
Shares outst
18,886,000
18,780,000


A Cotton Plant Grows in an Unlikely
LEAD: THE Fillin' Station, a restaurant at a busy highway intersection here, looks like, and is, a good place to have a no-nonsense breakfast of bacon and scrambled eggs and grits.


Washington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,000,000
3,800,000
Per share
.14
.54
9mo net inc
8,100,000
9,900,000
Per share
1.15
1.41


Israeli Leader Rejects a Compromise With Palestinians
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has formally served notice that he is not prepared to compromise with the Palestinians, even if it means his Government falls and Israel enters a sharp conflict with the United States.


Energy Conversion Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energy Conversion Devices Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,652,000
2,490,000
Net inc
3,374,000
b9,637,000
Share earns
.56
-
Yr rev
25,568,000
10,159,000
Net loss
2,236,000
31,293,000
b-Net loss


Allen Organ reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allen Organ (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,124,224
5,750,124
Net inc
1,359,724
1,122,113
Share earns
.90
.75
9mo sales
18,110,191
16,939,167
Net inc
3,407,089
3,112,746
Share earns
2.26
2.07


Review/Theater; Heat on Many Levels, in Sally Nemeth's 'Mill Fire'
LEAD: Three widows stare ominously from behind black tulle veils while the audience files in to Sally Nemeth's play ''Mill Fire'' at the Apple Corps Theater. ''Mill Fire'' is, thankfully, not as grim as the visages of those three women: its young heroine, Marlene, another widow, refuses to grieve in the conventional, quiet mode thought proper in Birmingham, Ala., in 1978.


I.B.M. to Buy Back $1 Billion of Stock
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said its board had authorized the repurchase of up to $1 billion worth of stock.
The program is one of series of similar actions the company has taken since 1986.
A stock buyback program initiated by I.B.M. in September 1988 is still in effect.
Currently, $368 million of the $2 billion originally allocated is still to be spent.


Corrections
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on Tuesday misidentified the 1955 World Series game in which Roger Craig was the winning pitcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers against the Yankees.
It was the fifth game, not the third.


Currents; Designers Under 30 In a Show at Steelcase
LEAD: IN 1966 the Architectural League of New York held a huge exhibition, ''40 Under 40,'' showing the work of 40 architects under age 40.
Many of those whose designs were on view have become the most influential architects practicing today.
Remembering that show, Steelcase Design Parnership, in collaboration with


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Signal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
102,148,000
96,592,000
Net inc
5,863,000
4,780,000
Share earns
.57
.47
9mo rev
307,571,000
277,564,000
Net inc
16,672,000
13,340,000
Share earns
1.63
1.32


Princess Gina, Consort in Liechtenstein, 67
LEAD: Princess Gina of Liechtenstein, wife of the head of state, died today, the Government announced.
She was 67 years old.


Bridge
LEAD: Some plays are so routine and obvious that the average player assumes they have no exceptions.
But an expert, if concentrating, will sometimes sniff the air and detect one of the rare exceptions to a general guideline.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Low Water Pressure  Q. Is there a safe, economical way to improve the water pressure in my 75-year-old house?
A.
First, make sure that the water pressure coming into the house is up to par.
You can ask your local water company to check this, or a plumber can put a pressure gauge on the incoming line to make sure the pressure is adequate.


Currents; Prince's Architectural Vision on View
LEAD: SINCE 1984, when he delivered a speech to the Royal Institute of British Architects in which he described the new wing for London's National Gallery as ''a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much loved and elegant friend,'' the Prince of Wales has become perhaps the most visible architecture critic around.


National Westminster Banorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster Banorp Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b113,503,000
c34,852,000
9mo net loss
b55,518,000
c91,064,000
b-Included an $155 million addition to reserve against loans to certain countries with severe debt servicing problems.


The New York Times Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* The New York Times Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
415,340,000
390,477,000
Net inc
b210,779,000
c26,682,000
Share earns
2.68
.33
Shares outst
78,000,000
80,270,000
9mo rev
1,298,715,000
1,250,022,000
Net inc
b285,607,000
c117,238,000
Share earns
3.63
1.44
Shares outst
78,420,000
81,165,000


4 Other Members of the Crew
LEAD: For the flight of the space shuttle Atlantis, the space agency has selected crew members with extensive flying or scientific experience.
Three have been on previous shuttle flights.
One member of the crew is Dr.
Ellen Shulman Baker, the daughter of the Queens Borough President.
Here are sketches of the other four astronauts:


Pioneer-Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer-Standard (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
74,140,000
73,267,000
Net inc
798,000
1,776,000
Share earns
.15
.33
6mo sales
150,539,000
146,166,000
Net inc
2,096,000
3,650,000
Share earns
.39
.68


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,554,300,000
2,506,000,000
Net inc
289,100,000
281,100,000
Share earns
1.06
1.03
Shares outst
273,247,000
271,728,000
9mo rev
7,607,900,000
7,398,900,000
Net inc
906,500,000
927,700,000
Share earns
3.37
3.40
Shares outst
269,177,000
272,867,000


German Touch at Sony Classical
LEAD: The managing director of CBS Masterworks, the classical music arm of CBS Records, has kept a low profile during the last year as he planned his reorganization of the label.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clorox Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
366,936,000
330,464,000
Net inc
45,911,000
b42,516,000
Share earns
.83
.77
b-After a loss of $874,000 from discontinued operations.


Watkins-Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watkins-Johnson (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,526,000
71,802,000
Net inc
b7,323,000
5,533,000
Share earns
.87
.66
9mo sales
233,571,000
211,645,000
Net inc
18,045,000
14,974,000
Share earns
2.15
1.79


Measuring the Magnitude
LEAD: For every increase of one on the Richter scale, there is a tenfold increase in ground motions, or seismic waves.
The energy released by the earthquake's motion is about 30 times greater for each increase of one on the scale.
There is no maximum or minimum on the scale.
Even earthquakes of less than -2 are routinely measured.


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,887,000
3,699,000
Per share
.50
.48
9mo net inc
11,610,000
9,518,000
Per share
1.48
1.28


L.I. Saboteur Tried to Spread Asbestos, Police Say
LEAD: A saboteur ripped insulation laced with asbestos from pipes in two Nassau County government buildings and placed it in front of air-circulation fans, the police said today.


Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,300,000,000
2,600,000,000
Net inc
b66,000,000
cd3,000,000
Share earns
.64
-
Shares outst
102,500,000
87,100,000
Shares outst
102,500,000
87,100,000
9mo rev
9,600,000,000
7,600,000,000
Net inc
b106,000,000
c110,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.05
Shares outst
88,900,000
86,800,000


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
27,854,000
23,687,000
Net inc
54,000
1,005,000
Share earns
.01
.20


Geologists Track Quake To Predict Future Risk
LEAD: Teams of geologists fanned out into the rugged mountains above Santa Cruz today to piece together the nature and extent of Tuesday's earthquake, map aftershocks and gather data to help determine earthquake risk in nearby areas.


Rudolph J. Boyko, 93, Former Steel Executive
LEAD: Rudolph J. Boyko, a New Jersey steel executive who was one of the founders of Ben-Gurion University of the Negev in Israel in 1969, died of complications from surgery Tuesday at Newton (N.J.) General Hospital.
He was 93 years old and lived in Blairstown, N.J., and Manhattan.


First Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
372,000
483,000
Per share
.48
.63
9mo net inc
1,135,000
1,289,000
Per share
1.47
1.67
Shares outst
772,353
772,353


United Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,750,000,000
4,470,000,000
Net inc
196,700,000
190,100,000
Share earns
1.46
1.45
9mo rev
14,492,200,000
13,246,400,000
Net inc
517,700,000
508,500,000
Share earns
3.91
3.89


Cycare Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cycare Systems Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,703,000
16,500,000
Net inc
773,000
236,000
Share earns
.13
.04
9mo rev
51,510,000
49,736,000
Net inc
2,364,000
2,610,000
Share earns
.41
.47


Why No Debates - or Debate?
LEAD: Would that David Dinkins, who has handled New York's racial tensions with such skill and sensitivity, showed as much skill in agreeing to campaign debates.
There's been no encounter between him and Rudolph Giuliani, and at this rate it looks as if there may never be one - largely because Mr.
Dinkins continues to duck.


Waterzip Is Upset Winner at Aqueduct Opener
LEAD: Waterzip slogged through the soft turf to post an upset victory in the $87,900 Ashley T. Cole Handicap yesterday as Aqueduct Race Track opened on a dark and damp afternoon that reflected the mood of the sparse crowd.


Imo Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imo Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
188,564,000
163,787,000
Net inc
5,614,000
8,053,000
Share earns
.31
.46
Shares outst
18,271,000
17,579,000
9mo sales
567,725,000
488,500,000
Net inc
22,600,000
19,300,000
Share earns
1.26
1.25
Shares outst
17,579,000
17,990,000


Sovran Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
69,215,000
61,923,000
Per share
1.15
1.04
Shares outst
60,099,000
59,517,000
9mo net inc
196,589,000
174,964,000
Per share
3.28
2.94
Shares outst
59,944,000
59,531,000


Media General Selling Unit
LEAD: Media General Inc. has put up for sale 31 weekly newspapers in Orange County and the San Gabriel Valley area, saying the California papers are too far from its base in Virginia.


SUNY Buffalo Fails Tuition Audit Again
LEAD: The State University of New York in Buffalo fails to make sure all students have paid tuition by the first day of classes, Comptroller Edward Regan said in an audit today.


U.S. Seeks to Stop Brazil's Missile-Technology Deal
LEAD: The Bush Administration has begun a campaign to dissuade France from selling Brazil rocket-motor technology that American officials say could be used to make ballistic missiles.


Philip Morris Had 21% Gain In Its Third-Quarter Profit
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest consumer-products concern, reported a strong third-quarter performance, especially in its international tobacco operations and its recently acquired Kraft foods business, with its net income rising nearly 21 percent.


Bay Area Newspapers Continue Publishing
LEAD: Despite power failures that blacked out computers and shut down printing presses, most newspapers in the San Francisco Bay area managed to publish today.


When Businesses and Schools Join Hands, Everybody Benefits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bigger One Is Believed Still Ahead
LEAD: Despite the devastating effects of the earthquake Tuesday, it was not nearly as strong as either the great quake that struck San Francisco in 1906 or the great quake that most seismologists believe will strike the Bay area sooner or later.


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,707,894
8,403,924
Per share
.69
.66
9mo net inc
25,432,602
24,437,224
Per share
2.00
1.92


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Edberg Advances to Second Round in Tokyo: Stefan Edberg of Sweden, seeded first, defeated Glenn Michibata of Canada, 6-1, 6-3, yesterday in the first round of the Seiko Super tournament.(AP)  Graf Advances: Steffi Graf, seeded No. 1, breezed into the quarterfinals yesterday at the $250,000 European Indoor tournament with a 6-2, 6-1 victory over Dinky van Rensburg of South Africa.


Monsanto Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,061,000,000
2,022,000,000
Net inc
126,000,000
116,000,000
Share earns
1.88
1.67
9mo sales
6,674,000,000
6,412,000,000
Net inc
589,000,000
546,000,000
Share earns
8.66
7.57
Shares outst
68,000,000
72,200,000


Books of The Times; On the Electronic Trail of a Computer Spy
LEAD:  The Cuckoo's Egg  Tracking a Spy Through the Maze of Computer Espionage  By Clifford Stoll  326 pages.
Doubleday. $19.95.


Ex-Official Admits He Stole Million From New York City
LEAD: A former New York City official in the Department of General Services pleaded guilty yesterday in State Supreme Court to charges of using his position to steal more than $1 million in city money.


Talking Deals; McCaw Strategy In Seeking Lin
LEAD: IN the battle for Lin Broadcasting, McCaw Cellular Communications has introduced a rare tactic intended to sweeten its bid without having to pay anyone more money right away.


Cameron Iron Works Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cameron Iron Works Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
156,037,000
143,268,000
Net inc
11,736,000
4,268,000
Share earns
.34
.10


Bonn Asks Californian's War Crimes Extradition
LEAD: The Justice Department announced today that the West German Government had requested extradition of a Los Angeles resident accused of war crimes committed while a guard at a Nazi concentration camp.
It is believed to be only the second extradition request ever made by West Germany in a war crimes case here.


A Body for Better Men to Beat On
LEAD: Dave Jaco sometimes works on short notice.


ABC Expects No Loss From Series Suspension
LEAD: ABC does not expect any financial loss from the suspension of the World Series as a result of the earthquake in the San Francisco Bay area Tuesday, network spokesmen said yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section on Oct. 5 about tours, exhibitions and lectures on New York City's history and future characterized the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge incorrectly.
Its suspension span, 4,260 feet, was the world's longest when the bridge opened in 1964, but it was surpassed in 1981 by the Humber Bridge, near Hull,


New U.S. Arts Chairman Discusses Role
LEAD: John E. Frohnmayer, the new chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, said today that judgment rather than the specific language of a bill passed this month by Congress would best help prevent the agency from financing obscene art.


Trinova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
456,221,000
421,999,000
Net loss
29,679,000
c19,645,000
Share earns
-
.57
Shares outst
34,217,000
36,121,000
9mo sales
1,436,428,000
1,287,145,000
Net inc
b12,010,000
c62,769,000
Share earns
.35
1.82
Shares outst
34,210,000
36,118,000


Jail for Ex-Inspector In a Bribery Case
LEAD: A former state Department of Environmental Conservation inspector was sentenced yesterday to six months in prison for tax evasion related to bribes she took from reputed organized crime figures.


A.P. Green Says It Is Not for Sale
LEAD: The management of A. P. Green Industries has rebuffed an investment partnership that said it was considering a bid for the Mexico, Mo., heat-resistant metals concern.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the partnership, East Rock Partners, said H. M Stover, A. P. Green's chairman, told it last Friday that ''the company was not for sale.


Creditors Question Eastern
LEAD: The unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines voted unanimously at their meeting Tuesday to have their own financial advisers examine alternative approaches to the airline's plans for its emergence from bankruptcy.
That could lead to the creditors' considering presenting their own plan to the court, people who were told of the results of the meeting said yesterday.


Concept Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concept Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
13,570,000
11,920,000
Net inc
1,448,000
1,482,000
Share earns
.15
.15
Shares outst
9,600,000
9,535,000
Yr sales
49,555,000
42,777,000
Net inc
4,861,000
4,480,000
Share earns
.51
.47
Shares outst
9,584,000
9,470,000


Kroger Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kroger Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 7
1989
1988
Sales
5,533,949,052
5,584,522,264
Net loss
b5,301,953
c56,200,206
Share earns
-
.65
9mo sales
14,450,620,583
14,405,091,127
Net loss
b26,798,673
c153,525,595
Share earns
-
1.81


2 Camps Try to Sway Charter Voters
LEAD: Less than three weeks before the Election Day referendum, the campaign over the proposed New York City Charter remains limited to debates before community groups and in the press.


Cuba Is Elected to the U.N. Security Council
LEAD: Cuba, Rumania and Southern Yemen were elected to the Security Council today for two-year terms.
Many Western diplomats said they feared that the move would make it harder for the Council to agree on a common line toward future threats to international peace.


'My House, My House,' She Cried
LEAD: The joggers of the Marina district were back out this sunny morning, but this time their lungs were filled with the acrid smoke from the fire.





Champion International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,318,488,000
1,285,698,000
Net inc
102,062,000
122,386,000
Share earns
1.09
1.29
9mo sales
3,896,531,000
3,814,141,000
Net inc
329,444,000
336,553,000
Share earns
3.48
1.24


Near Normal Life Resumes for Many in San Francisco After Flurry of Work
LEAD: The trolleys were running again today.


Number of Nation's Poor Remains at 32 Million for a Second Year
LEAD: The number of Americans living below the official poverty level remained at nearly 32 million people for a second straight year in 1988 even though average individual income reached an all-time high of $13,120, figures released today by the Federal Census Bureau showed.


Midlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
66,100,000
57,768,000
Per share
1.68
1.48
9mo net inc
187,206,000
163,413,000
Per share
4.78
4.20
The results for the latest periods included the five New York banks purchased from Bank of New York Co.


Hexcel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hexcel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
97,021,000
90,986,000
Net inc
1,649,000
3,694,000
Share earns
.24
.53
9mo sales
309,112,000
293,239,000
Net inc
6,656,000
11,450,000
Share earns
.96
1.66


Precision Castparts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Castparts (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
110,900,000
109,400,000
Net inc
7,200,000
8,700,000
Share earns
.43
.51
6mo sales
222,500,000
219,900,000
Net inc
14,900,000
15,500,000
Share earns
.88
.92


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,727,400,000
2,328,300,000
Net inc
137,000,000
150,300,000
Share earns
2.16
2.50
Shares outst
63,100,000
59,000,000
9mo rev
7,894,100,000
6,456,300,000
Net inc
415,900,000
360,100,000
Share earns
6.59
5.99
Shares outst
62,900,000
59,000,000


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
126,918,000
115,616,000
Per share
1.33
1.25
Shares outst
94,223,000
91,571,000
9mo net inc
375,974,000
341,319,000
Per share
3.98
3.70
Shares outst
93,526,000
91,018,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about occupational illness among artists and musicians misidentified a neurologist at the Performing Arts Clinic at the University of Texas Medical School.
He is Dr.
Alan H. Lockwood.
The article also misidentified the founder of Doctors for Artists, an organization of physicians who treat artists.


To Readers
LEAD: Because of the earthquake in California, trading of options at the Pacific Stock Exchange in San Francisco was suspended yesterday.


Gorbachev's Assault On Paper Stirs Fears
LEAD: In the fifth year of glasnost, the Soviet press is getting a rough reminder this week of how much this country's tenuous liberties still depend on the tempers of one man, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Events: Student Designs And Quilts for the Tiny
LEAD: Evolving Design, Pratt Institute, Schafler Gallery, 200 Willoughby Avenue (Washington Street), Brooklyn; 718-636-3746.


Some Roughhousing Is Bad for Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brown May Seek Federal Help After Attacks
LEAD: The president of Brown University is considering asking for Federal help in the aftermath of a number of attacks on white students by blacks.


Avant-Gardist For Lanvin
LEAD: Leon Bressler, chairman and chief executive of the House of Lanvin, announced today that Claude Montana, the ready-to wear designer, would design its couture collection and oversee its ready-to-wear line.


SHL Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SHL Systemhouse (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
142,700,000
84,000,000
Net inc
3,400,000
b7,900,000
Share earns
.13
-
Yr rev
630,800,000
230,100,000
Net inc
15,300,000
5,800,000
Share earns
.58
.22


Suspect in Car Theft Is Killed By an Officer in Larchmont
LEAD: A police officer shot and killed a suspected car thief who had fired a shot that struck the officer's gunbelt but did not injure him, the police said today.


Nacco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nacco Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
372,153,000
171,713,000
Net inc
13,798,000
12,789,000
Share earns
1.55
1.44
Shares outst
8,875,000
8,859,000
9mo rev
780,849,000
432,533,000
Net inc
35,016,000
36,024,000
Share earns
3.95
4.07
Shares outst
8,874,000
8,844,000


BTU International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BTU International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
26,825,000
18,163,000
Net inc
1,845,000
1,220,000
Share earns
.25
.23
Shares outst
7,254,000
5,325,000
9mo sales
76,277,000
43,852,000
Net inc
6,008,000
572,000
Share earns
.84
.09
Shares outst
6,965,000
5,299,000


Dow Chemical Net Off 7%; Monsanto's Earnings Up 9%
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company reported yesterday that its earnings had fallen 7 percent in the third quarter, primarily because of lower demand for polyethylene, a main ingredient in plastic products.


Bernstein and Copland
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein is to conduct the New York Philharmonic this month in four performances of an all-Copland program.
The concerts, at Avery Fisher Hall, will take place today and Saturday at 8 P.M., Friday at 2 P.M. and Oct. 24 at 7:30 P.M.
The works to be played are ''Music for the Theater,'' ''Connotations,'' the Clarinet Concerto and ''El Salon Mexico.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: Every year millions of unsuspecting Americans, from children in school to the elderly in nursing homes, work with art materials that could endanger their health.
But rarely are they properly protected from the potentially harmful ingredients.
Indeed, rarely are they or their instructors even aware of the risks.


When Businesses and Schools Join Hands, Everybody Benefits; Invest in Teachers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Green Says He's Been Offered Reds' Job
LEAD: Dallas Green, who was dismissed in August before completing his first season as manager of the Yankees, said yesterday he had been offered the Cincinnati Reds' managing job by Marge Schott, the owner.
But Bob Quinn, newly named the Reds' general manager after holding that job with the Yanks, said the post had not been offered to anyone.


Housing Construction Fell 5.2% in September
LEAD: Housing construction, buffeted by rising mortgage rates, fell for a second consecutive month in September, declining to the weakest pace in seven years.


Fisher Transportation ServFices reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Transportation ServFices
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,149,231
3,842,751
Net loss
216,223
b53,721
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
12,063,584
11,336,189
Net loss
624,633
444,599
b-Net income


Goodbye to Glasnost
LEAD: On the night of Oct. 1, in the kitchen of the Hotel Leningrad, cooks and waiters and other workers assembled around a television set and watched, transfixed, as the American Jim Lehrer interviewed Boris Yeltsin for 23 minutes in English, with Russian dubbed in.


British Unit Challenges Deloitte's Merger Plan
LEAD: Deloitte Haskins &amp; Sells's British affiliate, which had previously rejected the accounting firm's proposed merger with Touche Ross, said yesterday that it would sue ''to prevent the unauthorized use'' of the Deloitte name worldwide.


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
7,400,000
6,568,000
Per share
.63
.54
Shares outst
11,700,972
12,100,329
9mo net inc
21,820,000
15,525,000
Per share
1.84
1.28
Shares outst
11,826,918
12,110,934


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,507,854,000
1,415,204,000
Net inc
266,202,000
240,663,000
Share earns
1.80
1.65
Shares outst
147,603,000
146,241,000
9mo sales
4,428,445,000
4,199,621,000
Net inc
766,657,000
693,543,000
Share earns
5.21
4.75
Shares outst
147,083,000
146,111,000


EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,826,300
7,011,100
Net inc
415,900
335,400
Share earns
.17
.14
Yr rev
33,288,900
22,033,800
Net inc
1,154,700
846,500
Share earns
.47
.34


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Cork &amp; Seal (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
509,764,000
485,622,000
Net inc
29,017,000
28,901,000
Share earns
1.10
1.05
Shares outst
26,347,401
27,739,710
9mo sales
1,456,286,000
1,420,685,000
Net inc
75,431,000
75,208,000
Share earns
2.86
2.71


Airline Takeover Bill Gains
LEAD: A House committee today voted to give the Transportation Department new authority to forestall big airline takeovers, but the Bush Administration threatened to veto the bill.


National Savings Bank of Alany reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Savings Bank of Alany
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
917,641
923,632
Per share
.78
.79
Yr net inc
3,379,068
3,565,826
Per share
2.86
3.06


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boatmen's Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
32,077,000
29,471,000
Per share
.92
.86
9mo net inc
96,035,000
81,381,000
Per share
2.77
2.38


Multibank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b3,276,000
7,458,000
Per share
.35
.80
9mo net inc
17,334,000
18,516,000
Per share
1.86
2.00
b-Included an addition of $7 million to the reserve for possible credit losses.


Tyler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyler Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
108,178,000
98,670,000
Net inc
b2,231,000
c10,543,000
Share earns
.11
.55
Shares outst
21,256,000
19,491,000
9mo sales
308,734,000
279,684,000
Net inc
b3,136,000
c20,229,000
Share earns
.15
1.11
Shares outst
21,413,000
18,105,000


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Upsala Calls Time To Fetch Quarterback
LEAD: The established reasons to call a time out in a football game include halting the clock, making a substitution or a strategic decision, even rattling an opponent's field-goal kicker.


President Soft-Pedals Flag Measure
LEAD: After advancing a constitutional amendment as the only certain way to protect the American flag from desecration, President Bush has held back from an all-out effort to save the proposal in the Senate, Congressional and Administration officials said today.


An Integrated Independence for Baltics?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Status of Travel And Phones
LEAD: The status of national transportation and communication services in the San Francisco area:


Philip Morris Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philip Morris Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,247,000,000
7,737,000,000
Net inc
748,000,000
621,000,000
Share earns
.81
.67
Shares outst
927,000,000
924,000,000
9mo rev
33,612,000,000
23,102,000,000
Net inc
2,083,000,000
b1,995,000,000
Share earns
2.25
2.13
Shares outst
926,000,000
935,000,000


James M. Fulton, 75, Ex-Executive at Merck
LEAD: James M. Fulton, a former executive at Merck &amp; Company in Rahway, N.J., died of a heart attack on Monday at his home in Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
He was 75 years old.


THE CALIFORNIA QUAKE: The Next Day; QUAKE DEAD PUT AT 270, DAMAGE AT A BILLION AS CALIFORNIANS STRIVE TO RESTORE ORDER
LEAD: On the day after the most terrifying night of their lives, Northern Californians today catalogued disasters great and small, counted the dead and comforted the living and began restoring order and civility to their devastated cities and towns.


THE CALIFORNIA QUAKE: Earthquake Engineering; Why the Skyscrapers Just Swayed
LEAD: San Francisco's skyscrapers, which over the last generation have given the gentle bayfront city the look of a modern metropolis, came through the earthquake Tuesday with little or no damage, thanks in large part to tough codes for earthquake resistance enacted in California over the last 15 to 20 years.


Animal Rights Activists Endanger Medical Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Record Textile Imports
LEAD: United States imports of textiles and apparel totaled more than 1.42 billion square yards in August, a record for any month, the American Textile Manufacturers Institute said Tuesday.
It said the figure was up by 19 percent over August 1988.
In the first eight months of this year, imports were 9.82 billion square yards, a 13 percent rise over last year.


Oklahoma Officers Acquitted Of Conspiring to Kidnap Man
LEAD: A jury in Sherman, Tex., today acquitted two Oklahoma lawmen on charges that they had conspired to kidnap a man they thought was a drug dealer, bring him across state lines and torture him with a curling iron.


General Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Dynamics (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,517,300,000
2,285,200,000
Net inc
76,500,000
76,400,000
Share earns
1.83
1.82
9mo sales
7,407,900,000
7,060,800,000
Net inc
210,300,000
208,800,000
Share earns
5.03
4.97


Her Hints Are Words To Live By
LEAD: ''FORGIVE the dog toys,'' said Heloise, pointing her manicured finger to the rubber skunk, sea anenome, hamburger and ice-cream bar embedded in the grass.
The visitor certainly did.
After all, this was Heloise.
The 38-year-old household-hints writer, who in 1977 inherited her mother's fabled column, ''Hints from Heloise,'' has been called the ''high priestess of housework'' and ''the maven of the mundane.


Crippled Airliner Lands Safely
LEAD: After losing electrical power, a jetliner with 104 people aboard made an emergency landing at a small unattended airport early today and ran off the runway, burying its tires in the mud.


Medco Containment Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medco Containment Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
219,422,000
147,908,000
Net loss
b6,301,000
c6,562,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Included a pre-tax net loss of $15,823,000 in the long-term investment portfolio.


Fears Expressed for 40 East Timor Protesters
LEAD: Amnesty International expressed concern today for the safety of about 40 people in East Timor said to have been arrested for taking part in a pro-independence protest in front of Pope John Paul II last week when he visited the disputed Indonesian province.


Currents; New Wrinkle in Porcelain
LEAD: ''A FRIEND who is an artist always came to dinner wearing a wrinkled shirt,'' Angela Cummings said, ''so I decided to make some tableware that looked wrinkled, just to tease him.''


Snap-On Tools reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snap-On Tools (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
212,577,000
208,897,000
Net inc
23,351,000
27,240,000
Share earns
.57
.65
Shares outst
41,015,000
41,799,000
9mo sales
671,117,000
643,317,000
Net inc
82,036,000
86,151,000
Share earns
2.00
2.06
Shares outst
41,015,000
41,799,000


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
244,805,000
158,030,000
Net inc
31,655,000
26,778,000
Share earns
1.81
1.54
9mo rev
610,169,000
459,484,000
Net inc
91,461,000
75,773,000
Share earns
5.24
4.35


Insurers Tallying, But Policies on Houses Are Few
LEAD: As damage estimates from the California earthquake exceeded a billion dollars, hundreds of insurance claims adjusters moved into the area yesterd day to assess the devastation and pay claims.


Emerson String Quartet
LEAD: The Emerson String Quartet, in its only New York appearances this season, will play the late string quartets of Beethoven and Schubert in four concerts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The quartet - Eugene Drucker, Philip Setzer, Lawrence Dutton and David Finckel - will play at 8 P.M. today and on Dec.


Seoul Leader Offers Assurances To Congress Over Import Markets
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea sought to assure Congress today that his nation would open its developing markets to foreign imports quickly and that anti-Americanism in his country was limited to a handful of radicals.


In London, Subway Style Above Ground
LEAD: British fashion seems to be going down the tube - the subway, that is.
At the designer shows and in the offbeat London shops, styles first seen on New York City streets and subways carried the day: hooded shirts and jackets with large graphics, sweat pants, belt packs, knapsacks and chunky leather basketball shoes.


An Integrated Independence for Baltics?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Partners in UAL Buyout Offer Continue to Maneuver
LEAD: Efforts continued yesterday to reassemble a takeover bid for the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, and one partner in the bid, British Airways, said it hoped a new proposal would be forthcoming from its other partners, United's pilots and management.


Fleet/Norstar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet/Norstar Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
96,392,000
85,761,000
Per share
.86
.79
9mo net inc
278,978,000
248,186,000
Per share
2.51
2.28


Garcia Jury Still Deliberates In Extortion and Bribery Trial
LEAD: Deliberations are to continue for the fifth day today in the bribery and extortion trial of Representative Robert Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee.


Maryland Under Scrutiny
LEAD: The Maryland men's basketball program, which has spent three years in the shadow of the cocaine-related death of Len Bias, now has to respond to accusations of at least 19 violations by a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation.


Move Seen on Oil Stockpile
LEAD: The Bush Administration will stop buying Mexican oil for the United States emergency stockpile early next year, ending an eight-year supply link aimed in part at aiding the debt-ridden Mexican economy, people close to the situation said today.


New Measure Finds Growing Hardship for Youth
LEAD: The well-being of children in America has declined dramatically since 1970, according to an index that measures aspects of ''social health'' like infant mortality and drug abuse.


A Lesson in Playfulness: School Annexes That Please the Eye
LEAD: THESE days, it is architects who are playing in schoolyards.
Four startling new buildings have sprung up alongside public schools in the Bronx and Brooklyn.
Covered with classical ornament and painted bright colors, they seem to be on loan from Disney World.
Actually, they contain classrooms.


Judge Says Hospital Can Take Queens Baby Off Respirator
LEAD: A baby who has been declared brain dead can be removed from life-support equipment despite his parents' opposition, a judge ruled yesterday.


Colonial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
18,591,000
18,949,000
Net inc
3,141,000
2,223,000
Share earns
.39
.28
9mo rev
56,440,000
57,950,000
Net inc
9,064,000
6,367,000
Share earns
1.13
.81


Adlai S. Hardin Dies; Wood Sculptor Was 88
LEAD: Adlai S. Hardin, a sculptor and former advertising executive, died of complications from a stroke on Monday at the Saybrook Convalescent Hospital in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He was 88 years old.


N.C.A.A. Council Seeks Reforms &lt;
LEAD: In a series of moves that supported calls for reform in intercollegiate sports, the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Council today called for year-round, random drug-testing and endorsed mandatory disclosure of graduation rates for student-athletes.


Hunter Sets Sale Of a Subsidiary
LEAD: Hunter Environmental Services Inc. reached a preliminary agreement to sell its environmental consulting and services business for $40 million plus the assumption of debt.
The deal is subject to completion of a definitive agreement, approval by Hunter's stockholders and receipt of all necessary consents.


3 Crushed by Skidding Truck That Hits Jeep in New Jersey
LEAD: Three New York residents were killed today when their vehicle was crushed by a tractor trailer carrying compressed garbage, the state police said.


Democrat Captures Mississippi House Seat    With Mr. Taylor were his wife, Margaret, and son, Gary. (AP)


At Least 18 Dead in Tremor In Rural Area of North China
LEAD: A series of earthquakes rattled northern China late Wednesday and early today, killing at least 18 people and flattening about 8,000 houses in a largely rural area, the authorities said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Weekend on Friday about foliage and farm stands gave an incorrect telephone number for the Kohlmaier Farm in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Its number is (914) 226-5028.


Soviets, Vividly Recalling Earthquake Tragedy in Armenia, Offer Aid to U.S.
LEAD: The Soviet Union offered its condolences and assistance to the United States today because of the California earthquake.


Nine Mile Pt. 2 Nuclear Plant Is Shut by Utility After Leak
LEAD: The Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear power plant was shut at 4:22 A.M. today, when the owner, the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, learned of a higher-than-normal leak rate in a drywell in the containment structure, the utility said in a release.


Folklorists See Art In Window Dressing
LEAD: Windows decorated with ceramic vases, swans and Madonnas - a common sight in row-house neighborhoods like South Philadelphia - are being studied by folklorists who consider them to be an urban folk art tradition.


Schering-Plough Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
743,700,000
724,400,000
Net inc
114,000,000
94,400,000
Share earns
1.01
.84
9mo sales
2,381,000,000
2,229,000,000
Net inc
360,200,000
296,900,000
Share earns
3.20
2.65
Shares outst
112,700,000
112,000,000


Apple Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bancorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,013,000
6,348,000
Per share
1.30
1.38
9mo net inc
b18,490,000
17,296,000
Per share
4.02
3.77
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $1,250,000, or 26 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,941,000, or 85 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b65,200,000
c73,600,000
Per share
1.04
1.19
9mo net inc
204,900,000
202,300,000
Per share
3.28
3.25
b-Included a gain of $55 million from sale of a building, partially offset by a $10 million charge for certain reserve requirements, and a $9 million loss from disposition of a unit.


Unocal Thailand
LEAD: Unocal Thailand said today that it plans to spend $2 billion in the next 10 years to develop offshore natural gas fields in the Gulf of Thailand.
A spokesman for the company, a unit of the Unocal Corporation of the United States, said about $1.4 billion would be capital investment and the rest operating costs.


The Fight Over Changing the Borough Presidents' Role
LEAD: Of all the changes in New York City's government proposed by the Charter Revision Commission, none are quite so dramatic as those proposed for the borough presidents.


Michigan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b116,607,000
24,202,000
Per share
7.54
1.57
9mo net inc
c163,064,000
69,727,000
Per share
10.57
4.55
b-Included $225 million pre-tax gain from sale of credit card portfolio.


Northrop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northrop Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,245,600,000
1,356,500,000
Net inc
21,500,000
28,800,000
Share earns
.46
.61
9mo sales
3,923,400,000
4,071,100,000
Net loss
46,900,000
b190,300,000
Share earns
-
4.05


Treasuries Steady; Trading Slow
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday in slow trading, despite a report that showed housing starts were at their lowest level in more than five years.


Home Improvement
LEAD: FALL is an ideal time to clean and protect outdoor metal items.
Ridding them of rust and corrosion before storage prevents deterioration in the winter.


Criminal Case in Singapore
LEAD: A wealthy Singapore businessman who is head of several flourishing companies was charged today with corruption.


Brand Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brand Cos.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
87,431,000
38,068,000
Net inc
3,453,000
1,179,000
Share earns
.37
.24
Shares outst
9,421,000
4,918,000
9mo rev
197,432,000
110,752,000
Net inc
7,163,000
2,565,000
Share earns
.77
.54
Shares outst
9,344,000
4,750,000


Union Camp Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
667,320,000
669,812,000
Net inc
76,045,000
75,052,000
Share earns
1.11
1.09
9mo sales
2,085,320,000
1,975,277,000
Net inc
237,192,000
216,686,000
Share earns
3.45
3.11


More on The Quake
LEAD:  THE SCENE  GLIMPSES  Heroism and Camaraderie


American Precision Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Precision Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,972,000
12,820,000
Net inc
1,183,000
1,024,000
Share earns
.20
.17
9mo rev
39,778,000
37,864,000
Net inc
3,262,000
2,515,000
Share earns
.56
.43


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
27,016,000
23,789,000
Share earns
.73
.65
9mo net inc
75,970,000
68,067,000
Share earns
2.08
1.83


Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
47,464,000
44,278,000
Net inc
7,732,000
7,829,000
Share earns
.65
.65
9mo rev
126,463,000
117,870,000
Net inc
13,516,000
13,636,000
Share earns
1.14
1.13


Addendum
LEAD: *
The Consumer News and Business Channel will produce six one-hour programs tied to special issues of U.S.
News &amp; World Report.
The programs, which will begin in April 1990, will be broadcast just before the magazine appears on newsstands.


UJB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UJB Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
31,353,000
29,979,000
Per share
.69
.67
9mo net inc
94,070,000
87,529,000
Per share
2.08
1.95


Net Off 25.3% At Northrop
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation reported today that its third-quarter earnings declined 25.3 percent, to $21.5 million, or 46 cents a share, from $28.8 million, or 61 cents a share, a year earlier.


From Queens Streets, City Hall Seems Very Distant
LEAD: The voters of Kew Gardens, Queens, have not forgotten the blizzard of 1969.
Manhattan's streets were plowed first, they say.
But in Kew Gardens, a man had to be an Under Secretary General of the United Nations and a Nobel Prize winner to get his street cleared.


Valley National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
72,187,000
b18,721,000
Per share
-
.95
9mo net loss
136,403,000
b48,596,000
Per share
-
2.46
b-Net income  The latest third quarter results included a $110 million provision for credit losses and a provision of $11 million for other real estate owned .


Manville's New Chief For Forest Products
LEAD: The Manville Corporation has named Thomas H. Johnson as the president of its Manville Forest Products Corporation, which accounts for 40 percent total company sales.


Columbus Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbus Energy Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,555,000
1,958,000
Net loss
449,000
356,000
Shares outst
2,755,000
2,556,000
9mo rev
6,690,000
5,682,000
Net loss
3,360,000
372,000
Shares outst
2,719,000
2,395,000


Consolidated Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Rail Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
835,000,000
876,000,000
Net inc
87,000,000
83,000,000
Share earns
1.27
1.21
9mo rev
2,588,000,000
2,586,000,000
Net inc
229,000,000
228,000,000
Share earns
3.34
3.31


Pioneer Fedl Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Fedl Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b10,167,000
1,806,000
Per share
3.75
-
9mo net loss
c3,189,000
d3,923,000
b-Included a net credit of $8,356,000 representing recapture of unused provision for restructuring loss.


Campaign Matters; For Messinger, Making Friends With Old Foes
LEAD: Ruth W. Messinger was running for higher office well before she decided on the particular office - the Manhattan borough presidency, as it turned out - but she does not seem to be waiting for the election to begin her new line of work.


SPORTS PEOPLE: TRACK and FIELD; Nebiolo Named Again
LEAD: Primo Nebiolo, who was ousted as president of the Italian track and field federation amid a business scandal, was re-elected president of the Association of Summer Olympic Federations yesterday.


Labs in the Bay Area Escape Damage
LEAD: Safeguards incorporated during construction or added later apparently protected three major laboratories in the San Francisco Bay area from serious damage in the earthquake that struck the area on Tuesday.


Resolution Funding in $4.5 Billion Bond Sale
LEAD: The Resolution Funding Corporation, established by Congress last summer to finance the bailout of the nation's savings and loan industry, announced yesterday that it would auction $4.5 billion worth of 30-year bonds to the public next Wednesday.


Sam Moore, 85, Writer Of Comedy for Radio
LEAD: Sam Moore, a writer for radio in the 1930's and 1940's on such comedy programs as ''The Great Gildersleeve,'' died of a heart attack on Friday while he was on vacation in France.
He was 85 years old and lived in Blairstown, N.J.


Renault in Dutch Vehicle Venture
LEAD: Renault S.A., the French auto maker, said it had signed a letter of intent to create a joint venture with the Dutch company DAF to make light commercial vehicles.
Renault's vice chairman, Philippe Gras, said the two groups would share research and development costs of around one billion francs.


Brownstones to Tour And Apartments to See
LEAD: Seven for Luck, New Yorker League for Cerebral Palsy, 105 Madison Avenue; 212-683-6700.


The Shock of 6.9
LEAD: The millions of Americans who tuned in to the World Series Tuesday witnessed instead the horror of an intense earthquake.
The San Francisco Bay Area became the scene of terrifying images.
The Bay Bridge with a piece of its top deck down.
A one-mile stretch of the Nimitz Freeway collapsed deck to deck, crushing the cars in between.


Asian Venture Selects A Banker as Chairman
LEAD: Richard A. Melville, an international banking executive, has signed on with a newly formed financial services and merchant banking company that hopes to establish a global business.


Relief Groups Taking Aid
LEAD: Funds to help earthquake victims in California have been set up by the following organizations:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.
Episcopal Church/The Presiding Bishop's Fund for World Relief, The Episcopal Church Center, 815 Second Avenue, New York, N.Y.


Gain at United Technologies
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation said today that its third-quarter income rose 3 percent on the strength of increased sales for jet engines, air-conditioning systems and elevators.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about nominations for the 1989 National Book Awards misidentified the publisher of ''Barbarian Sentiments: How the American Century Ends,'' by William Pfaff.
It is Hill &amp; Wang, a division of Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Man Convicted Again For a Murder in 1983
LEAD: A man whose life was twice spared by the State Supreme Court after two separate murder convictions has again been convicted of the 1983 sexual assault and murder of an Asbury Park woman.
The conviction could be used against the man, Marko Bey, 24 years old, when he is resentenced for killing another woman in 1983.


In a Collapsed Building, Heroism and the Promise of a Cup of Coffee
LEAD: ''Don't leave me - I don't want to die in here,'' a woman cried out to a San Francisco firefighter while trapped in a collapsed three-story apartment building about half an hour after the earthquake hit here Tuesday afternoon.


Truck Jams in Overpass, Halting Van Wyck
LEAD: A tractor-trailer struck a pedestrian walkway that crosses over Jewel Avenue and the Van Wyck Expressway in Flushing, Queens, yesterday afternoon, forcing a halt to traffic in the northbound lanes of the expressway, the police said.
There were no reports of injuries.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,042,416,000
1,066,299,000
Net inc
155,258,000
134,800,000
Share earns
.83
.72
9mo rev
3,159,768,000
3,134,928,000
Net inc
448,977,000
375,896,000
Share earns
2.40
2.01


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE MARKETS  Investment bankers postponed two ''junk bond'' offerings totaling more than $1.2 billion because of volatile conditions in the high-risk, high-yield market.
And Kohlberg &amp; Company said Drexel Burnham Lambert, which was ''highly confident'' it could raise $75 million in financing for its buyout of Colorado Prime last summer, was unable to finance the deal through junk bonds.


Fund Yields Are Lower
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday.


Dayton Hudson Offer
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation, the big retail chain based here, said today that it had accepted for purchase seven million of its common shares, at $62.875 apiece, in response to its Dutch auction self-tender offer, which expired on Tuesday.
The company said it had received about 7,141,000 shares tendered at that price or below.


Reagan Speculates That Iran May Have Duped U.S. in Arms Deal
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan says he wonders now whether the Iran-contra affair that rocked his second term was not ''a setup, a sting operation, by the Iranians.''


Forschner Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forschner Group Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,592,000
10,645,000
Net inc
1,364,000
802,000
Share earns
.33
.20
Shares outst
4,079,000
4,083,000
9mo sales
30,642,000
27,179,000
Net inc
2,194,000
942,000
Share earns
.54
.23
Shares outst
4,053,000
4,087,000


Copper Prices Lose Ground; Big Mine May Reopen Soon
LEAD: Copper futures prices slipped yesterday to their lowest point this month on the Commodity Exchange in New York, and some analysts said the market's four-month-old rally appeared to be weakening.


Shuttle Launched After Delay And Galileo Is Sent to Jupiter
LEAD: The space shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit today to send the Galileo spacecraft on its planned six-year, 2.5-billion-mile journey to Jupiter.


ETHICS COMMITTEE SCOLDS LAWMAKER
LEAD: The House ethics committee scolded a California Congressman today for sexually harassing women on his staff.


Bell Units' Nets Vary In Quarter
LEAD: Two Bell holding companies, BellSouth and Ameritech, today reported third-quarter earnings in line with Wall Street's expectations, despite significant one-time charges.


The Earthquake So 'Great' a Later One Seems Puny
LEAD: Fires raged out of control for more than three days.
Communications with the outside world were severely restricted.
Coordination between government agencies was at times so poor that Federal troops clashed with roving groups of citizens who had been ordered by the Mayor to guard against looting.


Fetisov's First N.H.L. Goal Helps Devils Defeat Flyers
LEAD: With Vyacheslav Fetisov, the heralded Soviet defenseman, shining brightly for the second consecutive game, and Sean Burke making timely saves, the Devils tonight posted their second straight triumph.


It's Not Over, But It Should Be
LEAD: More than 250 people are dead.
Hundreds of others are broken and bandaged.
Long strips of yellow ''caution'' tape cordons off downtown buildings where piles of shattered window glass have been swept into the gutters.


Heart Federal S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heart Federal S&amp;L
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,697,000
1,994,000
Share earns
.38
.45
9mo net inc
5,241,000
5,436,000
Share earns
1.17
1.24


A.T.&amp;T. Dance Grants
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has awarded $105,000 in grants to three dance troupes - the David Gordon/Pick Up Company, the Hubbard Street Dance Company and the Trisha Brown Company - to participate in its 1989-90 Dance Tour program.
The grants will enable the companies to perform in 39 American cities.


3 Drug Makers Post Mixed Results
LEAD: Three large drug companies yesterday reported mixed results in third-quarter earnings, but analysts said the results at each company were in line with expectations.


Kent Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,540,000
9,157,000
Net inc
715,000
499,000
Share earns
.19
.18
Shares outst
3,731,300
2,746,400
9mo sales
21,693,000
16,567,000
Net inc
1,373,000
894,000
Share earns
.37
.33
Shares outst
3,717,600
2,720,000


Cleveland-Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cleveland-Cliffs (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
95,000,000
83,800,000
Net inc
b16,500,000
13,800,000
Share earns
1.42
1.19
9mo rev
272,200,000
228,000,000
Net inc
b47,300,000
c32,300,000
Share earns
4.08
2.25
Shares outst
11,600,000
13,700,000


Jersey Voters Get 2 Choices on High Car Insurance
LEAD: With the election less than three weeks away, the candidates for governor are stumping New Jersey with radically different solutions to the high cost of automobile insurance, an issue that has outraged the state's voters more than any other.


One Valley Bancorp (W. Va.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Valley Bancorp (W. Va.)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,240,000
3,847,000
Per share
.70
.63
9mo net inc
12,043,000
10,939,000
Per share
1.98
1.78


William P. Palmer, 92, Lawyer in Manhattan
LEAD: William P. Palmer, a senior partner in the Manhattan law firm of Dewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer &amp; Wood, died Monday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 92 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.


Review/Art; The Recent Sculptures Of Giacomo Manzu
LEAD: This is - in intention, at any rate -the month of Giacomo Manzu in New York.
On Monday, Francesco Cossiga, the President of Italy, unveiled in the garden facing the United Nations building a 25-foot-high bronze sculpture by Mr.
Manzu that represents a woman holding a child.
The gift of the Italian people to the United Nations, it was commissioned in 1987 by the Italian Government.


Rejection of Case Against Judge Urged
LEAD: The impeachment trial of a Federal judge on charges arising from a bribery case took an unexpected twist today when a Republican Senator who has been active in the matter urged fellow lawmakers to reject the charges and let the judge remain on the bench.


Signs of Big Soviet Purchase Move Corn Prices Higher
LEAD: Signs of a large Soviet purchase of American corn pulled corn futures prices up sharply on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday.


PBS Appoints New Programming Chief
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service named Jennifer Lawson, the senior programming excutive of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, to the newly created position of executive vice president for national programming and promotion services yesterday.
The PBS position will make Ms.
Lawson, who is 43 years old, the most powerful programming executive in public television.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Il Cantinori


Total Research Corp.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Research Corp.
12mo June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,014,828
6,973,136
Net inc
375,545
221,538
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
7,745,480
7,735,000


House Democrats Say They Want Extra $2.5 Billion in Quake Aid
LEAD: House Democrats said today they would seek more than $2.5 billion in additional funds to aid earthquake victims and rebuild roads and bridges in the San Francisco Bay area.


Premier Bankshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bankshares Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,198,000
1,284,000
Per share
.35
.37
9mo net inc
3,848,000
3,696,000
Per share
1.13
1.07


Rocky Mountain Chocolate reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,029,723
1,091,382
Net inc
139,027
49,622
Share earns
.13
.01
9mo rev
1,937,392
1,969,423
Net inc
277,756
b21,616
Share earns
.26
-
b


Major Earthquakes West of Beijing Kill at Least 29
LEAD: A series of major earthquakes rocked northern China Wednesday night and today, killing at least 29 people and injuring hundreds in largely rural areas west of Beijing, the authorities reported today.


Micron Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micron Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,580,686
8,688,306
Net inc
19,153
9,120
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
2,440,157
2,434,775


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co. of Colorado (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
382,989,000
354,411,000
Net inc
23,539,000
b18,574,000
Share earns
.39
-
9mo rev
1,317,237,000
1,271,358,000
Net inc
106,689,000
74,575,000
Share earns
1.85
1.24


Quipp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quipp Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,139,383
3,112,742
Net loss
125,499
b300,975
Share earns
-
.19
6mo sales
9,435,886
10,814,784
Net loss
618,786
b1,023,421
Share earns
-
.66
b-Net income


Comshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
22,077,800
18,871,400
Net inc
1,118,000
b183,300
Share earns
.41
.07
b-After a loss of $337,700 from discontinued operations.


Aide to Gorbachev Takes Pravda Helm; Brezhnev Man Is Out
LEAD: The chief editor of Pravda, the stodgy and authoritative organ of mainstream Soviet Communism, was removed from his job today and replaced by a close aide to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
135,669,000
111,679,000
Net inc
6,478,000
6,002,000
Share earns
.62
.58
Shares outst
10,405,000
10,324,000


United Financial Banking Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Financial Banking Cos.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
801,018
479,281
Per share
.87
.50
Shares outst
916,533
957,392
9mo net inc
1,182,081
1,014,045
Per share
1.29
1.01
Shares outst
916,887
1,002,756


American Reliance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Reliance Group Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
18,409,000
15,672,000
Net inc
1,633,000
1,141,000
Share earns
.64
.45
9mo rev
52,536,000
45,045,000
Net inc
4,581,000
b3,228,000
Share earns
1.80
1.27


Stock Dinkins Sold for $58,000 He Once Valued at $1 Million
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor of New York, may have a new tax problem to contend with.


Bankers First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers First Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,243,000
1,034,000
Per share
.29
.24
Shares outst
4,286,000
4,311,000
9mo net inc
3,685,000
3,349,000
Per share
.86
.72
Shares outst
4,273,000
4,679,000


B.A.T. Moves Approved by Shareholders
LEAD: Shareholders of B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. today overwhelmingly approved the company's plan to sell some $6 billion worth of operations, including its Saks and Marshall Field department store chains, and to buy back as much as 10 percent of its stock.


Homeless and Jobless in Life; A Heroic Figure in Death
LEAD: In a city numbed by the presence of homeless people everywhere, John Sigurd Nelson had no home, but for more than 40 years, he found a secure place: the streets of Brooklyn Heights.


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Communications Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
39,260,000
39,112,000
Net inc
3,861,000
3,947,000
Share earns
.19
.19
9mo rev
119,056,000
117,377,000
Net inc
12,535,000
12,703,000
Share earns
.61
.61


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avemco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
22,336,000
26,272,000
Net inc
2,228,000
3,785,000
Share earns
.25
.42
9mo rev
70,103,000
80,969,000
Net inc
11,006,000
14,222,000
Share earns
1.23
1.56


Mid Am Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Am Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,323,000
1,901,000
Per share
.57
.47
9mo net inc
6,067,000
4,823,000
Per share
1.49
1.19
The company said year-ago figures were restated for an acquisition on pooling-of-interests basis.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
743,000,000
760,000,000
Net inc
38,000,000
51,000,000
Share earns
.89
1.21
9mo sales
2,129,000,000
2,127,000,000
Net inc
126,000,000
131,000,000
Share earns
2.99
3.14
Shares outst
42,175,504
41,816,315


Artel Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Artel Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,834,000
1,192,000
Net inc
b324,000
c202,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
8,860,000
4,102,000
Net inc
b1,153,000
c989,000
Share earns
.29
-


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Microwave (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
5,141,446
4,826,663
Net loss
53,504
161,015
6mo sales
10,464,188
9,790,171
Net loss
74,449
38,545


USX and Kobe Form Venture
LEAD: The USX Corporation, the nation's largest steel producer, said yesterday that it had agreed to form a joint venture with Kobe Steel Ltd., Japan's fifth-largest steelmaker, to produce rust-resistant steel products, primarily for the automobile industry.


An Author Who Is Blunt About Life, Evil and Sex
LEAD: In a passage describing his literary method, Camilo Jose Cela, the Spanish writer who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature yesterday, had this to say about writing:


CBS Cancels a Comedy, Season's First Casualty
LEAD: CBS became the first network to cancel a new series yesterday, dropping ''The People Next Door'' from its Monday night comedy lineup.
The network will bring back ''Doctor, Doctor,'' a comedy that had a tryout in the summer.


With Galileo Deployed, Shuttle Crew Conducts Space Experiments
LEAD: Having completed their primary task, deploying the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis settled down today to a planned four more days of orbiting Earth and conducting an assortment of scientific experiments.


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecolab Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
369,765,000
337,692,000
Net inc
18,355,000
18,982,000
Share earns
.67
.70
Shares outst
27,503,000
27,280,000
9mo sales
964,939,000
899,954,000
Net inc
22,476,000
30,013,000
Share earns
.82
1.11
Shares outst
27,440,000
26,975,000


Only 3 Books by Cela Are in Print in the U.S.
LEAD: Only three English-language translations of Camilo Jose Cela's books appear to be in print in the United States.
One is a travel book, ''Journey to the Alcarria'' (1948), translated by Frances M. Lopez-Morillas and published by the University of Wisconsin Press.


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto-Culver Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
192,205,000
165,247,000
Net inc
9,377,000
8,144,000
Share earns
.72
.62
Yr sales
717,438,000
604,708,000
Net inc
29,438,000
b24,622,000
Share earns
2.25
1.83


Central &amp; South West reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,506,000,000
2,512,000,000
Net inc
283,000,000
373,000,000
Share earns
3.00
3.94


United Banks of Colo.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colo.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,300,000
3,500,000
Per share
.31
.19
Shares outst
15,469,000
15,048,000
9mo net inc
13,800,000
8,100,000
Per share
.79
.43
Shares outst
15,302,000
14,980,000


Vitalink Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitalink Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,071,000
10,137,000
Net inc
b5,422,000
c2,618,000
Share earns
.38
.24
9mo sales
57,164,000
37,409,000
Net inc
b18,667,000
c9,415,000
Share earns
1.50
.92


As Recovery Begins, Challenges Remain
LEAD: Commuters relied on resourcefulness. Page A19.


Fogli in New York Race
LEAD: Laura Fogli of Italy, who has never finished worse than fourth among the women in seven New York City Marathon appearances, has entered the Nov. 5 race.
Fogli, 30 years old, has finished second twice, including last year; third three times, and fourth twice.


Super Food Services reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Food Services (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
527,714,000
493,976,000
Net inc
5,796,000
5,451,000
Share earns
.81
.75
Yr sales
1,691,577,000
1,573,142,000
Net inc
15,935,000
14,533,000
Share earns
2.21
2.02


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loral Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
295,688,000
293,916,000
Net inc
19,828,000
c20,981,000
Share earns
.79
.84
Shares outst
25,227,000
25,094,000
6mo sales
528,411,000
549,910,000
Net inc
b37,095,000
c40,609,000
Share earns
1.47
1.62
Shares outst
25,199,000
25,064,000


Speaking Blasphemy
LEAD: The issue is not perestroika. The issue is not Mikhail Gorbachev.


Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry (R.G.) Corp.(A)
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
38,731,000
33,507,000
Net inc
2,120,000
343,000
Share earns
.57
.09
9mo sales
73,252,000
61,423,000
Net inc
536,000
b2,724,000
Share earns
.14
-


Advanced Marketing Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Marketing Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
45,527,000
28,482,000
Net inc
639,000
693,000
Share earns
.11
.13
Shares outst
5,840,000
5,462,000
6mo sales
75,914,000
54,039,000
Net inc
827,000
1,223,000
Share earns
.14
.23
Shares outst
5,838,000
5,230,000


Staff Builders reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
48,060,000
41,723,000
Net inc
294,000
925,000
Share earns
.03
.13
6mo rev
96,008,000
78,842,000
Net inc
577,000
1,772,000
Share earns
.06
.24


Affiliated Bankshares of Coloado Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bankshares of Coloado Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,477,000
388,000
Per share
.12
.02
9mo net inc
4,194,000
b3,788,000
Per share
.34
-
b-Net loss


16 Reliving The Terror Of a Quake
LEAD: For 16 children now living in this area and receiving medical treatment, the violent earthquake here was the second shock hurled at them by fate in 10 months.
They also lived, and suffered, through the earthquake that devastated Armenia last Dec. 7.


Rapid Transit In Full Service
LEAD: The Bay Area Rapid Transit system, a vital link between San Francisco and the East Bay, was back in full service today.


Simpson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simpson Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
46,218,000
43,276,000
Net inc
1,269,000
2,464,000
Share earns
.13
.26
9mo rev
149,776,000
129,912,000
Net inc
8,245,000
7,138,000
Share earns
.86
.75


Two Airmen Admit a Plot to Sell Jet Engines
LEAD: Two Air Force security guards have pleaded guilty to stealing three F-16 jet engines and selling them to undercover agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


British Jobless Rate Dips
LEAD: Unemployment in Britain fell to 6 percent in September, its lowest level in nine years, the Government said today.
Unemployment figures, adjusted for seasonal factors, showed a larger than expected fall of 50,400 people, to 1.69 million, the Employment Department said.


Memorial for Bill Barron
LEAD: A memorial service for Bill Barron, the saxophonist, composer and professor of music at Wesleyan University, is to be held at 7 P.M. on Sunday at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, on Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.


New Currency Studied
LEAD: The Bureau of Engraving and Printing is looking at new designs for currency that would make counterfeiting more difficult.
A bureau research panel is studying various designs, but it will need the approval of the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Bank for any change, a spokeswoman said.
She declined to say whether there had been an increase recently in counterfeiting cases.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''From April to October, the length of a baseball season, may be enough to establish a winner of the World Series.
It's not enough to win the war on drugs in this city or any other city.''  - William J. Bennett, the national drug policy director, in Washington.  [ A1:3. ]


British Columbia Telephone Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* British Columbia Telephone Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
421,300,000
409,300,000
Net inc
b47,800,000
c40,800,000
Share earns
.43
.37
Shares outst
102,324,000
100,058,000
9mo rev
1,229,500,000
1,213,700,000
Net inc
b121,500,000
c117,200,000
Share earns
1.08
1.06
Shares outst
101,646,000
99,618,000


Fidelity Federal S&amp;L-Tenn reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Federal S&amp;L-Tenn
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,641,000
1,588,000
Share earns
.47
.45
6mo net inc
3,031,000
2,798,000
Share earns
.86
.79


Hasbro Profits Rise
LEAD: The toy company Hasbro Inc. said today that better profit margins and improved performances by its Milton Bradley and Playskool units had helped third-quarter earnings rise 73.1 percent.
The company reported earnings of $31.3 million, or 53 cents a share, compared with $18.08 million, or 31 cents a share, in 1988's third quarter.


School Backs Down on Issue of Black Player
LEAD: An all-white private school has reversed its decision to cancel a football game against a team with a black player, thus avoiding expulsion from the Mississippi Private School Association.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
319,472,000
251,864,000
Net inc
33,306,000
28,744,000
Share earns
1.10
.96
9mo sales
913,886,000
713,937,000
Net inc
79,929,000
68,986,000
Share earns
2.65
2.30


A.T.&amp;T.'s Income Rises 19%; 'Baby Bell' Profits Are Mixed
LEAD: Reflecting the continued strong growth in long-distance calling, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday reported a 19 percent increase in its third-quarter earnings.


Hibernia Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
100,332
452,988
Per share
.13
.56
9mo net inc
615,195
1,043,310
Per share
.77
1.30


SOME BUSINESSES AND SCHOOLS OPEN
LEAD: Parts of this exhausted and shaken city returned to a tentative sort of normality today, while in the most stricken neighborhoods the stunned good nature of recent days gave way to impatience, anger and fear.


Giants Face Big, Aggressive Chargers
LEAD: A few years ago, the San Diego Chargers were the mad bombers of pro football, with Dan Fouts seemingly passing on every play.
The Chargers who play the Giants on Sunday in San Diego are a different breed, a big team on offense and defense that tries to shove the ball down the throat of the opposition in the style of the Washington Redskins.


Goulds Pumps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goulds Pumps Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
136,203,000
116,373,000
Net inc
7,722,000
7,050,000
Share earns
.38
.35
9mo sales
381,749,000
339,646,000
Net inc
21,349,000
18,711,000
Share earns
1.05
.95


Realty Sale By Fogelman
LEAD: Avram B. Fogelman, the beleaguered Memphis real estate developer, yesterday signed a letter of agreement to sell his golf and related resort properties on South Carolina's Hilton Head Island to the Beach Company, a closely held Charleston real estate firm, and Voute, Coats, Stuart &amp; O'Grady L.P., a private investment company.


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
182,000
602,000
Per share
.11
.36
The company's latest quarter's earnings reflected a $300,000 addition to reserves for possible loan losses, compared with a $125,000 addition for year-ago period.


Realty South Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Realty South Investors (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
856,000
1,342,000
Net inc
229,000
b620,000
Share earns
.11
.30
9mo rev
2,749,000
3,332,000
Net inc
836,400
b1,588,000
Share earns
.40
.76


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPI Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,045,000
28,672,000
Net inc
2,818,000
2,326,000
Share earns
.23
.19
9mo sales
88,944,000
79,784,000
Net inc
9,230,000
6,683,000
Share earns
.75
.55


Another 'Junk' Offering Is Delayed
LEAD: Investment bankers postponed one $220 million ''junk bond'' offering yesterday, and bankers at another firm sweetened the offer on a $475 million issue to attract reluctant investors.


Integrated Device Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Device Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
54,118,000
46,271,000
Net inc
5,765,000
5,714,000
Share earns
.22
.22
6mo sales
105,689,000
89,681,000
Net inc
10,976,000
10,825,000
Share earns
.43
.42


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Amax Inc.
$ 56,800,000
-57.1
American Brands Inc.
166,400,000
+13.4
American Cyanamid Co.
64,500,000
+0.6
American Express Co.
331,800,000
+21.1
A.T.&amp;T. Co.
699,000,000
+19.1
Amoco Corp.
336,000,000
-39.1
Bell Atlantic Corp.


Micro Bio-Medics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Bio-Medics
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,532,061
11,188,637
Net inc
374,223
351,827
Share earns
.07
.07
9mo sales
30,146,461
27,003,189
Net inc
458,044
418,518
Share earns
.09
.08


'Skinhead' Is Sentenced in Slaying of Black
LEAD: A white supremacist ''skinhead'' was sentenced to up to 20 years in prison today for helping to beat a black immigrant to death.


Photographs of Haiti
LEAD: Recent photographs of Haiti by Maggie Steber are on view in Room 408 of the Union Square Gallery, 32 Union Square East, through Nov. 11.
The exhibition focuses on the Caribbean country since the fall of the dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier.
Hours are Fridays from 1 to 7 P.M., Saturdays from noon to 5 P.M., and by appointment.


Digital Net Tumbles 32.5%
LEAD: Slow domestic sales and the continued strength of the dollar overseas contributed to a 32.5 percent decline in the Digital Equipment Corporation's earnings for its first quarter ending Sept. 30, the company said yesterday.


Amax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amax Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
928,400,000
997,900,000
Net inc
56,800,000
132,500,000
Share earns
.66
1.61
9mo sales
2,988,800,000
2,945,300,000
Net inc
301,900,000
452,700,000
Share earns
3.52
5.03


Rattling Horns and Green Tomatoes
LEAD: Red sumacs, orange maples, golden aspens, wine-dark ash leaves.
This marvelous sunset range of colors is sometimes given voice by flights of geese breezing southward - in wiggling check-marks or military wedges, cheering one another on with halloos, gabbles, baying barks.


U S West Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U S West Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,323,000,000
2,427,700,000
Net inc
258,100,000
283,200,000
Share earns
1.39
1.55
9mo rev
7,151,200,000
6,871,900,000
Net inc
766,300,000
b860,000,000
Share earns
4.17
4.68


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evergreen Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,414,000
2,364,000
Per share
.52
.51
9mo net inc
7,625,000
6,466,000
Per share
1.66
1.41


Vilified Ball Park Passes Greatest Test
LEAD: Candlestick Park, a 29-year-old stadium that has been vilified since birth, seems to have come through in good shape from its encounter with the biggest earthquake of its life.


Shawmut National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
66,380,000
63,165,000
Per share
.90
.85
9mo net inc
197,844,000
b176,465,000
Per share
2.63
2.40
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $97.7 million from the sale of a building, offset by an addition of $56.3 million to reserves for LDC loans, $40.4 milllion in restructuring costs and $5.7 million in reserves for unconsolidated affiliates, all pretax.


Review/Film; Med School Madness In 'Gross Anatomy'
LEAD: When Joe Slovak (Matthew Modine) gets the news that he has been accepted for medical school, he stuffs the letter in his pocket, strikes a noncommittal pose and ignores the anxious relatives waiting to find out what the letter says.
That's Joe in a nutshell: diffident and jokey, vastly charming but also obnoxiously cavalier.


Market Place; Insurance Stocks Regaining Favor
LEAD: AFTER the largest California earthquake in 80 years, one that could cost the insurance companies hundreds of millions, if not billions, Wall Street has responded by bidding up the price of insurance company stocks.


Kodak Camera
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company said it would introduce a disposable wide-angle-lens camera in the United States.
The Kodak Stretch 35 will cost $12.95 and will take 12 color photographs.
The company introduced the one-time use camera in Europe and Japan earlier this year.
The camera's wide-angle lens will take panoramic photographs.


Seattle to Examine Bridges and Freeways
LEAD: State engineers said today that they would conduct a study to see if some of the old two-tiered bridges and freeways in Seattle, a city with geography and structures similiar to San Francisco's, should be redesigned to meet stricter standards.


Union Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,578,500,0000
1,543,800,000
Net inc
137,400,000
165,000,000
Share earns
1.35
1.44
9mo rev
4,754,200,000
4,485,500,000
Net inc
427,700,000
456,400,000
Share earns
3.98
4.00


Tiffany to Open Philadelphia Store
LEAD: Tiffany &amp; Company said it plans to open a 12,400-square-foot store in Philadelphia in the autumn of 1990.
Tiffany's senior vice president, Thomas Andruskevich, told a meeting of financial analysts that the New York-based jewelry retailer would build a stand-alone store on Walnut Street in downtown


Constar International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constar International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
135,510,000
139,096,000
Net inc
3,865,000
b3,073,000
Share earns
.60
.50
9mo rev
412,735,000
403,183,000
Net inc
11,321,000
b6,427,000
Share earns
1.80
.98


Intermec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
40,413,000
30,218,000
Net inc
2,721,000
1,638,000
Share earns
.37
.24
Shares outst
7,343,000
6,924,000
6mo rev
78,230,000
55,764,000
Net inc
4,771,000
2,674,000
Share earns
.65
.39
Shares outst
7,325,000
6,884,000


Debate Begins on Reducing Budget Deficit
LEAD: House and Senate budget negotiators today began what promises to be a slow process: reconciling major differences in their plans for reducing the fiscal year 1990 budget deficit and repealing $16.1 billion in automatic spending cuts that took effect on Monday.


Toast the Screenwriter, Not the Actor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Dig for More Bodies on Missouri Farm
LEAD: Police officers searching for missing transients have already found the bodies of three unidentified men buried on a farm here, and are continuing to dig.


Sam Moore, 85, Writer Of Comedy for Radio
LEAD: Sam Moore, a writer for radio in the 1930's and 1940's on such comedy programs as ''The Great Gildersleeve,'' died of a heart attack last Friday while he was on vacation in France.
He was 85 years old and lived in Blairstown, N.J.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,994,000,000
2,862,000,000
Net inc
307,000,000
296,000,000
Share earns
1.37
1.30
Shares outst
222,756,437
227,094,207
9mo sales
9,036,000,000
8,571,000,000
Net inc
952,000,000
882,000,000
Share earns
4.29
3.88
Shares outst
222,114,660
227,343,429


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equifax Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
211,563,000
189,273,000
Net inc
10,787,000
9,605,000
Share earns
.44
.39
Shares outst
24,519,152
24,452,003
9mo rev
619,150,000
543,310,000
Net inc
31,249,000
b30,936,000
Share earns
1.28
1.36
Shares outst
24,497,962
22,743,876


Nu Horizons Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu Horizons Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,621,685
9,754,438
Net inc
217,004
234,777
Share earns
.05
.05
6mo sales
20,088,555
18,838,156
Net inc
426,620
455,863
Share earns
.10
.10


Hextall to Practice
LEAD: Ron Hextall, a holdout this season, will return to practice today with the Philadelphia Flyers, whose 1-5-1 record has them off to their worst start in 20 years.
Team officials declined to comment on the status of their star goaltender's contract dispute.


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 1
1989
1988
Revenue
81,781,000
94,410,000
Net loss
b2,396,000
357,000
6mo rev
168,301,000
184,692,000
Net loss
b3,390,000
547,000
b-Included gains of about $360,000 in each of the first and second quarters from the sales of limited partnership interests in manufactured housing communities located in Michigan.


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,182,319
989,695
Per share
.34
.28
Shares outst
3,526,329
3,523,093
6mo net inc
2,183,332
1,931,415
Per share
.62
.55
Shares outst
3,528,549
3,523,751


Now in New York, Spousal Impoverishment Need Not Be Feared
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scripps Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scripps Howard Broadcasting (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
69,923,000
64,915,000
Net inc
2,869,000
2,450,000
Share earns
.28
.24
9mo rev
217,026,000
195,171,000
Net inc
12,050,000
8,295,000
Share earns
1.17
.80


Fall Antiques Show: Americana on the Hudson
LEAD: MANHATTAN'S engaging artifacts fair - the Fall Antiques Show at the Pier - encompasses the North American continent, with special emphasis this year on the great Southwest.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Optimism About Inflation Helps Bolster Stock Market  Consumer prices rose two-tenths of 1 percent in September, with much of the increase coming from clothing.
The stock market rallied, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 39.55 points, or 1.5 percent.
Page D1.
Pretoria's Pact With Banks


Viratek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Viratek Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
435,000
175,000
Net loss
4,172,000
b181,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
9,240,000
9,237,000
9mo rev
955,000
277,000
Net loss
6,811,000
6,681,000
Shares outst
9,234,000
8,389,000


Review/Film; Wisdom and Innocence on the Eve of War
LEAD: In the Scilly Isles, off the southwest coast of England, there lives a silent hermit who loves birds.
He's known, not surprisingly, as the Birdman.
Here, on the tiny Isle of Bryher on the eve of World War I, the Birdman is the only inhabitant who remembers living on the neighboring Isle of Samson.


McKinney Injured
LEAD: Tamara McKinney, the United States' top female skier, is out for the World Cup season after breaking her left leg in a training spill in Switzerland, Coach Paul Major said yesterday.


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
160,970,000
136,150,000
Net inc
8,263,000
557,000
Share earns
.32
.02
9mo rev
682,677,000
614,581,000
Net inc
b25,453,000
15,066,000
Share earns
.98
.57


MCA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
918,371,000
806,727,000
Net inc
50,824,000
54,260,000
Share earns
.69
.74
Shares outst
73,298,561
73,037,506
9mo rev
2,515,082,000
2,061,561,000
Net inc
120,137,000
89,202,000
Share earns
1.64
1.22


Giants Practice at Candlestick With Regrets
LEAD: Two days after an earthquake shook the Bay Area and postponed the third game of the World Series until at least next Tuesday, the San Francisco Giants put on their uniforms at Candlestick Park today for an intrasquad game.
But they seemed almost to be apologizing for playing baseball.


Sage Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Drilling Co.
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,229,000
1,387,000
Net loss
1,980,000
904,000
Yr rev
4,606,000
5,515,000
Net loss
2,693,000
1,477,000
The company said latest fourth- quarter results included charges of about $502,000 for write-down of assets to be sold, about $398,000 for additional amortization of capitalized oil and gas costs and $945,000 to reduce the carrying value of drilling equipment.


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Boston (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
125,100,000
b79,200,000
Per share
-
1.14
Shares outst
70,678,000
66,344,000
9mo net inc
61,800,000
239,600,000
Per share
.73
3.47
Shares outst
70,207,000
65,924,000


Senate Sends Bush a Bill to Broaden Abortion Aid
LEAD: The Senate sent President Bush a bill today that permits federally financed abortions for poor women who are victims of rape or incest.
Mr.
Bush has said he will veto the measure.


King School Stages Battle Over Advent Of R.O.T.C.
LEAD: The Manhattan high school named for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. is at the center of an emotional dispute over whether a new Air Force Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps program desecrates the name of the slain Nobel Peace Prize laureate.


Gamma Biologicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gamma Biologicals (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,657,000
4,478,000
Net inc
465,000
b157,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
9,426,000
9,287,000
Net inc
824,000
b293,000
Share earns
.18
-
b


Puerto Rico Bank Merger
LEAD: The Banponce Corporation and the Banco Popular de Puerto Rico agreed today to merge in a deal valued at $324 million, or $56.25 per Banponce share.
The new bank holding company will be called the Banponce Corporation.


Brooklyn Handyman Held in Slayings of 2
LEAD: A part-time handyman was charged late Wednesday in the slaying of a Brooklyn mother and her sister-in-law last month while two young children looked on, the police said.


Schlumberger Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schlumberger Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,106,352,000
1,181,348,000
Net inc
114,219,000
112,152,000
Share earns
.48
.42
Shares outst
238,332,000
269,661,000
9mo rev
3,484,970,000
3,683,995,000
Net inc
b323,369,000
c357,201,000
Share earns
1.36
1.32
Shares outst
237,889,000
271,117,000


U.S. Critical on Export
LEAD: Venezuela is subsidizing exports of aluminum sulfate and selling it in the United States at less than fair value, the Commerce Department said today.
It said that if the International Trade Commission finds that the shipments have injured the United States industry, countervailing duties would be imposed.


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b54,411,000
71,631,000
Per share
.87
1.22
9mo net inc
b182,642,000
210,070,000
Per share
2.97
3.62
Shares outst
58,019,862
53,984,461
b-After extraordinary tax benefit carryforwards of $1,750,000, or 3 cents per share, for the quarter and $6,950,000, or 12 cents per share, for the 9 months.


Moore-Handley reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore-Handley (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
26,024,000
26,176,000
Net loss
24,000
136,000
9mo sales
70,880,000
79,542,000
Net loss
476,000
b96,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $83,000, or 4 cents a share.


Reich &amp; Tang L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reich &amp; Tang L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,930,000
8,880,000
Net inc
4,705,000
4,302,000
Share earns
.47
.43
9mo rev
28,192,000
27,669,000
Net inc
13,289,000
13,080,000
Share earns
1.33
1.31


Washington Talk; Is Quayle Out of Tune On U.S. Soviet Policy?
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle went to California this week.
Because he was there when the earthquake struck, he had a golden opportunity to generate some favorable publicity for a change, to show himself capable of reacting to events quickly and effectively.


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mattel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
410,049,000
306,633,000
Net inc
38,037,000
21,933,000
Share earns
.76
.45
Shares outst
50,231,000
48,315,000
9mo sales
877,619,000
702,366,000
Net inc
58,928,000
25,430,000
Share earns
1.19
.53
Shares outst
49,674,000
48,056,000


American Telephone &amp; TeleFgraph reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; TeleFgraph (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,896,000,000
8,812,000,000
Net inc
b699,000,000
587,000,000
Share earns
.65
.55
9mo rev
26,811,000,000
26,003,000,000
Net inc
b1,992,000,000
1,673,000,000
Share earns
1.85
1.56


Ford Will Stop Importing Its German Luxury Sedan
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it would discontinue imports of its Scorpio luxury sports sedans from West Germany because of poor sales.
The move would end Ford's attempt to attract buyers of European luxury cars to its Lincoln-Mercury dealerships.


Salvador Epilogue: At Least They're Still Talking
LEAD: The failure of the Salvadoran Government and leftist rebels to reach a single major accord after three days of talks here indicates that any peace agreement may be even harder to negotiate than previously assumed.


Jannock Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jannock Ltd.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
103,683,000
82,645,000
Net inc
15,842,000
13,486,000
Share earns
.58
.48
9mo sales
264,431,000
227,322,000
Net inc
b35,011,000
c38,044,000
Share earns
1.26
1.34


Pretoria Official Meets Guerrillas In Namibia for 'Friendly' Talks
LEAD: South Africa's Foreign Minister held what he called friendly and constructive talks today with the South-West Africa People's Organization, the group that has fought South African rule of the territory for 23 years.


Trace Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trace Products (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,286,000
6,183,000
Net inc
149,000
b1,030,000
Share earns
.02
.11
6mo sales
12,593,000
12,339,000
Net inc
561,000
b2,129,000
Share earns
.06
.22


Argentina and Britain Opening Consular Ties
LEAD: Ending three days of talks here, Argentina and Britain decided today to resume consular ties and direct air and sea links, clearing the path for substantial normalization of relations, according to a joint statement issued today at the end of three days of talks.


Review/Cabaret; Wallowing in Romance With Andrea Marcovicci
LEAD: Few singers poke fun at themselves more tellingly than Andrea Marcovicci, who returned to the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street) on Tuesday evening for her fourth extended engagement.


Dining Out Guide: Hotel Dining
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Adrienne  ** (Oct 6, 1989), Peninsula Hotel, 700 Fifth Avenue, at 55th Street (903-3918) - A menu of dazzling cross-cultural cooking is served in Adrienne's luxurious Art Nouveau dining room.


Plymouth Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plymouth Rubber (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
11,288,000
9,325,000
Net inc
106,000
52,000
Share earns
.07
.03
9mo sales
34,174,000
29,527,000
Net inc
296,000
b1,253,000
Share earns
.18
-


Corrections
LEAD: A Man in the News article yesterday about Egon Krenz, the new East German leader, referred incorrectly to his native town, Kolberg.
It is now called Kolobrzeg and has been part of Poland since 1945.


First New York Business Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First New York Business Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
924,000
808,000
Per share
.24
.22
9mo net inc
2,825,000
1,820,000
Per share
.75
.49


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas &amp; Betts Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
131,318,000
126,102,000
Net inc
12,084,000
13,866,000
Share earns
.71
.82
9mo sales
404,880,000
384,777,000
Net inc
41,638,000
44,846,000
Share earns
2.45
2.65


Network General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network General (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,120,000
2,891,000
Net inc
1,412,000
585,000
Share earns
.21
.12
Shares outst
6,810,000
4,847,000
6mo rev
12,610,000
5,473,000
Net inc
2,515,000
1,161,000
Share earns
.39
.24
Shares outst
6,529,000
4,847,000


Hubert Carr, Executive And Lawyer, Dies at 68
LEAD: Hubert F. Carr, a lawyer and steamship company executive, died of heart disease Wednesday at River View Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 68 years old and lived in Colts Neck, N.J.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Buddy Films


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''PINOCCHIO,'' a show by the Puppetworks, 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. tomorrow, at the Riverdale Presbyterian Church, 4765 Henry Hudson Parkway, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Tickets: $5.
Information: 548-8260.  ''HOLIDAY BAZAAR,'' with movie showings, toys, books, clothing, new and old merchandise, refreshments and homemade delicacies to take home, 11 A.M.


Four Cases of Hepatitis Are Reported at GTE
LEAD: Four employees at GTE Corporation's headquarters, including a cafeteria worker, have been discovered to have hepatitis, and company officials are recommending that everyone who ate in the cafeteria this month have a gamma globulin shot.


Coastal to Reopen Refinery in Aruba
LEAD: The Coastal Corporation has signed a definitive agreement with the Government of Aruba to reopen a refinery there that the Exxon Corporation closed in February 1985 after 50 years of operation.


Transgenic Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transgenic Sciences
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
55,000
2,000
Net loss
407,000
126,000


First Chattanooga reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chattanooga
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
868,000
1,350,000
Per share
.31
.48
Shares outst
2,798,638
2,816,413


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
883,611,000
803,493,000
Net inc
48,263,000
45,961,000
Share earns
1.38
1.28
9mo sales
2,518,402,000
2,270,004,000
Net inc
143,049,000
129,442,000
Share earns
4.07
3.61


Proposal to Limit Death-Row Appeals Is Unjust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Uncovered Short Sales Fall 4.3% on the Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest had dropped 4.3 percent in the four-week period that ended Oct. 13.
Short interest is the number of shares sold short by investors and not yet covered.


Caterpillar Net Tumbles 43.2%
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc.'s third-quarter earnings tumbled 43.2 percent because of a sales slump that has forced the company to place about 325 employees on indefinite layoff, the company said today.


Review/Film; Creating The Bomb, In 'Fat Man'
LEAD: In attempting to tell the story of the making of the atom bomb, Roland Joffe, the director (''The Killing Fields,'' ''The Mission''), and Bruce Robinson, with whom he collaborated on the original screenplay, have made a movie of terminal dimness.


Economic Scene; Must the Market Dive Again?
LEAD: JUST before the sharp recession of 1937, a Wall Street sage, Richard Dana Skinner, said, ''More zeal and energy, more fanatical hope, and more intense anguish have been expended over the past century in efforts to 'forecast' the stock market than in almost any other single line of human action.'' Sam Goldwyn, the fabulous movie producer, put it more succinctly: ''Never make forecasts, especially about the future.


Baseball Must Light Its Candles
LEAD: rrNow that electricity is back in much of the Bay Area, life goes on.
Fresh caffe latte and good bread are back in the shops while rescue crews sift the ruins of homes and freeways.


Inflation Outpaces Pay
LEAD: Workers' earnings rose 3.5 percent in the year ended Sept. 30, failing to keep pace with the rate of inflation in the same period, the Labor Department said today.


Dico Systems Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dico Systems Ltd.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,300,000
5,000,000
Net loss
597,000
b50,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  Results are in Canadian dollars.


Money Fund Assets Surge
LEAD: Assets of the nation's 473 money market mutual funds surged by $6.07 billion in the latest week to a record $356.1 billion, reflecting investors' moving out of stocks and into more stable investments after the stock market plunge last Friday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


Allergan reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allergan (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
206,400,000
189,400,000
Net inc
26,700,000
7,000,000
Share earns
.40
-
9mo sales
595,400,000
539,400,000
Net inc
67,500,000
39,300,000
Share earnings for the year-ago quarter, latest 9 months and year- earlier 9 months were not available.


Geologists Can't Find Quake's Surface Signs
LEAD: Puzzled scientists yesterday continued hunting without success for signs of surface movement along a 30-mile segment of the San Andreas fault that ruptured deep in the earth Tuesday afternoon, causing wide damage in Northern California.


Digital Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,131,190,000
2,941,799,000
Net inc
150,783,000
223,374,000
Share earns
1.20
1.71
Shares outst
125,768,130
130,961,583


Hasbro Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hasbro Inc.
13wks to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
403,016,000
368,427,000
Net inc
31,303,000
18,079,000
Share earns
.53
.31
40wk rev
992,700,000
962,956,000
Net inc
68,185,000
51,295,000
Share earns
1.15
.88


U.S. Officials Look to Policy on East Germany as Next Big Challenge
LEAD: The Bush Administration is reviewing American policy toward East Germany, seeking a balance of encouraging democratization there without also fostering a pell-mell movement toward reunification of Germany that would threaten both Moscow and America's NATO allies.


Wilson Waits Turn As Vikings' Starter
LEAD: Wade Wilson has been in and out as the Minnesota Vikings' starting quarterback so frequently over the past three seasons that even Wilson has difficulty keeping count.
Currently, he is out.


First Bank System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,100,000
46,000,000
Per share
.01
.73
9mo net inc
109,400,000
117,400,000
Per share
1.54
1.87


Athletics Still Numb in Aftermath
LEAD: When their meeting was over this afternoon, the Oakland Athletics walked slowly from the clubhouse into the bright sunshine to work out.
But their faces seemed void of emotion as they passed through the runway, almost as if the impact of Tuesday's earthquake still had not settled.


Catholics, Condoms and AIDS
LEAD: A draft report by a committee of Catholic bishops strongly rejects the use of condoms to retard the spread of the AIDS virus.
Every religion has the right to set its own doctrine without interference.
But when doctrine affects public health, that's everyone's business.


Roger Mynors, Classical Scholar, 86
LEAD: Sir Roger Mynors, one of Britain's leading classical scholars, was killed Tuesday in a car crash.
He was 86 years old.


Composer's Orchestra
LEAD: The soprano Martina Arroyo will be the soloist with the American Composer's Orchestra in Samuel Barber's ''Andromache's Farewell'' at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon at 3.
Mr.
Barber composed the work for Miss Arroyo, who gave it its premiere at a New York Philharmonic concert in 1962.
The program, which is to be conducted by Dennis Russell Davies, also includes Steve Reich's ''Tehillim'' and the world premieres of William Albright's ''Chasm: Symphonic Fragment'' and Martin Bresnick's ''Pontoosuc.


Blacks Plan Rights March in Chicago
LEAD: It is an unwritten rule of life in Chicago.
Black people do not generally venture into the Bridgeport neighborhood after dark.
Over the years, that rule has been underscored by more than a few beatings and tire-slashings.


Glenfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
673,179,000
600,491,000
Net inc
19,567,000
31,446,000
Share earns
.64
1.07


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,368,000,000
2,381,000,000
Net inc
278,000,000
318,000,000
Share earns
.68
.75
Shares outst
410,231,000
423,077,000
9mo rev
7,118,000,000
7,055,000,000
Net inc
920,000,000
939,000,000
Share earns
2.23
2.22
Shares outst
413,217,000
424,111,000


Birmingham Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birmingham Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
116,812,000
114,769,000
Net inc
7,810,000
12,000,000
Share earns
.63
.97
Shares outst
12,304,000
12,351,000


A 'Prime' Fund Suspends Sales
LEAD: Officials of the Eaton Vance Prime Rate Reserves Fund said yesterday that they were suspending sales of the popular fund, effective Nov. 1.
The firm is taking the unusual step because its portfolio manager has been unable to invest the almost $1.7 billion of shareholder assets as quickly as the money has come in, they said.


In a Debut, Ranger Stops Penalty Shot
LEAD: For the Rangers last night, the moment could not have been more important.
For Mike Richter, the circumstances could not have left him more solitary.
Hartford's Kevin Dineen, having been awarded a penalty shot with the Rangers leading Hartford, 4-2, in the second period, stood 90 feet away.


Seagate Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
378,892,000
303,220,000
Net inc
23,432,000
b52,807,000
Share earns
.45
-
Shares outst
51,783,000
49,718,000
b-Net loss


Group Seeks New Ways To Pressure South Africa
LEAD: Leaders of the 49-nation Commonwealth searched today for new ways to put pressure on South Africa to move toward political change after discovering this morning that Pretoria had managed to reschedule a large portion of its foreign debt.


Judge Mr. de Klerk By His Actions
LEAD: The credibility crisis that faces the new South African administration of state President F. W. de Klerk was pinpointed by Dr.
Frank Chikane, general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, when he, I and Dr.
Allan Boesak, president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, met Mr. de


Novellus Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novellus Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
13,770,000
6,554,000
Net inc
3,144,000
1,059,000
Share earns
.46
.20
Shares outst
6,825,000
5,267,000
9mo sales
36,376,000
14,419,000
Net inc
7,931,000
1,710,000
Share earns
1.24
.35
Shares outst
6,379,000
4,899,000


Pretoria and Banks In $8 Billion Debt Pact
LEAD: In what the Government described as one of its most significant achievements this year, South Africa and foreign banks have reached an agreement to defer repayment of a large part of the country's debt.


Cumberland Fedl Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cumberland Fedl Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,845,000
1,812,000
Per share
.74
.73
9mo net inc
5,068,000
b5,065,000
Per share
2.04
2.05
b-After an extraordinary charge of $142,000 from prepayment charges on early extinguishment of Federal Home Loan Bank advances.


Looking Up at Some Stellar Figures of American Law
LEAD: Forty-five American judges of the last 200 years are celebrated in a show, ''Portraits of the American Law,'' now on view through Jan. 15, 1990, at the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery here.
From John Jay to Felix Frankfurter, the giants of American legal history look down from the walls.


Langer Biomechanics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Langer Biomechanics
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,387,000
3,077,000
Net inc
52,000
b63,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
6,415,000
6,097,000
Net loss
128,000
17,000
b-Net loss


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a television review yesterday about coverage of the California earthquake reported incompletely on broadcasts by NBC News and its anchor, Tom Brokaw.
This passage was omitted:


Squibb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Squibb Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
730,120,000
679,457,000
Net inc
144,471,000
123,007,000
Share earns
1.47
1.25
9mo sales
2,102,675,000
1,920,975,000
Net inc
383,648,000
328,023,000
Share earns
3.92
3.30
Shares outst
97,883,000
99,313,000


Westmoreland Coal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmoreland Coal Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
145,411,000
153,423,000
Net inc
5,852,000
b520,000
Share earns
.71
-
9mo rev
448,972,000
441,121,000
Net inc
8,487,000
b3,524,000
Share earns
1.08
-


Reality Intrudes on Capital Drug Crusade
LEAD: Six months after the Bush Administration vowed to make the nation's capital a test case in the nationwide effort to combat illegal drugs, local and Federal officials say the city's drug epidemic is as severe as ever.


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aceto Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
25,640,000
20,707,000
Net inc
674,000
598,000
Share earns
.18
.16
Shares outst
3,815,431
3,799,761


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,149,037,000
1,165,943,000
Net inc
72,939,000
b120,359,000
Share earns
.95
1.60
Shares outst
76,082,000
74,670,000
9mo rev
3,429,520,000
3,518,110,000
Net inc
162,112,000
b176,852,000
Share earns
2.13
2.34
Shares outst
75,691,000
74,698,000


First Federal S&amp;L Assn of S.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S&amp;L Assn of S.C.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
356,000
b1,246,000
Share earns
-
.26
b-Net income


A BROAD PROGRAM OF AID TO POLAND IS VOTED BY HOUSE
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly today to set up a major new program to support democracy, private enterprise and the development of a free-market economy in Poland.


4 Jailed in 1975 Terrorist Bombings Are Released


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
360,067,000
348,304,000
Net inc
35,458,000
40,025,000
Share earns
.95
1.06
9mo sales
1,082,343,000
1,043,071,000
Net inc
112,353,000
118,801,000
Share earns
3.00
3.16


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holiday of Shemini Atzereth, which concludes the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Harlem on Her Mind


American Express reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Express (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,502,400,000
5,226,400,000
Net inc
331,800,000
b273,900,000
Share earns
.77
.64
Shares outst
422,477,000
419,983,000
9mo rev
18,726,000,000
15,088,300,000
Net inc
899,800,000
b807,500,000
Share earns
2.09
1.89
Shares outst
422,213,000
421,103,000


First Peoples Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Peoples Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b4,007,000
c3,601,000
Per share
1.41
1.13
Shares outst
2,818,000
3,154,000
9mo net inc
b10,818,000
c12,983,000
Per share
3.64
3.96
Shares outst
2,931,000
3,247,000


Treasury Issues Generally Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved generally higher yesterday, buoyed by a better-than-expected report on inflation and by purchases of as much as $2 billion worth of 30-year bonds by a large Japanese investor.


Biggest Heroin Distributor Seized, U.S. Agents Say
LEAD: A man described as the largest heroin distributor in New York City has been arrested by Federal agents, who also seized a popular Chinatown restaurant and an adjoining ice cream store that, authorities said, were used in his illegal operations.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,487,482,000
1,390,438,000
Net inc
b97,981,000
c50,537,000
Share earns
1.15
.60
9mo rev
4,395,391,000
4,134,459,000
Net inc
b171,374,000
c158,064,000
Share earns
2.01
1.87


Capital Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
36,600,000
-
Net inc
157,000
820,000
Share earns
.02
.09
The company said the earnings decline was mainly due to the increase in its administrative and general operating expenses to $4.7 million from $3.1 million.


2 Yemens Let Animosity Fizzle Into Coziness
LEAD: Two lands called Yemen, long divided, are nudging toward a new coziness reflecting their common sense of nationhood.


Maryland Federal S &amp; L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maryland Federal S &amp; L Assn
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
552,000
908,000
Per share
.19
.31
9mo net inc
1,122,000
1,869,000
Per share
.38
.64
Shares outst
2,943,500
2,785,000


Bush Accepts Resignation Of Rights Agency Chairman
LEAD: The White House says President Bush has accepted the resignation of William Barclay Allen, whose tenure as chairman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights was marked by several controversies.


Alfa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alfa Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b7,115,513
c6,144,179
Share earns
.34
.29
9mo net inc
b19,508,496
c16,191,773
Share earns
.93
.84
Shares outst
20,941,756
19,192,835
b-Included investment gains of $1,262,836 and $3,301,608 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,281,000
1,255,000
Per share
.31
.29
9mo net inc
b6,785,000
3,509,000
Per share
1.64
.82
b-Included gain of $3,093,000, or 75 cents per share, from sale of a subsidiary.


TV Weekend; A Drama of Day Care With a Satanic Twist
LEAD: On Sunday evening at 9, the television movie on CBS is called ''Do You Know the Muffin Man?'' Set in present-day suburbia, it is about child abuse and Satanism.
Also Sunday night at 9, ''Masterpiece Theater'' is beginning a two-part adaptation on Channel 13 of Mary Webb's 1924 novel ''Precious Bane.


Books of The Times; A Hefty Ramble Through 12 Centuries of French
LEAD:  A New History of French Literature  Edited by Denis Hollier  1,150 pages.
Harvard University Press.


We Already Know the Folly of Decriminalized Drugs; Tax-Form Checkoff
LEAD: To the Editor:


Martin Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,423,105,000
1,455,002,000
Net inc
87,286,000
b202,788,000
Share earns
1.65
3.81
Shares outst
53,038,738
53,182,886
9mo sales
4,172,905,000
4,192,342,000
Net inc
233,419,000
b335,161,000
Share earns
4.41
6.30
Shares outst
52,931,081
53,171,861


On Stage
LEAD:  Three Firsts


Japan Banks Turn Cautious on Lending for U.S. Buyouts
LEAD: Japanese banking officials have become extremely cautious about making loans for American leveraged buyouts.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  George Coleman


Review/Dance; Some Cows, A Goat and (So to Speak) Real Hoofers
LEAD: There was a lot to watch in ''Can We Dance a Landscape?'' For instance, the cows.
Then came the goat; then the chickens.
The cows appeared first, right when the curtain went up on Wednesday night in the Carey Playhouse of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
They were nice black-and-white cows.
But they were only sculptures, and dancers eventually pushed them offstage.


Adlai S. Hardin Dead; Wood Sculptor Was 88
LEAD: Adlai S. Hardin, a sculptor and former advertising executive, died of complications from a stroke on Monday at the Saybrook Convalescent Hospital in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He was 88 years old.


Reebok International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reebok International Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
524,512,000
539,357,000
Net inc
49,887,000
37,067,000
Share earns
.44
.32
Shares outst
114,262,000
114,117,000
9mo sales
1,444,480,000
1,455,367,000
Net inc
140,048,000
130,277,000
Share earns
1.23
1.14
Shares outst
144,041,000
113,935,000


Key Tronic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Tronic Corp.
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
32,537,000
30,796,000
Net inc
391,000
b249,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Camilo Jose Cela Wins Nobel Prize; Spaniard Broke Taboos in the 40's
LEAD: Camilo Jose Cela, regarded as a breaker of literary taboos in the years after the Spanish Civil War, won the Nobel Prize in Literature today.


Ex-Dinkins Worker Says He Used Campaign Money in Vote Effort
LEAD: Robert C. (Sonny) Carson said yesterday that he had used $9,500 from the mayoral campaign of David N. Dinkins for a legitimate get-out-the-vote operation on Primary Day.


Jefferies Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferies Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
36,015,000
31,199,000
Net inc
2,216,000
2,343,000
Share earns
.35
.31
Shares outst
6,224,000
7,560,000
9mo rev
105,236,000
108,378,000
Net inc
6,820,000
11,130,000
Share earns
1.07
1.50
Shares outst
6,360,000
7,430,000


Pentair Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pentair Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
300,082,000
203,920,000
Net inc
7,957,000
10,114,000
Share earns
.64
.95
Shares outst
10,832,000
9,862,000
9mo rev
878,769,000
602,168,000
Net inc
27,299,000
28,859,000
Share earns
2.23
2.74
Shares outst
10,801,000
9,710,000


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,308,900,000
3,181,200,000
Net inc
288,700,000
338,900,000
Share earns
1.47
1.72
Shares outst
197,000,000
196,900,000
9mo rev
9,842,800,000
9,417,800,000
Net inc
851,300,000
972,800,000
Share earns
4.32
4.90
Shares outst
197,000,000
198,700,000


Net Off at Media Concern
LEAD: Park Communications Inc., a diversified media company, said this week that after-tax income in the quarter ended Sept. 30 came to $3.86 million, down 2.3 percent from $3.95 million a year earlier.
Earnings per share remained at 19 cents, reflecting the impact of a 3-for-2 stock split.
Revenue for the quarter totaled $39.3 million, up from $39.1 million a year earlier.


TSC Shannock Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSC Shannock Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,871,905
4,382,167
Net inc
29,982
44,304
Share earns
.01
.01
Figures are in Canadian funds.
The company said net income fell due to a one-time expense of opening its Dartmouth branch in February.


Senate's Vote on Flag Move
LEAD: Following is the 51-to-48 roll-call vote by which the Senate failed today to muster the necessary two-thirds vote to approve an amendment to the Constitution protecting the American flag against desecration.
A yes vote was a vote for the amendment; a no vote was a vote against it.
Voting yes were 18 Democrats and 33 Republicans.


Plan Would Reassign Power on Land Use
LEAD: Since land is to New York City what oil is to Houston, it is not surprising that changes in the regulation of land use proposed by the Charter Revision Commission have divided planners, developers, environmentalists and many others.


Dinkins Interview Excerpts About Stock Sale and Taxes
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview yesterday at The New York Times with David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor of New York City:  Q. How do you explain that you sold the stock to your son for less than you yourself listed with the state?
A.
You do not mention that repeatedly over the years in the financial disclosure forms filed with the city, that that same stock was listed between, I think, $20,000 and $50,000 or $20,000 and $60,000 or something.


American Express Profit Rose 25.7% in 3d Quarter
LEAD: The American Express Company, the nation's largest financial services company, yesterday reported increases of more than 20 percent in its third-quarter revenue and operating profit, with strong growth in its core business of charge cards.
But it also noted an additional reserve for bad loans at its American Express Bank subsidiary and one-time gains and sluggish growth at its Shearson Lehman


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: The directors of the Lionel Corporation have rejected an $8-a-share offer from Robert I. Toussie, a New York real estate developer.
The bid is valued at $145 million, including debt.


Duriron Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duriron Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
64,187,000
57,803,000
Net inc
4,169,000
4,354,000
Share earns
.35
.37
9mo sales
203,064,000
167,799,000
Net inc
14,189,000
11,059,000
Share earns
1.19
.97


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,578,000,000
2,743,000,000
Net inc
108,000,000
190,000,000
Share earns
1.07
1.87
9mo sales
8,188,000,000
7,645,000,000
Net inc
390,000,000
453,000,000
Share earns
3.85
4.46


Vivigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vivigen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,379,700
1,474,800
Net inc
468,200
209,000
Share earns
.17
.09
9mo rev
6,539,600
4,118,100
Net inc
1,317,400
553,300
Share earns
.52
.23


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
120,147,000
89,066,000
Net inc
3,927,000
c4,102,000
Share earns
.39
.38
Shares outst
10,183,062
10,934,717
9mo sales
320,133,000
262,039,000
Net inc
b13,592,000
c14,565,000
Share earns
1.34
1.32


Deals
LEAD: Football


Investor Group To Buy Elliman
LEAD: New York City's largest residential real estate management and brokerage firm, Douglas Elliman &amp; Company, said yesterday that it had agreed to be acquired by an investment group consisting of the Manhattan investors Arthur G. Cohen and Martin B. Tepper and the Lambert Brussels Capital Corporation, an international investment concern controlled by Belgian and


Note Cites D'Amato H.U.D. Grant Help
LEAD: A 1985 note to a high-ranking Federal housing official said Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was working to obtain a Housing and Urban Development grant for a group headed by a Puerto Rican developer who later became a D'Amato campaign contributor and fund-raiser.


Rowers Aim to Rekindle an Olympic Spirit
LEAD: On a drive down to Philadelphia a couple of weekends ago, Bill Stowe was uneasy.
Stowe, a 49-year-old retired crew coach who is somewhat overweight and out of shape, was about to join other members of the 1964 Olympic eight-oared crew for a venture that he regarded as absurd. ''Crazy,'' he said.
The crew was the last American men's eight to win an Olympic gold medal, something they did in


Amoco Net Slides 39.1%
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation's third-quarter net income tumbled 39.1 percent, to $336 million, or 65 cents a share, from $552 million, or $1.07 a share, in the comparable period in 1988, the giant petroleum company reported yesterday.


Review/Art; Intense Personal Visions Of a Fragile Japanese Artist
LEAD: The 1960's are not so long ago, yet the art history of the period already has its gaps.
One is being filled by the Center for International Contemporary Art, whose inaugural exhibition is a small retrospective of the work of Yayoi Kusama, a Japanese artist active in New York between 1958 and 1972.


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colgate-Palmolive Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,259,935,000
1,193,645,000
Net inc
76,724,000
b60,195,000
Share earns
1.06
.88
Shares outst
67,882,000
68,407,000
9mo sales
3,753,297,000
3,522,341,000
Net inc
217,523,000
b191,093,000
Share earns
3.09
2.79
Shares outst
68,463,000
68,328,000


Elizabeth Willis, 67, Patron and Composer
LEAD: Elizabeth Firestone Willis, a patron of the arts and a composer, died of heart failure Wednesday at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
She was 67 years old and lived in Washington.


Noranda Forest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noranda Forest Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,199,000,000
1,202,000,000
Net inc
45,000,000
66,000,000
Share earns
.40
.63
9mo rev
3,671,000,000
3,604,000,000
Net inc
162,000,000
200,000,000
Share earns
1.50
1.92


Pitney-Bowes reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pitney-Bowes (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
734,765,000
650,885,000
Net inc
61,967,000
54,049,000
Share earns
.78
.68
Shares outst
79,473,032
79,224,314
9mo rev
2,108,468,000
1,903,742,000
Net inc
177,235,000
b164,487,000
Share earns
2.24
2.09
Shares outst
79,271,670
78,890,027


Frenchtex Inc.  reports earnings for 12mo July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frenchtex Inc.
12mo July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,604,943
422,380
Net inc
127,521
27,402
Share earns
.10
.03
Shares outst
1,217,926
1,002,000


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,909,400,000
2,755,300,000
Net inc
363,200,000
341,000,000
Share earns
1.82
1.72
Shares outst
199,600,000
198,000,000
9mo rev
8,558,300,000
8,108,500,000
Net inc
1,072,800,000
1,014,200,000
Share earns
5.43
5.12
Shares outst
197,700,000
198,100,000


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bank of New England Corp., Boston, said it would sell its merchant credit card processing unit to the National Data Corp., Atlanta.
Terms were not disclosed.


Firstar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstar Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
22,204,000
19,136,000
Per share
.95
.81
9mo net inc
64,639,000
115,596,000
Per share
2.76
5.01
The year-ago 9 months' results included $22,422,000 tax benefit from sale of real estate.


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
47,894,012
46,078,977
Net inc
2,296,281
2,055,420
Share earns
.35
.31
9mo sales
141,587,886
131,674,572
Net inc
6,503,447
5,582,836
Share earns
.98
.85


Social Security Payments To Increase 4.7% Next Year
LEAD: The nation's 38.9 million recipients of Social Security payments will receive a 4.7 percent increase in January, the largest annual cost-of-living adjustment in seven and a half years.


Coke Product Test
LEAD: Coca-Cola Company announced that it would introduce a caffeine-free Coca-Cola Classic in test markets on Monday.
The company said the first test market would be Charlotte, N.C., with others to be named the following week.
The company said a date for national distribution would depend on the test results.


Regal-Beloit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regal-Beloit Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
37,885,000
36,336,000
Net inc
2,308,000
2,681,000
Share earns
.23
.30
Shares outst
10,049,520
8,961,040
9mo sales
119,490,000
108,457,000
Net inc
8,608,000
8,303,000
Share earns
.86
.93
Shares outst
10,043,820
8,950,739


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,600,000,000
5,907,000,000
Net inc
336,000,000
552,000,000
Share earns
.65
1.07
9mo rev
19,932,000,000
17,731,000,000
Net inc
1,291,000,000
1,688,000,000
Share earns
2.50
3.28


Santa Fe Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
733,800,000
756,000,000
Net inc
33,800,000
b646,800,000
Share earns
.21
-
Shares outst
159,600,000
157,300,000
9mo rev
2,146,100,000
2,258,300,000
Net inc
224,000,000
b202,600,000
Share earns
1.40
-
Shares outst
159,400,000
157,500,000


FSI International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FSI International (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
18,476,000
14,210,000
Net inc
1,109,000
820,000
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
4,148,000
3,115,000
Yr sales
61,594,000
45,214,000
Net inc
3,154,000
1,107,000
Share earns
.84
.35
Shares outst
3,734,000
3,119,000


Dollar Posts Mixed Results Despite Data on U.S. Prices
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed against major foreign currencies yesterday at the end of an uneventful session.


Central Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Pacific Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,376,000
1,639,000
Per share
.42
.29
9mo net inc
5,721,000
3,838,000
Per share
1.02
.69


Alexander &amp; Baldwin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
185,811,000
166,966,000
Net inc
29,045,000
25,181,000
Share earns
.64
.51
Shares outst
46,075,000
50,104,000
9mo rev
675,024,000
528,835,000
Net inc
185,884,000
b126,580,000
Share earns
4.01
2.53
Shares outst
46,402,000
50,100,000


About Real Estate; Builder's Plan Cuts Down Payments
LEAD: One factor holding back home ownership in New York City, as in other parts of the country, is the difficulty many would-be buyers have in amassing enough savings for a down payment.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
87,918,000
80,203,000
Net inc
5,830,000
b3,936,000
Share earns
.47
.33
9mo sales
270,733,000
204,190,000
Net inc
18,493,000
b12,557,000
Share earns
1.51
1.06


Grace Reports Gain in Profit
LEAD: W. R. Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that its third-quarter profit nearly doubled because of a large gain on the reorganization of its energy operations.


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knogo Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,010,000
14,832,000
Net loss
1,077,000
b1,505,000
Share earns
-
.29
Shares outst
5,169,234
5,187,930
6mo rev
32,329,000
29,484,000
Net inc
332,000
2,860,000
Share earns
.06
.55
Shares outst
5,220,731
5,202,479


Warner Seeks to Stop Sony From Hiring 2 Producers
LEAD: Warner Communications Inc. is seeking a preliminary injunction in Los Angeles Superior Court to stop the Sony Corporation from hiring two producers, Peter Guber and Jon Peters, to head Columbia Pictures, which Sony is buying.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Red Wings 4, Blues 3: Joe Murphy's unassisted goal with 1 minute 21 seconds remaining remaining capped Detroit's three-goal third-period rally last night in St.
Louis.
Murphy picked up a loose puck near the blue line and beat the rookie goaltender Pat Jablonski to the glove side with a 40-foot shot for his second goal of the game as Detroit (4-4-0) won for the first time on the road.(AP)


Gephardt Offers an Agenda
LEAD: Declaring that his party had been ''dealing with the thread and not the fabric'' of the economy, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, outlined today ''a new Democratic agenda for investment and economic growth.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.68
8.75
8.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.51
7.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.53
7.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.94
8.01
8.67
30-YR.


Relief Fund Set Up for Victims Across Pacific
LEAD: Feeling suddenly vulnerable to the dangers of earthquakes at home, Japan responded today to the quake in California by setting up an emergency relief fund for victims there.


Northeast Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
311,000
b13,370,000
6mo net loss
469,000
9,885,000
b-Net loss  The net income for the latest quarter included $607,000 gain from tax loss carryforward and early retirement of notes.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peerless Carpet
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
135,211,000
67,145,000
Net inc
220,000
3,001,000
Share earns
.03
.35
6mo sales
195,189,000
127,014,000
Net inc
1,958,000
5,623,000
Share earns
.23
.65


Ameriana Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameriana Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
572,000
500,000
Per share
.30
.26
9mo net inc
1,634,000
b297,000
Per share
.86
-
b-Net loss and after a loss of $1,689,000 from discontinued operations, which included a loss of $1.1 million from disposal of discontinued operations.


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
501,096,000
427,119,000
Net inc
61,289,000
56,980,000
Share earns
1.22
1.19
9mo sales
1,102,977,000
976,686,000
Net inc
79,620,000
73,105,000
Share earns
1.59
1.56


George Risk, 76, Dies; Electronics Executive
LEAD: George Risk, an inventor who founded electronics companies in Nebraska, died Tuesday in a hospital in Cheyenne, Wyo., after a brief illness.
He was 76 years old.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  'IMAGES OF HAITI'


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  A new aid plan for Poland, which aims to support democracy and the development of a free-market economy, was passed by the House.
A similar but smaller plan for Hungary was also passed.
Page A1


Beijing Journal; China's Campus Life: A Torrent of Self-Criticism
LEAD: A university professor sighed as he described the long self-criticism that he had written painstakingly in a small notebook and then read aloud to a critical audience of colleagues and Communist Party officials at a political meeting.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gillette Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
921,600,000
845,700,000
Net inc
65,200,000
63,900,000
Shares outst
96,741,000
110,723,000
Share earns
.57
.57
9mo sales
2,766,500,000
2,613,500,000
Net inc
205,300,000
207,000,000
Share earns
2.02
1.82
Shares outst
96,694,000
113,445,000


D &amp; N Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D &amp; N Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,067,000
5,159,000
Per share
.30
1.42
9mo net inc
2,290,000
10,688,000
Per share
.63
2.93


Hitox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hitox Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,911,000
4,613,000
Net inc
340,000
667,000
Share earns
.10
.31
Shares outst
3,387,320
2,123,266
9mo sales
12,692,000
11,955,000
Net inc
1,677,000
1,592,000
Share earns
.49
.75
Shares outst
3,387,129
2,120,091


MCA Net Down 6.6%
LEAD: MCA Inc. reported today that its third-quarter earnings declined 6.6 percent, to $50.8 million, or 69 cents a share, from $54.3 million, or 74 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company's revenues increased 12.2 percent, to $918.4 million, from $806.7 million in the period last year.
Despite record revenues, generated partly from box office hits like ''Parenthood'' and ''Uncle Buck,'' earnings dipped because of increased interest expenses caused by higher interest rates and higher average borrowings compared with 1988.


Dr. Peter Dineen, 64, Surgeon and Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Peter Dineen, a professor and vice chairman of the department of surgery at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, died of cancer there Tuesday.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Film; Escape to Fame and Fortune
LEAD: ''The Method'' is an independently produced low-budget romantic drama about Anna, a 40-year-old housewife from Oregon, who finds fame, fortune and her own identity as an actress in San Francisco.


First Federal of Western Pa.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Western Pa.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
440,000
443,000
Per share
.33
.33
9mo net inc
1,214,000
1,364,000
Per share
.92
1.03


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Mexico Seizes Nephews of 2 Top Traffickers
LEAD: The national police said today that they had captured nephews of two major Colombian cocaine traffickers and broken up a ring that flew the drug into Mexico and shipped it by boat to Florida.


College Student Dies At Pledging Activity Held by a Fraternity
LEAD: A Morehouse College sophomore from the Bronx has died in what school officials say appears to be a hazing incident at the college's chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha, the nation's oldest fraternity for blacks.


Wilmington Trust Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
15,546,000
13,764,000
Per share
.89
.79
Shares outst
17,477,000
17,452,000
9mo net inc
42,078,000
35,627,000
Per share
1.86
1.73
Shares outst
17,495,000
17,389,000


Former Patient Points to Nurse In Murder Trial
LEAD: The trial of a former nurse accused of injecting his patients with fatal amounts of muscle-paralyzing drugs opened today with a 77-year-old man testifying that he began to choke and struggle immediately after receiving a mysterious late-night injection.


Southern New England Telecomm. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern New England Telecomm. Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
423,900,000
394,400,000
Net inc
42,800,000
39,600,000
Share earns
1.38
1.27
Shares outst
1,864,000
1,830,000
9mo rev
1,671,300,000
1,554,600,000
Net inc
b187,800,000
151,800,000
Share earns
6.02
4.89
Shares outst
31,173,000
31,054,000


Caci International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
34,617,378
35,522,740
Net inc
837,150
1,107,514
Share earns
.07
.09


Bristol-Myers Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,589,473,000
1,516,161,000
Net inc
266,245,000
232,325,000
Share earns
.93
.81
9mo sales
4,726,216,000
4,492,965,000
Net inc
715,860,000
633,450,000
Share earns
2.49
2.20
Shares outst
287,797,000
287,795,000


Snow Records Are Set in Midwest


Assassinations: Can't We Learn?
LEAD: It happens I was one of a small company assembled in the big southwest corner office of the west wing of the White House in the early afternoon of Nov. 22, waiting word from Dallas.
In the event, no message came; leastwise, none that I recall.
Rather, at a point we seemed to come to the same realization.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,360,100,000
1,360,800,000
Net inc
106,700,000
112,900,000
Share earns
.97
1.03
Shares outst
110,100,000
109,500,000
9mo sales
4,309,900,000
4,184,700,000
Net inc
363,800,000
365,300,000
Share earns
3.25
3.32
Shares outst
111,900,000
110,000,000


Premiere to Be Featured At the Asian Festival
LEAD: The first International Festival of Asian Film continues this weekend with the New York premiere at 4 P.M. today of ''At the Beach,'' a 1984 film by Teng Wenji, at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
The film, which has rarely been seen outside of China, shows how modern industry affects the lives of those in a small fishing village.


Albany International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
120,998,000
107,955,000
Net inc
9,966,000
8,985,000
Share earns
.40
.36
Shares outst
25,090,000
24,971,000
9mo rev
369,514,000
336,171,000
Net inc
32,259,000
27,677,000
Share earns
1.29
1.12
Shares outst
25,085,000
24,672,000


Puget Sound P&amp;L reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound P&amp;L (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
872,882,000
767,892,000
Net inc
131,823,000
125,999,000
Share earns
2.14
2.15
Shares outst
55,299,791
53,668,340


Our Towns; Painting Geese Amid Deer Herds In an Office Park
LEAD: Peter Corbin is a painter of wildlife and sporting scenes whose credentials include selection as artist of the year by the Atlantic Salmon Federation and Ducks Unlimited.
President Jimmy Carter once commissioned him to do drawings for the White House.


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Coal (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
73,521,000
63,117,000
Net inc
4,782,000
7,303,000
Share earns
.28
.47
Shares outst
15,032,000
14,749,000
9mo rev
230,367,000
193,803,000
Net inc
b15,903,000
c26,188,000
Share earns
.95
1.83
Shares outst
15,028,000
14,149,000


Mesa Air Details StatesWest Offer
LEAD: Mesa Airlines Inc. said StatesWest Airlines Inc. was offering $10 a share for Mesa's common stock.
The offer, which values the company at $16.5 million, consists of $7 a share in cash plus StatesWest securities with a value of $3 a share.


American Petrofina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Petrofina Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
711,875,000
696,063,000
Net inc
15,056,000
35,157,000
Share earns
.98
2.66
Shares outst
15,438,341
13,202,476
9mo rev
2,278,186,000
1,959,222,000
Net inc
105,665,000
99,955,000
Share earns
6.96
7.57
Shares outst
15,179,127
13,198,778


Ex-Employee Is Named Bergen Line's President
LEAD: Bergen Line Inc., the New York unit of a company that operates cruises on the Norwegian coast, has named a new president, Kristin P. Demetriou, who has been running a travel agency in Nashville.


Review/Film; 'True Love,' as It Is in the Italian Bronx
LEAD: If ''Moonstruck'' had been made by, for and about real people, it might have been a lot like ''True Love,'' Nancy Savoca's exuberant, raucously funny film about a big Italian-American wedding and all its abundant fallout.
Ms.
Savoca, a Bronx native and a first-time director making a delightful debut, knows her territory and knows much better than to treat it too kindly.


Ryan's Family Steak Houses reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan's Family Steak Houses (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 27
1989
1988
Revenue
62,960,000
51,647,000
Net inc
5,844,000
5,094,000
Share earns
.11
.10
Shares outst
53,024,000
52,330,000
9mo rev
178,550,000
144,977,000
Net inc
16,125,000
14,626,000
Share earns
.31
.28
Shares outst
52,804,000
52,410,000


TJ International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TJ International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
103,897,000
96,835,000
Net inc
5,419,000
7,111,000
Share earns
.75
1.00
9mo sales
267,126,000
242,804,000
Net inc
13,321,000
14,679,000
Share earns
1.85
2.07


'New Chapter' Promised by East German Leader
LEAD: East Germany's new leader, Egon Krenz, got off to a fast start today, visiting a factory to hear workers' grievances and meeting unexpectedly with senior church leaders to whom he pledged a ''new chapter of constructive cooperation.''


Relief Agencies Accepting Funds
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,062,900,000
3,126,400,000
Net inc
166,400,000
b146,800,000
Share earns
1.71
1.53
Shares outst
95,156,359
93,193,697
9mo rev
9,031,400,000
8,979,800,000
Net inc
458,800,000
b452,000,000
Share earns
4.76
4.50
Shares outst
94,072,167
97,839,265


HUNGARY LEGALIZES OPPOSITION GROUPS
LEAD: The Hungarian Parliament formally legalized opposition political parties today, voting overwhelmingly to end more than four decades of one-party rule.


Pioneer Set to Acquire Laser Disk Company
LEAD: The Pioneer Electronic Corporation of Japan, a leader in the laser disk player market, said today that it would pay $200 million for Discovision Associates, a joint venture of the International Business Machines Corporation and MCA Inc.
Discovision holds more than 1,400 important patents and patent applications in laser audio and video technology.


U.S. May Yield on Philippine Bases
LEAD: American officials are prepared to negotiate an entirely new military bases agreement with the Philippine Government that will acknowledge increasing Philippine concerns about sovereignty, Western diplomats say.


Businesses in Bay Area Hope for a Quick Return To Life Almost as Usual
LEAD: It was business almost as usual today in the Bay Area as the banks opened for business, the hotels began restocking food and the computer chip producers operated at full speed.


Panel Backs Nominee For Agricultural Post
LEAD: A divided Senate Agriculture Committee voted today to recommend confirmation of James E. Cason to the Agriculture Department's top environmental position.
But opponents said they would continue their fight against the nomination on the Senate floor.


Pope &amp; Talbot reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope &amp; Talbot (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
162,076,000
135,314,000
Net inc
13,224,000
8,479,000
Share earns
1.11
.71
9mo rev
471,136,000
373,000,000
Net inc
33,816,000
23,295,000
Share earns
2.86
1.95


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,945,000
44,015,000
Net inc
9,113,000
5,710,000
Share earns
.58
.39
Shares outst
15,715,000
14,476,000


QUAKE AT A GLANCE
LEAD:  RECOVERING


Valcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
92,800,000
61,026,000
Net inc
1,406,000
1,051,000
Share earns
.31
.24
9mo sales
261,912,000
161,146,000
Net inc
4,065,000
3,153,000
Share earns
.91
.72


Canadian Pacific In Bid for Soo Line
LEAD: Canadian Pacific Ltd. offered $19.50 a share, or $81.5 million, for the 44 percent of the Soo Line Corporation it does not already own.
Canadian Pacific said it had made the bid after it failed to sell its stake in Soo Line, a Minneapolis-based transportation and real estate company that operates the 10th largest rail system in the United


Los Angeles Residents Face Their Peril, Briefly
LEAD: Psychic tremors from the San Francisco earthquake are rattling in Los Angeles, where people are engaged in a flurry of preparations for ''the big one'' they usually prefer not to think about.


F&amp;M Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M Financial Services
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,005,000
756,000
Per share
.43
.35
9mo net inc
2,694,000
1,878,000
Per share
1.22
.88


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,808,000,000
1,708,000,000
Net inc
102,000,000
85,000,000
Share earns
.34
.28
Shares outst
283,000,000
278,000,000
9mo sales
5,438,000,000
5,036,000,000
Net inc
307,000,000
267,000,000
Share earns
1.03
.90
Shares outst
281,000,000
277,000,000


CNB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,775,000
3,433,000
Per share
.57
.52
9mo net inc
10,196,000
9,604,000
Per share
1.55
1.45


New Factors in Commute Across Bay: Extra Time, More Money and Fear
LEAD: San Franciscans today found new ordeals in the old challenge of commuting.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,340,000
c2,611,000
Per share
.58
.64
9mo net inc
b6,775,000
c6,620,000
Per share
1.68
1.64
b-After extraordinary credits due to tax loss carryforwards of $721,000, or 18 cents per share, for the quarter and $2,064,000, or 51 cents per share, for the 9 months.


Harrier Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harrier Inc.
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,164,244
582,825
Net inc
b193,278
c1,327,568
Share earns
.04
-
b-Included other income of $1,820,512 principally from sale of license rights.
c-Net loss and included other income of $222,855 principally from sale of license rights.


Soviet Military Transport Plane Crashes Into Caspian, Killing 57
LEAD: A Soviet military transport plane carrying paratroopers to peacekeeping duty in the Caucasus region caught fire and crashed into the Caspian Sea on Wednesday night, killing all 57 people on board, according to reports by the official press agency, Tass, and the Government newspaper, Izvestia.


Textron reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Textron (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,734,800,000
1,717,000,000
Net inc
59,500,000
62,800,000
Share earns
.66
.72
Shares outst
90,754,000
86,851,000
9mo rev
5,407,000,000
5,295,200,000
Net inc
b182,000,000
c170,400,000
Share earns
2.06
1.93
Shares outst
88,500,000
88,231,000


BankAmerica Profit Rises by 33.7%
LEAD: Continuing its comeback, the BankAmerica Corporation, one of the nation's largest banks, said yesterday that third-quarter net income rose 33.7 percent, to $254 million, or $1.16 a share, from $190 million, or 97 cents a share, in the corresponding 1988 period.


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
129,477,000
102,638,000
Net inc
2,510,000
2,096,000
Share earns
.06
.05
Year-ago figures restated to reflect the May 1989 merger with Education Systems Corp.


Review/Art; So Sad, So Pastoral, So End of the Century
LEAD: It is rare to find a survey of contemporary art nowadays that does not include at least a few Neo-Romantic landscapes.
Not long ago, the Whitney Museum of American Art's branch at the Equitable Center devoted an exhibition to these works and at the moment there are no fewer than three shows that deal in one way or another with this theme.


First Ohio Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Ohio Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,835,125
842,271
Per share
.64
.19
9mo net inc
7,084,467
b4,878,651
Per share
1.59
1.09
b-Reflected $2.4 million, or 53 cents per share, gain from accounting change.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ecology As Applied To the Media
LEAD: IN a pastoral Catskills setting more appropriate for musings on nature and ecology, a claque of cigarette-smoking urban intellectuals gathered recently to ruminate on the state of the world's media ecology.


Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waste Management Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,186,729,000
938,180,000
Net inc
151,779,000
b129,123,000
Share earns
.66
.57
Shares outst
230,400,000
226,272,000
9mo rev
3,264,403,000
2,593,028,000
Net inc
409,232,000
339,486,000
Share earns
1.79
1.50
Shares outst
229,018,000
226,769,000


Flightsafety International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flightsafety International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
57,000,000
44,124,000
Net inc
16,131,000
11,841,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Shares outst
34,035,622
33,836,237
9mo rev
168,148,000
126,215,000
Net inc
46,692,000
36,195,000
Share earns
1.37
1.07
Shares outst
33,967,110
33,770,022


Message to Rattled Populace: Try to Talk About It
LEAD: At Horace Mann Academic Middle School in the Mission District, only a third of the 600 students showed up today for the first day of classes since Tuesday's earthquake.


In Dick Tracy's latest caper, 'The Case of the Purloined Panels,' a law firm is embarrassed
LEAD: For all the funny papers they file, law firms have little in common with the funny papers.
But in a bizarre operation earlier this month, Dick Tracy came to the firm of Bryan, Cave, McPheeters &amp; McRoberts.


Waiting for the Big One
LEAD: ''The big one'' has not yet hit the San Francisco Bay Area, the experts tell us, or southern California.
That's small comfort to the thousands bereaved or devastated by a 6.9-magnitude earthquake, but it's a clear warning even to those Americans who live nowhere near the San Andreas Fault.


President Appointed Inter-Regional Chief
LEAD: Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc., a Minneapolis-based company that operates two brokerage units, has named its president, Irving Weiser, to the additional post of chief executive, beginning Jan. 1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Jamaica Tourism Board Parts Ways With Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: Tension between Young &amp; Rubicam and the Jamaica Tourist Board flared yesterday with the agency and the tourist board publicly disagreeing over the release of the news that the two were ending their relationship.


Bristol-Myers And Squibb Report Gains
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that the Bristol-Myers Company and the Squibb Corporation each had record sales and earnings in the third quarter.
It was the last quarter that the two drug companies remained separate entities before their merger was completed on Oct. 4.


Prices Rose Modestly Last Month
LEAD: Consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in September, cutting the nation's inflation rate so far this year to the same 4.4 percent posted for 1988, the Labor Department reported today.


Warsaw Pact Offers Plan to Monitor Troop Cuts
LEAD: The Warsaw Pact presented a comprehensive plan in Vienna today for monitoring cuts in conventional forces.
It calls for permanent inspectors at key transit points in Europe, Western officials said.


Gateway Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,552,000
1,324,000
Per share
.44
.38
9mo net inc
4,311,000
3,877,000
Per share
1.23
1.11
The year-ago per share earnings were adjusted to reflect 10 percent stock dividend paid on May 5.


American Medical
LEAD: The IMA Acquisition Corporation, which has offered to purchase American Medical International Inc. for an investor group, said it had sufficient commitments to finance the senior bank portion, or $1.58 billion, of its bid.
The commitments were completed when the Chemical Bank syndicated $509 million to 23 other institutions.


Triton Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
65,116,000
53,349,000
Net loss
b4,698,000
c5,055,000
b-Included tax credits of $155,000, or 1 cent a share, and included oil and gas writedowns of $3 million.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Air Purator Corp., Boston, a maker of air pollution control devices, appointed Daniel S. Tedone president.


World Series Resumption On Course
LEAD: The plan to resume the World Series next Tuesday remains ''on course,'' Commissioner Fay Vincent said today.
But he reiterated and emphasized that the status of the Bay Area's recovery from the devastating earthquake remained the No. 1 condition that would determine the ultimate decision.


Cal Rep Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,857,758
1,605,162
Per share
.67
.58
9mo net inc
5,266,610
4,413,988
Per share
1.90
1.59


We Already Know the Folly of Decriminalized Drugs; War Isn't Working
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cleveland Orchestra
LEAD: Ralph Kirshbaum will be the cello soloist in the first New York performance of Peter Maxwell Davies's ''Strathclyde Concerto No. 2'' with the Cleveland Orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday at 3 P.M.
The work is the second in a series of 10 concertos commissioned by the Strathclyde Regional Council.


American Cyanamid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Cyanamid Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,140,800,000
1,094,100,000
Net inc
64,500,000
64,100,000
Share earns
.72
.71
9mo sales
3,671,700,000
3,488,900,000
Net inc
263,900,000
242,800,000
Share earns
2.94
2.70


Robert Gersin, 60, Designer, Dies
LEAD: Robert P. Gersin, an award-winning industrial designer, died of cancer Wednesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.


We Already Know the Folly of Decriminalized Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


FBX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FBX Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,596,435
3,068,458
Net loss
b827,352
c3,044
9mo rev
12,576,368
9,313,676
Net loss
b677,278
89,539
b-Included an inventory writeoff of $850,000 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Scecorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scecorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,182,213,000
2,029,342,000
Net inc
400,903,000
391,655,000
Share earns
1.84
1.79
9mo rev
5,284,657,000
4,713,792,000
Net inc
659,445,000
655,200,000
Share earns
3.02
3.00


First Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,163,000
3,688,000
Per share
.54
.48
9mo net inc
12,658,000
9,647,000
Per share
1.64
1.25


East German Television Lightens Up, a Bit
LEAD: A kind of glasnost appeared on the country's two tightly controlled television channels today, a day after Erich Honecker's fall as leader of East Germany.


Panama Excuses, and Assassination
LEAD: Two questions about the failed coup in Panama need to be separated promptly to avert undermining a landmark Presidential ban on assassinations.
One is why the Administration chose not to support the attempted overthrow of General Noriega on Oct. 3.
That is rapidly becoming blurred into a second, much larger question: whether, if there is a risk of assassination, the U.S.


Officer Tells of Partner's Slaying in Drug Operation
LEAD: As the family of a slain police officer sat quietly in a Manhattan courtroom, and a dozen off-duty officers glared in stony silence at the three defendants, a narcotics officer testified in harrowing detail yesterday about how his partner was killed in an undercover drug operation on the Upper West


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
463,474,000
457,746,000
Net inc
13,265,000
3,986,000
Share earns
.74
.23
9mo rev
1,424,269,000
1,340,531,000
Net inc
45,268,000
29,327,000
Share earns
2.54
1.66


Standard Register Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Register Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
174,111,000
162,724,000
Net inc
7,489,000
5,692,000
Share earns
.25
.19


Status of Travel And Phones
LEAD: The status of national transportation and communication services in the San Francisco area:


Judge Is Calm in Eye of Storm He Helped Create
LEAD: At the center of a long-running storm that has taken Kansas City's school problems to the Supreme Court sits a quiet and reserved Federal judge endowed by background and temperament, associates say, with the patience to weather the winds of controversy.


10 Side With San Diego
LEAD: Ten of the 24 challengers for the America's Cup have sided with the San Diego Yacht Club in its legal dispute with New Zealand by asking the New York courts not to consider any further appeals.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Maine Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
444,662
424,182
Per share
.32
.31
9mo net inc
1,168,738
1,032,577
Per share
.85
.75
Latest quarter and 9 months included the results of Hampton Co- operative Bank, acquired Jan.


Arco Chemcial Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arco Chemcial Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
632,000,000
696,000,000
Net inc
b94,000,000
126,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.27
9mo rev
2,057,000,000
1,955,000,000
Net inc
b330,000,000
360,000,000
Share earns
3.44
3.62


Comet Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comet Entertainment Inc.
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,422,692
-
Net loss
480,931
-
Year-ago figures are not available because the company changed to a June year from a calendar year.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
606,600,000
562,700,000
Net inc
73,500,000
74,600,000
Share earns
1.02
1.04
Shares outst
71,900,000
71,800,000
9mo rev
1,835,600,000
1,728,000,000
Net inc
239,100,000
245,700,000
Share earns
3.33
3.38
Shares outst
71,800,000
72,700,000


Executive Board of U.S.O.C. Faces Debate on Reforms
LEAD: With scores of recommendations before it, the United States Olympic Committee's executive board plans to spend the next few days trying to reshape the organization by approving measures it feels would make the U.S.O.C. more efficient in operation and more responsible to the country's elite athletes.


Trump Offers Remodeled Shuttle
LEAD: Donald J. Trump displayed the first refurbished Trump Shuttle 727, complete with leather seats, wood paneling and pink marble-like vanities.
The plane's seats are tan leather with burgundy accents and chrome trim.
A GTE Airfone has been installed behind every center seat.


Bankers Say Refinancing Is Needed to Avert Defaults
LEAD: Bankers affiliated with the South Africa debt agreement said yesterday that the main reason the nation's creditors agreed to refinance $8 billion was that the loans were coming due on July 1 and would have to be rescheduled sooner or later.


Violin Concert
LEAD: Leonidas Kavakos, a violinist, will play Mozart's Sonata in B flat (K. 454), Prokofiev's Sonata No. 1 in F minor, and Schumann's Sonata No. 2 in E minor at Washington Irving High School, 16th Street and Irving Place, tomorrow evening at 8.
Mr.
Kavakos won first prize in the Walter W. Naumburg Violin Competition in 1988.


Niners, Patriots Meet at Stanford
LEAD: The game between the San Francisco 49ers and the New England Patriots on Sunday will be played at Stanford Stadium in nearby Palo Alto while preparations continue to ready Candlestick Park for the resumption of the World Series next week.


Pop/Jazz; What's New, What's Hot, On the Live Music Scene
LEAD: FOR rock performers, New York City is still the ultimate test.


Job Interview for Helms
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds' interim manager, Tommy Helms, wants a chance to stay on as manager for the 1990 season.
He said he would meet Tuesday with Bob Quinn, the team's general manager.


Review/Theater; Sexual Politics and Tango in 'Dangerous Games'
LEAD: If theater people want to make a spectacle of themselves on a Broadway stage, that is their inalienable right, but whatever happened to the poor audience's right to enjoy a few laughs in the face of such disaster? ''Dangerous Games,'' a new musical misfire at the Nederlander, extinguishes all opportunities for fun by shrouding its inanities in stern sermonettes on sexual politics, dour images from Greek mythology and real-life South American state terrorism.


HomeFed Bank
LEAD: The HomeFed Corporation of San Diego said it had converted its Home Federal Savings and Loan subsidiary to a Federal savings bank, and changed its name to the HomeFed Bank.
The parent company received approval to make the switch last week from the Office of Thrift Supervision.
HomeFed Bank deposits will continue to be insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Senate Rejects Amendment Outlawing Flag Desecration
LEAD: In a sharp rebuff to President Bush and a clear victory for the Democratic Congressional leadership, the Senate today rejected a proposed constitutional amendment to outlaw desecrating the American flag.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
981,204,000
1,016,549,000
Net inc
18,272,000
61,025,000
Share earns
.43
1.70
Shares outst
36,525,000
33,663,000
9mo sales
3,193,156,000
3,030,950,000
Net inc
112,989,000
b204,539,000
Share earns
3.04
5.76
Shares outst
35,827,000
33,529,000


MPG Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MPG Investment Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
582,934
510,457
Net inc
280,962
323,652
Share earns
.03
.04
Results are in Canadian funds.


For Jets, Weapons Are Few On Offense
LEAD: They are unable to go long, unable to go short and unable to run.
So what are the Jets going to do on Sunday when they face the Bills at Orchard Park, N.Y.?


British Air Ends Deal For UAL
LEAD: British Airways P.L.C. will not participate in a buyout of the UAL Corporation at this time, its chairman said yesterday.


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,186,000
3,180,000
Per share
.66
.66
9mo net inc
9,623,000
9,329,000
Per share
2.01
1.95


Questions Arise on the Death Toll In Vehicles on Collapsed Highway
LEAD: Questions arose today about how many bodies and how many cars were trapped in the wreckage of the collapsed freeway here, and about whether the state had done everything it could to insure that it was safe.


Dow Rises By 39.55 in Wide Gain
LEAD: Stock prices moved up sharply yesterday as traders reacted to encouraging inflation news and to indications that the Federal Reserve might be willing to allow interest rates to fall further.


Plan Seen For Another TV Network
LEAD: MCA Inc. and Paramount Communications Inc. are planning a fifth television network to compete with NBC, CBS, ABC and the Fox Broadcasting Company, industry executives said today.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fedders Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
60,509,000
34,240,000
Net inc
2,440,000
b3,569,000
Share earns
.13
.20
Shares outst
19,398,000
13,738,000
9mo sales
293,221,000
153,987,000
Net inc
17,167,000
b15,561,000
Share earns
.94
.97
Shares outst
17,480,000
13,666,000


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
254,000,000
190,000,000
Per share
1.16
.97
Shares outst
201,486,000
178,907,000
9mo net inc
b833,000,000
c461,000,000
Per share
4.07
2.40
Shares outst
194,558,000
172,188,000


General Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Signal (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
473,828,000
444,254,000
Net inc
17,923,000
b4,422,000
Share earns
.94
-
Shares outst
19,066,000
28,605,000
9mo rev
1,440,777,000
1,296,628,000
Net inc
56,409,000
4,530,000
Share earns
2.96
.16
Shares outst
19,047,000
27,937,000


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
107,503,369
97,239,449
Net inc
9,608,684
8,672,025
Share earns
.43
.39


Zions Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zions Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b5,382,000
c8,433,000
Per share
.91
-
9mo net inc
b11,408,000
c5,587,000
Per share
1.93
-
b-After tax benefits from net operating loss carryforwards of $1,170,000 for the quarter and $2 million for the 9 months.


Three Soviet Film Makers Take Their Work on Tour
LEAD: In 1986, the Union of Soviet Film Makers set up a ''conflict commission'' to reconsider the fate of more than 140 films that had been banned or suppressed.
Movies that for years had been prevented from being released were distributed, and began to find audiences in the Soviet Union and abroad.
Four of the most prominent Soviet directors who have benefited from the political changes in their country - Aleksei Gherman, Aleksandr Sokurov, Kira Muratova and Tengiz Abuladze - are represented in a series of screenings that begin today at the Museum of Modern


Equitable Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equitable Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,084,000
12,539,000
Per share
.76
.67
9mo net inc
39,808,000
35,478,000
Per share
2.14
1.89


Damage to Link Across Bay Is More Serious Than Thought
LEAD: State officials said today that the earthquake had caused more damage to the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge than had been thought and that the span could be closed as long as two months.


Sherwood Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwood Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,217,803
3,921,494
Net loss
2,920,234
2,396,462
Shares outst
13,162,131
10,968,531


New York State E &amp; G reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State E &amp; G (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
319,985,000
311,584,000
Net inc
26,430,000
32,656,000
Share earns
.41
.52
Shares outst
57,238,000
56,356,000
Yr rev
1,414,091,000
1,300,197,000
Net inc
159,021,000
112,082,000
Share earns
2.56
1.76
Shares outst
56,920,000
56,019,000


Saudi Visits Syria to Aid in Lebanon Talks
LEAD: The Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, met with Syrian officials in Damascus today in an effort to break an impasse in talks on a Lebanese peace accord, Damascus radio said.


For Shoemaker's Picks, Dial Away
LEAD: Bill Shoemaker, the 58-year-old jockey who is retiring in February after more than 50 paid farewell appearances at tracks around the world, was not offered any mounts in last year's Breeders' Cup races and has no prospects this year.


Ultimatum Goes Out To Giuliani On Tactics
LEAD: Under attack for more than a week over the way he has kept account of his personal and campaign finances, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor of New York, yesterday issued an ultimatum to his Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani: Stop the ''gutter politics'' within 24 hours, or face some of the same.


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
30,878,000
33,617,000
Net loss
155,000
b1,742,000
Share earns
-
.30
Shares outst
5,811,000
6,661,000
Yr sales
118,771,000
140,685,000
Net loss
2,287,000
b9,858,000
Share earns
-
1.62
Shares outst
5,811,000
6,744,000


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Saranac, in Manhattan


TII Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TII Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,655,000
8,740,000
Net loss
2,202,000
1,116,000
Yr sales
31,475,000
30,742,000
Net inc
338,000
b13,582,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
3,603,000
3,059,000


Auctions
LEAD:  Pre-Columbian Gold


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
11,398,000
10,283,000
Per share
.56
.50
9mo net inc
31,684,000
28,642,000
Per share
1.55
1.39
Summit said it realized a $21.6 million after-tax gain from the tender of shares of Ultra Bancorp.


Idle Vandeweghe Returns to New York
LEAD: Kiki Vandeweghe, who reported to the Knicks' training camp two weeks ago with back spasms, returned to New York yesterday while his teammates flew to Detroit for a preseason game tonight against the Pistons at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.


Tragedy's Reservoir
LEAD: Similar stories emerge from natural disasters.
Voices are heard crying in the wreckage.
Someone is saved against all odds.
Someone else expires just as the rescuers arrive.
The pictures are similar, too.
Buildings collapse into playing-card piles.
Pavements are crazed with cracks.
Flames belch from broken gas mains.


Fahnestock Viner Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fahnestock Viner Holdings
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,052,000
19,569,000
Net inc
1,741,000
b524,000
Share earns
.15
-
9mo rev
63,503,000
61,223,000
Net inc
3,890,000
1,768,000
Share earns
.35
.16


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Waste Management (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
242,885,000
184,941,000
Net inc
40,339,000
33,059,000
Share earns
.20
.17
9mo rev
654,515,000
482,354,000
Net inc
103,791,000
81,825,000
Share earns
.51
.41


Yeltsin Asserts K.G.B. Men Have Threatened to Kill Him
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin asserted today that K.G.B. agents warned him they could kill him at any moment using a remote electronic device that would stop his heart.


State-O-Maine Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State-O-Maine Inc.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,501,596
17,911,296
Net inc
1,815,726
1,427,227
Share earns
.46
.42
Shares outst
3,975,286
3,397,531
6mo sales
34,256,726
27,483,188
Net inc
2,453,279
1,922,084
Share earns
.62
.60
Shares outst
3,974,559
3,179,401


Review/Film; Two Kinds of Warrior, Two Ways to Die
LEAD: Martin Wragge's World War II action-adventure film ''The Last Warrior'' is not a movie that will advance good relations between the United States and Japan.
Set on a small Pacific island during the final year of the war, it chronicles in interminable and fetishistic detail the life-and-death struggle between a young American intelligence officer (Gary Graham), who has been reporting on the movements of a Japanese fleet, and the Japanese military officer (Cary-Hiroyuki


Rosen Loses Memorabilia
LEAD: Al Rosen, the Giants' general manager, lost much of his baseball memorabilia when the Marina area apartment of his son Jim, an attorney, was destroyed by fire and water damage during the earthquake Tuesday.


Marion Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
236,625,000
206,181,000
Net loss
b100,804,000
c48,085,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
150,468,000
154,000,000
b-Included special charge of $252,517,000 associated with settlement of stock appreciation rights and other expenses related to the beneficial ownership change which occurred when Dow Chemcial Co.


Lincoln Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,965,000
4,742,000
Per share
.72
.68
9mo net inc
14,332,000
12,893,000
Per share
2.07
1.86


Novacare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novacare Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
22,172,000
15,748,000
Net inc
2,371,000
979,000
Share earns
.17
.07
Shares outst
14,053,504
13,453,412
Novacare changed its name from Inspeech Inc. effective yesterday.


Independent Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
676,000
b797,000
Per share
.27
.33
9mo net inc
1,995,000
b1,628,000
Per share
.80
.76
b-After extraordinary credits of $193,000, or 8 cents a share, for the quarter and $373,000, or 20 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Edwin Elbert, Retired Foreign Trader, 85
LEAD: Edwin A. Elbert, a retired import-export executive, died of a heart attack Wednesday at Daniel Freeman Hospital in Marina Del Rey, Calif.
He was 85 years old and lived in Marina Del Rey.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holiday of Shemini Atzereth, which concludes the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Fewer Blacks Migrate to Northern Harvests
LEAD: For many black itinerant farm workers here, the northern end of the migrant stream has always seemed very cold and very far from their homes in the South.
But it has also offered them ample consolation: come fall, plenty of work in the apple orchards of upstate New York.


West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
69,426,000
69,019,000
Net inc
3,244,000
3,729,000
Share earns
.20
.23
Shares outst
16,212,000
16,270,000
9mo sales
228,973,000
212,799,000
Net inc
16,075,000
12,168,000
Share earns
.99
.75


Dollar Up in Quiet Trading In U.S. and Gold Is Stable
LEAD: The dollar ended higher in quiet New York trading yesterday after a mixed performance overseas.


Merchants Bank of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bank of N.Y.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,674,603
2,763,650
Per share
1.62
1.67
9mo net inc
8,102,031
7,803,443
Per share
4.90
4.72


British Airways Seen as Still Interested in UAL
LEAD: Although British Airways P.L.C. says it will not join in a new bid for the UAL Corporation ''in the foreseeable future,'' the airline nevertheless completed today a stock issue that had been planned to help finance the UAL deal.


Hastings Ousted As Senate Vote Convicts Judge; The 5 Previous Convitions
LEAD: Officials found guilty by the Senate and removed from office.


Flagler Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagler Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
522,000
431,000
Per share
.25
.20
9mo net inc
1,643,000
1,363,000
Per share
.77
.64


News Summary
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-6  Philippine Communist rebels are in a stall, suffering from factionalism, internal purges, declining college recruitment and the capture of some important leaders, diplomats and Philippine officials say.
Page 1  East Berlin faces financial trouble exacerbated by the recent of exodus of 50,000 people to the West.


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge players, like drivers, have to be cautious about overtaking.
Wasting two honors on one trick can be fatal, but there are times when it must be done.
A subtle example is the diagramed deal played a week ago in the North Jersey Open Pairs in Allendale, N.J.


Adobe Stock Sale Helps Raise Apple Net
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said today that its net earnings increased 49.3 percent in the fourth quarter, almost entirely because of a gain of $48 million on the sale of Adobe Systems Inc. stock.


Emulex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
28,759,000
36,161,000
Net inc
176,000
3,489,000
Share earns
.02
.30


Aliens to Be Included In Redrawn Districts
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators have agreed that illegal aliens who are counted in the 1990 census will be included when Congressional districts are redrawn to account for shifts in population.


T. Rowe Price Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T. Rowe Price Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
30,589,000
27,408,000
Net inc
7,738,000
6,418,000
Share earns
1.04
.88
9mo rev
87,586,000
79,868,000
Net inc
22,252,000
17,367,000
Share earns
3.01
2.36


Drexel to Pay Delaware
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. will pay Delaware $50,000 and observe certain restrictions if it decides to do business in the state again, officials said.


Banctec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banctec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
43,219,000
26,853,000
Net inc
2,033,000
1,713,000
Share earns
.31
.28
Shares outst
6,646,000
6,139,000
6mo rev
85,628,000
51,156,000
Net inc
3,941,000
3,322,000
Share earns
.60
.54
Shares outst
6,612,000
6,176,000


Collaborative Research reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collaborative Research (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,519,000
4,537,000
Net loss
924,000
b18,000
Yr rev
11,984,000
15,444,000
Net loss
4,111,000
863,000
b-Net income


Norwich Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwich Financial Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,095,000
1,833,000
Per share
.20
.32
9mo net inc
2,638,000
4,891,000
Per share
.47
.85


Rothmans Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rothmans Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
101,400,000
107,000,000
Net inc
11,300,000
7,900,000
Share earns
1.98
1.36
6mo sales
205,000,000
216,000,000
Net inc
b18,800,000
18,000,000
Share earns
3.27
3.12


Ethics Panel Is Told To Shun Full Inquiry In Gingrich's Case
LEAD: A law firm hired by the House ethics committee to investigate the business dealings of Representative Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, has recommended that the panel conduct no formal investigation, House and other officials said today.


A Sound Course on the Baltics
LEAD: Nothing threatens the improving American-Soviet relations more than potentially explosive nationalism in the Soviet Union, especially in the Baltic States.
If Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia press for independence now, they could undermine Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms or prompt a crackdown.
Either outcome would throw East-West rapprochement into reverse.


Jason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jason Inc.
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
27,346,000
19,507,000
Net inc
551,000
376,000
Share earns
.15
.10
9mo sales
78,959,000
59,983,000
Net inc
2,630,000
1,809,000
Share earns
.70
.48
The share earnings were adjusted for 10 percent stock dividend paid May 8.


Political Mentor Is Also Big Dinkins Contributor
LEAD: Percy E. Sutton, the former Manhattan Borough President who is David N. Dinkins's political mentor, is also one of his chief financial angels.


Analysis &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysis &amp; Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,792,000
20,463,000
Net inc
848,000
827,000
Share earns
.38
.36
6mo rev
45,811,000
40,129,000
Net inc
1,721,000
1,574,000
Share earns
.78
.72


Review/Dance; A Traditional Form From India
LEAD: Ritha Devi devoted a program to Odissi, one of the traditional dance forms of India, on Sunday afternoon at the Uris Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Miss Devi, an Indian-born dancer who has taught at New York University, specializes in Odissi, which comes from Orissa, a state in eastern India.


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
342,334,000
335,926,000
Net inc
4,510,000
4,277,000
Share earns
.44
.42
Shares outst
10,303,689
10,265,852
9mo sales
985,039,000
970,412,000
Net inc
15,247,000
6,131,000
Share earns
1.48
.60
Shares outst
10,295,731
10,244,684


Teams Alter Ticket Sales In Bay Area
LEAD: In the aftermath of the earthquake, the ticket arrangements for World Series and National Football League games at Candlestick Park continued to be worked out today.


St. Joseph Light &amp; Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Joseph Light &amp; Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,548,000
22,070,000
Net inc
4,079,000
3,822,000
Share earns
.94
.83
Shares outst
4,325,000
4,581,000
9mo rev
59,654,000
58,697,000
Net inc
8,758,000
8,766,000
Share earns
2.00
1.90
Shares outst
4,371,000
4,608,000


Home &amp; City Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home &amp; City Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,300,000
1,900,000
Per share
.45
.66
9mo net inc
5,100,000
4,800,000
Per share
1.77
1.66


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is therefore ordered that the said Alcee L. Hastings be and is hereby removed.''  - Senator Robert C. Byrd  of West Virginia.  [ 7:3. ]


KLA Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLA Instruments (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
43,166,000
38,785,000
Net inc
2,554,000
2,835,000
Share earns
.14
.16
Shares outst
17,997,000
17,996,000


GARCIA AND WIFE ARE FOUND GUILTY IN EXTORTION CASE
LEAD: Representative Robert Garcia, who emerged from the bare-knuckles politics of the South Bronx to become one of the leading Hispanic politicians in the country, was convicted yesterday of extortion and conspiracy charges.


Golden Nugget Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Nugget Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
52,173,000
41,799,000
Net loss
b13,127,000
c1,469,000
Shares outst
17,235,000
20,278,000
9mo rev
167,313,000
124,726,000
Net loss
b11,401,000
c4,258,000
Shares outst
16,570,000
20,991,000


Manufacturers National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
27,368,000
24,377,000
Per share
1.80
1.62
9mo net inc
79,040,000
69,944,000
Per share
5.20
4.66


Hercules Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hercules Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
787,422,000
686,860,000
Net inc
44,128,000
26,762,000
Share earns
.94
.58
9mo sales
2,318,301,000
2,053,127,000
Net inc
130,529,000
113,912,000
Share earns
2.78
2.39


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Canada
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,980,000
17,322,000
Net inc
1,044,000
1,429,000
Share earns
.48
.66
9mo rev
52,603,000
50,924,000
Net inc
3,767,000
3,208,000
Share earns
1.74
1.48


50,000 in Candlelight March For Change in East Germany
LEAD: As many as 50,000 people held a silent candlelight march in Dresden today in a demonstration for change two days after Egon Krenz became the East German leader, witnesses said.


Finally, Take 2 Pills And Learn What They're Really Doing
LEAD: How do patients learn about the drugs they take?


Healthcare Services Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Services Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,247,000
8,311,000
Net inc
1,051,000
536,000
Share earns
.22
.14
Shares outst
4,888,395
3,934,570
9mo rev
40,848,000
25,156,000
Net inc
3,009,000
1,356,000
Share earns
.62
.35
Shares outst
4,880,254
3,898,026


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundstrand Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
386,124,000
356,547,000
Net inc
26,012,000
7,095,000
Share earns
1.41
.39
9mo sales
1,157,553,000
1,057,122,000
Net inc
90,172,000
b58,752,000
Share earns
4.52
-


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American City Business Journals Inc., Kansas City, Mo., a business newspaper publisher, completed the purchase of the entire holdings of American City stock owned by the company's co-founders, for $44.1 million.


Takeover Offer For A.P. Green
LEAD: East Rock Partners, a private New York investment partnership, has offered to acquire all of the shares of A. P. Green Industries that it does not already control for $40 a share in cash, or a total purchase price of $97.2 million.
Shares of A. P. Green rose $1.875 today, to $38, in the over-the-counter market.


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,000,000
4,400,000
Per share
.76
1.12
9mo net inc
9,600,000
12,900,000
Per share
2.44
3.30


How New York Justice Weights Its Sentences
LEAD: To the Editor:


United Canadian Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Canadian Shares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,217,709
14,660,997
Net inc
611,709
1,064,643
Share earns
.43
.75
9mo rev
50,503,176
49,605,271
Net inc
2,416,520
1,981,868
Share earns
1.71
1.40


4 Days of Heavy Rain Leave Street Flooding
LEAD: A slow-moving storm bade the New York metropolitan area a drenching farewell yesterday, leaving local flooding in its wake.
Forecasters said relief was on the way and predicted partial clearing overnight and some sun this morning.


Former Sperry Executive Pleads Guilty on Navy Bribe
LEAD: A former marketing executive of the Sperry Corporation admitted in court today that he had initiated a bribery scheme in which a Navy official was paid $400,000 for helping Sperry compete for an electronics contract.


Gander Mountain reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gander Mountain (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
32,650,000
29,182,000
Net inc
1,006,000
580,000
Share earns
.36
.21


London Journal; A President, a Cabinet, but a Country Far Away
LEAD: The polished brass plate on the door of 43 Eaton Place proclaims that the stately residence is home to the President of the Polish Republic.
But the only thing that the incumbent, a soft-spoken 69-year-old former accountant named Ryszard Kaczorowski, presides over is a meeting of his cabinet, every two weeks.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
560,010,000
544,993,000
Net inc
117,751,000
134,558,000
Share earns
1.37
1.61
Shares outst
80,136,000
79,083,000
9mo rev
1,518,625,000
1,437,294,000
Net inc
232,230,000
259,477,000
Share earns
2.61
3.01
Shares outst
79,883,000
78,972,000


Greater N.Y. Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater N.Y. Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b5,861,000
c6,476,000
Per share
.42
.52
9mo net inc
b17,885,000
c8,726,000
Per share
1.30
.69
b-After extraordinary credits of $2,070,000, or 17 cents a share, for the quarter and $6,234,000, or 49 cents a share, for the 9 months from realization of federal income tax benefit of net operating loss carryforward.


Giuliani Withdraws Ads
LEAD: In a shift, Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign has withdrawn its negative commercial about David N. Dinkins.
Page 29.


2,000 Attend a Westminster Memorial for Olivier
LEAD: Friends and fellow actors gathered at Westminster Abbey today to celebrate the life and achievements of Laurence Olivier.


Bid Is Said To Be Near For United
LEAD: The pilots, flight attendants and top executives of United Airlines will submit a revised buyout proposal on Monday to the board of the UAL Corporation, United's parent company, the president of the flight attendants' union at United said yesterday.


Dime Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,828,000
1,757,000
Per share
.34
.33
9mo net inc
5,464,000
5,342,000
Per share
1.02
1.00
Dime Financial said its 1989 earnings included the results of City Savings Bank of Meriden, which became a wholly owned subsidiary in December 1988.


Pittston Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pittston Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
395,319,000
398,281,000
Net inc
b3,126,000
c14,678,000
Share earns
.08
.38
9mo rev
1,226,864,000
1,170,369,000
Net inc
b22,596,000
c33,428,000
Share earns
.60
.87


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
153,256,000
146,660,000
Net inc
7,878,000
b6,584,000
Share earns
.77
.70
Shares outst
10,268,000
9,444,000
9mo rev
446,230,000
354,466,000
Net inc
20,444,000
b18,876,000
Share earns
2.05
2.05
Shares outst
9,967,000
9,226,000


Corrections
LEAD: Articles on Wednesday and Thursday about the California earthquake misstated the history of the Marina district of San Francisco.
The district was built on landfill created to make space for the Panama-Pacific International Exposition of 1915, not the Pan-American Pacific Exposition of 1905.


Reviews/Film; Revenge of the Hillbillies
LEAD: ''Next of Kin,'' an appreciably better-than-average revenge drama that opened yesterday at Loew's 84th Street and other theaters, has a taste for novelty.
Its heroes are hillbillies, adrift in the big city.
Its gangster villains run a vending machine concern.
Its final fight to the death takes place in a cemetery, which seems vaguely redundant somehow.


Experts Put Stock Value Higher Than Dinkins Did
LEAD: The communications company at the center of the dispute over David N. Dinkins's stock holdings appears to be a prosperous one, with particularly valuable holdings in radio.
It also owns an interest in a Queens cable franchise and the Apollo Theater.


Pharmacontrol Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pharmacontrol Corp. (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
23,261,000
21,219,000
Net loss
7,728,000
11,303,000
Losses in 1989 included charges for non-recurring items totaling $1,712,000.


Qintex Unit Files for Bankruptcy
LEAD: The American affiliate of Qintex Australia Ltd. said today that it had filed for bankruptcy protection after the Australian entertainment company unexpectedly failed to provide financing for a debt payment due this week.


Review/Music; Refining Tempos in the Mahler Fifth
LEAD: Roughly speaking, there are five ways to decide how fast to play a piece of music.
The first is to follow the composer's metronome markings.
Whether to do so is a thorny question that we are spared in the case of Mahler's Fifth Symphony, which was heard in a tempo-conscious reinterpretation Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall.


Nuggets' Deal Reopened
LEAD: Bertram Lee and Peter Bynoe were poised again today to assume ownership of the Denver Nuggets, this time with the financial backing of the media executive Robert Wussler.


Review/Jazz; Ballad Style For Dinner
LEAD: The interrelationships of jazz saxophonists is evident in the performances of the Bob Kindred Trio, which is playing at the Fortune Garden Pavilion, 209 East 49th Street, through today.


'Looking at the Insides of the Freeway Moving Up and Down'
LEAD: Michael Friedman knew something was terribly wrong when the freeway started heaving.


Osmonics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osmonics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,552,000
8,674,000
Net inc
1,022,000
875,000
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo sales
26,888,000
23,329,000
Net inc
3,148,000
2,293,000
Share earns
.90
.65


Signet Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
27,789,000
59,635,000
Per share
1.04
2.24
Shares outst
26,749,000
26,474,000
9mo net inc
90,623,000
124,173,000
Per share
3.33
4.69
Shares outst
26,651,000
25,898,000


Tuckahoe Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tuckahoe Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,613,601
4,513,900
Net inc
708,336
453,581
Share earns
.12
.08
6mo rev
10,482,157
8,638,005
Net inc
1,405,240
951,041
Share earns
.24
.16
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Mahorn Testing Italian Market
LEAD: Rick Mahorn was part of a championship team with the Detroit Pistons last spring.
Then he became part of an expansion team when he was left unprotected and chosen first by Minnesota in the special draft.
Now he may became part of a team in Italy, and part of a lawsuit as well.


Scan-Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scan-Optics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,597,000
12,280,000
Net loss
5,262,000
486,000
9mo rev
29,844,000
33,416,000
Net loss
8,221,000
780,000


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,767,456,000
1,867,717,000
Net inc
361,129,000
424,203,000
Share earns
1.59
1.89
9mo rev
4,440,256,000
4,263,870,000
Net inc
653,197,000
662,673,000
Share earns
2.74
2.77


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Saving for College
LEAD:  There is now a wider choice of college savings plans than ever before.
At least three banks, several states and the Federal Government offer programs that are not subject to the rapid fluctuations of the stock market.
These programs have variable rates tied to various indexes.
They require minimum deposits of $250 to $1,000, and mature in anywhere from 2 to 25 years.


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
190,163,000
190,067,000
Net loss
b10,501,000
c7,061,000
Share earns
-
.40
9mo rev
597,822,000
576,128,000
Net inc
3,225,000
20,424,000
Share earns
.18
1.15


PWA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PWA Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
816,140,000
650,932,000
Net inc
35,500,000
26,900,000
Share earns
1.07
1.36
Shares outst
31,300,000
18,500,000
9mo rev
2,021,657,000
1,754,719,000
Net inc
200,000
38,400,000
Share earns
-
1.79
Shares outst
27,700,000
18,500,000


Home Federal Savings Bank (Ind.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings Bank (Ind.) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
549,000
572,000
Per share
.60
.62


The Wallenberg Fog Persists
LEAD: Despite glasnost, a thick mist still obscures the fate of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swede who rescued tens of thousands of Jews in Nazi-ruled Hungary.
It's certainly progress that the Soviet Union now calls Mr.
Wallenberg's arrest near Budapest on Jan. 17, 1945, by Red Army authorities ''a tragic mistake that has never been corrected.


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Justin Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
72,053,000
62,515,000
Net inc
2,507,000
1,822,000
Share earns
.44
.32
9mo sales
198,207,000
172,912,000
Net inc
3,822,000
3,900,000
Share earns
.67
.70


Hawthorne Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawthorne Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,184,659
3,109,918
Per share
1.23
1.20
9mo net inc
11,264,002
7,741,227
Per share
4.33
2.98


Amgen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amgen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
42,460,000
21,544,000
Net inc
3,912,000
320,000
Share earns
.22
.02
6mo rev
72,634,000
40,991,000
Net inc
4,747,000
625,000
Share earns
.26
.04


First Interstate Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
8,001,000
b3,264,000
Per share
-
.39
9mo net loss
737,000
b9,673,000
Per share
-
1.13
b-Net income  First Interstate Corp. of Wisconsin said the latest third quarter results included a one-time loss of $4 million from cancellation of a data-processing contract.


Japanese Steel Export Curb
LEAD: The United States and Japan have agreed to extend Japanese steel export restrictions for 30 more months, the Government announced today.


People Moving Gingerly As They Pick Up Pieces
LEAD: The power is back on today.
The broken pots and televisions and bottles and picture frames have been swept and tossed.
The driveway has been cleared of loose earth.
But Gene Holtan and Elizabeth Sanchez lie awake at night in their Tudor house on Beach Hill, listening to the wind pushing on their creaking chimneys and wonder if life will ever really get back to normal.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co.  (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,602,009,000
3,675,578,000
Net inc
473,612,000
618,876,000
Share earns
4.16
5.58
Shares outst
101,275,000
101,263,000
The company said year-ago figures are restated for the effects of the accounting change for unbilled revenues.


Hungary to Disband Party Militia
LEAD: The Hungarian Parliament voted today to disband a militia that was created to protect the Communist Party after the 1956 revolt.


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
956,000
b1,960,000
Per share
.16
-
9mo net inc
3,963,000
b6,907,000
Per share
.65
-
Shares outst
5,995,622
6,209,814
b-Net loss  The net income for the 9-month period a year ago included an accounting adjustment for income taxes of $1,343,000.


Nun Provides Young Blacks A 'Way Out of Helplessness'
LEAD: Five Roman Catholic bishops in African vestments celebrated Mass on Thursday for a scholarship foundation established in the name of a nun who has long been active in minority education.


BancTexas Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
8,931,000
5,591,000
9mo net loss
24,706,000
22,615,000


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
190,100,000
192,500,000
Net inc
9,900,000
20,000,000
Share earns
.18
.35
9mo sales
588,300,000
565,600,000
Net inc
53,000,000
58,000,000
Share earns
.95
1.01
Shares outst
55,876,000
57,377,000


THE EARTHQUAKE'S TOLL IN 8 COUNTIES
LEAD:  ALAMEDA: Thirty bodies recovered from collapsed section of Interstate 880.
Maybe 97 to 167 people still missing.
Countywide, 320 injuries reported and $1.3 billion damage.
No water in city of Alameda, near Oakland.
SAN FRANCISCO: Ten deaths; 300 injured.
Mayor's office estimates $2 billion in property losses.


CF&amp;I Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CF&amp;I Steel Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
77,592,000
75,768,000
Net loss
492,000
b83,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
224,415,000
243,439,000
Net loss
5,197,000
b8,404,000
Share earns
-
1.27


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Blackhawks 4, Jets 2: Dirk Graham's short-handed goal in the third period clinched Chicago's victory last night and handed Winnipeg its fifth loss in seven games.(AP)  Sabres 6, Canadians 2: Dave Andreychuk had two goals and an assist and Buffalo erupted for four goals in the third period.


James B. Grant, 71, a Manhattan Lawyer
LEAD: James Benton Grant, a lawyer in Manhattan for 40 years and an avid yachtsman, died of leukemia Thursday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Greenwich.


O'Brien Energy Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Brien Energy Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,277,000
3,436,000
Net inc
369,000
b2,256,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
11,912,831
9,487,600
b-Net loss


Transactions
LEAD:  THURSDAY  Football


Data Switch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Switch Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,164,000
27,860,000
Net inc
109,000
648,000
Share earns
.01
.06
Shares outst
11,171,261
11,052,697
9mo rev
75,959,000
83,458,000
Net loss
2,245,000
b1,864,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
11,139,164
11,014,784


Intel and Siemens End Biin Venture
LEAD: The Biin Company, a joint venture of the Intel Corporation and Siemens A.G., will be liquidated because no buyer could be found for Biin's manufacturing plant.
Intel and Siemens had sought a buyer for Biin's Hillsboro, Ore., plant because the maker of fault-tolerant computers had failed to find a market for its product, a Biin spokesman, Jess Houdret, said.


Network Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
33,856,000
34,079,000
Net inc
4,392,000
4,147,000
Share earns
.15
.14
9mo rev
99,019,000
95,224,000
Net inc
9,669,000
9,935,000
Share earns
.33
.34


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1989
LEAD:  Markets


Integrated's Talks On a Sale Resume
LEAD: Integrated Resources Inc. resumed negotiations with an unnamed party to buy its core financial services in an attempt to raise money to help pay off $1.75 billion in debt.
Integrated said Tuesday that the talks had ended.
It said then that a group of its senior executives was considering making an offer.


Kodak in Project On Film Transfer
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company and a unit of Britain's Rank Organization P.L.C. are working together to make a high-definition telecine, a machine that transfers film images to video.
Rank Cintel Ltd. is the world's largest producer of conventional telecine machines, which cost between $300,000 and $500,000 each.


Minneapolis Museum Director to Retire
LEAD: Martin Friedman, director of the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis for 28 years and a prominent figure in the international art world, will retire in November 1990, soon after his 65th birthday.


Editors' Note
LEAD: This is the last Saturday News Quiz.


Roll-Call Vote on Hastings
LEAD: Following is the 69-to-26 roll-call vote by which the Senate today convicted Judge Alcee L. Hastings on Article I of 17 impeachment articles relating to bribery.
A two-thirds vote was required for conviction.
Article I was the main count against Judge Hastings, and a vote for conviction on any single count was sufficient to remove him from office.


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Media General Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
142,291,000
181,820,000
Net inc
3,941,000
10,787,000
Share earns
.15
.38
9mo rev
441,469,000
564,385,000
Net inc
21,888,000
38,439,000
Share earns
.84
1.34


Contel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
780,000,000
720,000,000
Net inc
b72,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
.45
.39
Shares outst
159,100,000
157,800,000
9mo rev
2,283,000,000
2,082,000,000
Net inc
b203,000,000
c226,000,000
Share earns
1.27
1.43
Shares outst
159,400,000
157,600,000


Tuesday Morning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tuesday Morning Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,276,888
14,954,860
Net loss
186,367
366,251
9mo sales
54,142,062
45,652,247
Net loss
337,881
951,571


Review/Music; An Irish Mix Of Rock Beat And Folk
LEAD: The Waterboys, an Irish group that mixes folk instrumentation and melodies with the raw power of rock, came to the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night and had the audience dancing in the aisles.
The show, which was sold out, was another reminder of exactly how popular folk-based rock has become over the last five years.


Otto Dohrenwend, 90, Investment Broker
LEAD: Otto E. Dohrenwend, a retired New York investment broker, died Thursday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y., after a long illness.
He was 90 years old.


Omnicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omnicare Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
22,972,000
21,185,000
Net inc
b1,711,000
c769,000
Share earns
.18
.08
9mo sales
69,656,000
62,282,000
Net inc
b3,677,000
c2,577,000
Share earns
.39
.26


Sir Anthony Quayle, British Actor And Theater Director, Dies at 76
LEAD: Sir Anthony Quayle, a versatile actor and director who helped establish Stratford-on-Avon as a major center of British theater, died of cancer yesterday at his home in London.
He was 76 years old.


Vandeweghe Unlikely to Play in Opener
LEAD: Kiki Vandeweghe, the Knicks forward who has a history of back problems and is now suffering from back spasms, will probably not be ready to play when the National Basketball Association's regular season begins on Nov. 3.


Philips Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philips Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
246,070,000
245,059,000
Net inc
11,451,000
13,760,000
Share earns
.40
.48
6mo sales
501,968,000
470,327,000
Net inc
27,029,000
28,773,000
Share earns
.94
1.00


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Thursday explaining how the magnitude of earthquakes is measured and an article yesterday about a Japanese fund for victims of the California earthquake gave incorrect dates for the Great Kanto Earthquake in central Japan.
It occurred in 1923.


Samuel Pulitzer, 84, A Maker of Neckwear
LEAD: Samuel C. Pulitzer, founder and chief executive officer of the Wemco Corporation of New Orleans, one of the world's biggest manufacturers of neckwear, died of cancer yesterday at Touro Infirmary in New Orleans.
He was 84 years old and lived in New Orleans.


Briggs &amp; Statton reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Briggs &amp; Statton (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
167,349,000
170,636,000
Net loss
7,290,000
7,533,000


Pronet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pronet Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,292,000
2,872,000
Net loss
154,000
63,000
9mo rev
9,288,000
7,875,000
Net loss
456,000
b112,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Verdict Dashes a Classic Success Story
LEAD: Until his indictment on charges of bribery and extortion last year, Representative Robert Garcia seemed a classic New York political success story, rising from the streets of the Bronx to prominence in Washington.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about British Airways' withdrawal from a group seeking to buy the UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, misstated the terms in some editions.


East Germany Starts to Calculate Its Loss
LEAD: After months of denying that the flight of thousands of educated, well-trained people is hurting the nation's economy, East Germany appears to be cautiously admitting the cost of the mass migration.


Merchants Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,188,527
2,135,725
Per share
.60
.59
9mo net inc
6,670,424
b6,538,856
Per share
1.83
1.79
b-After an accounting adjustment gain of $963,111, or 26 cents per share.


BI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BI Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,237,000
919,000
Net inc
251,000
b711,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
3,333,000
2,601,000
b-Net loss


Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated-Tomoka Land Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,136,541
9,101,831
Net loss
518,908
b151,235
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
33,155,806
32,891,836
Net inc
395,779
1,804,871
Share earns
.13
.58


Columbia's Passing Game on Target
LEAD: In recent years, much has gone wrong for Columbia's football team between the time a coach chalks an offensive play on a blackboard and the Lions' attempt to execute it in a game.
Somehow, on the field, the plans would splinter as if a stiff wind had blown them off the coach's clipboard.


Victoria Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Victoria Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
507,000
2,353,000
9mo net loss
2,511,000
5,636,000


Letter: On Legal Services; Helping AIDS Patients in Chicago
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adjust Federal Pay to Regional Costs of Living
LEAD: To the Editor:


Changing the Color of Money Won't Stop Corruption
LEAD: To the Editor:


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
9,296,000
15,617,000
Per share
.30
.51
9mo net inc
35,631,000
b49,716,000
Per share
1.15
1.63
b-Included a gain from accounting change of $4,962,000, or 16 cents a share.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chris-Craft Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
62,974,000
58,656,000
Net inc
462,877,000
1,141,000
Share earns
18.74
.04
9mo rev
192,901,000
179,243,000
Net inc
467,599,000
10,343,000
Share earns
19.07
.43


Japanese Designers Offer a Rainbow
LEAD: Japanese designers opened the spring and summer showings here with an unexpected wild blast of color that contributed to the upbeat look.


Hammond Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hammond Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,632,840
6,551,499
Net inc
928,769
553,404
Share earns
.55
.26
6mo rev
11,168,050
11,543,511
Net inc
415,968
310,591
Share earns
.22
.15


Synoptics Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synoptics Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,912,000
13,261,000
Net inc
2,296,000
2,066,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Shares outst
7,501,000
6,850,000
9mo rev
51,743,000
25,460,000
Net inc
6,164,000
3,971,000
Share earns
.83
.66
Shares outst
7,487,000
6,039,000


Moscow Watches East Berlin Change With Deliberate Detachment
LEAD: Western diplomats said today that the Kremlin seems to be watching with reserve and at least a bit of skepticism to see whether Egon Krenz can bring to East Germany the one thing that really matters to Moscow: stability.


SHUTTLE'S MISSION MAY BE EXTENDED
LEAD: With high winds forecast for Monday at their California landing site, the astronauts of the space shuttle Atlantis were instructed tonight to conserve power in case their mission is extended several days.


Quests to Learn the Fate Of Homes After Quake
LEAD: Darryl Yee held up the precious computer list - the ''2 A.M. list,'' it was called; there would be a later one - that reported on the condition of the buildings in the Marina district.


PROFIT SCOREBORAD
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Apple Computer Inc.
$ 161,000,000
+#49.2
Beverly Enterprises
900,000
*-
Contel Corp.
72,000,000
+#16.1
Hercules Inc.
44,100,000
+64.6
Lyondell Petrochemical Co.
73,000,000
-54.4
Marion Laboratories
(100,800,000)
-
Media General Inc.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,581,000
7,362,000
Per share
1.04
.90
Shares outst
8,258,238
8,162,640
9mo net inc
24,830,000
18,997,000
Per share
3.02
2.33
Shares outst
8,234,468
8,146,425


Tultex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tultex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
107,262,000
101,146,000
Net inc
4,013,000
5,581,000
Share earns
.15
.20
Shares outst
27,621,000
27,589,000
9mo sales
211,026,000
203,890,000
Net inc
2,991,000
8,187,000
Share earns
.11
.30
Shares outst
27,615,000
27,572,000


Holiday Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holiday Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
433,465,000
422,128,000
Net inc
39,770,000
b21,035,000
Share earns
1.53
.84
Shares outst
25,959,000
25,035,000
9mo rev
1,209,127,000
1,228,845,000
Net inc
99,097,000
b102,122,000
Share earns
3.86
4.10
Shares outst
25,704,000
24,892,000


TBC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TBC Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
132,208,000
130,296,000
Net inc
4,571,000
4,261,000
Share earns
.46
.40
Shares outst
9,938,000
10,679,000
9mo sales
361,346,000
362,509,000
Net inc
11,950,000
11,546,000
Share earns
1.17
1.08
Shares outst
10,240,000
10,669,000


Home Port Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Port Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
680,000
577,000
Per share
.31
-
9mo net inc
1,984,000
1,424,000
Per share
.92
-
Year-ago per share earnings not available; the company converted to stock form on Aug.


AIDS Program Fails Many, Patients Say
LEAD: Impoverished AIDS sufferers say the program set up by New York City four years ago to help them survive is in disarray, and their caseworkers agree.


Parker Drilling Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Drilling Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,924,000
22,334,000
Net loss
18,331,000
b122,904,000
Share earns
-
3.52
Yr rev
117,589,000
95,273,000
Net loss
42,104,000
b62,614,000
Share earns
-
1.83


Soviets Show Wallenberg's Jail Card
LEAD: After decades of insisting that they had no evidence or documents about the fate of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat arrested by Soviet troops after saving thousands of Jews from the Nazis, the Soviet authorities today showed Mr.
Wallenberg's friends and family the card registering him as a prisoner of war in Lubyanka Prison here.


Giants' Secondary Shows Improvement
LEAD: The Giants' success against the Chargers in San Diego on Sunday may depend on how well the Giants contain Anthony Miller, the Chargers' swift second-year wide receiver.


Arrivederci, Milano
LEAD: Benoit Benjamin, the 7-foot center who rejected a contract offer from the Los Angeles Clippers on Monday and flew to Italy to seek a contract with the Philips Milano team, has turned down the team's offer and returned to the United States to renegotiate with the Clippers. (AP)


First Woburn Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Woburn Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
46,000
992,000
Per share
.01
.26
Shares outst
3,226,774
3,839,328


Reviews/Music; A Bernstein Celebration of Copland
LEAD: For virtually all of Leonard Bernstein's professional career, the works of Aaron Copland have been woven through the texture of his life.
The two friends and composing colleagues have been the warp and weft of American music for so long that they seem to make up one long-wearing fabric.


World Reaching Out To Boy Who Lost Leg
LEAD: Offers of money, toys and even a new home poured in from many parts of the world today for Julio Berumen, the 6-year-old boy who was rescued from the Interstate 880 wreckage only through amputation of much of his right leg.


Dow Up By 4.7% For Week
LEAD: The stock market yesterday completed its best week in 16 months with a mixed performance, although futures-related buying at the close pushed the Dow Jones industrial average to a small gain.


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
833,611,000
803,493,000
Net inc
48,263,000
45,961,000
Share earns
1.38
1.28
9mo sales
2,518,402,000
2,270,004,000
Net inc
143,049,000
129,442,000
Share earns
4.07
3.61


BAY AREA FOCUSES ON COST OF REPAIRS
LEAD: Local, state and Federal officials turned their attention today toward raising the billions of dollars needed to rebuild the Bay Area in the aftermath of the area's most calamitous earthquake in 83 years.


Co-Steel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Co-Steel Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
246,000,000
237,900,000
Net inc
8,800,000
b14,300,000
Share earns
.36
.59
9mo sales
753,000,000
738,400,000
Net inc
36,100,000
b47,100,000
Share earns
1.49
1.95


Colorado National Banchares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado National Banchares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b879,000
2,666,000
Per share
.07
.25
Shares outst
11,012,000
10,823,000
9mo net inc
3,770,000
8,594,000
Per share
.34
.80
Shares outst
10,990,000
10,804,000


Your Money; Sources of Help On Credit Abuse
LEAD: ''Dear Preferred Customer, ...''


Giants Visiting Earthquake Relief Centers
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants had a split-squad workout this morning at Candlestick Park so that half of the team could visit an earthquake relief center downtown as a morale-raising measure.
The other half of the team will do the same on Saturday.


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BTR Realty Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,964,244
5,360,166
Net loss
65,982
85,032
9mo rev
21,232,150
17,842,408
Net inc
325,961
779,300
Share earns
.04
.10


Jets' Latest Tale of Woe: Mackey Is Hurt While Sleeping
LEAD: The Jets, it seems, aren't even safe in their own beds these days.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Oct. 10 about Ira Hirschmann, a business executive involved in anti-Nazi activities, misstated the date of his book ''The Embers Still Burn,'' which criticized United States foreign policy.
It was 1949, not 1939.


When America Failed a Hungarian Patriot
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
26,367,000
b7,416,000
Per share
-
.46
9mo net inc
179,764,000
163,392,000
Per share
-
1.30
b-Net income


Knoll Agrees to Sell Its Color Tile Unit
LEAD: Knoll International Holding, a privately held company based in New York, said it had agreed to sell its Color Tile Inc. unit to Investcorp, an international investment bank, and members of the unit's senior management.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Union Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Planters Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
14,400,000
b7,200,000
Per share
-
.41
9mo net loss
4,700,000
b22,800,000
Per share
-
1.29
b-Net income  The company said latest year earnings included a pre-tax $14.5 million special provision for loan losses; a $7.5 million writeoff of certain intangible assets; and a charge of $1.5 million related to future legal costs associated with on-going litigation.


COMPANY NEWSTexaco Buys Reserves In $476.5 Million Deal
LEAD: Texaco Inc. announced today that it would acquire an oil and gas company, the Tana Production Company of Corpus Christi, Tex., for $476.5 million in cash and stock.


FPL Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPL Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,812,525,000
1,652,789,000
Net inc
158,641,000
174,876,000
Share earns
1.20
1.33
9mo rev
4,708,416,000
4,461,780,000
Net inc
340,267,000
362,078,000
Share earns
2.59
2.76


Brooklyn Man Admits Killing 5-Year-Old Girl
LEAD: A Brooklyn man pleaded guilty yesterday in the death of Jessica Cortez, a 5-year-old girl who was found savagely beaten and sexually assaulted in a Brooklyn apartment last year.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Up
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation announced this week that its third-quarter earnings rose 15.2 percent despite a drop in revenue.
The business information company said it earned $155.3 million, or 83 cents a share, up from $134.8 million, or 72 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1988.
Revenue declined to $1.04 billion, from $1.07 billion a year earlier.


Hopper Soliday Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hopper Soliday Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,200,676
3,345,647
Net loss
362,549
9,924,302
9mo rev
29,768,293
10,862,371
Net inc
14,934
b10,158,845
b-Net loss


Termiflex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Termiflex Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,082,861
1,778,331
Net inc
13,303
63,821
Share earns
.01
.05
Shares outst
1,318,217
1,313,324
The company, which reduced its staff by 20 percent on Aug. 11, said the full effect of that reduction will be reflected in expenses for the second quarter ending Dec.


Police Officer Thrown From Roof Is Buried


Nilsson to Give Master Class
LEAD: Birgit Nilsson is to give a master class in the John C. Borden Auditorium of the Manhattan School of Music (Broadway and 122d Street) on Nov. 12 at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets are $25, with the proceeds going to the scholarship fund established in the Swedish soprano's name to help young voice students at the school.


Homeowners Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeowners Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,090,000
8,785,000
Net inc
1,163,000
999,000
Share earns
.19
.18
Shares outst
6,052,000
5,655,000
9mo rev
29,268,000
22,929,000
Net inc
3,350,000
2,697,000
Share earns
.56
.52
Shares outst
6,005,000
5,193,000


Redefining Comptroller, Council Head
LEAD: While the broad outlines of a new municipal government were the central concern of the New York City Charter Revision Commission, the panel also proposed dozens of small but significant changes in city government.


Concurrent Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concurrent Computer Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
86,991,000
18,722,000
Net loss
b1,627,000
370,000
b-Included purchase accounting related amortization related to merging with Massachusetts Computer Corp.


Tellabs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tellabs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
39,860,000
37,470,000
Net inc
533,000
3,053,000
Share earns
.04
.23
Shares outst
12,603,000
13,022,000
9mo sales
125,502,000
111,795,000
Net inc
5,889,000
9,379,000
Share earns
.47
.72
Shares outst
12,603,000
13,022,000


Wingham Institution for Savngs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wingham Institution for Savngs
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
2,388,000
b218,000
9mo net loss
1,944,000
b283,000
b-Net income  Per share earnings not applicable; bank went public in December 1988.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Formal Wear
LEAD: ''Black tie'' on an invitation sends some people to their closets, others to the stores, but far more to the local Yellow Pages for the names of companies that rent formal wear.
Dozens of advertisements and listings only add to the difficulty of finding the right outfit at the right price for a special occasion.


Giuliani Pulls a Negative TV Ad As Dinkins Broadcasts First One
LEAD: In a change of strategy, the mayoral campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani has pulled its negative television advertisement about his Democratic opponent, David N. Dinkins, off the air.


Stratus Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratus Computer Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
83,693,000
68,863,000
Net inc
8,435,000
7,552,000
Share earns
.40
.37
Shares outst
20,932,000
20,235,000
9mo rev
243,188,000
185,916,000
Net inc
25,192,000
20,146,000
Share earns
1.21
1.00
Shares outst
20,786,000
20,235,000


The No Dealer
LEAD: They say Ronald Reagan has had his phone number unlisted.
Apparently it's a case of a thoroughly fed-up Gipper.
Too many phone calls in the night from George Bush.
Here's a story going around: It's 3:30 in the afternoon.
Reagan is sleeping deeply.
Phone rings. ''Mister President.'' ''I'm not your Mister President anymore.


Joseph I. Levine, Producer, 63
LEAD: Joseph I. Levine, who produced ''J.
B.,'' a play by Archibald MacLeish that won a Pulitzer Prize in 1958, died of stomach cancer Tuesday in the Tarzana Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 63 years old and lived in Sherman Oaks, Calif.


Provident Life &amp; Accicent reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Life &amp; Accicent (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
628,666,000
650,011,000
Net inc
35,453,000
33,325,000
Share earns
.76
.72
9mo rev
1,978,721,000
1,942,995,000
Net inc
96,593,000
48,030,000
Share earns
2.07
1.03
Shares outst
46,690,704
46,690,704


Interleaf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interleaf Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
22,005,000
18,395,000
Net loss
968,000
b123,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
44,429,000
35,446,000
Net loss
843,000
b232,000
Share earns
-
.02
b


Justice Delays Iran-Contra Justice
LEAD: Twice this year, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has intruded in Iran-contra criminal cases to appeal decisions on the use of national secrets as evidence.
Each time, a Federal Court of Appeals has ruled that the independent counsel on Iran-contra matters, Lawrence Walsh, has the unfettered right to represent the Government in court.


Dancing for Graham: Disciple's Story
LEAD: Christine Dakin leans back in her chair, wryly recalling the time she hurried back to ballet class to develop a high battement, or kick, for Martha Graham's pure-dance ''Diversion of Angels.'' The results proved almost too good, soon after in rehearsal. ''I did a battement, hit myself in the head and fell down,'' she said.


Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,742,000
c1,725,000
Share earns
.18
.17
9mo net inc
b4,738,000
c5,688,000
Share earns
.48
.61
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $4,000.


'Dangerous Games' Closing
LEAD: ''Dangerous Games,'' a tango musical conceived, choreographed and directed by Graciela Daniele, will close after this evening's performance at the Nederlander Theater, 208 West 41st Street.
The show will have run for 12 previews and 4 regular performances.


Dispute Over Panel Highlights Difficulty of Disbanding the Contras
LEAD: Days after its first visit to Nicaraguan rebel camps in Honduras, a special international commission established to oversee the dismantling of the rebel army has been plunged into controversy over how far it may go in urging the rebels to disband.


A. Schulman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A. Schulman Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
142,605,000
145,887,000
Net inc
8,668,000
8,229,000
Share earns
.65
.61
Shares outst
13,398,108
13,392,291
Yr sales
626,084,000
598,907,000
Net inc
30,812,000
27,646,000
Share earns
2.30
2.06
Shares outst
13,395,303
13,392,291


Lojack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lojack Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,393,984
1,176,100
Net loss
296,287
b55,526
Share earns
-
.01
Shares oust
11,571,070
10,185,788
6mo rev
2,687,259
2,179,931
Net loss
672,230
b164,570
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
11,098,132
10,150,773


Saundra Bernatovich Wed in Hartford
LEAD: Saundra Lynn Bernatovich, an associate in investment banking at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, and Robert Leo Gulley, an associate in investment banking at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dawson Trenchard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.


New York Area Sales Up a Bit
LEAD: Sales for several of New York's biggest retailers were a bit higher in September than a year earlier, rising by 1.2 percent in the city and 4.2 percent in the metropolitan area, a spot-check has found.


Destec Energy Set To Add PSE Inc.
LEAD: Destec Energy Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Dow Chemical Company, reached a definitive agreement to acquire PSE Inc. for $12.25 a share, or about $115 million.
Destec, based in Houston, said it would start a tender offer by next Thursday for all PSE common shares, conditioned on the receipt of enough shares to give


Copper Plummets as Strike Is Settled at Mine in Canada
LEAD: Copper futures prices plummeted to new lows for the month yesterday as a three-and-a-half-month strike at a large Canadian copper mine ended and Mexico's biggest copper mine reportedly prepared to reopen after a two-month shutdown.





Miller Building Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller Building Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,705,349
11,885,016
Net inc
628,092
630,150
Share earns
.16
.16


Treasury Notes and Bonds Decline
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices eased yesterday in lackluster trading.
Dealers attributed the dull session to the absence of any significant economic or market news and the usual caution that precedes a week in which a large amount of debt is scheduled for sale.


American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
10,308,000
b5,606,000
Per share
-
.72
9mo net inc
3,639,000
23,633,000
Per share
-
3.29
b-Net income  The company said the latest 9 months' per share earnings was a loss after payment of preferred stock dividends.


Teradata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teradata Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
42,979,000
25,494,000
Net inc
b2,419,000
b1,905,000
Share earns
.17
.14
b-Included extraordinary credits of $466,000, or 3 cents a share, and $661,000, or 5 cents a share, representing reduction of income taxes due to net operating loss carryforward, for the latest and yer-ago quarters, respectively.


Hospitals Try to Help Survivors To Adjust
LEAD: Jane Morgan smiled as comfortably as she could with a broken nose, blackened eyes and a new cast on her left leg.


More Than Rivalry at Stake for Alabama and Tennessee
LEAD: A college football team can undergo a radical change in just one year.
At this time last season, the Tennessee Volunteers had lost their first five games and went on to drop their sixth by a 28-20 score at home to Alabama, their longtime rival.


A Pitching Change Dismays 2 Athletics
LEAD: Tony La Russa made his decision, but it did not sit well with either of the two Oakland Athletics pitchers who expected to pitch in the third and fourth games of the World Series against the San Francisco Giants.


Review/Music; Praising Nicaragua in Song
LEAD: Agitprop gets a Caribbean lilt in the songs of Luis Enrique Mejia Godoy, one of Nicaragua's leading pop singers and a self-conscious musical ambassador. ''We didn't come to the United States to create problems, or to destabilize your country,'' he said, jokingly, during his first set on Tuesday at SOB's, in Spanish with a translator on stage.


Ford and Saab Ending Talks
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company and Saab-Scania A.B. said today that they were ending their talks.


Patents; New Method To Cultivate A Mushroom
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company obtained a patent this week on a new method of growing the shiitake mushroom, which is immensely popular in Japan and China and until recently has been usually grown inside oak logs.


THE INNER CITY STOCK TRANSFERS
LEAD:  May 8, 1972: David N. Dinkins buys 50 shares of class A common stock in Inner City Broadcasting Corp. for $5,000, or $100 per share.  1982 and 1983: Mr.
Dinkins acquires 24 more shares at $275 per share.
He receives 10 shares as a dividend.
May 11, 1983: Mr.
Dinkins, in a letter to Governor Cuomo's office, says the asset value of the 84 shares is $1,009,230.60, or $12,014.65 per share.


Texas Instruments Reports 30.6% Decline in Earnings
LEAD: Citing weaker prices for memory chips, Texas Instruments Inc. said today that its net income in the third quarter fell 30.6 percent.


Chicago Exchange Head
LEAD: The chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, Karsten Mahlmann, will seek an unprecedented fourth consecutive term as head of the world's largest commodity futures exchange.
In a three-page letter mailed to Board of Trade members this week, Mr.
Mahlmann said mounting threats to the traditional open-outcry system persuaded him to run for another one-year term.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,538,500,000
1,577,400,000
Net inc
65,000,000
93,700,000
Share earns
.67
1.03
9mo rev
4,663,100,000
4,602,700,000
Net inc
255,800,000
271,000,000
Share earns
2.70
3.01


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankWorcester Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,565,000
b3,042,000
Per share
-
.41
Shares outst
6,833,000
7,344,000
9mo net inc
3,399,000
7,016,000
Per share
.48
.91
Shares outst
7,048,000
7,691,000


Eastern Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
57,552,000
56,220,000
Net loss
1,082,000
1,742,000
9mo rev
173,032,000
163,673,000
Net inc
41,810,000
33,872,000
Share earns
1.80
1.46


Vukota Nets Hat Trick For Islanders
LEAD: Mick Vukota, a fourth-line right wing who had scored a total of three goals in his career, netted three consecutive goals in five minutes for the Islanders tonight as they beat the Washington Capitals, 5-3.


Relief Groups Taking Aid
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.


Infotron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infotron Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,090,000
24,166,000
Net inc
673,000
1,033,000
Share earns
.13
.20
9mo rev
70,675,000
69,635,000
Net inc
2,753,000
2,872,000
Share earns
.53
.55


Dickerson Can't Run And He Can't Hide
LEAD: It has not been a vintage week for Eric Dickerson.
On Sunday, Dickerson, the Indianapolis Colts running back who holds four National Football League rushing records, was held to 35 yards by Denver as the Broncos won, 14-3.
The loss not only broke the Colts' winning streak at three games, but it was also the fourth game in a row that


Bush Urged to Take Lead on Eastern Europe
LEAD: Pressure is increasing on the Bush Administration to show more leadership in helping Poland and Hungary shed their Communist economic systems.


Patents; Synthetic Blood
LEAD: Motivated in part by the danger of transmitting contagious diseases through blood transfusions, as well as by periodic scarcities in supplies, two chemists have patented a synthetic blood.
The blood consists of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells, encapsulated in bubbles that have the consistency of Jell-O.


DINKINS DEFENDS HANDLING OF STOCK HE SOLD TO HIS SON
LEAD: With an accountant by his side, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic candidate for mayor of New York, fielded questions for almost two hours yesterday in an effort to stanch further controversy over the communications-company stock he sold to his son in 1986.


INSIDE
LEAD:  East Berlin and the Exodus


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Buy Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
118,304,000
117,162,000
Net inc
550,000
1,098,000
Share earns
.07
.13
6mo rev
225,464,000
228,942,000
Net loss
697,000
b864,000
Share earns
-
.10


Triad Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triad Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
39,582,000
36,861,000
Net inc
1,315,000
3,324,000
Share earns
.12
.41
Shares outst
11,632,000
9,664,000
Yr rev
138,386,000
127,410,000
Net inc
5,695,000
8,315,000
Share earns
.63
.93
Shares outst
10,318,000
9,619,000


Concert Programs Changed
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic programs at Avery Fisher Hall from Thursday through Oct. 31 have been altered, the orchestra has announced.
On Thursday and Friday evenings at 8, Leonard Bernstein will conduct an all-Tchaikovsky program of ''Romeo and Juliet,'' ''Francesca da Rimini'' and the Symphony No.


Palfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Palfed Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
790,000
705,000
Per share
.59
.53
9mo net inc
1,666,000
1,944,000
Per share
1.24
1.45


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelly Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
44,730,000
40,898,000
Net loss
1,347,000
b963,000
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income


Ojeda Comes Through
LEAD: Bob Ojeda of the Mets visited the Tule River Indian reservation in Porterville, Calif., yesterday to check on progress of a home for displaced Indian children.
Ojeda, who lives in nearby Visalia, has helped raise more than $30,000 in two months for the project. ''Sometimes people say things and never produce, but Bobby Ojeda is a man of his word,'' said Joe Carrillo, head of the Tule Indians Youth Council.(


Roger Mynors, Classical Scholar, 86
LEAD: Sir Roger Mynors, one of Britain's leading classical scholars, was killed in a car crash on Tuesday.
He was 86 years old.


Hastings Ousted As Senate Vote Convicts Judge
LEAD: In a solemn two-hour proceeding, the Senate today removed Federal District Judge Alcee L. Hastings from the bench by convicting him of eight impeachment articles, including one charging that he had conspired to obtain a $150,000 bribe.


Experts Ask if Anti-Quake Steps Contributed to Highway Collapse
LEAD: Pointed questions were raised today about whether a weakness in joints supporting Oakland's Nimitz Freeway contributed to its collapse in the earthquake Tuesday and whether the state's program of strengthening highways and bridges made the failure more serious.


Changing the Color of Money Won't Stop Corruption; Anti-Laundering Effort
LEAD: To the Editor:


Parallel Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parallel Petroleum (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
236,917
142,534
Net inc
37,334
b21,839
9mo rev
623,528
456,308
Net inc
98,613
b11,345
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


2 Accused in Artillery Mishap
LEAD: The Army has charged two gunners with negligent homicide and dereliction of duty in the case of an artillery round that strayed from its target area onto a rifle range here last month, killing three other soldiers and injuring 24.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
114,952,000
113,146,000
Net inc
39,216,000
19,373,000
Share earns
1.31
.62
9mo rev
344,736,000
340,524,000
Net inc
73,427,000
52,786,000
Share earns
2.41
1.69


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carlisle Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
136,504,000
144,058,000
Net inc
5,006,000
6,431,000
Share earns
.62
.80
9mo sales
421,306,000
426,269,000
Net inc
b22,275,000
c18,716,000
Share earns
2.76
2.32


Soviet Citizens Protest Nuclear Tests


Baker (Michael) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker (Michael) Corp.(A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,596,390
22,300,108
Net inc
727,596
452,019
Share earns
.29
.25
Shares outst
2,532,994
1,793,214
9mo rev
75,760,566
64,382,959
Net inc
1,442,824
1,024,608
Share earns
.71
.57
Shares outst
2,039,808
1,793,214


Vulcan Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Materials (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
307,237,000
298,584,000
Net inc
50,473,000
49,369,000
Share earns
1.25
1.19
Shares outst
40,297,000
41,229,000
9mo sales
818,464,000
785,740,000
Net inc
b111,203,000
110,930,000
Share earns
2.74
2.68
Shares outst
40,576,000
41,319,000


Scientific NRG reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific NRG
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
254,098
186,952
Net inc
10,059
b71,193
b-Net loss


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winnebago Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Revenue
89,528,000
95,377,000
Net loss
11,276,000
1,494,000
Shares outst
24,699,000
24,651,000
Yr rev
437,500,000
430,266,000
Net loss
4,675,000
b2,726,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
24,695,000
24,724,000


Intermark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermark Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
190,934,000
180,744,000
Net loss
5,859,000
590,000
6mo rev
399,607,000
376,130,000
Net loss
5,589,000
b214,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


HOMELESS IN CHINA BRAVE COLD WINDS
LEAD: Thousands of peasants whose homes were destroyed by earthquakes prepared today to spend a second night outdoors on the windy northern Chinese plain.


Books of The Times; Young and Slangy Mix Of the U.S. and Japan
LEAD:  A Wild Sheep Chase  By Haruki Murakami  Translated by Alfred Birnbaum. 299 pages.
Kodansha International. $18.95.


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
712,371,000
665,628,000
Net inc
138,259,000
b7,820,000
Share earns
1.62
-
9mo rev
1,874,384,000
1,712,043,000
Net inc
314,987,000
153,090,000
Share earns
3.62
1.59


Continuum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuum Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,339,000
16,455,000
Net inc
634,000
440,000
Share earns
.15
.10
6mo rev
36,648,000
33,293,000
Net inc
337,000
1,085,000
Share earns
.08
.25


Telematics International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telematics International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,977,000
25,633,000
Net inc
499,000
2,653,000
Share earns
.03
.16
9mo sales
43,300,000
40,633,000
Net loss
6,800,000
b5,615,000
Share earns
-
.33


Convex Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convex Computer (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,237,000
27,541,000
Net inc
3,075,000
1,648,000
Share earns
.16
.09
Shares outst
19,026,000
18,033,000
6mo rev
111,940,000
74,822,000
Net inc
7,742,000
b3,897,000
Share earns
.41
.22
Shares outst
18,803,000
18,005,000


First Interstate Expects a Loss
LEAD: The First Interstate Bancorp said today that it expected to report a third-quarter loss of about $16 million after taking a $200 million write-off and setting aside $150 million to cover loan losses at its Arizona bank.


Cenvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvest Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,517,000
c1,324,000
Share earns
-
.37
9mo net inc
603,000
2,915,000
Share earns
.15
.81
b-After a net provision of about $2 million to loan loss reserves.
The pretax reserve amounted to $3,591,000.


Ovonic Imaging Systems reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ovonic Imaging Systems
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,673,000
2,859,000
Net loss
2,190,000
9,495,000


Hopi Priest Claims Mask At Pier Show Was Stolen
LEAD: An 82-year-old Hopi Indian high priest, who believed the rain that was drenching disgruntled New Yorkers was a good omen, walked into an antiques show on a Manhattan pier on Thursday and identified a 150-year-old sacred tribal mask as stolen from the tribe's reservation in Arizona.


Sanders Is Injured
LEAD: Jeff Sanders, a 6-foot-9-inch forward from Georgia Southern who was one of three Chicago Bulls first-round draft choices in June, has suffered a stress fracture in his right foot and is expected to be out for six to eight weeks. (AP)


Control of Arby's By Posner Fought
LEAD: Restaurant franchisees of Arby's Inc., a unit of DWG, said they overwhelmingly opposed continued control of Arby's by Victor Posner, who owns a controlling interest in DWG.
The franchisees said they had agreed at a special meeting here to raise $1.5 million to support a new group headed by Leonard Roberts, who was recently dismissed by Mr.


Wollman Rink Opening Is Dampened by Downpour


Sei Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sei Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,157,000
33,155,000
Net inc
3,100,000
3,155,000
Share earns
.27
.25
Shares outst
11,535,000
12,754,000
9mo rev
107,238,000
98,754,000
Net inc
9,323,000
10,089,000
Share earns
.80
.79
Shares outst
11,631,000
12,735,000


Lyondell Petrochemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyondell Petrochemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,275,000,000
1,184,000,000
Net inc
73,000,000
160,000,000
Share earns
.91
-
9mo rev
4,029,000,000
3,568,000,000
Net inc
310,000,000
386,000,000
Share earns
3.87
-


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldor Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,087,000
60,319,000
Net inc
3,237,000
2,765,000
Share earns
.33
.29
Shares outst
9,759,439
9,574,713
9mo sales
210,360,000
178,461,000
Net inc
9,653,000
7,724,000
Share earns
1.00
.81
Shares outst
9,693,151
9,546,315


Beverly Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
533,722,000
516,353,000
Net inc
929,000
b11,484,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
58,914,000
53,597,000
9mo rev
1,568,407,000
1,514,586,000
Net loss
106,371,000
12,325,000
Shares outst
53,603,000
53,596,000


Sick Get Experimental Drugs Free
LEAD: Under pressure from consumer groups, a growing number of major pharmaceutical manufacturers are giving away experimental drugs that have not received final Government approval to thousands of AIDS patients and people being treated for other life-threatening diseases.


Gorman-Rupp Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gorman-Rupp Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
28,166,000
20,213,000
Net inc
1,726,000
2,120,000
Share earns
.45
.55
9mo sales
86,564,000
60,144,000
Net inc
5,986,000
6,589,000
Share earns
1.57
1.70


Universal Health Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Realty (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,726,000
3,911,000
Net inc
1,958,000
2,057,000
Share earns
.28
.29
Shares outst
7,047,000
7,193,000
9mo rev
13,432,000
11,333,000
Net inc
6,257,000
6,271,000
Share earns
.89
.87
Shares outst
7,048,000
7,246,000


United Carolina Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Carolina Bancshares Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,133,000
6,115,000
Per share
.44
.44
9mo net inc
18,337,000
17,075,000
Per share
1.32
1.23


Communists Warning Warsaw Over Change
LEAD: The Communist Party warned the Solidarity-led Government today that it lacked a popular mandate for its sweeping plans to switch Poland to a free-market economy.


Life Isn't Always a Cabaret
LEAD: It was only two weeks before the Oct. 3 opening night of his cabaret act at the Ballroom in Manhattan that Jeff Harnar left his job as a singing waiter in Mrs.
J's Sacred Cow, a restaurant on the Upper West Side.


National Education reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Education (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
94,211,000
108,950,000
Net loss
6,525,000
b12,992,000
Share earns
-
.44
9mo rev
290,317,000
313,092,000
Net loss
1,016,000
b27,052,000
Share earns
-
.93


Mitchell Says He's Doubtful Of Cut in Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: The majority leader, George J. Mitchell, said today that he did not expect the Senate to approve any cut in the capital gains tax this year, and he sharply criticized President Bush for devoting so much effort and attention to achieving it.


NESB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NESB Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b29,077,000
c3,414,000
Per share
-
.44
9mo net loss
b33,401,000
c8,183,000
Per share
-
1.06
b-Included writeoff of $23.5 million in intangible goodwill resulting from the 1988 acquisition of the now-troubled Omnibank as a non-recurring charge and a special provision of $13 million for possible loan losses.


Changes Are Urged
LEAD: Saying that the controversy surrounding the University of Florida athletic program had hurt the state's educational system, Charles Reed, chancellor of the state university system, said yesterday that state schools might have to curtail their sports programs.


Durr-Fillauer Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durr-Fillauer Medical (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
171,985,000
148,316,000
Net inc
3,846,000
3,361,000
Share earns
.38
.45
Shares outst
10,166,000
7,552,000
9mo rev
517,206,000
430,720,000
Net inc
10,080,000
b2,853,000
Share earns
1.08
.38
Shares outst
9,308,000
7,516,000


Why I Can't Quit the Bay Area
LEAD: The big mirror in the living room crashed into a million pieces, sending minuscule shards all over couches, chairs and rugs, but I barely pay it any mind.


Stop, Think and Saw
LEAD: It's time to cut that wood you set aside to dry last spring down to fireplace size, and if you are going to use a chain saw, stop, think and plan.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerbank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b7,930,000
c2,387,000
Per share
-
.20
9mo net loss
1,654,000
c8,978,000
Per share
-
.74
b-Reflected a $10 million provision to loan loss reserves, resulting from the uncertainties of the New England real estate climate, and in recognition of regulatory concerns created by that climate.


Patents; Using Bacteria to Extend Life of Fresh Vegetables
LEAD: The bacteria used to make cheese may soon be used to extend the life of refrigerated fresh vegetables.


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
122,239,000
121,363,000
Net inc
3,319,000
5,194,000
Share earns
.53
.85
Shares outst
5,880,624
5,468,245
9mo sales
385,094,000
377,293,000
Net inc
12,883,000
14,809,000
Share earns
2.07
2.43
Shares outst
5,623,048
5,438,976


Retailing Deals Persist Despite Recent Turmoil
LEAD: Despite predictions that takeovers are on the wane, three significant merger proposals, totaling $1.3 billion, appeared this week in retailing and related fields and more are expected in the weeks ahead.


Nippon Insurance
LEAD: Nippon Life Insurance, Japan's largest life insurer, said it had agreed to buy an 80 percent stake in the Paine Webber Building on Avenue of the Americas in midtown Manhattan for $550 million.
The Equitable Life Assurance Society will hold the other 20 percent and continue to manage the 38-story building, a Nippon Life spokesman said.


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,442,000
1,257,000
Per share
.44
.43
9mo net inc
3,887,000
2,017,000
Per share
1.22
.69


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
193,103,000
170,446,000
Net inc
b1,269,000
8,053,000
Share earns
.04
.23
Shares outst
34,883,349
34,902,634
b-After an extraordinary charge of $3,924,000 which stemmed from a loss resulting from an order by the Federal Trade Commission that Flowers divest itself of certain operating facilities.


The Return Of the Crack Of the Bat
LEAD: There was some laughter, there were some jokes, there was a baseball game.
On the ball field by the Bay, there was again the sound of the crack of the bat - silenced for two days - and in the empty upper deck, a jackhammer was echoing and yammering.


POLAND'S PREMIER, IN ROME, SEEKS AID
LEAD: On his first trip abroad since taking office in August, Poland's Prime Minister made an urgent appeal today to Western governments to help his country deal with shortages of food and other supplies before winter.


To Arbitrager, UAL Is 50,000 Shares of Woe
LEAD: As she rode to work yesterday morning on the Long Island Rail Road, Sharon J. Kalin, an arbitrager with a 50,000-share position in the UAL Corporation, glanced over the shoulder of a commuter who was reading a newspaper. ''My heart sank,'' she recalled, when she saw an article saying that British Airways P.L.C.


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.


Reagan Urges Japan to Look Past Its Success
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan began a nine-day visit today by offering a gentle nudge to Japan to open its markets to more imports and take greater responsibility for foreign assistance to the poor countries of the world.


First Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,258,000
b3,393,000
Per share
.57
.58
9mo net inc
12,807,000
b11,612,000
Per share
2.23
2.13
b-Included tax credits of $408,000, or 5 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,674,000, or 67 cents a share, for the 9 months.


About New York; Women Given Cruelest Choice Now Fight Back
LEAD: New York City's jail population has an excellent chance of rising above 20,000 for the first time early next week, if rain doesn't slow the pace of arrests.
The number of people crowded into city cells has more than doubled over the last five years, making Rikers Island the world's largest penal colony behind one fence outside of the Soviet Union and South


Commerce Clearing House reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Clearing House (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
136,808,000
129,930,000
Net loss
b2,534,000
c3,417,000
Share earns
-
.19
9mo rev
523,583,000
467,857,000
Net inc
b39,190,000
47,883,000
Share earns
2.18
2.66


Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
29,127,616
26,412,057
Net inc
1,131,134
1,002,815
Share earns
.29
.24
Shares outst
3,917,961
4,141,500


Taiwan Draws Investors
LEAD: New securities firms and investors are continuing to enter Taiwan's vibrant stock market, the country's Securities and Exchange Comission said today.
The commission said Taiwan, with 20 million people, would have 4 million stock investor accounts by the end of 1989, against 3.7 million now and 700,000 in May 1988.


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
1,383,747,000
1,168,719,000
Net inc
b161,080,000
107,919,000
Share earns
1.24
.84
Shares outst
129,910,000
127,920,000
Yr sales
5,284,013,000
4,071,373,000
Net inc
b454,033,000
400,258,000
Share earns
3.53
3.08
Shares outst
128,669,000
129,900,000


Patents; Sewage Sludge Used To Make Bricks and Tile
LEAD: The Fujimi Tile Company of Nagoya, Japan, has patented a method for making ceramic bricks and tile out of sewage sludge.
The process begins by burning the sludge into ash and then mixing the ash with ceramic raw materials, including debris from making conventional tiles, to form a clay that can be molded and baked.


Nature's Sunshine Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nature's Sunshine Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,800,000
11,200,000
Net inc
1,064,000
772,000
Share earns
.21
.14
9mo rev
37,900,000
32,700,000
Net inc
3,096,000
2,362,000
Share earns
.60
.46


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyfus Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
68,939,000
64,308,000
Net inc
20,902,000
21,247,000
Share earns
.52
.52
Shares outst
40,568,000
41,225,000
9mo rev
204,039,000
203,253,000
Net inc
62,647,000
b71,067,000
Share earns
1.54
1.72
Shares outst
40,796,000
41,231,000


Selling or Advising? Dispute Settled On Tobacco Ads
LEAD: Can corporate editorial-style advertisements be covers for product pitches?
The Federal Trade Commission seems to think so.


Burmese Moving to Curb Dissidents in Vote
LEAD: Burmese military leaders announced measures today that could bar detained opposition leaders from taking part in the general election scheduled for next year.


Taiwan-China Trade
LEAD: Political turmoil in China slowed the growth in trade between Taiwan and the mainland in August, the Board of Foreign Trade said today.
Official figures showed two-way trade was $298 million in August, compared with $300 million in July and $243 million a year earlier.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 16.


Jackie Mason Is The Opposite of Bigoted
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about ''Heroic Landscape VII (Evening),'' a landscape by Jeff Joyce, misidentified the gallery where it is being shown.
It is at the Elizabeth McDonald Gallery, not the Barbara Fendrick Gallery.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.68
8.68
8.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.56
7.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.57
7.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.97
7.94
8.70
30-YR.


Giants Visit San Francisco Shelters


A Busy Sutter Outdoes the Devils
LEAD: The Devils kept the Vancouver Canucks' Soviet tandem of Vladimir Krutov and Igor Larionov at bay tonight, but they were not so successful with Rich Sutter.


Colonial Bancgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Bancgroup (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
778,000
2,124,000
Per share
.12
.33
9mo net inc
4,027,205
5,946,154
Per share
.62
.92


After 20 Years, Philippine Insurgency Falters
LEAD: After 20 years, the largest indigenous Communist insurgency in Southeast Asia has stalled because of factionalism, purges, declining campus recruitment and the capture of some important leaders, diplomats and Philippine officials say.


Peoples Westchester Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Westchester Savings (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,482,000
3,168,000
Per share
.29
.62
Shares outst
5,056,466
5,054,966
9mo net inc
7,014,000
b9,012,000
Per share
1.38
1.78
Shares outst
5,056,182
5,054,966


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Slocan Forest
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
49,700,000
43,300,000
Net inc
3,300,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.61
.53
9mo sales
147,400,000
139,500,000
Net inc
9,100,000
9,800,000
Share earns
1.70
1.83


A Double Whammy for the Insurers
LEAD: Insurance companies operate in the shadow of the ''big ones.'' These are the brutal storms and earthquakes that strike every so often, crippling cities and forcing insurers to write out bundles of checks.
In their planning, insurance company executives expect a big one to occur at worst about once every three to five years.


Alabama Derails Tennessee
LEAD: Gary Hollingsworth, who started this season as Alabama's backup quarterback, and Siran Stacy, a tailback who played junior college football last year, ripped Tennessee's defense apart today in a Southeastern Conference battle of previously unbeaten teams.


TRIMMING SCHOOL COSTS: READERS RESPOND; Education Costs: Well Worth the Price
LEAD: Re ''Trim the Fat From High Cost of Education'' (Opinion, Sept. 24): I am outraged.
I am a New York City schoolteacher, born and bred in Merrick.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: CRITICS' CHOICES
LEAD:  Roger Rabbit's Straight Man, and Then Some


Protesters Block the Doors Of an Abortion Clinic on L.I.
LEAD: About 150 anti-abortion protesters sealed off the doors of an abortion clinic here today, chaining themselves together to block more than a dozen women from getting in, officials said.


Tenderized, 'Cured' Meats With Marinade
LEAD: MARINATING accomplishes many purposes.
It is an excellent method of providing flavor.
It also tenderizes and even cures foods, pickling or ''cooking'' them in acid.
How long a food is left in a marinade depends on what the final product should be as well as the character of the main ingredient.
The following recipes illustrate these points.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


Tenderized, 'Cured' Meats With Marinade
LEAD: MARINATING accomplishes many purposes.
It is an excellent method of providing flavor.
It also tenderizes and even cures foods, pickling or ''cooking'' them in acid.
How long a food is left in a marinade depends on what the final product should be as well as the character of the main ingredient.
The following recipes illustrate these points.


WEDDING CHAOS
LEAD:  ONCE UPON A TIME ON THE BANKS  By Cathie Pelletier.  368 pp.
New York:  Viking. $19.95.


POSTINGS: Project Conference; Bronx Prospects
LEAD: Anyone interested in learning more about three major Bronx development proposals may attend ''The Bronx Is Up!
Accomplishments and Future Projects,'' a half-day conference on Thursday from 8:30 A.M. to 1 P.M. sponsored by the New York City Department of City Planning.
The session will be held at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse at 165th


Change in Certifying Nursery Teachers
LEAD: In the Sept. 3 article discussing Gov.
Thomas H. Kean's impact on New Jersey's schools, it is suggested that there may be flaws in his claim to be the ''education Governor.'' An action taken only three days later by the State Board of Education weakens the Governor's claim further.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Danbury, Conn.  $150,000  22 Barnum Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; brick fireplace, walk-out basement, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,640.
Darien, Conn.  $1,125,000  64 St.
Nicholas Road  8-bedroom, 5-bath, 19-year-old garrison colonial; pool, 3-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $7,431.


Charity Agrees to Dissolve After Yearlong Investigation
LEAD: The Creo Society, a producer of opulent charity balls for socially prominent New Yorkers, has agreed to close after a yearlong investigation by the State Attorney General's office into the group's fund-raising.


Pearl Izenzon, Founder Of Support Group, 48
LEAD: Dr.
Pearl (Perry) Izenzon, the co-founder and executive director of the Potsmokers Anonymous drug-rehabilitation program, died of cancer Friday night at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 48 years old and lived on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.


4 Are Acquitted in the Sale of Faulty Pacemakers
LEAD: Four former officials of the Cordis Corporation, a medical equipment manufacturer, have been acquitted of conspiracy and related charges in the sale of hundreds of defective heart pacemakers.


Backup Leads Hofstra
LEAD: Andy Ryan, filling in at quarterback for the injured Rhory Moss, ran 4 yards for a touchdown and completed 9 of 16 passes for 150 yards as Hofstra defeated Merchant Marine Academy, 15-8, yesterday at Hofstra Stadium in Hempstead, L.I.


A Forum Sees Hope for a Resurgence of Jewish Culture in the Soviet Union


Decoration in a Lavish Style
LEAD: Landscapes, Greek gods or exotic Indian flowers - penned in black on white, white on black or brown on gold - cover virtually every inch of the surfaces of 87 chests, tables, game trays and boxes exhibited at Hyde Park Antiques, 836 Broadway (at 13th Street).


MEGADEALERS: DOES SIZE MEAN POWER
LEAD: To capitalize on the downturn, some dealers have shifted into an acquisition mode.
The DiFeos, for one, now have 35 franchises mainly in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
And the family, which now sells all but 6 of the 40 makes on the market in this country, hopes to buy five more franchises in the next year.


Role of Sectarian Institutions in Child Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Belmar  $105,000  217 19th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, screened porch, h/w floors; taxes $1,674.
Brick Township  $114,900  136 Ashwood Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 9-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, full basement, eat-in kitchen; taxes $1,406.


Missed Base Hurt Mathewson
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Syria Said to Agree to Relocate Some Beirut Troops
LEAD: Syria has agreed to relocate some of its troops in Beirut, a development that may move Lebanese lawmakers closer to agreeing on a peace plan for their country, people attending the peace conference here said today.


Private Carriers vs. the Post Office
LEAD: Last summer, about 5,000 Atlanta subscribers to Time, Sports Illustrated, People and other Time Warner publications found their magazines in unexpected places: not in their mailboxes, but sealed in waterproof plastic bags under their boxes and on their doorsteps.


Correction
LEAD: The bottom picture caption on page 46 today, with an article about fashion industry reaction to the book ''Chic Savages,'' misidentifies the woman shown.
She is the designer Mary McFadden, not Anna Wintour, who is pictured above.


Story With a Moral, And a Twist From Time
LEAD: I DON'T remember how we got on the subject, but on a recent shopping trip to Mount Kisco I was prompted to tell my wife the story of ''Masha and Sasha.'' It's something I read in a book when I was a very little boy, and it stuck with me ever since.
It seemed like such a valuable lesson to learn and to live by.


Mr. Dinkins's Self-Inflicted Wounds
LEAD: When he finally got around to answering a complex set of allegations about his personal finances, David Dinkins did it with poise and patience.
The New York Democratic mayoral nominee fielded questions for nearly two hours Friday, trying to explain why he sold stock to his son for $58,000 two and a half years after he valued the same stock at more than $1 million.


Feisty Devils Win, 5-4
LEAD: Feistiness and persistence characterized the play of the Devils tonight against the Canadiens as New Jersey ended an eight-game streak without a victory at the Forum.


In Bronx, Bitterness On Garcia
LEAD: Few constituents in Robert Garcia's South Bronx district said yesterday that they understood all the facts behind his extortion and conspiracy conviction, but several were certain of two things - Mr.
Garcia had let them down and had hurt the prospects of other Hispanic people seeking public office.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; Spain and Italy Marry Happily
LEAD: Some of the most popular restaurants in this country carry names likes and Chinois, signaling the combinations of French and Asian foods they serve.
So why should anyone raise an eyebrow if an American chef decides to combine the best of an Italian cooking technique with a deservedly popular Spanish recipe?


TRIMMING SCHOOL COSTS: READERS RESPOND; The 'Good Old Days' May Rest in Peace
LEAD: I have spent the last 33 years with the Huntington School District.
When I began in 1956, we had one superintendent and an assistant superintendent.
There were no therapists or teachers for the blind.
We did have three classes for the ''retarded.'' Classes for the learning disabled, emotionally disturbed and handicapped were unknown.


2-Point Goal a First
LEAD: Trivia buffs take note: The first 2-point goal in the history of lacrosse was scored yesterday by Greg Kelly, a Johns Hopkins midfielder from Northport, L.I., in a game against Loyola College of Baltimore in a four-team tournament at the University of Maryland Baltimore County branch in Catonsville,


Film Maker Wed To Miss Gunther
LEAD: The marriage of Catherine Lloyd Gunther, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Gunther of San Francisco, to Richard Sazerac Saunders Dallett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Dallett of Taconic, Conn., took place yesterday at Calvary Episcopal Church in Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Philip Devens performed the ceremony.


FRANKENSTEIN SINGSGhouls' Gallery
LEAD: To the Editor:


Long Island Journal
LEAD:  Bivalve Gluttony


GOODNIGHT, MRS. MADRIGAL
LEAD:  SURE OF YOU  By Armistead Maupin.  262 pp. New York:  Harper &amp; Row.


David Hare Captures His Muse on Stage
LEAD: WHen the British playwright David Hare sat down to write ''The Secret Rapture,'' a strong and striking image came into his head.
It was of a youngish woman sitting quietly in the dark beside the bed in which her father lay dead.
He wasn't altogether sure what she'd do or where she'd go, but he knew at once who would, who must embody the character in the theater: the actress Blair Brown.


Bereavement
LEAD: To the Editor: In April 1986 my daughter died suddenly - I was informed in the evening.
The first flight to Los Angeles was an American Airlines flight at 9 A.M.
I had logged hundreds of thousands of miles on American but was confronted with a bill of over $900 out and back.
Even though I asked for some relief, their answer was ''Sorry.


CAMPUS LIFE: University of Wisconsin; Student's Death Quickly Followed By Counseling
LEAD: Amid grief over the unexplained death of a freshman early on Oct. 15 at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, students and administrators are lauding the efforts of a crisis-response team in helping dormitory residents cope with the incident.


Elizabeth Greene Weds P. A. Wiley
LEAD: The First Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Elizabeth Davis Greene, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Davis Greene Jr. of Philadelphia, and Peter Alexander Wiley, a son of Welles Wiley of Seattle and the late Cathryn Wiley.
The Rev.
Peter Sime officiated.


Smaller Solar
LEAD: To the Editor:


Does Ideology Stop at the Laboratory Door? A Debate on Science and the Real World
LEAD: AS we move toward the final decade of the 20th century, perhaps it is natural for some of society's intellectuals to become seized with a sense of millenarianism, declaring that life as we know it is about to end.
First it was ''The End of History?'' Francis Fukuyama's essay about the triumph of capitalism and Western liberal democracy, which was published in The National Interest earlier this year.


Gutter Cleaning and Repair
LEAD: CLEANING and repairing gutters is best done in the spring and fall, but if you can find time to do this job only once a year, fall gutter maintenance is the more important.


Rooney Out of It
LEAD: With the National Football League owners divided on a choice for a new commissioner, a compromise candidate emerged last week -and promptly shot down his own trial balloon.
Asked on Friday to assess his chances of becoming commissioner, Dan Rooney, the 57-year-old president of the Pittsburgh Steelers, replied: ''Slim and none.


Feminist Version
LEAD: To the Editor:


William Bullis 2d, Medical Student, Weds Miss Gano
LEAD: Jennifer Lauren Gano and William John Bullis 2d, graduates of Georgetown University in Washington, were married there yesterday in the Dahlgren Chapel by the Rev.
James P. M. Walsh, a Roman Catholic priest.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Roger Gano of Harrison, N.Y., and Mr. and Mrs.


Fostering Concern for the Environment


Lower Levels of Ozone Reported This Summer
LEAD: OZONE pollution declined sharply in 1989 over 1988, during a decade of decreasing ozone pollution that state environmental officials attribute to tougher air-quality requirements.


SPEAKING THE PRINCE'S ENGLISH
LEAD: It is fitting that a tenured English professor should agree with a king-to-be's conservative theories of architecture and grammar (''Speaking the Prince's English,'' by Malcolm Bradbury, Sept. 24).
After all, it is upon just such time-worn constructions that their livelihoods rely.
Both Mr.
Bradbury and Prince


Cruising for Burgers on the Champs Elysees
LEAD:  TRAVELS WITH ALICE  By Calvin Trillin.  195 pp.
New York:  Ticknor &amp; Fields. $18.95.


Steven Freeman Weds Ms. Printz
LEAD: Elizabeth A. Printz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Printz of New York and Hillsdale, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday evening to Steven M. Freeman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Freeman of Sergeant Bluffs, Iowa.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Roy Rosenberg and the Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Hotel


The Disorder of Dismantling Apartheid
LEAD: SOUTH AFRICA'S new President, F. W. de Klerk, has been trying to buy time and good will for his promised program of evolutionary changes, but in some ways his efforts are only creating new problems.
With each piecemeal gesture toward conciliation, new contradictions have been cropping up in the enforcement of laws that perpetuate white minority rule.


A Return to The Past in Austria's Alps
LEAD: NOT many visitors to Salzburg realize that just a short drive south of the city, in Austria's Hohe Tauern national park, a unique project is underway.
The Austrian Government has set aside a section of the park - dubbed Tauriska, after the region's ancient Celtic name - for an experiment in small-scale economic development.


State Museum Returns Wampum Belts to Onondaga Nation


Q and A
LEAD:  London


Illinois Edges Michigan State
LEAD: Jeff George threw a 9-yard scoring pass to Mike Bellamy with a little more than a minute to play today to give Illinois a 14-10 Big Ten Conference victory over Michigan State.


A Walk Into the Past and Future
LEAD: I WALK every morning, a habit I acquired after the death of my father.
He followed his daily schedule of walking until the day he died - I remember him going out even during the bombing of Seoul.
I also do it because my doctor told me when I was in for my checkup that my cholesterol level is in the high-risk range.


Review/Theater; Vietnam Veterans Ensemble in 'The Ambassador'
LEAD: In his plays, Slawomir Mrozek mixes art and polemics.
Sometimes, as in ''Tango'' and ''Emigres,'' his sense of theater is as strong as his political awareness.
This is not the case with ''The Ambassador,'' receiving its United States premiere at the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company.
With politics taking precedence, the narrative becomes a thin thread on which to hang the author's inquiry into the nature of dissidence and diplomacy during a time of subversion.


TOUGH TIMES FOR MR. LEVITTOWN
LEAD: Michael Kaufman's article brought back distant memories.
From 1950 (my freshman year at Hofstra College) until 1955 (when I received a master's degree in history there), most of my spare waking moments were spent delivering telegrams to many of those 17,311 houses in Levittown, L.I.


Miss Pond Weds R. G. Hubbard 2d
LEAD: Constance Sue Pond, the president of Charter Service of America, an aircraft charter company in Nashua, N.H., and Robert Glenn Hubbard 2d, a professor of economics and finance at the Columbia University Graduate School of Business, were married in Boston yesterday.
The Unitarian-Universalist ceremony was performed at the First and Second Church in Boston by the Rev.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner; Ethnic Variety Uptown And a Chinatown Spot
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Amsterdam's


More Than 50 Burn to Death In a 2-Bus Accident in Sudan
LEAD: A bus veered into a high-voltage power pole and caught fire after colliding with another bus on Friday, and more than 50 people burned to death, the authorities said today.


Bereavement
LEAD: To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article on bereavement fares (Practical Traveler, Sept. 10) was especially timely.
I had to attend a funeral on Labor Day.
After the news of the death on Saturday evening, I telephoned USAir and requested a bereavement fare for a flight the next morning.
The reservations clerk was extremely helpful and said that USAir offered a special fare of $360.


FASHION: On the Street; Queen of the Jungle: The Look of the Cat
LEAD: One of the most appealing looks of the year is one of the simplest: a two-piece ensemble - black stretch tights and a black one-piece cat suit - that creates a stark, sleek silhouette.
The tights and cat suits are blends of synthetic stretch fibers, cotton and wool.
They fit snugly, enhancing and seeming to extend the figure.


Annette Radoslovich Weds Peter Francis Corbin
LEAD: Annette Domenica Radoslovich, an assistant vice president with the Bankers Trust Company, and Peter Francis Corbin, an assistant controller and stategic planner with the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, both in New York, were married yesterday in Fairview, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward L. Glynn performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large kitchen with 25-year-old cabinets covered with a brown matte-finish plastic laminate.
We would like to paint these cabinets white.
How can we make paint stick to this laminate?


Needlework Stories Tell of Chilean Life
LEAD: THE collection of 71 Chilean arpilleras owned by the William Benton Museum of Art of the University of Connecticut is seldom on display at the red-brick institution on the campus in Storrs.
The bright primitive wall hangings depicting particular events and the hardships of daily life under the Pinochet regime were acquired two years ago to be used as educational tools.


Ann Getty: Publish and Perish?
LEAD: THE PARTNERSHIP OF Ann Getty and George Weidenfeld -fabulous wealth wed to expansive ambition - should have been the perfect match.
He is among Britain's most visible publishers, founder and chairman of Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Ltd.
She is bankrolled by her husband, Gordon, son of the oil tycoon J. Paul Getty.


Nynex Ordered to Reinstate Medical Aid to Striking Workers
LEAD: A Federal District Court Judge late Friday temporarily restrained the Nynex Corporation from withholding medical benefits from striking employees.


Leigh Fludd Wed To Peter H. Smith
LEAD: Lisa M. Fludd and Peter H. Smith were married yesterday by Robert J. Walsh Jr., a justice of the peace, at the Silvermine Tavern in Norwalk, Conn.
The bride, 24 years old, is the daughter of Victoria S. Jimpson-Fludd of New York and Michael G. Fludd of Teaneck, N.J.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.


DATA UPDATE: October 22, 1989
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Sept.
Aug.
Sept. 88
Rents
149.8
-0.1
4.2
Homeowner's costs
156.5
0.6
6.2
Fuel and utilities
99.5
-0.7
4.7
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
?%Somerset and Passaic.


Review/Theater; A Ghost Walks, in 'God's Policemen'
LEAD: At one point in ''God's Policemen,'' two serial killers force a captive salesman to mimic Elvis Presley performing the song ''Don't Be Cruel.'' By then, the song is a plea that might well be taken up by the audience and addressed to the playwright, Richard Lay.


THEY LIKE IKE
LEAD: Harry S. Truman is entitled to his opinions, but, buried under the Eisenhower landslides of 1952 and 1956, his attacks look awfully petty (''He Didn't Like Ike,'' by Harry S. Truman, Sept. 17).


Stinging Forces
LEAD: It was the British forces under Lord Cornwallis who first learned just how testy the residents of Charlotte, N.C., and surrounding Mecklenburg County could be when provoked.


Harbor Bar
LEAD: To the Editor: I was surprised at the omission of the Harbor Bar, a small ice cream bar, on the dessert options among Maine's lobster shacks mentioned in Cynthia Hacinli's warm-spirited article ''No-Frill Lobster on Maine's Coast'' (Travel, Aug. 13). (The ''r's'' are not pronounced by the locals, so it becomes ''Ha-ba Ba.


Military Satellite Launched by Delta 2 Rocket


CAMPUS LIFE: Mississippi; 5 Are Disciplined In Racial Prank At Fraternity
LEAD: At the University of Mississippi, where two people were killed in a riot before James H. Meredith enrolled as the first black student 27 years ago this month, a racial incident has provoked strong responses.


Elizabeth Sanford Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth H. Sanford, the assistant circulation director of Life magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Jack R. Horstmeyer, the director of advertising and creative services for Doubleday Book and Music Clubs Inc. in Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Jean Smith officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton, N.J.


Reviews/Dance; Capucilli and Rooks
LEAD: ''Dark Meadow,'' a 1946 work that the Martha Graham Dance Company presented last Sunday night at the City Center Theater, is both allegorically complex and ambiguous.
It shows a woman venturing into some strange, dangerous place.
There are mythological motifs borrowed from many cultures, as well as recurrent symbols of sex, martyrdom, death and resurrection.


Designer Is Wed To Ms. Cashman
LEAD: Lindsey Avril Cashman, the daughter of Ruth Parker Cashman and Gideon Cashman, both of New York, was married yesterday to John Peter Fallon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Fallon of Boston.
The nondenominational ceremony was performed at the Union Club in New York by the Rev.
Dr.
Melvin A. Hawthorne, a


The End of Inequality?
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Challenge Top Students, Academies Are Needed
LEAD: AT a time when other states are moving aggressively to provide challenging opportunities for their best and brightest high school students, New Jersey is lagging behind.


2d 'A' in A.A. Important, Too
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Brokers' Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lydia Gray to Wed R. S. Bartholow Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gray Jr. of New York and Haverhill, N.H., have made known the engagement of their daughter Lydia Beatriz Gray to R. Stephen Bartholow Jr., the son of Anne Ford and Mr.
Bartholow, both of Dallas.
A December wedding is planned.


Lack of Mass Transit Affects Employment
LEAD: Senator Frank Lautenberg's fine article (''Reducing the Labor Shortage,'' Opinion Page, Sept. 3) on the labor shortage in this state, with emphasis on high unemployment in urban areas, did not address a major reason for this state of affairs: lack of available mass transit.


Deborah Sanders to Wed in March
LEAD: The engagement of Deborah L. Sanders to Eliot Studnitzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon Studnitzer of the Bronx, has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Saul L. Sanders of Montville, N.J., and York, Me.
A March wedding is planned.


GROUPS OPPOSE BID TO CUT ALIENS' AID
LEAD: Civil libertarians and groups representing the poor and the elderly have expressed concern over a measure passed by the Senate that would bar illegal aliens from receiving Federal benefits, including Social Security and disability payments.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: A scrap of blue and red paper sold for $1 million this month.
For the arithmetically minded, this bit of paper, the plate block from the sheet of Inverted Jenny airmail stamps, is 2 1/2 inches square.
Thus the anonymous broadcast executive who bought the block at a Christie's auction paid the equivalent of $23 million a square foot, or $1 trillion dollars an acre.


''We Think of Adoption as a Triangle''
LEAD: AS the number of healthy American infants available for adoption decreases, infertile couples are increasingly seeking alternatives, said Estelle LaChance, the adoption program coordinator for Catholic Family Services of the Diocese of Bridgeport.
These options include adopting infants or children from other countries, those with special needs or older children.


THEY LIKE IKE
LEAD: I was saddened to see President Truman's diatribe appearing in print on the eve of President Eisenhower's centennial.
It is also sad that this sour note comes when both Presidents are rising in the estimation of historians of the 1980's.


No Luck for Lions In '89 Homecoming
LEAD: Last year, homecoming was especially sweet at Columbia as the Lions ended their record losing streak at 44 games with a victory over Princeton.
For homecoming at Wien Stadium this year, the Lions were just hoping to get their first-year coach, Ray Tellier, his first victory at the school and end a losing streak at five games.


Palme's Widow Criticizes Police
LEAD: The widow of Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden said today that the police and the press ''sabotaged'' the inquiry into her husband's killing and the subsequent trial.


Ranger Defense Holds Fort
LEAD: The noise was deafening, the physical attack numbing.
For the Rangers, everything was under assault: their net, their lead, their philosophy that common sense and unadorned defense will more often than not prevail.


Volunteers Step In As State Support of Aqueduct Drops
LEAD: WHEN it opened on July 4, l842, Manhattan bar owners offered their patrons a free Croton Cocktail, a glass of pure water to celebrate the completion of the country's longest aqueduct and New York City's first water-supply system.


Lisa S. Benenson Wed To Joseph Quattrocchi
LEAD: Lisa Sharon Benenson and Joseph A. Quattrocchi were married in New York last evening at the Pierre by Rabbi David M. Posner.
Mrs.
Quattrocchi is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Hartley Benenson of New York.
Her husband is a son of Laura P. Quattrocchi of Fort Edward, N.Y., and the late Anthony J.


Self-Parody as a Part Of the Pop Singer's Art
LEAD: Twenty years ago, an article about Bob Dylan compared his singing to ''hog calling.'' I don't remember the writer or the publication, but the image came back to me recently during a Dylan concert at the Beacon Theater, where the skinny, frizzy-haired rock legend still looked and sounded much like the avenging brat of the mid-1960's.


Nuggets Are Sold
LEAD: They had to accept some outside help and give up their dream of owning a controlling interest, but, as expected, Bertram Lee and Peter Bynoe have resurrected a deal to become the first black owners of a major league franchise, the Denver Nuggets of the National Basketball Association.


Defining Quality
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Victims of the Hurricane, Pain and Uncertainty Linger
LEAD: Every morning for almost a month, 75-year-old Harper McNeil has climbed into his rusted 1972 station wagon and driven to the debris-strewn site where Hurricane Hugo obliterated his trailer home Sept. 21.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:  Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


The Crimes and Punishments of Wedtech
LEAD: WITH the extortion conviction last week of Representative Robert Garcia of the Bronx and the sentencing of E. Robert Wallach, the Wedtech case is all but over.


U.N. Not Story It Once Was to the U.S. Press
LEAD: In the newsroom at the United Nations, there are 34 manual typewriters facing 34 empty chairs.
They usually sit untouched in neat rows, a monument to the days when reporters banged out breaking news with a click and a zing instead of rushing to electronic terminals.


213 Years Ago, White Plains Was a Battlefield
LEAD: I OFTEN walk along the path bordering the Bronx River, running from the White Plains railroad station to Hartsdale.
Along this path, to the west of the Bronx River Parkway, are high bluffs that define the elevation known as Chatterton Hill, or more familiarly, Battle Hill, which marks the site of the Battle of White Plains, fought 213 years ago, on Oct.


The Race to Market a 486 Machine
LEAD: Computer companies are beginning to beat their drums, and their chests, over the imminent introduction of computers built around the powerful Intel 80486 microprocessor.
Because companies are making promises - about shipping dates, for instance - that they may not be able to keep, customers should be wary of the chest-thumping.


More Adventures in Publishing
LEAD: To the Editor:


A CORRECTION
LEAD: An article on Oct. 8 about a comeback for fixed-rate mortgages misidentified a lender.
It is the Home Mortgage Acceptance Corporation.


Patrice Duggan Is Wed
LEAD: Patrice Lee Duggan, a reporter at Forbes magazine in New York, and Gary David Slutsker, a senior editor at Forbes, were married last evening at the Players clubhouse in New York by Rabbi Lawrence Siegel.
The bride, 30 years old, will keep her name professionally.
She is a daughter of David F. Duggan of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Marinelle Greene Duggan.


I.B.M.'s Urbane New Place in the Sun in Texas
LEAD: The first sign that Solana is not like other suburban office parks is the three 100-foot-tall pylons - one magenta, one purple, one yellow - that stand in the rolling Texas prairie like pieces of a gargantuan building toy left in a thousand-acre backyard.
The pylons announce Solana's presence from a mile down the freeway, and they foretell the nature of its architecture, a series of stucco-clad buildings with intense, rich color and a surprisingly urbane presence.


No Abortion Session in Texas
LEAD: In a move that stunned opponents of abortion, Gov.
William P. Clements Jr. has decided not to put the issue on the agenda of either of two scheduled special sessions of the State Legislature.


Settlements
LEAD: The bullhorns, spotlights and canned music make the downtown corner look like a street party.
It turns out instead to be a real estate hustle - one that gives blatant, blaring evidence of a cloud over Israel's future.


Noriega Might Stay, But the Canal Will Go On
LEAD: UNDER the Panama Canal treaties, a Panamanian is supposed to take over as administrator of the waterway on Jan. 1.
But in the last few weeks, the Bush Administration has made clear that that will not happen if Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is still ruling Panama.
Nevertheless, the canal will continue operating regardless of whether General Noriega retains or surrenders power, American officials say.


Plane Crashes in Honduras, Killing at Least 131
LEAD: A Honduran jet carrying 146 people broke apart in the air and crashed in flames into a mountain today as it prepared to land, killing at least 131 people, officials said.


Tenderized, 'Cured' Meats With Marinade
LEAD: MARINATING accomplishes many purposes.
It is an excellent method of providing flavor.
It also tenderizes and even cures foods, pickling or ''cooking'' them in acid.
How long a food is left in a marinade depends on what the final product should be as well as the character of the main ingredient.
The following recipes illustrate these points.


Stars Lend Scant Luster to News Shows
LEAD: The star reporter, a status once earned by men and women for chasing stories or digging into them, has been replaced on prime-time television by the news-show star, a hybrid like the programs themselves.
These glamour-pusses do not do much chasing or digging; sometimes they deign to commit the odd interview, but mainly they are performers, reading lines often written for them in circumstances concocted by their shows' producers.


Army Grinds Out A Tough Victory
LEAD: Army's ground game overshadowed a fierce passing attack for the second successive Saturday as the Cadets beat Lafayette, 34-20, today.


Dahn Ben-Amotz, Israeli Author, 65
LEAD: Dahn Ben-Amotz, a novelist, playwright and journalist who was a leading figure in Israeli culture for several decades, died of liver cancer on Friday at his home in the Jaffa section of Tel Aviv.
He was 65 years old.


For Sale: 'I Love New York'
LEAD: The Cuomo administration has hired a New York City marketing company to handle franchising of the ''I Love New York'' logo, state officials said today.
The company, Hamilton Projects, will be responsible for finding companies that want to use the logo in advertising.
Earlier this year the state decided to charge royalties for use of the logo after allowing free use of it for years.


Elizabeth Douglass Sands Is Married To Talmage Petty, Executive, on L.I.
LEAD: Elizabeth Douglass Sands, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Keating Sands of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married yesterday to Lawrence Talmage Petty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Robert Petty of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


NO ONE IS NICE HERE
LEAD:  PASSOVER  By Foumiko Kometani.  148 pp. New York:  Carroll &amp; Graf. $14.95.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Augusta, Me.; Competing For the Malls
LEAD: ALTHOUGH plans for regional shopping malls in both Augusta and Waterville have been announced, it is generally acknowledged that only one is likely to be built.


Karen E. Olsen Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Karen Ellen Olsen was married yesterday to John Michael Pugliese Jr. at the Reformed Church in America in Middletown, N.J., by the Rev.
William Coventry, assisted by Robert Nimon, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Olsen Jr. of Middletown.
Her husband is the son of Mr.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Braniff Cutback: What to Do With Tickets


Squad's Specialty: Shutouts
LEAD: The Byram Hills High School football team has a reputation for stopping winning streaks.
In 1967, the Bobcats snapped Bronxville's streak at 39 games.
They snapped Irvington's at 16 in 1979.
They stopped Rye's at 23 in 1987.


Review/Dance; Nikolais-Louis Troupe In Premiere of 'Act One'
LEAD: Murray Louis has a bright new work in ''Act One,'' which was presented by Nikolais and Louis Dance for the first time in New York on Friday night at the Joyce Theater.
It provided an intriguing look at Mr.
Louis's strengths and weaknesses.


Abstractions by John Golding at Yale Center for British Art
LEAD: AS an art historian, John Golding may know more than is good for him as a painter.
He has, nevertheless, kept the two disciplines going for some 30 years, writing about Modernism and Modernists and having frequent exhibitions of his own work.
Most of these have been in London and the one now at Yale Center for British Art marks his debut in the United


TOUGH TIMES FOR MR. LEVITTOWN
LEAD: Your article neglected to mention one significant and controversial aspect of the builder's visions of suburbia: all the inhabitants were white.
Mr.
Levitt openly refused to sell Levittown houses to black families.
In an article that appeared in The Saturday Evening Post in the mid-1950's, he explained his position in the following manner: ''.


Lois Sassone Marries An Insurance Broker
LEAD: Lois Sassone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Sassone of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James B. Lavelle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Lavelle of Rye.
Msgr.
Thomas McMahon officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing; Ghoulies and Ghosties With Senses of History
LEAD: Twenty-five years ago, legend has it, Eliza Jumel stood on the balcony of her Washington Heights home and shouted ''Shut up!'' at a group of neighborhood schoolchildren.
But Mrs.
Jumel had died a century earlier.
This is one of the most famous of New York's ghost stories - and there are many.
With Halloween approaching, there are three supposedly haunted houses in the metropolitan region for the adventurous to visit.


A Passion for Pedaling Country Roads
LEAD: FROM shoreline towns to the Litchfield Hills, Connecticut is booming with bicycles.
More and more residents, tired of jarring their joints with high-impact aerobic sports, are storing their jogging shoes, strapping on helmets and taking to the roads by bicycle.
Cycling, which its enthusiasts say is fast becoming the No.


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; In Wake of Rapes, Center for Victims To Open by July
LEAD: In the wake of seven rapes that have been reported on or near the Syracuse University campus since summer, the school's chancellor has announced plans to open a center to provide education, counseling and support services to rape victims.


THEY LIKE IKE
LEAD: When one former United States President refers to another as a ''chicken-hearted,'' ''weak,'' ''cowering,'' ''dumb son of a bitch'' who ''didn't know anything when he became President and in the years in office he didn't learn anything,'' as Truman says of Eisenhower, the reader has reason to suspect the integrity of what is being written.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  AS  A Surfeit of Similes.
By Norton Juster.
Illustrated by David Small.
Unpaged.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $9.95.  (Ages 9 and up)


Margaret Vernon Is Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Margaret Bennett Vernon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack H. Vernon of Weston, Mass., to Dr.
James William Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Young of Birmingham, Ala., took place yesterday at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Newton Lower Falls, Mass.
The Rev.
Laurance W. Walton Jr.


Chicago Schools Try A Radical New Cure
LEAD: EVEN as President Bush's education summit last month called for reforming the nation's school systems, Chicago was well on its way to laying the groundwork for the most radical school restructuring ever attempted in the United States.


Outdoors; Fishing Book Stands Out From Crowd
LEAD: Among the books on angling that pour from the presses each year are a few that you can snatch from the flood and enjoy for decades to come.
John Cole's charming, perceptive and witty ''Fishing Came First'' (Lyons &amp; Burford, 216 pages, $16.95) is one of them.


As Expected, Bush Vetoes Bill That Would Pay for Some Abortions
LEAD: As he said he would, President Bush today vetoed a measure that allow the use of Federal money to pay for abortions for poor women made pregnant by rape or incest.


CAMPUS LIFE: Williams; Rugby Players Come Under Fire For Beer Practice
LEAD: Beer practice has been a tradition at Williams College ''for longer than anyone can remember,'' says the president of the Williams Rugby Football Club, J. Chapman Petersen.


William Lerch Jr. And Susan Torell Wed in Bronxville
LEAD: Susan Allgood Torell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Torell 3d of Bronxville, N.Y., and Pasadena, Calif., was married yesterday at the Reformed Church in Bronxville to William Nelson Lerch Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lerch of Lothian, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard J. Lichti performed the ceremony.


All Skewers Aren't on Plate As Fashionable Meet at Lunch
LEAD: In the flower-filled arena of La Grenouille, the chic restaurant on 52d Street just off Fifth Avenue, the orchids and hydrangeas fairly hummed with suppressed tension.
John Fairchild, the chairman and publisher of Women's Wear Daily - and grand poo-bah of the high-fashion putdown - had just taken his customary seat in the corner of the clubby front room.


Krenz Gives Bonn Reason To Wait for Reunification
LEAD: ALREADY in his first few days in office, the new East German leader, Egon Krenz, has given West Germany what Communist news agencies like to call a ''resolute rebuff.'' Though he did not directly address reunification - the very term is largely taboo in a state that would vanish in a single Germany - Mr.


Illegal Apartments: Let's Face Facts
LEAD: Recently, the Long Island Board of Realtors has encouraged zoning changes to accommodate owner-occupied residences with accessory apartments (''Restricting Illegal Apartments,'' Sept. 24).
The support has never been more timely.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: Flipping through the November auction catalogue of Bowers and Merena, Inc., the auction house in Wolfeboro, N.H., one is struck by the great number and diversity of coins.
They range from New Jersey coppers to counterfeits to medical tokens.
But the last entry, an obscure 1744 Austrian token, has politics, religion and sex, three things that mothers say should never be discussed at dinner.


Sarah E. Swanson Weds P. C. Barry
LEAD: At St.
James Episcopal Church in Skaneateles, N.Y., Sarah Elizabeth Swanson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Swanson of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Patrick Charles Barry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Barry of Palmyra, Pa.
The Rev.
J.
Edward Putnam performed the ceremony.


Try Telling A Frenchman . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Glen Cove Acts to Update Environmental Laws
LEAD: THE city of Glen Cove has revised its environmental ordinances, many for the first time in 50 years, to keep pace with technological changes.


Awards for Kickers
LEAD: Who are the best place-kickers in the National Football League?
That's a question that is answered under game pressure every week during the N.F.L. season, but for those who like things neat, Mike Lansford of the Los Angeles Rams, and Morten Andersen of the New Orleans Saints, have strong claims on the honor.


As Profits Slide, a Struggle to Survive
LEAD: These are tough times for the nation's $303 billion a year business of selling automobiles.


Miss Ward Wed To Robert Brent
LEAD: Michelle Alaine Ward, a daughter of Maj.
Gen. and Mrs.
William F. Ward of Fort Myer, Va., was married in Washington yesterday to Robert Stephen Brent, a son of Captain Robert Brent, U.S.N. retired, and Mrs.
Brent of Rancho Bernardo, Calif.
The Rev.
John Mudd performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  INVESTMENT IN TIME


SHE WOULD NOT BE MOVED
LEAD:  MARY HEATON VORSE  The Life of an American Insurgent.
By Dee Garrison.
Illustrated. 377 pp.
Philadelphia:  Temple University Press. $27.95.


A Black Homer Bursting With A Black 'Odyssey'
LEAD: The morning after hurricane Hugo tore through the South, the author Theodore Rosengarten returned to his home in McClellanville, S.C., a small coastal town near Charleston.
Miraculously, the house in which the transplanted Northerner lives with his wife, Dale, and their two children was still standing.


Bereavement
LEAD: To The Editor: The article on bereavement fares could not have been more timely for my family.
My wife's mother had passed away that morning in Buffalo, and she had already made regular fare reservations to fly there that evening.
After reading your article, my wife called back to USAir and was able to change the reservations for herself and our daughter, resulting in a savings of $172.


CAR MAKERS AND CREDIT UNIONS ENCOURAGE DEALER HONESTY
LEAD: Car dealers once were ranked alongside fast-talking politicians and snake-oil salesmen.
But some are trying to create a kinder, gentler image.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I hope there's someone else left alive.
No one is leaving tonight.
They don't care how dangerous it is.''
- Jeff Breckenridge,
a rescue worker at the
Oakland highway overpass.  [ 1:3. ]


County Checks Up on Fuel-Oil Meters
LEAD: A COUNTY program is saving taxpayers thousands of dollars a year and protecting Westchester consumers from deceptive fuel-oil truck meter readings, said Kenneth W. Hale, Director of the County Department of Consumer Affairs.


David Duncan: Pillow Designer
LEAD: David Duncan has had a passionate interest in antique textiles for many years.


Houston Rolls to A 95-21 Victory
LEAD: Houston became the first team in major college history to gain 1,000 yards in a game and Andre Ware threw six touchdown passes today to set three National Collegiate Athletic Association records as the Cougars beat Southern Methodist, 95-21.


Vikings Aim to Patch Wounds and Discover a Winning Cure
LEAD: The road curves and bends and then suddenly in view is the home of the Minnesota Vikings, named Winter Park, a modern, appealing structure of stone and glass.


East Village: Quirky Mix for Rockers, and Bankers
LEAD: Amid the graffiti-splattered walls and the trash-strewn streets of the East Village lies an oasis of fashion: more than a dozen stores selling clothing, accessories and jewelry for men and women are scattered along the crosstown streets of St.
Marks Place and Ninth, Eighth, Seventh and First Streets.


Phoenix House Philosophy
LEAD: Residents of Phoenix House recite the center's philosophy at least twice a day.


The Joffrey Returns, Spotlighting a Virtuoso
LEAD: As a repertory ensemble, the Joffrey Ballet has always avoided the star system and even the term ''principal'' as a means of distinguishing its leading performers.
With only 40 dancers, the company is small relative to other major classical ensembles such as American Ballet Theater and New York City Ballet, and each performer must be able to handle his or her moment in the limelight when it comes.


The Realities of 'Friday the 13th'
LEAD: Thank you, Tokyo.


Opposing a Raise For Federal Judges
LEAD: I was intrigued by Federal Judge Harold A. Ackerman's responses to questions concerning the pay increase issue for Federal judges, in a recent New Jersey Q &amp; A. Judge Ackerman's reasons for supporting a raise for the judiciary were at least more substantive than those provided by President Bush and Chief Justice


NONFICTION
LEAD:  TO LIVE LIKE EVERYONE.
By Anatoly Marchenko.
Translated by Paul Goldberg. (Holt, $19.95.) In 1966, Anatoly Marchenko had a brief respite from what was to become a long career as a political prisoner in the Soviet Union.
Before his incarceration in 1958 - he was jailed once in the wake of a workers' brawl and again after a near-escape into Iran - Marchenko had been a young, self-satisfied construction foreman.


Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:  Senate


Archbishop of Canterbury Hails Unity on Women
LEAD: The Archbishop of Canterbury has endorsed the decision of Episcopal bishops to accommodate sharp differences over the ordination of women.


Wedding Planned By Miss Murphy
LEAD: The engagement of Mary Elaine Murphy and John Markert Arnold, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Arnold of Summit, N.J., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. Murphy of Trenton.
A November wedding is planned.


A MAN TOO ATTRACTIVE TO MARRY
LEAD:  CHARLEY BLAND  By Mary Lee Settle.  207 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


PERSPECTIVES: Churches as Builders; A Struggle Over Sites in the South Bronx
LEAD: IN the waning days of the administration of Mayor Edward I. Koch, it is still uncertain whether a housing production program that could bring Nehemiah-style one-family houses to vacant, city-owned land in the South Bronx will ever get started.


What Should Rise From Catastrophic Law's Ashes; The Flaws Exposed
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bohemia  $155,000  423 8th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Central Islip  $125,000  27 Naples Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 16-year-old ranch; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.


California Quake Seen as Challenging State's Reluctance to Tax and Spend
LEAD: The devastating earthquake here is already having a political aftershock: a re-examination of California's reluctance to tax and spend, enshrined in law by a series of voter initiatives over the last decade that now constitutionally handcuff the state's ability to repair its crumbled highways and bridges.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Madison Avenue Street Fair, Madison Avenue between 23d and 34th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Because of the East 50's Street


Science Agency Cancels Supercomputer Aid
LEAD: The National Science Foundation has canceled the financing for the John von Neumann National Supercomputer Center in Princeton, N.J., one of five supercomputer centers in the nation.


GIULIANI MAINTAINS ATTACK ON DINKINS OVER STOCK DEAL
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani entered a critical phase in his Republican-Liberal campaign for mayor of New York City yesterday as he held the feet of his Democratic opponent, David N. Dinkins, to the embers of a stock controversy and launched another attack on Mr.
Dinkins's fiscal fitness.


Smaller Solar
LEAD: To the Editor:


5-Man Giants' Rotation Enters Craig's Strategy
LEAD: They were supposed to have a workout today, but the San Francisco Giants instead spent most of their morning playing cards, signing baseballs and taking batting practice in a cage not far from their clubhouse.


Vincent Makes A Rough Climb To the Top Spot
LEAD: Fay Vincent's presence in baseball has been so intertwined with the brief tenure of Bart Giamatti as commissioner that it took an earthquake to give Vincent his own identity.


Editors' Note
LEAD: The Television section today carries some listings that have become outdated because of the California earthquake, which occurred after the section had gone to press.
Coverage of the World Series, on ABC, is tentatively scheduled to begin on Tuesday night.
Updated listings will appear on The Times's daily television page.


Marchers Protest a Charge Of Assault in Hawkins Killing
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton led about 100 black demonstrators through the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn yesterday, protesting the arraignment Monday of one of the defendants in the killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins.


Tenderized, 'Cured' Meats With Marinade
LEAD: MARINATING accomplishes many purposes.
It is an excellent method of providing flavor.
It also tenderizes and even cures foods, pickling or ''cooking'' them in acid.
How long a food is left in a marinade depends on what the final product should be as well as the character of the main ingredient.
The following recipes illustrate these points.


New &amp;Noteworthy
LEAD:  OUT OF THIS WORLD, by Graham Swift. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $7.95.) As Harry Beech, an aerial photographer, flies over the English landscape, his daughter lies on a psychoanalyst's couch in Manhattan.
Both try to figure out how their relationship went wrong. ''Not a book the reader is likely to forget, 'Out of This World' deserves to be ranked at the forefront of contemporary literature,'' Linda Gray Sexton said here last year.


An Opera Company In Search of Itself
LEAD: Lazarus rose from the dead only once; the New York City Opera has done it again and again during its 45-year history.
Depending on how an observer scores on the optimism/pessimism scale, the record of narrow escapes from the grave is either a proof of vitality or evidence of incurable sickness.
The company, for all its periodic staggering, has been a survivor in one of art's tougher neighborhoods: popular-priced opera.


Dinkins Says Trouble Is Past, But Some Supporters Wonder
LEAD: Campaigning amid large and enthusiastic crowds on the streets of four Queens neighborhoods yesterday, David N. Dinkins seemed buoyed by the cheers and said he believed he had put questions about his transfer of stock to his son behind him.


Brazil's Not-So-Civil Servants Defend Jobs
LEAD: ''Crazy woman, crazy woman,'' city employees chanted as the president of Rio's city council faced impeachment proceedings this week.


'You Are a Dog'
LEAD: They blindfolded him and handcuffed him with his hands behind his back.
Soldiers whispered in his ear, ''You are a dog.'' After putting a cloth in his mouth to keep him from screaming, they burned him with a cigarette on his ear and hand.
Then they took him into a bathroom and made him lie on the tile floor.


Carla Edwards Weds Herve Gouraige
LEAD: The marriage of Carla Jean Edwards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence J. Edwards of Jersey City, and Herve Gouraige, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frantz Gouraige of Rowland Heights, Calif., took place yesterday at the Riverside Church in New York.
The Revs.
Erik Kolbell, a United Church of Christ minister, and Peter D.


SURVIVAL OF THE LUCKIEST
LEAD:  WONDERFUL LIFE  The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History.
By Stephen Jay Gould.
Illustrated. 347 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


The Amistad Revolt: 'A Tale of Triumph'
LEAD: ONE HUNDRED and fifty years ago, on board the ship Amistad, 53 kidnapped Africans refused to accept the fate of slaves.
Instead they rose up, killed the captain and sailed away.
Thinking they were headed back to Africa, they became lost at sea and wound up on Long Island.
They were eventually brought to New


Janice T. Hirsch Wed To Michael L. Doniger
LEAD: Janice Turner Hirsch, the daughter of Mrs.
Warren Jones Denniston of Norfolk, Va., and the late Gus C. Turner Jr., was married yesterday to Michael Leslie Doniger, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Leo J. Doniger of Lincolnwood, Ill.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin officiated at the ''21'' Club in New York.


'LOVE IS A PUBLICITY STUNT'
LEAD:  LOUISE BROOKS  By Barry Paris.
Illustrated. 609 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Hospital Bans Many Generic Drugs
LEAD: Worried by reportedly unethical conduct by some generic drug manufacturers, the Hospital of Saint Raphael has indefinitely suspended the use of more than 150 generic drugs.


Fiona Ward Wed To Gregory Clapp
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York, Fiona C. Ward was married yesterday to Gregory G. Clapp.
The bride is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph N. Ward of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Clapp of Birmingham and Harbor Springs, Mich.


A New Leader Carries On An Orchestra's Tradition
LEAD: In the first three decades of the microgroove era, there was no symphonic ensemble more conspicuous in the form of recordings than the Orchestre de la Suisse Romande, which London/Decca seemed to favor for introducing each successive development in the technique of sound recording.
The orchestra, founded in 1918 by Ernest Ansermet, achieved international recognition as a direct result of its recording activity, which kept it so busy at its home base in Geneva that there was little time for touring until relatively recently.


Kohl Disavows Any Land Claims on Poland
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl, trying to clear an issue that has cast a shadow on his plans to visit Warsaw next month, said today that West Germany had no territorial claims on Poland.


Life, and Death, in the Fast Lane
LEAD: From skiing to surfing, California is a state of exhilarating extremes, and perils.
Even with respect to risk, Californians cover the spectrum.
A law passed by popular ballot in 1986 requires warning labels on any food whose ingredients have a 1-in-100,000 chance of causing cancer.
Yet, as Tuesday's tremor hammered home, tens of thousands could be killed in the truly major earthquake that might strike at any time.


Why the Deficit Is Paralyzing Congress
LEAD: RARELY in peacetime has a single issue dominated politics here the way the budget deficit is doing now.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Honduran Jetliner Crashes
At least 131 people were killed when a Boeing 727 passenger jet with 146 people aboard broke apart in the air and crashed in flames near Tegucigalpa.
At least 11 Americans were reported aboard.
Page 6.
A Rally in East Berlin
Several thousand East Berliners marched hand-in-hand in a single line through the center of the East German capital in their first demonstration for more democracy since Egon Krenz became leader.


Now Showing, Survival of the Fittest
LEAD: The buzzword in Hollywood today is ''bulk'' - in studio size and in movies.
The strongest studios are committed to making more movies, pictures that are larger in scope and budget, films that can feed a growing worldwide appetite in television, cable and home video.


Harvard-Army: An Elucidation
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Kerry Duffy Wed To Leo P. Wetter
LEAD: Kerry Ann Duffy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Malachy J. Duffy of Westbury, L.I., and Leo Peter Wetter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Wetter of Westbury, were married there yesterday at St.
Brigid's Roman Catholic Church by Msgr.
Timothy McDonnell.


Hong Kong on Borrowed Time
LEAD: EARLIER THIS MONTH, WHILE CHINA'S LEADERS WERE staging a grandiose celebration of their revolution's 40th birthday, thousands of somber Hong Kong residents gathered for a dreary commemoration of their own.
Far from the fireworks display in Beijing, Hong Kongers huddled in a rainstorm near the bronze statue of Queen Victoria, singing patriotic songs and listening to mournful poems dedicated to those who died in Tiananmen


Social Events
LEAD:  Musical Remembrance


SHUTTLE PREPARES FOR EARLY LANDING
LEAD: Flight controllers prepared today to end the flight of the space shuttle Atlantis one or two orbits ahead of schedule on Monday to avoid high winds predicted for later in the day at the desert landing base in California.


Schiller Approved as Director
LEAD: In one of its most contentious sessions in decades, the executive board of the United States Olympic Committee today unanimously approved the appointment of Harvey Schiller to replace Baaron Pittenger as the U.S.O.C. executive director.


At a Hospital, a Harsh Lesson on Drugs
LEAD: As the group of 10-year-olds walked into the pediatric ward of the Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, , their giggles and horseplay quickly changed into apprehension when they heard a rapid knock-knock sound.


Kathleen Collins Weds Navy Flier
LEAD: At St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I., Kathleen Ann Collins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Collins of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., was married yesterday to Comdr.
Walter F. Leoffler Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leoffler of Oxnard, Calif.
The Rev.
Ernest E. Robinson and the Rev.


Anne Garmey and A. H. Clutz to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Garmey of Boston and Stockbridge, Mass., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Anne Squires Garmey and Andrew Hunter Clutz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Clutz of Williamstown, Mass.


Treasures of the Czars
LEAD: FOR more than 500 years the treasure of the Kremlin has been one of the great sights of Moscow.
In 1485, after the completion of the first stone churches and palaces, the collection had become important enough to erect a special building to house it.
By the 16th century, the czar's treasure was so large that when Ivan the Terrible retreated to Novgorod before the Crimean


Few Rose To the Bait
LEAD: To the Editor:


An All-American City Strives To Maintain Racial Diversity
LEAD: IN 1971, Look magazine heralded Bloomfield as an all-American city, for creating a community in which blacks and whites lived together.
Now, nearly two decades later, Bloomfield is struggling to maintain its racial diversity.


Melanie Jane Wissemann Wed to Richard S. Essex
LEAD: Melanie Jane Wissemann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph Wissemann of Southold, L.I., was married yesterday in Bridgnorth, Shropshire, England, to Richard Scott Essex, a son of Evelyn Holt Essex of Columbus, Ohio, and the late Winfield Scott Essex.
The Rev.
James Butterworth performed the Anglican ceremony at St.


Bereavement
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on bereavement convinced me that United Airlines is misleading the media about its policy.
While the airline obviously told Betsy Wade (as they have told other reporters) that they operate on a ''case by case'' basis, I believe their claim is bogus.


Chicago Blacks Hold Bias Protest
LEAD: In a protest against bigotry and police brutality, more than 500 people, most of them blacks, marched without incident today through the city's Bridgeport neighborhood where two 14-year-old black boys were chased and beaten by a gang of whites this summer.


Hectic Recovery For Stock Prices
LEAD: Stocks came back after the Friday the 13th plunge of 190 points.
Sell orders poured in when the markets opened on Monday and the Dow Jones industrial average had an early 60- point loss but the market turned around within about an hour and the day ended with the Dow up 88 points.
Volume on Monday was 416 million shares, the fourth-busiest day ever.


Amtrak to Add 3 Expresses To Northeast Corridor Run
LEAD: Three high-speed express Metroliner trains will be added between Washington and New York to compete with the airline shuttles, Amtrak said Friday.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Oct. 7  MANHATTAN  Beekman Place Area  $205,000  10 Mitchell Place  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, windowed, large kitchen, fireplace, roof garden; maintenance $508, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: S. W. Bird &amp; Co.)


Reviews/Music; Gosdin's Songs of Pain
LEAD: Vern Gosdin's voice resonates with country tradition - the conversational, smoke-cured twang of George Jones and Ernest Tubb, holding back pain with quiet dignity.
But what brought an admiring cult to the Lone Star on Thursday night for a rare New York performance by Mr.
Gosdin was his songs, which are the work of a specialist - or a man obsessed.


Talks in Paris on Protecting Antarctica Fail
LEAD: After two weeks of negotiations, delegates to an international conference on the Antarctic have been unable to agree on measures to protect the continent's environment, and they say that next year they might consider making it a global nature reserve.


Court's Reporter Jailed To Finish a Transcript
LEAD: A court's reporter has been in jail more than two weeks for failing to finish a trial transcript that an appeals court has been waiting for so that it can consider a murder conviction.


College Enrollments Up, Except at Technical Schools
LEAD: ENROLLMENT at public and private college and universities in Connecticut increased more than 2 percent this fall while the number of students attending technical colleges declined for the seventh straight year.


A Network of Female Entrepreneurs
LEAD: A DECADE ago, 12 businesswomen from seven different fields met in a White Plains diner and decided that they needed a trade group.


Suzanne Coleman Planning to Wed
LEAD: Suzanne Gertrude Coleman's engagment to Frederic Moore Bancroft, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Woodward Bancroft of Old Brookville, L.I., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert John Coleman of New York and Fishers Island, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.


Correction
LEAD: The headline of a theater review last Sunday about two plays performed by Repertorio Espanol as ''Nelson 2 Rodrigues'' characterized them incorrectly.
They are Brazilian, but were performed largely in Spanish.


Still Scoring
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky may be gone from the Edmonton Oilers, but last week he gave the still adoring fans of his former team another reason not to forget him.
Playing in Edmonton with the visiting Los Angeles Kings, his team since a trade in 1988, the Great Gretzky, as he is known, became the greatest scorer in the history of the National Hockey League.


Pretoria Says It May Phase Out State of Emergency
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk said today that he might phase out a national state of emergency that has been in effect since June 1986.


Jennifer Dicker, Student, Marries
LEAD: Jennifer Gail Dicker and Peter John Rousseau were married last evening at the Hotel Westbury in New York by Rabbi Joel Gore.


DARKENING GLOOM IN A STRICKEN CITY
LEAD: Probably no Northern California city was harder hit economically by the earthquake than this picturesque town on the rocky Pacific Coast.
Almost all its downtown business district is in ruins, 250 businesses are shut and 2,000 people are out of work.


Mountain Wine Makers Escape Severe Damage
LEAD: Quitting time is 5 P.M. at Roudon Smith Vineyards, a winery in California's Santa Cruz Mountains.
On Tuesday, the earthquake hit four minutes later.


Dave Parker Has a Good Suggestion
LEAD: Out of tragedy comes dignity.
Dave Parker has used his large vote to persuade the Oakland Athletics to abandon the ritual champagne orgy if they win the World Series.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large kitchen with 25-year-old cabinets covered with a brown matte-finish plastic laminate.
We would like to paint these cabinets white.
How can we make paint stick to this laminate?


Defending O'Day
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Kosher Cafe Challenges Stereotypes
LEAD: IN years past, kosher restaurants were predictable.
The kosher symbol in the window always meant corned beef, pastrami, stuffed derma, potato pancakes and matzoh ball soup: traditional heavy eating.


Nancy R. Tooker and Richard J. Davis Are Wed
LEAD: Nancy R. Tooker and Richard J. Davis were married yesterday in their New York home by Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  FROM JOHANNESBURG


Transactions
LEAD:  Basketball


Landmarks Appeals Panel Proposed
LEAD: In the ballot on Election Day, New Yorkers will be asked to vote on the proposed city charter in two questions.
The first asks whether voters want to approve all the major elements of the proposed new government, including eliminating the Board of Estimate.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 1 about the economist Jeffrey Sachs misidentified the sponsor of his trips to Poland.
It is the Stefan Batory Society.


Reviews/Music; Improvising In Two Fashions
LEAD: The opening concert of P.S. 122's Hearings series on Wednesday night had a good concept: the double bill of Irene Schweizer and Maggie Nichols, who have a large following in Europe, and Anthony Coleman and Jim Pugliese showed the differences between European and American improvising styles.
It was a nice idea, but unfortunately the performances, except for an occasional burst of energy, sagged.


Karen Griffin, Ad Executive, Weds Clay T. Barnes
LEAD: Karen Elizabeth Griffin, the daughter of Thomas L. Griffin of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Maria Teresa Ermini of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Clay Timothy Barnes, a son of John E. Barnes and Cynde Barnes, both of Logansport, Ind.
The Rev.
David Heetland, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Alice Millar Chapel at Northwestern University in Evanston,


Q and A
LEAD:  Delayed Access to Condo


Independents, Feeling a Pinch, Restyle a Niche
LEAD: These are difficult days for the small independent video store.
For one thing, many of the customers who dropped in for rentals and perhaps a purchase or two are now off scouting the miles of cassette bins in huge discount department stores. ''We can't compete with their prices,'' says Jan DeMasse, the proprietor of the Video Place in Exeter, N.


Islanders Defeated By Canucks 2-1
LEAD: The Vancouver Canucks, on a three-game tour of New York-area rinks, won their second successive game when they beat the Islanders, 2-1, tonight at Nassau Coliseum.


LOOK DEEP INTO YOUR LIFE
LEAD:  ALL NEW PEOPLE  By Anne Lamott.  166 pp.
San Francisco:  North Point Press. $16.95.


The Fed's New Tool Just Doesn't Work
LEAD: The research staff of the board of Governors of the Federal Reserve has developed what is described as a new method for forecasting inflation.
The announcement of this new construct brought a great deal of publicity.
The equation, which is called P-Star, is a throwback to strict monetarism in its most primitive form.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: The exchange sacrifice is the one offer that players who have sworn off sacrifices will still venture.
That's because so much of the time an exchange sacrifice is really more a kind of positional investment than a bludgeon of attack.


Don't Mess With Gramm-Rudman
LEAD: Pressure is building to revise Gramm-Rudman, the budget-balancing legislation enacted in 1985 and amended in 1987.
Indeed, Congress seems to be on the verge of adopting a pattern of amending the law every two years.
This year the argument for revising the targets will have a new and powerful twist: the need to protect people's retirement checks by segregating the Social Security accounts from the rest of the budget for deficit reduction purposes.


Question Of the Week; Should the Jets Have Benched O'Brien?
LEAD:  Absolutely not.
If top management approaches the same problem with the same solution yielding the same result year in and year out, changes must take place at the top or changes will take place at the bottom.
VLAD RYBAKOV  Rego Park, Queens


Why the Road Turned Rocky for 'Old Gringo'
LEAD: When the movie ''Old Gringo'' was being filmed here early in 1988, it seemed to everyone involved to have all the prerequisites for great artistic and commercial success.
In Gregory Peck and Jane Fonda, the film boasted two big names, paired with each other for the first time.
The Carlos Fuentes novel on which the script was based offered a story full of passion, both political and erotic, and intelligence.


Kathryn Haggerty Weds
LEAD: Kathryn Dianne Haggerty, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen C. Haggerty of Scottsdale, Ariz., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Marc Pomerantz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Pomerantz of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Albert King, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Scottsdale Princess Resort.


Obsession
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Modern Isn't at Home in Germany
LEAD: Two new works presented this month in New York - ''Mayday'' by Lucinda Childs and ''Machandel'' by Reinhild Hoffmann - are at such opposite extremes that certain premises about a general cultural consensus can no longer to be taken for granted.


What Should Rise From Catastrophic Law's Ashes
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Japan, Dazzle Aplenty
LEAD: On Wednesday, 61 Japanese performers chosen from among 350 young women all in their 20's and resident at Takarazuka City, an entertainment center 15 minutes from Osaka, arrive at Radio City Music Hall for six appearances.
They bring with them nine tons of scenery, including a spanking new built-in-Japan 26-step grand staircase (the one the


N.C. State Stopped By Clemson, 30-10
LEAD: Chris Gardocki kicked three field goals as Clemson defeated previously undefeated North Carolina State by 30-10 today to keep alive its slim hopes of winning an unprecedented fourth consecutive Atlantic Coast Conference title.


GOING PUBLIC
LEAD: CLICK.
AT 2:30 P.M.
IN RESTAURANTS IN NEW York, a synchronized activity begins.
Women open their compacts and swiftly pat noses, cheeks, chins.


Spain
LEAD: To the Editor: Earlier this year my husband and I took a tour of Portugal and Spain.
We enjoyed Portugal and its people.
However, in Seville, we were victims of a purse snatching.
We were aware that we should carry nothing of value on the streets, I needed to carry my sunglasses and medication -- and that's all the thieves got.


Executive Is Wed To Julia Talavera
LEAD: Julia Talavera and Robert McKay Pflieger were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Washington by the Rev.
John F. Myslinski.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Edwin Flye Stetson 2d of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Rafael F. Talavera.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


Review/Theater; Scenes From Memory In 'Bronx Tale,' a Solo
LEAD: Chazz Palminteri's one-man play ''A Bronx Tale'' is the theatrical equivalent of sprawling streetwise rock songs like Bruce Springsteen's ''Jungleland'' and Billy Joel's ''Scenes From an Italian Restaurant.'' Performing on a set that impressionistically re-creates the corner of 187th Street and Belmont Avenue in 1960, the New York-born actor and writer spins a vivid true story of his own childhood and adolescence when he was taken under the wing of a neighborhood gangster named Little


Brokers' Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


My 7 Visitors And How They Really Love to Eat
LEAD: MY deck stands in the waddle path of the neighborhood's raccoons.
There are seven of them: Rocky, Baby, Sherwood, Scruffy, Prince, Charles and Spot.


Not Over Yet
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tax Issue Splits Gulotta and Korn
LEAD: AS he tries to become the first Democratic county executive in 20 years, Richard Korn, is seeking to picture the incumbent, Thomas S. Gulotta, as a fiscally irresponsible politician who makes special deals with his developer friends and who deceives the county's taxpaying citizens.


Mansion Melodies and Mini-Concerts
LEAD: THE pumpkins reach the Old Ferry Dock in Beacon this afternoon, and then resume their sail to other towns along the Hudson.
It is the annual Pumpkin Festival, when huge piles of the gourds are offloaded from the sloop Clearwater each day while its crew is on call for ballad-singing, story-telling and ecological discussions.


The Pendulum Swings Away From Cynicism
LEAD: In the 1980's art has seemed to suffer from a fin-de-siecle anxiety.
The source of that anxiety has been a fundamental skepticism about the possibility of ''making it new.'' Instead of seeming limitless, culture and the world itself have come to be seen as finite, closed systems that have been depleted by overuse.


Allegre Kicking in the Groove
LEAD: Raul Allegre of the Giants is kicking less and enjoying it more.
And doing better, too.


Sarah McNally Plans a Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McNally of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah McNally to William H. Lynn 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynn of Atlanta.
A November wedding is planned.


BRAVE NEW CAREER
LEAD:  HUXLEY IN HOLLYWOOD  By David King Dunaway.
Illustrated. 458 pp.
New York:  A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Harper &amp; Row. $24.95.


Behind Japan's Passion for a Pinball Game, the Unsavory Side of Society
LEAD: It was only noon, but the New Alpha Pachinko Parlor here was already throbbing as dozens of pinball enthusiasts sat mesmerized in front of their machines amid a deafening roar of bells, buzzers, rock music and shouted exhortations over the microphone.


Gutter Cleaning and Repair
LEAD: CLEANING and repairing gutters is best done in the spring and fall, but if you can find time to do this job only once a year, fall gutter maintenance is the more important.


ANYONE FOR WAR?
LEAD:  THE LONG GRAY LINE  By Rick Atkinson.
Illustrated. 592 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE DEAD PULL HITTER.
By Alison Gordon. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) Mystery buffs who also happen to be baseball fans can enjoy both pastimes at once in ''The Dead Pull Hitter,'' an energetic first novel by the Toronto sportswriter Alison Gordon.
The lineup of Ms.
Gordon's fictional Toronto Titans includes all the archetypes of baseball lore - crafty veterans and insufferable superstars, good-hearted heroes and washed-up sluggers struggling to eke out one more season.


Pipe Organs
LEAD: To the Editor: As a longtime organist, I share Craig R. Whitney's enthusiasm for experiencing various instruments (''Pursuing Pipe Organs of Note,'' Travel, Aug. 13) and, like him, I am well aware that no two pipe organs sound alike.


TOUGH TIMES FOR MR. LEVITTOWN
LEAD: My parents' first house was built by the Levitts, in Levittown, L.I. (''Tough Times for Mr. Levittown,'' by Michael T. Kaufman, Sept. 24).
I look back on it fondly.
It was nicely laid out, had a fireplace and the floors were always warm.
The neighborhood was friendly, with lots of kids to play with.


Reviews/Music; Schiff's Central European Assortment
LEAD: Sometimes the art of program-making rightly usurps the normal pleasures that attend concertgoing.
Sometimes the very intelligence with which an artist has juxtaposed scores on a program seems so arresting that it takes natural precedence over the individual pieces or their performance, however excellent they may be.


Patients Dance Into the Unconscious
LEAD: IN place of a psychiatrist's couch, there is a piano, an easel or just an open room.
In place of lengthy conversations about ego and relationships, patients paint, sing, dance or create a drama about their feelings.
This is therapy?
For thousands of people in Connecticut it is.
Whether frustrated with conventional psychotherapy or simply curious about a different approach, they enlist the help a creative arts therapist who uses dance, drama, art, music or poetry as the basis of psychological treatment.


A Jury Awards $1.3 Million To Parents Whose Son Died
LEAD: The parents of a 12-year-old Waterbury boy who died shortly after his release from Yale-New Haven Hospital, where he was being treated for a heart condition, have been awarded more than $1.3 million by a Superior Court jury.


New Tourney For $6 Million
LEAD: A season-ending men's tournament, in which the winner will get $2 million, has been set up by the International Tennis Federation, which said the $6 million Grand Slam Cup would be the richest tennis tournament in the world.


Man Rescued From Rubble of Collapsed Highway
LEAD: Smiling and waving his right hand, a man was pulled alive this morning from the wreckage of the highway overpass that collapsed in Tuesday's earthquake.


No Headline
LEAD: At the Wren Chapel at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Va., Leslie Cornell Bones, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Bones of Richmond, was married yesterday to Lieut. (j.g.) Jeffrey Donald Maclay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Maclay of Brookfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas N. Oates, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony.


PASTIMES: Gardening; To the Rescue of Endangered Plants
LEAD: Pogo, the beloved opossum developed by the late cartoonist, Walt Kelly, once appeared on a poster supporting anti-pollution causes.
He was saying ''We have met the enemy, and they is us.''


CAMPUS LIFE: Missouri; 'Little Sister' Program Stopped After Assaults
LEAD: Four fraternity-associated sexual assaults, including two last weekend, have prompted the University of Missouri-Columbia temporarily to suspend all ''little sister'' organizations associated with fraternities.


More Adventures in Publishing
LEAD: To the Editor:


W. Virginia Routs Cincinnati by 69-3
LEAD: Major Harris threw for two touchdowns and ran for another in just over a half today as West Virginia ended a two-week slump with a 69-3 rout of Cincinnati.


Mary A. Krieger, Lawyer, to Marry
LEAD: The engagement of Mary Allana Krieger to Dennis Russell O'Brien has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Krieger of Summit, N.J.
Mr.
O'Brien is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. O'Brien of Elizabeth, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''You could posit that Friday's activity was the market's ultimate signal that the day of crazy deals was over.''
Michael D. Madden, senior managing director, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., speaking of the plunge on Oct. 13.


U.S. Jews Plan Drive to Protect Auschwitz Site
LEAD: Troubled by the decay of buildings and exhibits at the site of the Auschwitz death camp, American Jews are organizing an international campaign to conserve them.


I.R.A. Gunmen Kill an Officer
LEAD: Gunmen ambushed a police car in South Armagh province, killing an officer and wounding another, the police said today.
The Irish Republican Army in South Armagh asserted responsibility for the machine-gun attack in Belleek, about 10 miles north of the border with the Irish Republic.
Constable Michael Marshall, 25 years old, died instantly, the police said.


Gazing Into the Economic Crystal Ball
LEAD: THE bad news: The Long Island economy faces trouble.
The good news?
We should start thinking about making some changes in our regional economy.
While the Island has long-term strengths, the time to deal with a future of stress is before a storm.


A Grown-Ups' Designer Offers Glamour for Girls
LEAD: Victor Costa, the designer whose fame rests partly in making brilliant copies of haute couture and selling them for hundreds rather than thousands of dollars, is now glamorizing little girls' party dresses.


Horning In on the Corner Shoe Repair Store
LEAD: While pounding new heel guards onto a man's ailing loafers, Donald Leafloor wrinkled up his nose and talked about the meaning of shoes. ''People get unbelievably attached to their shoes,'' he said. ''They know that their feet will love them if they put on a good pair.
So people have their favorite shoes and they hate to lose them.


Brisk Victory for Dispersal
LEAD: Dispersal, the lone 3-year-old in a field of seven, contested a fast early pace but still had enough left in the final yards to hold off Sewickley by a long nose and win the $581,000 N.Y.R.A.
Mile Handicap yesterday at Aqueduct.


Summer Skiing
LEAD: To the Editor: Summertime skiing in South America (Travel Section, Aug. 20) certainly whetted the appetite of this ardent skier.
However, spending $2,000 to $3,000 a couple for a week skiing a South American winter wonderland is a major deterrent, which probably accounts for the paucity of North Americans at their resorts.


Sally Moyer Wed To Harry M. Kent
LEAD: Sally Ann Moyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Moyer Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Harry Martin Kent, the son of Mrs.
Carl C. Boggild of Toronto, and the late Martin G. Kent, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Barry L. Brooks of the United Church of Canada performed a nondenominational ceremony at the Sunningdale Country Club in


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Sept. 24 about lodgings in Scotland misstated the scope of the listing.
It included the Shetland Islands, not just the Highlands.


Hospitals Ready for Bitter Battle On Rate Increases
LEAD: THE average patient in a Connecticut hospital in the year ending Sept. 30 incurred a bill of $5,872.37.
Under budgets proposed by the state's 34 general hospitals for the current year, that same patient would pay nearly $6,900, an increase of 18.8 percent, and the magnitude of that increase has shocked state officials and the businesses that would pay higher health insurance premiums to support those rates.


Miss McDaniel Plans to Marry
LEAD: Elizabeth Chase McDaniel and Malcolm John Sutherland Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sutherland of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., plan to marry in December.
Their engagement was made known by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Chase McDaniel 2d of Haverford, Pa.


A Potential New Soviet Export Product: Cold-War-Surplus Missiles
LEAD: In an effort to turn swords into plowshares, or ''tanks into tractors,'' as Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d put it last week, the Soviet Union is trying to turn its SS-20 missile into a commercial rocket for launching small satellites into space.


595 High Earners Avoided Income Tax in '87
LEAD: A handful of the highest-earning Americans are still able to avoid paying Federal income tax despite repeated Congressional efforts to close loopholes.


Building Codes: Designs for Last Quake, Not Next
LEAD: When it opened in 1957, the Nimitz Freeway in Oakland was an engineering marvel.
The story of how it became a concrete graveyard is the story of California's century of attempts to define what makes a structure withstand an earthquake.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CARRINGTON: A Life.
By Gretchen Gerzina. (Norton, $24.95.) Dora Carrington (1893-1932) was only a peripheral member of the Bloomsbury group, remembered today because of her curious relationship with Lytton Strachey, whom she loved and lived with for nearly 17 years, despite his homosexuality.
Carrington was a difficult though charismatic figure.


California Struggles With The Other Side Of Its Dream
LEAD: FROM the beginning, California has been the American symbol of opportunity, freedom, renewal, sunny paradise and human dominion over a land that was as beautiful as it was terrible.
Dams and aqueducts brought water into the desert, where vast cities and farms blossomed.
Dramatic bridges and mammoth freeways turned small towns into powerful cities.


TRIMMING SCHOOL COSTS: READERS RESPOND; Statistics in Support Of the Indefensible
LEAD: The adage ''Statistics don't lie, statisticians do'' came to mind when I read That Irving Gerber feels comfortable living in ignorance of economic realities is his prerogative.
However, selling his ignorance to others is, in his own words, indefensible.


Report Urging End Of Homosexual Ban Rejected by Military
LEAD: A draft report by a Pentagon research center concludes that the American military should consider ending discriminatory practices against homosexuals and allowing them in the services.


Swiss to Vote On Disarming Their Fortress
LEAD: Absorbed by the grandeur of the Alpine scenery on the train ride southeast from here, few notice the peaks of a different sort - the rows of dragon's teeth, stubby concrete tank traps sewn along the hedgerows to shepherd an invading force toward open ground, where they can be blasted by gun emplacements hidden in the hills.


POSTINGS: Four Levels, With Elevators; Looking Down on Wickers Creek
LEAD: Most builders like to put their projects on level, open ground so potential buyers can visualize barbecues and ball games on the lawn out the back door.


Bereavement
LEAD: To the Editor: On Sept. 9 my father passed away in Maine.
We contacted Continental and told them that we had a death in the family.
They did not offer any special rate, and I had to pay $320 one way to Maine.
The next day your story appeared, so when I returned to Florida I called customer service.


SPEAKING THE PRINCE'S ENGLISH
LEAD: I note that Mr.
Bradbury has a few unkind implications for the Chomskyites.
He could have saved his breath.
It is true that they promoted promiscuous permissiveness 15 years ago, but they no longer bedevil language instruction in America.


Lauren A. Spina, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: The First Presbyterian Church in Glen Cove, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lauren Astrid Spina, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Spina of Bellmore, L.I., and Gray Watson Hampton 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hampton Jr. of Huntington, W.Va.
The Rev.
Bruce Curry Page officiated.


Who Has to Do What As New York Prepares To Pick a New Mayor
LEAD: THE nomination of David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani for mayor of New York City last month also produced two political truisms: that Mr.
Giuliani could not win without first deflating Mr.
Dinkins, and that this would be Mr.
Dinkins's election to lose.


An Amiable Spot for Italian Standbys
LEAD: MONROE is not widely known for its restaurant choices, so it was a pleasant surprise to discover Cristallini Ristorante, a small place making an effort to serve good Italian food.


Houston Accident Care: Options Are Cut
LEAD: After more than a year of financial chaos, one of the two Houston hospitals offering trauma care closed its doors this month to ambulances carrying the severely injured.


Some Say Plan for Lake Erie Park Could Make Matters Worse
LEAD: Despite a decade of evidence that breakwaters ruin shorelines, Pennsylvania recently began building the world's largest breakwater system here to protect one of the nation's most popular parks from the pounding waves of Lake Erie.


Gene Tests Planned to Settle Claims on Girl
LEAD: A couple who claim their daughter was switched with another girl in a hospital maternity ward have promised not to seek custody of the girl in exchange for an agreement on genetic testing to settle the dispute.


Foster Parents Testify on Failures in the Child-Welfare System
LEAD: Grieving and angry over the loss of children that they could not help but think of as their own, a group of foster parents came to City Hall Thursday to offer stirring testimony about the ways in which government had failed the youngsters.


Talking Their Way Out of Trouble
LEAD: THE sign outside the door reads: ''Center for Dispute Resolution.
School Mediation Program.'' Behind the closed door and away from the clanging of lockers that signaled the end of classes, four students huddled at a small table in a basement room of Gorton High School here, hammering out a solution to a conflict between two teen-agers.


'Red Revolution'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why Auto Insurance Costs So Much
LEAD: NEW JERSEY drivers, who currently pay the highest automobile insurance premiums in the nation, can expect to see their rates double by the turn of the century, officials say, unless comprehensive, industry-wide changes are immediately undertaken.


Brokers' Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: The year's most remarkable contribution to international understanding in the world of bridge took place in Mragowo, Poland, in mid-July.
It was the 8th European Junior Bridge Camp.
It attracted 174 juniors aged 25 and under.
The youngest was a 12-year-old Danish girl.


SEEDING TIME
LEAD: FALL IS THE SEASON WHEN MOST people's thoughts turn to the harvest.


Jewelry Gaining in Crafts
LEAD: IT is easy to spot the jewelry booths at crafts fairs.
Customers decked out in new earrings cluster in front of the booths, waiting to admire themselves in a mirror.
But the true cognoscenti of handmade jewelry, the insatiable collectors, continue searching the aisles, checking out the booths of crafts people who miniaturize some of their work into jewelry.


Reviews/Music; Century Hopping by the Camerata Bern
LEAD: The Camerata Bern, a Swiss ensemble which at full strength comprises 14 string players and a harpsichordist, hopped back and forth through four centuries of music on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.34
7.32
7.75
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.55
8.60
7.77
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.41
6.42
6.05
Bank Rate Monitor


Relief Groups Accepting Donations
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.


Challengers for Cup Split by Legal Issue
LEAD: Challengers for the America's Cup have split over the legalities that hamstring the future of the event.
Some talk reluctantly of pulling out of the races altogether, while others would like to see the New York legal system resolve the impasse no matter how long it takes.


SHORTAGE OF FOOD SEEN FOR AFGHANS
LEAD: United Nations officials are worried that hundreds of thousands of poor and displaced people in Afghanistan's cities may suffer another winter with too little to eat.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Dazzle of Evil


NONFICTION
LEAD:  ISTANBUL INTRIGUES.
By Barry Rubin. (McGraw-Hill, $18.95.) Throughout World War II, neutral Turkey remained an oasis attracting refugees, political plotters, deserters, profiteers, assassins, international beauties, journalists and spies.
High-stakes intrigue became Turkey's national industry, even as bombers, tanks and death camps were laying waste to much of Europe.


Gutter Cleaning and Repair
LEAD: CLEANING and repairing gutters is best done in the spring and fall, but if you can find time to do this job only once a year, fall gutter maintenance is the more important.


Marc A. Zambetti, Sales Director, 27
LEAD: Marc A. Zambetti, a sales director for the Stella D'Oro Biscuit Company, was killed in the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway in Tuesday's earthquake in Oakland.
The 27-year-old San Francisco resident was a grandson of the company's founders and the son of its chief executive officer.


Claire's Romance With God
LEAD:  THE GOLDEN THREAD  By Ann Copeland.  274 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


Nataly Goldstein to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Goldstein of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Nataly Goldstein to Scott Goldstein, the son of Albert Goldstein of New York and Irene Amsterdam Goldstein of Mineola, L.I.
The families are not related.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldstein is a placement counselor at the Redford Agency in New York.


Amy Kiernan Marries Griffith E. Lewis
LEAD: The wedding of Anne Madeleine Kiernan and Griffith Eric Lewis took place yesterday at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Albany.
The Most Rev.
Howard Hubbard, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Albany, officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Peter DeLacy Kiernan of Albany, Hobe Sound, Fla., and Oyster Harbors, Mass.


Brokers' Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHAT IS FUKUYAMA SAYING? AND TO WHOM IS HE SAYING IT?
LEAD: THE YEAR 2000 FAST APPROACHES, and millennial doom is in the air.
Global warming, nuclear proliferation, chaos in Eastern Europe.
Even the notion of post is over.
Post-modernism, post-history, post-culture (to borrow the critic George Steiner's term) - we're beyond that now. ''The sun is about to set on the post-industrial era,'' declares the economist Lester C.


Hard Facts Daunt Israeli Researcher
LEAD: As Meron Benvenisti sees it, Israelis of both the left and the right refuse to allow the facts to get in the way.


Jan Wurtzburger Plans a Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jon A. Wurtzburger of New York and Bedford, N.Y., have made known December wedding plans for their daughter Jan Wurtzburger and Talbot A. Hack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Hack of Greenwich, Conn.


Scharr's Passing Leads Syracuse Romp
LEAD: The Syracuse team that was supposed to be so intimidating this season finally emerged at Rutgers Stadium today as the Orangemen routed the Scarlet Knights, 49-28.


TALKING: Modulars; Cottages For the Elderly
LEAD: THE option of creating an accessory unit - an apartment in a single-family house or a separate cottage on the house lot - has long been important to many homeowners, especially the elderly and families with limited incomes.


Rebecca Moss Wed to Patrick Guyver
LEAD: Rebecca Sarah Moss and Patrick Richard Guyver were married yesterday at St.
Gregory-the-Great Church in Stratford-on-Avon, England.
The Rev.
Placid Sinnott, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; The Slow Market Benefits Conservation
LEAD: AS developers fret over their stagnant projects, land conservationists are taking advantage of the slow property market to gather parcels while they may.


The 'Original' 'Show Boat' Comes to TV, Via New Jersey
LEAD: The only American musical of the 1920's that remains a part of the standard musical theater repertory, the Jerome Kern-Oscar Hammerstein 2d ''Show Boat,'' has been revived frequently on Broadway, in the West End, by opera companies and stock and amateur groups, and in the movies.


'Life Goes On' Stretches Reality, Within Reason
LEAD: During a rehearsal the other day inside the family den of the new ABC series ''Life Goes On,'' the actors Kellie Martin and Bill Smitrovich, who play the teen-aged Becca Thacher and her father Drew, ignored the fact that Christopher Burke wasn't on the set.
While his dialogue coach stood in for him to feed lines to the other actors, Mr.


A Political Aftershock
LEAD: The quake has brought a re-examination of the California taxpayer revolt that enshrined the state's reluctance to tax and spend.
Page 26.


Conjured by Calder
LEAD: ''The intimate world of Alexander Calder'' at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum is as much fun as any exhibition we can hope to see.
But, quite apart from being so much fun, it is also a lesson in life, for Calder had in a high degree the gift of metamorphosis.
The first thing we learn from this exhibition is that in the everyday things around him - a clothespin, a cork, a fishbone, a discarded can of this or that - he saw disinherited ingredients that could be put to magical use.


Blacks Should Push For Mayoral Agendas
LEAD: To the Editor:


What Should Rise From Catastrophic Law's Ashes; Willing to Pay
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Ann Coleman, A Banker, Is Married
LEAD: Susan Ann Coleman, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, and Philippe Geneste, a vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Casa Madrona Hotel in Sausalito, Calif.
The Rev.
William P. Bullard of the Church of Science of the Mind performed the nondenominational service.


Question Of the Week; Should the Jets Have Benched O'Brien?
LEAD:  It has been several years now that we have watched Ken O'Brien being sacked, injured and otherwise violated.
During this time he has always returned to the scene of the sack willingly, and he never complained about lack of pass protection.


'No Exit,' Sartre's Version of Hell
LEAD: ''HELL is other people'' is the standard superficial explanation for the meaning of Jean-Paul Sartre's ''No Exit,'' now at Long Island Stage in Rockville Centre.


Wedding Plans For Amy Wilentz
LEAD: Justice Robert N. Wilentz of Deal, N.J., has announced November wedding plans for his daughter, Amy Wilentz, and Nicholas Goldberg, a son of Richard Goldberg of Wiesbaden, West Germany, and Uli Monaco of New York.


Hanging On When the Dow Plunges
LEAD: With the stock market on a roller-coaster course again, many people are wondering if they belong in the equity market at all.
But most financial experts warn against panic selling should the Dow Jones industrial average experience another precipitous drop, the way it did on Oct. 13, and urge long-term investors to hang on for the ride.


Alcohol Lurks as a Gateway to Other Drugs
LEAD: THE fervor and intensity associated with the war on drugs is a tug on the emotional strings of America.
The rhetoric smacks of a call to arms intended to placate the majority, who are worried that crack-cocaine, and the crowd associated with it, will soon be sitting on front lawns and calling to children in suburban classrooms.


Miss McDonough, Banker, Married
LEAD: At St.
Monica's Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan, Maureen Jennifer McDonough, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick McDonough, was married yesterday to Robert Leo Morgan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Morgan of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
John D. O'Leary officiated.


Lately the Lens Frames Moral Issues
LEAD: Casual and perfunctory violence, both psychic and physical, are so commonplace on the screen these days that it's truly surprising to find characters expressing regret when they hurt one another.
There's a remarkable moment in ''Sea of Love'' when Al Pacino, as a New York police detective on the trail of a serial killer, inflicts unintended injury as he lures and interviews a number of female suspects by pretending to be a lonely bachelor (which in fact he is, but that's another part of the story).


Jaunts Keep County's 'Senior Bus' Busy
LEAD: MORE of the county's older residents are getting out and about lately, thanks to a new ''senior bus'' that is being made available 365 days (and nights) a year by the Westchester County Office for the Aging.


'Liaisons Dangereuses' With Its Glossy Veneer
LEAD: PERHAPS for all the wrong reasons, ''Les Liaisons Dangereuses'' has become something of a theatrical epidemic since its Broadway run in a Royal Shakespeare Company production in 1987.
Playhouses everywhere appear to be pouncing upon Christopher Hampton's adaptation of the 1782 novel by Choderlos de Laclos.


Brokers' Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Storm-Tossed Canvases And Tension in Sculptures
LEAD: AS one of the artists John Myers helped put on the map, Walter Darby Bannard was included in the 1988 show commemorating the late dealer.
His was a 1969 Color Field canvas, daintily, almost timidly, executed - very different from the figure the painter cuts in Myers's memoir, ''Tracking the Marvelous.


THE PRODUCERS
LEAD: IT IS LATE AUGUST, A MONTH BEFORE THE BATTLE BE-tween Warner Bros. and Sony would turn Hollywood on its ear.


Ellen J. Savette Marries David Archer
LEAD: Ellen Jeanne Savette and David John Archer were married yesterday at Christ and St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
Barbara Thrall.
The bride is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Savette of New York.
Her husband is a son of Mary Archer of Leavenworth, Kan., and the late Dr.


Reviews/Dance; Role Debut for Dakin In Graham's 'Meadow'
LEAD: Martha Graham has written of the many sources for her ''Dark Meadow,'' among them Roman, Greek and American Indian myths and Jungian theory about the collective unconscious.
One might reasonably expect a bit of clutter.
And certainly the dance, presented by the Martha Graham Dance Company on Thursday at City Center, has its share of sculptural


Bring Back Upper Volta
LEAD: THE PEOPLE OF Chad had good reason to change the name of &gt;Fort-Archambault to &gt;Sarh, and &gt;Fort-Lamy to &gt;Ndjamena: the new names are less warlike, contain no memories of a colonial past and are easier for local residents to pronounce.
I will go along with this change in about a year, when I become sure the


Indian News Program Struggles With Censors
LEAD: India's first privately produced news and documentary program, made on videotape for sale and rental, is running into problems with India's film censors as it begins its second year.


Sarah B. Thayer Marries a Banker
LEAD: Sarah Bradlee Thayer and Charles LaMar Robinson were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
Luke in the Fields in New York by the Right Rev.
Paul Moore Jr., who recently retired as Episcopal Bishop of New York.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
David Wetmore Devens of New York and the late Francis Curtis Thayer.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large kitchen with 25-year-old cabinets covered with a brown matte-finish plastic laminate.
We would like to paint these cabinets white.
How can we make paint stick to this laminate?


INDIA WITHOUT NONSENSE
LEAD: ''O new Palms!!!
O flowers!!
O creatures!!
O beasts!!
Violent and amazing delight at the wonderful variety of life and dress here. . . .
Colours, and costumes, and myriadism of impossible picturesqueness!!!'' So exclaimed Edward Lear in his diary with characteristic enthusiasm in 1873 when he arrived in Bombay for what was to be his last extended journey.


Still Searching
LEAD: The K.G.B. has not backed away from its contention that Raoul Wallenberg died 42 years ago in Lubyanka Prison.
But the Russians suddenly are willing to go through the motions of cooperating with people who think otherwise and who are determined to search for Mr.
Wallenberg, a Swede who saved thousands of Hungarian Jews from World War II death camps before his arrest by Soviet authorities in 1945.


Punter Becomes Weapon For Jets
LEAD: The Jets may be on to something new in the National Football League: the vertical game.


BRIGHT SHARDS AND SOLID POTTERY
LEAD:  TIME'S POWER  Poems 1985-1988.
By Adrienne Rich.  58 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $7.95.
TAKE HEART  By Molly Peacock.  71 pp.
New York:  Random House.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $9.95.
HARP LAKE  By John Hollander.
Illustrated. 94 pp.
New York:  Alfred A.


About Cars; Subaru Comes a Long Way
LEAD: It has been six months since my friend Huey Kenniff bought his Subaru Legacy, but he continues to love it.
He talks about it all the time, and I have told him he has a good shot at boring me to death.


No Headline
LEAD: IN the heart of Moscow, dominating the city, stands the Kremlin, 90 fortressed acres in which Russia's past and present, her ecclesiastical and political legacies join, still a holy place to many Russians, to the world the emblematic center of the Soviet Union.


Madrid: A New Beat
LEAD: WARNING: Madrid contains a potentially addictive form of night life.
Occasional visitors can develop a sudden reluctance to go to bed early.
Much of the local population shows symptoms of advanced insomnia.
Those young at heart - and with a body willing to follow - are especially vulnerable.


Ms. Topper Wed To Paul A. Hurty
LEAD: Elizabeth Hale Topper and Paul Anders Hurty were married yesterday by the Rev.
Clifford Gain at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Nativity in Marina Del Rey, Calif.
The bride, who is 29 years old and is known as Betsy, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Topper of New Providence, N.J.
Her husband, 29, is a son of Mr.


SPEAKING THE PRINCE'S ENGLISH
LEAD: Malcolm Bradbury deplores ''contemporary British media personalities'' who ''wallow in vernacular informality and a heavy regional accent.''


A GENTLEMAN IN THE GALLERY
LEAD:  READING RUSSELL  Essays 1941-1988.
On Ideas, Literature, Art, Theater,  Music, Places, and Persons.
By John Russell.
Illustrated. 263 pp.
New York:  Harry N. Abrams. $29.95.


Landmarks Hearing
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has schedule a public hearing on whether to designate the Guggenheim Museum a city landmark.
The hearing is to be held Dec. 12 at 9:30 A.M. at City Hall.


WALL STREET GEARS UP TO BACK A BUYOUT WAVE
LEAD: Auto dealers have long shunned the notion of raising money from outside investors.
They don't like ''anyone under the tent but them,'' explained Ezra Mager, an executive vice president at Furman Selz Mager Dietz &amp; Birney Inc., a New York-based investment banker.


POSTINGS: The Meadowlands; 88,000 Ft. For Trade Shows
LEAD: Convention and trade show organizers and exhibitors who want space in the Meadowlands now are limited to hotel meeting rooms or the stadium in the Brendan T. Byrne Arena in the Sports Complex.
But not for long.


Expanded ''Dolphins' at East Coast Arts
LEAD: WITH his back arched and his head and toes on the floor, Jerry Tremendous is performing his morning yoga ritual in what is called the dolphin position.
Suddenly, he wonders who that woman was, the one who just walked by wearing a familiar-looking wedding ring.


Managua Puts Cloaks and Daggers on Display
LEAD: After years of secret C.I.A. operations against the Sandinista Government, Nicaraguans lined up this week for a firsthand look inside the spymasters' tool kit.


Sports of The Times: World Series; Once 0 for 31, Now He Roots for Canseco
LEAD: Ever since Jose Canseco lined a grand-slam over the center-field fence at Dodger Stadium in last year's World Series opener, he has had 24 consecutive official Series times at bat without a hit.
For a slugger of his stature, he's in the worst possible slump at the worst possible time.
But when he was told that Marv Owen, a third baseman for the Detroit Tigers more than half a century ago, held the Series record with 31 consecutive hitless times at bat, the Athletics' right fielder smiled.


Phoenix Open Increases Purse
LEAD: The Phoenix Open has obtained corporate sponsorship, and the purse for the 1990 golf tournament has increased $200,000 to $900,000.


Indian Consumer Group Wins Fight on Medicine
LEAD: An Indian public interest group, charging that pharmaceutical companies are supplying hospitals with contaminated products, won its first battle this week against drug enforcement agencies.


DEALERS VOTE FOR THEIR CHOICES
LEAD: The autumnal promise of early evenings and long nights stirs interest in video.
Fall is prime time in the stores as many viewers update their equipment.


Jacob Neal: Hair Stylist
LEAD: When Jacob Neal looks at a woman, he sees her not necessarily as she is, but as she could be.
He is a hair stylist who specializes in makeovers, which he describes as ''taking a man or woman from one point to another level.''


Pop Musical Cultures Mined and Mingled
LEAD: Border-crossing has become a 1980's rock ritual.
One after another, songwriters become infatuated with some ''exotic'' music, decide to make an album under its influence and collaborate with the top musicians available.
At best, star and collaborators inspire one another to synergistic heights.
Failing that, the star's fans may have their ears opened, and some might seek out the original sources (which are likely to reach more record stores in the wake of a cross-cultural hit album).


Anti-Drug Units Face Formidable Obstacles
LEAD: Colombia's war against the narcotics trade faces fundamental obstacles rooted in the country's geography and the weaknesses in its armed forces as well as the strength of the drug organizations.


Prospects; Free Trade With Mexico
LEAD: In comments made before a Senate hearing on the Latin American debt situation, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher predicted that the United States and Mexico would eventually enter into a free-trade agreement similar to the one that went into effect with Canada in January.
Four experts comment on the possibility.


Close Encounters of the Soviet Kind
LEAD: To the Editor:


Glitter at 'Traviata' Opening And a Barbie Doll at U.N.
LEAD: Even the jewels were on a grand scale at the opening of the Metropolitan Opera's new production of ''La Traviata'' Monday.
Many eyes were on Lamia Khashoggi, who wore a red dress and enormous diamond bracelets ballooning around her wrists.
Far above, boxes were occupied by such as Henry Kravis, Saul Steinberg and Brooke


Running Out of Space for Nuclear Waste
LEAD: THE problem of what to do with wastes from making nuclear bombs has always been viewed as a long-term issue, posing no immediate threat to life.
But events of the last few weeks have demonstrated to the Department of Energy that it can raise more immediate concerns.


Eight New Books to Help You Get Going
LEAD: THE publishing of how-to travel books, while still less of an industry than the where-to book business, is certainly burgeoning.
Eight new titles merit attention.  ''The Official Frequent Flyer Guidebook'' misled me at first; the word official in the title made me think that it was put out by the publishers of the Official Airline Guide, which corporate travel departments use.


Los Angeles Prepares for the Big One
LEAD: The dimly lit parking lot of the Virginia Street Elementary School in downtown Los Angeles was filled with stretchers and simulated cries of pain.


Many Issues Neglected In Race for Governor
LEAD: AS it enters its final weeks, the campaign for governor is attracting notice as much for what the candidates are not talking about as for what they are.


Saturday a Focus For Fan's Father
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Vibrant Majolica Handmade in Italy
LEAD: SINCE the early Renaissance, Deruta has produced much of Italy's most exuberant and refined majolica, the handcrafted ceramics developed by Italians in the 14th century.
The colorful, lavishly decorated objects were collected by kings and nobles, given as love tokens and prized by museums. ''One of the purest expressions of Italian Renaissance culture,'' noted Laurence Kanter, curator of the Robert Lehman collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New


A Producer Wed To Miss Proctor
LEAD: V. Elizabeth Proctor, the daughter of Virginia Millane Proctor of New York and Palm Beach, Fla., and William Ross Proctor of New York and Sanibel, Fla., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Lesure Salguero, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlos Eduardo Salguero of Monte Carlo, Monaco, Madrid and New York.
The Rev.


Home Schooling: Shane Is O.K.
LEAD: I would not enter the fray of this home-schooling discussion except that a child has been unjustly maligned and I would like to speak up for him.
We have known Shane, the son of Cindy Soehner (''My Son Is Better Off Learning At Home,'' Opinion, Sept 3), for over a year now and have found him to be a nice quiet boy, easy to have around.


Soviet Military Officers Pressing For Changes and a Trade Union
LEAD: Despite fears of possible reprisals from the Soviet Defense Ministry, present and former officers banded together today to press for improved conditions and political changes in the armed forces, including creation of an independent military trade union.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Cold Spring
LEAD: FOR 93 years, the foundry in Cold Spring - just across the Hudson River from the United States Military Academy at West Point - turned out iron smelted from ore in the nearby hills.
Set up with $25,000 allocated by Congress in 1818 and drawing craftsmen from Ireland, Scotland, Wales and England, it made cannon and cannon balls for the Union Army in the Civil War and parts for the first American locomotive.


Nancy L. Tellier to Wed in December
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Tellier of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Nancy Lyn Tellier to P. Murphy van der Velde, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Christiaan D. van der Velde of Norwich, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.


'A Little Fright Music' And 'Authentic' Baroque
LEAD: A BUSY chamber music week is not unexpected at this time of year - and we certainly have it - but the symphonic floodgates have opened as well.
First is the Fairfield Period Instrument Academy, a professional, chamber-sized ensemble that calls itself ''Connecticut's first 'authentic' instrument orchestra,'' is appearing at 4 this afternoon at St.


When Women Walk Together, A Quiet Bond Is Formed
LEAD: WE women who walk exchange barely perceptible nods and tight smiles as we arrive each morning at the earth-red macadam track that rims our high school.
Implicit in our reserve is the acknowledgment that we are determined to respect the yearning for solitude that has spurred each of us to don our sweat suits, lace our sneakers and walk briskly through the milky light of early morning.


East Berlin Must Move
LEAD: The first reaction to the change of leadership in East Germany was: at last, but what's the difference?
Egon Krenz, the new boss of East Berlin, is 52 compared with the ousted Erich Honecker's 77, but that is only a statistical generation change.


A Stitch, but Not in Time
LEAD: GIVEN THE GRIEVOUS RENTING suffered by the Exxon Valdez when it ran aground in Alaska's Prince William Sound last March 24, Fred N. Hallett marvels that the ship made it back to port at all.
An ex-Navy officer, Hallett is a vice president and spokesman for the National Steel and Shipbuilding Company (NASSCO) in San Diego, which built the Valdez and is now repairing it.


Nancy Adkins Is Married
LEAD: Nancy Anne Adkins and Joel Allen Shapiro were married last evening at the Lotos Club in New York by Judge Peter K. Leisure of Federal District Court in New York.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
John S. Adkins Jr. of Madison, Conn., and the late Mr.
Adkins.
A graduate of Pratt Institute, she is the printing manager at the Ogilvy &amp; Mather advertising agency in New York and will keep her name professionally.


Reviews/Music; Marclay, Hoberman, Sound And Fury
LEAD: Christian Marclay and Perry Hoberman have created a curious mixed-media monster this weekend at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, with the last of four evening performances set for tonight at 8:30.


STREETSCAPES: The Baker Mansion on Park at 93d; Under the Servants' Quarters, a Railroad Siding?
LEAD: IT is certainly a drop in the giant bucket of Manhattan office space - 5,600 square feet at $45 a square foot.
But the space is unusual, for it is in one of the grandest houses to survive in Manhattan, the old George F. Baker Jr. residence at the northwest corner of 93d Street and Park Avenue.


An AIDS Bite and a Conviction
LEAD: A man infected with the AIDS virus was convicted of attempted murder on Friday for biting a police officer.


Miss Fray Wed To Robert Carey
LEAD: Roberts Browning Fray and Robert James McDonald Carey were married yesterday at the Little Fork Church in Rixeyville, Va., by the Rev.
John J. Desaulniers, an Episcopal priest.
The bride is a daughter of Mary C. Fray of Culpeper, Va., and the late Jackson Lee Fray.
Mr.
Carey's parents are Mr. and Mrs.


Question Of the Week; Should the Jets Have Benched O'Brien?
LEAD:  The decision to bench Ken O'Brien for the journeyman Kyle Mackey has deeper implications than the quick-fix remedy for a troubled team.
It is this kind of unstable decision making that mirrors the disorganization that is the New York Jets, during the tenure of Joe Walton.


Registering a Clamp on Parking Tickets
LEAD: CITY officials in New Haven, Waterbury and Hartford are taking advantage of a state program to help the five largest municipalities in the state cut down on unpaid parking tickets.
Enacted by the General Assembly last spring, the program allows officials at the Motor Vehicle Department to deny vehicle registrations and renewals to drivers with outstanding parking violations.


Nicole L. Hiegel Becomes the Bride Of J. S. Bomann
LEAD: Nicole Laurance Hiegel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Hiegel of New York and Quogue, L.I., was married yesterday to J. Scott Bomann, a son of Donald Bomann Jr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Nebauer, both of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stanislaus Mosley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church in New York.


How to Brighten a Gloomy Monday
LEAD: MONDAY is not the cheeriest of days, especially when the weather is overcast and gloomy.
As a housewife whose children have grown and flown and whose ''girlfriends'' have jobs, so no one to play with, I was bored with housework, television and the telephone.


Alison Wheeler Weds a Banker
LEAD: At St.
Mary's-in-Tuxedo Episcopal Church in Tuxedo Park, N.Y., Alison Cordelia Wheeler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Wheeler of Tuxedo Park, was married yesterday to David Morrison Berray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Berray of Millbrook, N.Y.


THE EARTHQUAKE'S TOLL IN 8 COUNTIES
LEAD:  ALAMEDA: Thirty bodies recovered from collapsed section of Interstate 880.
Maybe 97 to 167 people still missing.
Countywide, 320 injuries reported and $1.3 billion damage.
No water in city of Alameda, near Oakland.
SAN FRANCISCO: Ten deaths; 300 injured.
Mayor's office estimates $2 billion in property losses.


Who Gets the Liver? The Gaffes of Waiters
LEAD: BECAUSE, like more and more Americans, my wife and I love dining out, and love it best where we find the best food and ambiance and service, we seek out the wonderful restaurants in New York City.


After Quake, Talks Break Up and Business Is Left Unfinished
LEAD: The last time John Schuerholz was seen in San Francisco, the Kansas City Royals' general manager was standing in a darkened hotel lobby wearing a set of lighted antennae on his head, something like John Belushi used to wear as a Killer Bee on ''Saturday Night Live.''


Davis Is Still Angered by Switch
LEAD: Storm Davis, an Oakland Athletics pitcher, was still upset with Tony La Russa, the manager, today, and La Russa was angry with Davis for being angry with him.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: They aren't daydreams because most daydreams are so far-fetched and even ridiculous (which doesn't mean that they aren't wonderful) that there's almost no chance that they could ever come true.
But certainly once or twice in each lifetime, there are foolish, impractical things that we could do, and even fleetingly consider doing, but that we back away from, usually because we're afraid of making fools of ourselves or embarrassed for other reasons.


East Berliners March for Democracy
LEAD: Several thousand East Berliners marched hand-in-hand in a single line through the center of the city today in the first demonstration for more democracy in the East German capital since Egon Krenz replaced Erich Honecker as Communist Party leader last Wednesday.
The police did not interfere.


HOLLYWOOD CONNECTIONS: WHERE THE MOVIES COME FROM
LEAD: Each of the eight major studios has its own strategy to make movies in the 1990's.
Here are some of the gambits and people involved.
COLUMBIA


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 8 about a videotape produced by the League of Women Voters in Maplewood about New Jersey's garbage crisis misidentified a television network that will show the program.
It will be broadcast on Tuesday at 8:30 P.M. on the Cable Television Network of New Jersey, not the New Jersey


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep planting, bulbs, shrubs, all evergreens, perennials.
Start cleanup by cutting back browning stems of perennials; pull up annuals and add them to the compost.
Start raking, if it has not been started, and put tree leaves, grass clippings and twigs on the compost.
About Seed


C. I. Pavelic Wed To Miss Marache
LEAD: Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Eugenie Jebb Marache, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert William Marache Jr. of Greenwich and Nantucket, Mass., to Christopher Ivan Pavelic, the son of Ivan Pavelic of Greenwich and the late Irene Gmur Pavelic.


More Adventures in Publishing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fighting Addiction: 3 Days in Phoenix House -- A special report.; Struggle and Hope From Ashes of Drugs
LEAD: As though part of an enormous stage set for some brooding morality play, Phoenix House, a drug-treatment center, stands on the edge of a sinister block in the heart of the Morris Heights section of the Bronx.
Scrawled across the treatment center's facade in graffiti are the letters C-R-A-C-K.


Sharyn Kaplan to Marry Vincent Tritto in April
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Solomon H. Kaplan of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sharyn A. Kaplan, to Vincent B. Tritto, the son of Joseph Tritto of New York.
An April wedding is planned.


Tigers Start Slow But Pick Up Steam
LEAD: It was an unfamiliar role for an Ivy League football team, but Princeton played like the big shot on the block today and bullied a decidedly weaker Fordham team at Palmer Stadium.


POSTINGS: Affordable Town Houses; A Push in Putnam
LEAD: In the weak market of the New York suburbs, Joe Cioccolanti thinks he has found a niche. ''There may be a large inventory of unsold homes, but they just aren't affordable,'' said the Putnam County developer, who is offering 75 two-bedroom town-house units in Kent at $129,900 apiece, well below the prices of most new homes in the area.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Hockey  Sabres 4, Penguins 2: Darren Puppa continued his hot goaltending last night by stopping 38 shots for Buffalo.
Puppa raised his season record to 5-1-1 as he and the Sabres held the Penguins scoreless in Pittsburgh on five power plays.
The Penguins, who set a National Hockey League record with 119 power-play goals last season, have connected on just 1 of their last 19 chances.(AP)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a large kitchen with 25-year-old cabinets covered with a brown matte-finish plastic laminate.
We would like to paint these cabinets white.
How can we make paint stick to this laminate?


GRIDIRON GREED
LEAD:  A PAYROLL TO MEET  A Story of Greed, Corruption, and Football at SMU.
By David Whitford.
Illustrated. 221 pp.
New York:  Macmillan Publishing Company. $18.95.
THE HUNDRED YARD LIE  The Corruption of College Football and What We Can Do to Stop It.
By Rick Telander.  223 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


DATA BANK: Oct. 22, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7


Alfred Hayes, 79, Retired Chief Of the Reserve Bank of New York
LEAD: Alfred Hayes, who headed the Federal Reserve Bank of New York until 1975 and played a pivotal role in the national and world banking systems for nearly two decades, died yesterday at a nursing home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 79 years old and a longtime resident of New Canaan.


Milet Andrejevic, 64, Painter and Teacher
LEAD: Milet Andrejevic, an artist and teacher whose work is in the permanent collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Whitney Museum of American Art, died of lung cancer Friday night at his home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.


Question Of the Week; Should the Jets Have Benched O'Brien?
LEAD:  Did the Jets make the right move in benching O'Brien?


'P-Star' Can Spot Inflationary Trends
LEAD: Recent work at the Federal Reserve board, christened P-Star analysis, has stimulated a renewed debate about the relationship between the money supply and inflation.
This new work is based on the earlier work of Irving Fisher, which he conducted evidence, and concluded that the P-Star concept is helpful in understanding inflation.


Surge in 2d Half Lifts Irish Past Trojans
LEAD: There had been so much talk in recent weeks about Raghib Ismail, Notre Dame's phenomenal sophomore tailback, that Coach Lou Holtz felt obliged to remind the team's fans that the Rocket was simply the latest Notre Damer to step forward and deliver when needed.


John A. Redmond, Executive, Plans To Be Married to Janalee Salestrom
LEAD: Vem R. Salestrom of Omaha and R. D. Salestrom of Phoenix have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Janalee Salestrom and John Alexander Redmond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
W.
Redmond of Washington and Dark Harbor, Me.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Sept. 24 about fall foliage omitted a phone number for Pennsylvania.
While the state has no separate phone number for tracking foliage, maps and information about fall activities are available at 800-847-4872.


How Washington Shifted to Embracing Gorbachev
LEAD: Five months ago the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, dismissed President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as a ''drugstore cowboy'' - all hat and no cattle, all talk and no delivery.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  HALLOWEEN OUTING


Pilot in Errant Flight Loses His Right to Fly
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration will not allow the pilot who was apparently unconscious while his small plane flew about 1,000 miles down the East Coast and crashed near the Bahamas last July to fly a plane again anytime soon.


Classic White Shirt: Still a Fresh Look
LEAD: Diogenes would have been content to find one honest man.
Today, many women are content to find one honest white shirt for under $100.
Fortunately, there are plenty of sources of quality shirts for less than that, sometimes far less.


A Parting Gift: A Lesson on Embracing Life and Death
LEAD: RUTH, my wife of 43 years, gave me many wondrous gifts: the gifts of love, four sterling children, a full and adventurous life.
She surprised me by giving me one more gift at the end.


Before Buying, School the Ears
LEAD: Before demonstrating a loudspeaker in his showroom, Alan C. Neubauer, one of New York City's more astute audio salesmen, asks his clients, ''When were you last at a live concert?'' He believes that a recent experience of live music helps his customers choose loudspeakers that will give them the most pleasure in the long run.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:  Hotel Terminus: The Life and Times of Klaus Barbie  1988.
Virgin Vision. $99.95.
Laser disk, $99.95. 4 hours 27 minutes.
Not rated.
A ''vivid, harrowing, minutely detailed'' recollection of France under the German occupation, Max Ophuls's spellbinding film is inexorable in its pursuit of truth, not just about Barbie the ''butcher of Lyons,'' but about the moral climate of his world and of ours today.


'Yaaba' Comes From Africa To Speak to the World
LEAD: Idrissa Ouedraogo, the film maker from Burkina Faso, West Africa, sat in his room at the Manhattan's Empire Hotel, surrounded by sheets and blankets and a bit bewildered by the pile of items he had to pack into his valise for that day's trip to Japan.
The previous night at Alice Tully Hall across the street, Mr.


Train to Track Could Use Whip
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Hextall Is Back
LEAD: In a variation of the ''you-can't-fire-me-I-quit'' routine, Ron Hextall, the Philadelphia Flyer goalie, has been staging a holdout while under a 12-game suspension for an incident in last season's Stanley Cup playoffs.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: ON a rocky spit at the river's edge just a few miles below the George Washington Bridge, 32 brand new town-house condominiums sit empty and fading, reminders that although the wild, lawless waterfront has drastically changed, part of it, for better or worse, endures.


Jill M. Goldberg Weds Alan Mann
LEAD: Jill Marla Goldberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Goldberg of Great Neck, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Alan James Mann, the son of Mrs.
Robert Horowitz of Newton, Mass.
The ceremony was performed at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., by Rabbi Jack Bemporad and Cantor Howard M.


Two of Us Is One Too Many
LEAD: HE WAS A PROWLER on my turf and I hated it.
When my husband took early retirement, I came down with a late, hard case of culture shock.
It made me crazy.


Old Shows With New Twists
LEAD: THE show is George and Ira Gershwin's ''Oh, Kay!'' The year is 1926, the setting is a swanky estate in Southampton and the characters include a titled bootlegger (The Duke) and an English heiress (Lady Kay).


The Serendipitous Appeal of Eurailpass
LEAD: WHEN the Eurailpass was introduced by the railroads of Europe in 1959, Americans of our generation instantly recognized our travel ideal in an affordable ticket offering unlimited access for a set period to all the trains that crisscrossed the Continent.
We were young adventurers, about to become children of the 1960's, and we valued the very things that the Eurailpass not only made possible but also celebrated: thrift, spontaneity, simplicity, a sense of camaraderie with other travelers and the opportunity for contact with local people.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


RETURN TO THE KILLING FIELDS
LEAD: Dith Pran and Dr.
Haing S. Ngor join with Nien Cheng and Elie Wiesel as having survived three of the darkest, most brutal regimes of the 20th century and then somehow summoned the strength to report to the world the atrocities they experienced (''Return to the Killing Fields,'' Sept. 24).
I believe it is the hope of these courageous survivors that their recollections may prevent the world from allowing such acts to take place again.


Still Miffed?
LEAD: Make no mistake, that was not a grudge that Nancy Reagan was holding as she chatted about Donald T. Regan in a recent radio interview.
Mrs.
Reagan, who was discussing her book, ''My Turn: The Memoirs of Nancy Reagan,'' which is to be published this month, said she ''tried very hard not to be vindictive'' when writing about certain top Presidential aides with whom she was not particularly friendly.


It's Time to Accept the New Russian Image at Face Value
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gutter Cleaning and Repair
LEAD: CLEANING and repairing gutters is best done in the spring and fall, but if you can find time to do this job only once a year, fall gutter maintenance is the more important.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Big Books about espionage, flying, adventure or what have you are very much a la mode these days.
They tend to run well over 300 pages, many over 400, and whatever their subject they all seem to read alike.


Transit Agency Wants to End Airport Express
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority has recommended that the express subway service between Manhattan and Kennedy International Airport be eliminated, arguing that it is not attracting enough riders.


Atlanta Judge Bars Enforcing Of Law Against Assault Guns
LEAD: A local judge has barred the city from enforcing an ordinance that bans the sale of semiautomatic assault weapons.


Confessions of a Seat Strategist
LEAD: AS a fairly frequent traveler, I have to confess I'm confused by the fuss over nonsmoking sections on trains and airplanes.
Not that I particularly enjoy sitting next to smokers (I don't).
It's just that smoke seems a minor irritation compared with the real issues that divide us.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: The vacuum cleaner has kept me busy lately trying to get rid of dust from the bellows of my view camera, which accumulated while on a visit to the Holy Land.
That accomplished, it's time to clean the lenses.


SMART ENOUGH FOR THEIR GOOD
LEAD: LIGHT CAN BE BOTH WAVE AND PARTICLE  By Ellen Gilchrist.  204 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $17.95.


Ideological Test for Federal Jobs Worries Doctors
LEAD: As several prominent medical authorities express concern over the Bush Administration's considering ideological issues for those seeking scientific jobs at the Department of Health and Human Services, one of the top appointees in the department has said the Administration should concentrate more on the scientific qualifications of candidates.


ADRIFT IN OUAGADOUGOU
LEAD:  MEMORY OF SNOW AND OF DUST  By Breyten Breytenbach.  308 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


FICTION
LEAD:  DEADFALL.
By Patti Davis. (Crown, $17.95.) This literary plea for a hands-off policy in Nicaragua is particularly plaintive, coming as it does from the daughter of a President.
The actress, songwriter and political activist Patti Davis, Ronald and Nancy Reagan's daughter, took on the American presence in Vietnam in her first novel, ''Home Front,'' which was written with Maureen Strange Foster.


Badminton Fans Boast of Feathers and Aerobics
LEAD: On Friday nights, Larry Hudak and his wife, Ginny, join as many as 60 people for a relaxing dinner cooked by friends and a few games of badminton.
The action is not in a backyard, though.
It is at the Gut 'n Feathers Club, a badminton club in this affluent coastal town known for its sailing and social traditions.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 1 about the television program 'Night Music'' omitted the name of the percussionist Don Alias from the list of musicians in the show's house band.
It also misstated the title of the Slim Gaillard song ''Flat Foot Floogie (With the Floy, Floy).''


Playboy Takes Off Its Ears
LEAD: Used to be, Playboy the company ran on the same devil-may-care principles that Playboy the magazine portrayed.
But ever since Christie Hefner joined upper management of the company her father founded in 1953, she has been battling to turn Playboy Enterprises Inc. from Hugh Hefner's ''personality-driven life-style company,'' as she put it, into an ''international media company for the mass market.


Slow Flight
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; Vietnamese Pianist in U.S. Debut
LEAD: A pianist of considerable abilities made his American debut at the 92d Street Y Thursday night.
Dang Thai Son was the winner of the 1980 Chopin Competition in Warsaw, and has garnered various other honors over the past decade.
It was possible to hear something of the consensus-oriented approach we often worry about with competition pianists in his polished, secure, unmannered playing, but there was no mistaking a true and varied command of the instrument and a feeling for musical shapes and pianistic textures that could yet blossom into true interpretative individuality.


A Skyscraper-High Office Space Surplus
LEAD: WITH office construction running at high levels at a time when New York City and its suburbs are struggling through an economic downturn, experts say the region is confronting the largest office space surplus in more than a decade.


Preparing to Operate, Polymerix Fills Post
LEAD: Polymerix Inc., a company that has not yet manufactured its product, has named Gary J. Schantz president and chief operating officer as it moves toward an operational stage.


Market Place; When the Panic Failed to Happen
LEAD: THE stock market news of last week, as in a famous Sherlock Holmes story where the key clue was that a dog failed to bark, may be more in what did not happen than in what did.


Brussels Computer Snag
LEAD: The Brussels stock exchange computer, which went out of operation early last week, will resume operating on Tuesday, the exchange's chairman, Jean Peterbroeck, said.
Belgian stockbrokers have had to resort to open outcry trading this week, using their old tools of blackboard and chalk, while the software is fixed to handle heavier volumes.


Business and the Law; A Plan to Speed Asbestos Cases
LEAD: INNOVATIVE plans are quietly being drawn up in Maryland to resolve thousands of asbestos cases that have swamped that state's dockets.


Safer Baseball For Children
LEAD: New baseballs and softballs, designed to reduce the potential for head injuries, are the first to meet national safety standards.
The balls meet standards approved last July by the National Operating Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment.


Deals
LEAD:  BASKETBALL  DENVER (NBA) - Announced the sale of the team to Bertram Lee and Peter Bynoe.
LOS ANGELES (NBA) - Signed Torgeir Bryn, forward.
PORTLAND (NBA) - Announced that Rolando Ferreira, center, had left camp.
UTAH (NBA) - Waived Rory White and Reggie Turner, forwards.
HOCKEY


UAL Board To Consider Its Next Step
LEAD: Under pressure to respond to a $111.25-a-share plunge in the company's stock last week, the board of the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, is to meet today in Chicago to consider several options.


LEBANESE FACTIONS AGREE ON CHARTER TO RESOLVE STRIFE
LEAD: Members of Lebanon's Parliament agreed in Saudi Arabia today on a new constitution that would increase the power of the country's Muslim majority and acknowledge a Syrian role in Lebanese affairs, participants in the talks said.


Gorbachev and the Wayward Press
LEAD: As the Soviet press has become a daily riot of sensationalism, from U.F.O.'s to sacrilegious critiques of the Bolshevik Revolution, Westerners and even many Soviet readers have come to mistake glasnost for freedom of the press.


As New Tactic, Do-It-Yourself Abortions Taught
LEAD: Concerned that abortion rights may be curtailed by the courts or legislatures, scores of self-help groups around the country are teaching women how to perform abortions on themselves and each other.


Wall St.'s 2 Camps
LEAD: As traders and Wall Street executives grope for a better understanding of the stock market's recent 190-point plunge, the search for likely villains is dividing Wall Street into two distinctly different camps: the old order and the new order.
The old order - Wall


INSIDE
LEAD:  H.U.D.
Jurisdiction Moved  housing secretary has decided to shift control over programs in Puerto Rico from the agency's troubled New York office to Atlanta.
Page B1.
Concern on Home Abortion  In a revival of a technique that flourished in the 1960's, scores of self-help groups are teaching women how to perform abortions.


Death Toll in Honduran Plane Crash Is Put at 131; 15 Survive


Gas-Export Plan by Canada
LEAD: Canada's National Energy Board has ruled that three international oil companies based in Calgary, Alberta, can export a total of 9.2 trillion cubic feet of gas to the United States over 20 years beginning in 1996.
But the companies - Esso


After 4 Setbacks, Developers Hire Critic to Design Seaport Building
LEAD: In their fifth attempt to build a large building in the small South Street Seaport Historic District, the developers Paul and Seymour Milstein have taken an unusual tack - hiring as their architect one of the most prominent critics of their fourth attempt.


Rock-'n'-Roll Managing
LEAD: Charlie Samuels peered into Davey Johnson's office, hoping to capture a full view of what was inside without being conspicuous.
There were times, Samuels will admit, when he thought he would look into Johnson's office in the Mets' clubhouse and see another man's belongings.
But this was too much.


Frank A. Saunders, 67, Corporate Executive
LEAD: Frank A. Saunders, a retired vice president of corporate relations and communications at Philip Morris Inc., who helped increase corporate support for the arts, died yesterday of pneumonia in Doctors Hospital after suffering a series of strokes.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan and Nantucket,


Salina Journal; Rallying Around A Prairie Prophet
LEAD: As if responding to a prophet crying in the wilderness, experts, supporters and others trooped to the Kansas prairie this weekend to give and take advice on agriculture and its environmental problems.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Claire A. Cerni Marries Brian H. Barr
LEAD: Claire A. Cerni, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore A. Cerni of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian H. Barr, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Barr of Orchard Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward Martin, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.


Jody Kresch, Lawyer, Weds Ross Silverman
LEAD: Jody E. Kresch, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Kresch of Searingtown, L.I., was married yesterday to Ross O. Silverman, a son of Irwin Silverman and Inez Silverman, both of Toledo, Ohio.
Rabbi Paula Winnig officiated at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.


Historian to Run in Hungary As the Opposition Candidate
LEAD: Hungary's leading opposition group today announced its candidate for President in the multi-party elections to be held next June.


11,000 Acre Fire Is Put Out
LEAD: A fire that charred nearly 11,000 acres in three counties appeared tamed today under a light rain, but firefighters kept an eye out for flareups.
The fire began Wednesday at this Marine base and spread to the San Mateo Canyon wilderness area in the Cleveland National Forest.
It charred land in Orange, Riverside and San Diego counties, but no structures were burned.


Review/Opera; 'Barbiere' in High Volume Is Presented at the Met
LEAD: Some of the wounds suffered by the Metropolitan Opera's ''Barbiere di Siviglia'' on Saturday afternoon were self-inflicted, though in at least one case, the Met was an innocent bystander.


Marc A. Zambetti Sales Director, 27
LEAD: Marc A. Zambetti, a sales director for the Stella D'Oro Biscuit Company, was killed in the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway in Tuesday's earthquake in Oakland.
The 27-year-old San Francisco resident was a grandson of the company's founders and the son of its chief executive officer.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-10  A new Lebanese constitution was agreed to by legislators, participants said.
The system would give more power to the country's Muslim majority and acknowledge a Syrian role in its affairs.
Page A1  An economic crisis in Poland is demoralizing a country whose hopes were stirred when its first non-Communist Government in more than four decades was elected in September.


Township Focuses on Its Prejudices
LEAD: The publication of anti-Semitic personal ads in a high school newspaper has heightened soul-searching among many people in this community as to whether prejudice is a serious problem here.


Kasparov Beats Chess Computer (for Now)
LEAD: Yesterday Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion, played Deep Thought, the world computer chess champion, in a two-game match.
He won both games handily, to nobody's surprise, including his own.


U.S. Committee Adopts Drug Plan
LEAD: The executive board of the United States Olympic Committee today approved an aggressive out-of-competition drug-testing program, which includes oversight by an independent auditor and the hiring of an officer to investigate drug-related accusations.


Man in the News; 'Nobody's Tougher': Buck Alvin Helm
LEAD: Today, the name Buck Alvin Helm is synonymous with hope. ''Lucky Bucky,'' they are already calling the man who was pulled from the wreckage of the Nimitz Freeway on Saturday after being trapped for 89 hours in a sandwich of concrete that has entombed at least 38 people.


The Senate Five
LEAD: The House Banking Committee is finally investigating the Government's failure to move promptly against a big, mismanaged California savings and loan association.
It has subpoenaed a raft of witnesses, but not five whose role is suspect and may have been crucial:  Alan Cranston, Democrat of California  Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona  John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio  John McCain, Republican of Arizona  Don Riegle, Democrat of


Not in City For Quake, Some Feel Left Out
LEAD: For Margaret Boothroyd, returning home this weekend from the Adirondacks to her family's small apartment on Russian Hill was a little disorienting because everything looked the way it did before she left.


Master Patent Overrides 'Stepchild' Patent
LEAD: To the Editor:


Woman Challenges New York State's Anti-Harassment Law
LEAD: Jackie Dietze, who lives in a small town near the Canadian border, does not deny that she was loud, that she swore, that she threatened to beat up a neighbor.
But she never raised a hand to anybody, she said, and therefore, she is not a criminal.


U.S. to Offer Plan to Curb Farm Support
LEAD: The United States will put forward in Geneva this week a plan to phase out many American farm programs if other countries agree to similar cutbacks.
The offer is part of negotiations to end trade distortion in agriculture by the next century.


Drug Recall Is Announced
LEAD: The American Home Products Corporation is recalling three generic drugs after Federal regulators found that a subsidiary of the company had mispresented drug data to regulators.


Nets Waive Jones
LEAD: The Nets waived Charles Jones, a 6-foot-8-inch forward, yesterday to reduce their roster to 16 players.
Jones, a four-year National Basketball Association veteran from Louisville, was signed by the Nets on Oct. 4 as a free agent.
Jones played 43 games with Washington last season and has also played with Phoenix and Portland.


Herbert Hastings Foster Jr., Lawyer, 76
LEAD: Herbert Hastings Foster Jr., a former general counsel for the J. P. Stevens textile company, died Friday in the Westerly (R.I.) Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Block Island, R.I., and Captiva, Fla.


Severe Injury For 49er
LEAD: Jeff Fuller, the 49ers' free safety and a member of two Super Bowl championship teams, today suffered severe neck damage that threatens his pro football career.
Fuller was injured in a head-on collision with John Stephens, the New England Patriots' halfback, on the second play of the game, which the 49ers won, 37-20.


Game 3 on Friday For World Series
LEAD: The World Series will resume in San Francisco on Friday, three days later than planned.
Sports Monday, page C1.
Bay Area residents began lining up to apply for Federal earthquake relief.


Critic's Notebook; The Unpredictable On View in Sao Paulo
LEAD: The Sao Paulo Bienal is not like other major international exhibitions.
It does not have the glamour of the Venice Biennale.
It does not attempt to be a state of the art show, like the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh.
Nor does it pretend to be a state of the world show, like ''Documenta,'' in Kassel, West


Premiums Losing Favor As Circulation Costs Rise
LEAD: A COUPLE of Christmas seasons ago, a magazine executive asked her counterpart at Newsweek to contribute to a fund to buy gifts for the residents of an orphanage in New York.


Stephanie Seed Weds Geoffrey James
LEAD: The marriage of Stephanie Winslow Seed and Geoffrey Laurence James took place yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in San Francisco.
The Rev.
Peter Lawson officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Dr.
William T. Seed of New York and Barbara B. Seed of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Her husband, also 26, is a son of Mr.


Review/Piano; Emigre's 10th Anniversary
LEAD: When the pianist Bella Davidovich emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1979, her name was known in the United States, but her playing had been heard only on pirated concert tapes.
She made her New York debut at Carnegie Hall that year on Oct. 21, with a Schumann and Chopin recital, and has been heard here many times since then.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Stock Exchange appointed James F. Duffy senior vice president and general counsel.


Jean Engelmayer Marries Jan Kalicki
LEAD: At the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., Jean Ellen Engelmayer and Jan Henry Kalicki were married yesterday by Rabbi David Posner.
The bride, 25 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Engelmayer of New York and East Hampton, L.I.
Her husband, 41, is the son of Mireya Jaimes-Freyre de Kalicki of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late Prof.


Renewed Debate on Nuclear Power
LEAD: Saving the world from global warming may require sharp reductions in burning fuel, but there was no consensus at a two-day meeting here of 40 nuclear industry executives, government officials, energy experts and environmentalists on whether new nuclear reactors are needed.


Despite Pain, Colorado Reaches for No. 1 Spot
LEAD: IN another place, at another time, the young people in gold and black, their index fingers pointed toward the sky, might have been doing little more than perpetuating an American sporting cliche.
But on that sad, gray Saturday afternoon at Husky Stadium in Seattle a little more than three weeks ago, in the moments before the football team from the University of Colorado would preserve its still-perfect record, the


A Sideline Campaign
LEAD: Top aides of State Senator John C. Daniels of New Haven are trying to dissuade him from officating at the Boston College-Syracuse game in Syracuse on Nov. 4.
And they appear to have a good reason since, on the following Tuesday, Daniels will be on the ballot as the Democratic candidate for Mayor of New Haven.


Tucker Anthony Officer New President of J. Bush
LEAD: The investment management firm of J. Bush &amp; Company has named a new president, William R. Gill Jr.
Mr.
Gill, 53, comes from Tucker Anthony &amp; R. L. Day Inc., where he was a managing director.
The J. Bush of his new firm is Jonathan Bush, 58, President Bush's younger brother and a leading New York Republican.


Baseball, Like Life Itself, Endures With Prudence
LEAD: CITING Winston Churchill, the commissioner of baseball has spoken for the reaffirmation of life.
Baseball will resume when the engineers and the police say it is practical.


Losing Coach Calls 95-21 Rout Needless
LEAD: Houston's punishing rout of Southern Methodist University's freshmen-dominated team Saturday, by a score of 95-21, severely tested the longtime friendship of Forrest Gregg and Jack Pardee, two famous Texas football figures who are now middle-aged coaches in the Southwest Conference.


Treating Kin Like Foster Parents Strains a New York Child Agency
LEAD: What was once an obscure decision to start licensing and paying relatives who acted as foster parents to abused and neglected children has become a vast and costly program that is overwhelming New York City's child welfare bureaucracy and causing city and state officials to question its wisdom.


Record Loss in Australia
LEAD: The Bond Corporation, the flagship company of the Australian investor Alan Bond, has announced the largest annual loss in Australian history.


Contra Ambush Kills 18 Nicaraguan Troops
LEAD: A group of contra rebels ambushed two trucks carrying Government soldiers in northern Nicaraguan on Saturday evening, killing 18 of the soldiers and wounding 8, the Defense Ministry said today.


Maryland Board Approving Sales Of Most Handguns It Considers
LEAD: The state board responsible for deciding which handguns can be sold in Maryland under one of the country's newest and most disputed firearms laws has turned down only a few dozen of almost 700 pistols and revolvers it considered.


Review/Television; Of 'World Today' and Disasters, a Marriage Is Made
LEAD: The publicity for a new hourlong program on the Cable News Network, which has lately distinguished itself again with its round-the-clock coverage of the San Francisco earthquake, announced that ''The World Today'' would ''change the face of evening news.''


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Durable Goods Sept.
Auto Sales Mid-Oct.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  G.N.P. 3d Qtr.
Friday  Personal Income Sept.


Pennsylvania Club's Crew Retains Title
LEAD: The Pennsylvania Athletic Club of Philadelphia successfully defended its championship eights title today in the final race of the 25th annual Head of the Charles regatta.


Fear And the First Lady
LEAD: ''Scathing and cruel . . . heartless and dumb . . . vicious and unbelievable'' are the adjectives chosen by Nancy Reagan's autobiographical collaborator to describe my writing about her, long before Nancyphobia became fashionable.


Residents Begin Lining Up For U.S. Disaster Aid
LEAD: Residents of the Bay Area began lining up today to apply for Federal assistance to help them recover from Tuesday's devastating earthquake.


Crash Kills Boat Racer
LEAD: A fatality marred the end of racing yesterday in the Trump Castle world powerboat championship in Atlantic City.
Kevin Brown, 37 years old, of Rocky River, Ohio, was killed instantly in the flipover and crash of his 32-foot catamaran speedboat.
Brown was this year's national champion in the Union Internationale Motonautique II, a class for powerboats of 23 to 40 feet.


When the Writers Read, the Readers Listen
LEAD: Fiction readings.
Nonfiction readings.
Celebrity readings.
Amateur readings.
Library readings.
School readings.
Church readings.
Synagogue readings.
Y readings.
Charity readings.
Publicity readings.
Street readings.
Readings?
The public reading is enjoying a renaissance in New York City.
This fall, the proprietors of venerable series like those at the Poetry Center of the 92d Street Y, the Writer's Voice at the West Side Y.M.C.A.


Turkey-Soviet Oil Deal
LEAD: Turkey will buy 2.5 million metric tons of Soviet crude oil a year in a trade pact that may make Moscow one of Ankara's biggest trading partners, a published report said Friday.
The Finance Minister, Ekrem Pakdemirli, was quoted by the Anatolian press agency on his return from Moscow as saying the agreement included trade and project credits, talks on railways, border trade and a possible new gas pipeline.


State Offices in Los Angeles Closed by Fire
LEAD: A fire in a 21-story building Friday closed Southern California offices of the state's courts and the State Attorney General three days after the earthquake closed similar offices in San Francisco.


FOREIGN ROLE RISES IN MILITARY GOODS
LEAD: The nation's military contractors are increasingly turning abroad for parts and components to build weapons systems, as the Pentagon puts pressure on them to reduce costs and foreign suppliers become more adept.


A Bookseller Gives Up Its Stores to Focus on Publishing
LEAD: The traditional, if vanishing, role of the book publisher as bookseller has been further eroded by an established company's decision to close its three stores and concentrate on publishing.


Review/Dance; Harlem Troupe Challenged By Three Varied Works
LEAD: Dance Theater of Harlem opened its annual season at Davis Hall of the City College of New York on Friday night with three varied works from its repertory.
Each challenged the company in a different way.


Amid TV's Ad Clutter, a Rabbit Runs Wild
LEAD: Right from the start, the new commercial for Eveready's Energizer batteries does not look like the run-of-the-mill television ad.
The star of the whimsical campaign is a bright pink toy bunny wearing Ray-Ban sunglasses and blue thongs.
Banging a big bass drum as it struts around the set, the mechanical rabbit suddenly runs amok and marches out of the sound studio's doors.


Kintetsu Will Market Macy Brands in Japan
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company has agreed to make all of its private-label merchandise available to Kintetsu Department Stores of Japan.
The one-year contract gives Macy an additional outlet for its large production capacity in East Asia.


Redskins Outlast Attack by Testaverde
LEAD: Three quarters of outstanding defense proved to be just enough for the Washington Redskins, who survived a fourth-quarter passing show by Vinny Testaverde today and escaped with a 32-28 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


Analysis of a Winner
LEAD: Having won the first two games of the World Series, the Oakland Athletics are obviously in a strong position to win the entire Series, but the team is far from a shoe-in.


I.B.M.'s Stronghold Under Siege
LEAD: For the first time in decades, the International Business Machine Corporation's undisputed control of the market for mainframe computers is being threatened by far-reaching changes in the industry.


Poland's Hard Times Deepen, Dampening Hope for Change
LEAD: Among the Poles who gathered today in Mokotowska street for a plate of soup and some bread was an 83-year old retired schoolteacher named Maria, visibly uncomfortable with the rough-and-tumble atmosphere.


Murderous Mischief on AIDS
LEAD: The language that Jesse Helms insisted on inserting into legislation appropriating money for AIDS prevention could condemn many innocent people to death.
Congress needs to take a second look.


2 Hired for Justice Dept. Jobs That Were Cut
LEAD: Nine months after Attorney General Dick Thornburgh ousted five career civil servants from the Justice Department's public affairs staff, he has hired two new political appointees to help in relations with news reporters.


Diuretics Continue to Be an Effective Therapy for Hypertension
LEAD: To the Editor:


This World Series No Longer Credible
LEAD: NOW that the resumption of the World Series has been delayed until at least Friday, baseball has created the unprecedented possibility that one of the Oakland Athletics or one of the San Francisco Giants will emerge as Mr.
November.


Rangers Are Wary Despite Fast Start
LEAD: Progress, the cynics like to say, is merely the exchange of one nuisance for another nuisance.
For the Rangers, progress over the last half-century has been even more illusory, amounting to little more than the substitution of one heartbreak for another.


Washington at Work; Crowe v. Abrams: A Private Feud Over Handling Panama Becomes Public
LEAD: The feud pits a true believer against a four-star admiral; a six-shooter against a 16-inch gun on a battleship.


Media General's Profit
LEAD: Media General Inc. said Friday that its profit had fallen about 63 percent in the latest quarter and attributed the results to weakness in newspaper advertising linage and declines in newsprint sales.
Net income dropped to $3.94 million, or 15 cents a share, from $10.78 million, or 38 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter.


New Jersey Rivals Differ On Growth and Ecology
LEAD: Pursuing prosperity and protecting the state from its excesses are common goals of both candidates for governor, but their ideas of how to make New Jersey both economically strong and environmentally clean differ, sometimes substantially.


Californians Fill Churches, Seeking Solace and Life
LEAD: They wore buttons that said ''I'm Alive'' at the Glide Memorial United Methodist Church here today, danced in the aisles and set the old building trembling with exuberant music.


Bridge
LEAD: One would not expect the administrative head of, say, a major tennis or golf tournament to win a significant title.
But that, in bridge terms, was what happened Wednesday in Stamford, Conn.


Shipments Of Steel Declining
LEAD: Reflecting a slowdown in the automobile and construction industries, steel shipments are below their year-ago level.
Several analysts predict that total shipments in the second half of the year will be down as much as 15 percent from the comparable period of 1988.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  Military contractors are turning abroad for parts to build weapons systems, as the Pentagon puts pressure on companies to reduce costs and as foreign suppliers become more adept.
The trend is raising fears on dependence, jobs and profits.  [ Page A1. ] A plan to phase out many American farm programs if other countries agree to similar cutbacks will be put forward this week by the Bush Administration.


Shuttle Mission Trimmed 3 Hours
LEAD: Astronauts on the space shuttle Atlantis were told by Mission Control today to return to Earth Monday morning, three hours early, to avoid the high winds predicted for afternoon at the desert landing base in California.


New York's Schools: A National Test
LEAD: It seems an appropriate, even ironic, coincidence that Joseph A. Fernandez was named New York City Schools Chancellor just as President Bush was gathering the governors for an education summit meeting.
Nothing promises to illustrate the practical limits of that conference's rhetoric more than Mr.
Fernandez's efforts to reform and improve the largest -and one of the most troubled - municipal school systems in


Dangerous for Japan to Leave U.S. Security Fold
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Long Island, a Touch of the Medieval


Campeau Faces New Cutbacks
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation is again facing cutbacks in merchandise shipments as some suppliers to its Federated and Allied department store units have found their trade credit curtailed or canceled.


Prague Autumn
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's cheerless Communist boss, Milos Jakes, lacks charisma but not cunning.
He recently told a closed party meeting that the regime erred in jailing the country's best-known dissenter, the playwright Vaclev Havel.
It would be far wiser, he said, to pick on lesser-known figures and so avoid an international uproar over human rights.


Democrats Take Offensive on Abortion and Flag
LEAD: The Democratic Party has long been on the defensive when it came to the politics of values, but in recent weeks Congressional Democrats have taken the offensive on two emotionally charged issues: desecration of the flag and the Federal financing of abortions.


Dolphins Hold Off Packers
LEAD: Pete Stoyanovich kicked a 33-yard field goal with 6 seconds to play, giving the Miami Dolphins a 23-20 victory today after Green Bay rallied with two touchdowns in the final six minutes.


Series Put Off To Friday
LEAD: In a joint decision, Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, and Mayor Art Agnos of San Francisco announced today that the World Series would not resume until Friday.
Disrupted by the devastating earthquake that struck the Bay Area last Tuesday, the Series had been tentatively scheduled to resume


Bronx Man Dies After Arrest, Apparently of Drug Overdose
LEAD: A 30-year-old Bronx man who was arrested yesterday after firing a gun six times inside his home died, apparently from an overdose of cocaine, an hour later, the police said.


Sinking Jets Manage 3 Points
LEAD: It got lower today for the Jets.


Remembering the Earthquake Victims


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Victory for Krickstein: Aaron Krickstein, posting his third victory of an injury-plagued season, won the Seiko Super tournament yesterday in Tokyo.
Krickstein trounced Carl-Uwe Steeb of West Germany, 6-2, 6-2, on the indoor surface.(AP)  Graf Wins: Steffi Graf of West Germany defeated fifth-seeded Jana Novotna of Czechoslvakia, 6-1, 7-6, to capture the women's European indoors tournament in Zurich yesterday.(AP)


Calangute Journal; India's Tourist Paradise, but Visitors Are Dreaded
LEAD: Pastoral Goa, which was seized by Indian troops in December 1961, now faces a different kind of invasion each year: tourism.


Opera Institute Director
LEAD: William Vendice has been appointed music director of the Opera/ Music Theater Institute of New Jersey.
He succeeds Henry Lewis.
Mr.
Vendice, who started in his new post on Oct. 1, made his Metropolitan Opera debut in 1983 conducting Rossini's ''Barbiere di Siviglia.'' He has been a guest conductor at American and European opera houses.


Campaign Matters; Crisis After Crisis Lying in Wait For Next Mayor
LEAD: Two weeks from tomorrow, either David N. Dinkins or Rudolph W. Giuliani will be mayor-elect of New York City after spending about $10 million and about 10 months campaigning.
It's a wonder that anyone would want the job.
The city's 106th mayor will lead New York into the final decade of the millenium, an era which Mayor Edward I.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Margie Abrams Wed To William John Otto
LEAD: Margie Abrams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Abrams of Roslyn, L.I., was married yesterday to William John Otto, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Otto of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Nathan Kapner officiated at the Swan Club in Glenwood Landing, L.I.


In Paris, Ready-to-Wear Forgoes Understatement
LEAD: Each of the major fashion houses showing spring and summer ready-to-wear this weekend had a distinctive style, so it was quite possible to tell the players without a scorecard.
If the clothes were not always memorable, the shows were.


Sloppy Giants Hold On
LEAD: Just think how well the Giants might do if they eliminated a few basic errors.


Review/Television; Following the Upsurge And Decline in U.S. Power
LEAD: ''America's Century,'' unusual for television, is essentially a history of an idea.
How, asks Lewis H. Lapham, the writer and narrator, has American power manifested itself in the 20th century?
Why did it rise so fast in the first half of the century?
What accounts for its slow decline during the second half?


Pretoria Sanctions Retained
LEAD: Leaders of the 49-nation Commonwealth moved today to tighten financial pressure on South Africa and said Pretoria would face new reprisals in six months if it failed to deliver on promises to dismantle apartheid.
Britain alone dissented.


Dangerous for Japan to Leave U.S. Security Fold; The Real Struggle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Faith L. Diamond Weds an Actuary
LEAD: At the Princeton (N.J.) Marriott, Faith L. Diamond, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Diamond of Fort Lee, N.J., was married yesterday to Martin Sacks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Sacks of Dresher, Pa.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated.
Mrs.
Diamond-Sacks, who graduated with distinction from the University of Virginia and received a master's of management degree from Northwestern University, is a product manager for the Rorer Corporation, a pharmaceuticals company in Fort Washington, Pa.


War on Cocaine in Peru Is Sputtering
LEAD: In this country where 65 percent of the world's coca crop is grown, the United States and the Government are waging a tiny anti-drug campaign with a handful of men and helicopters.


Bush Deserves Praise for Restraint on Noriega
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cup Outlook Is No Clearer
LEAD: A busy weekend of prep races failed to winnow many candidates or crown any strong new favorites for the Breeders' Cup races at Gulfstream Park Nov. 4.
When preliminary entries are taken today, the fields for five of the seven cup races are likely to be large and lacking a strong favorite.


Dinkins Pledges to Cut Spending By 1% to Reduce the City's Deficit
LEAD: Acknowledging that New York City faces ''difficult times'' financially, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic mayoral candidate, said yesterday that he would be prepared to cut city spending - except for the Police Department - by 1 percent to reduce a looming budget deficit.


Fernandez Stirs Anger Over Efforts In Albany
LEAD: State legislators, whose support is likely to be crucial to the new Schools Chancellor, are voicing resentment over his efforts to change laws affecting New York City's public schools.


Facts to Fit Every Fancy: Custom Textbooks Are Here
LEAD: It will not eliminate homework, term papers or studying all night for final exams.
But McGraw-Hill Inc., one of the nation's largest book publishers, has developed the ability to customize college textbooks to suit the needs of individual professors -or even individual students - in 48 hours.


Reagan Agreed to Prevent Noriega Death
LEAD: The Reagan Administration and the Senate Intelligence Committee agreed in 1988 that American officials should not become involved with Panamanian coup plotters whose efforts could lead to the assassination of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the Panamanian leader, according to Government officials.


Beer Ad Curb Faces Fight
LEAD: The National Association of Broadcasters has asked television and radio stations to fight any move by the National College Athletic Association to curb beer advertising during its annual basketball tournament.


Outdoors: A Reel of Diplomacy
LEAD: I WAS sitting in what passes for the Oval Office in this tiny principality high in the Pyrenees talking about fishing with several of Andorra's government officials when Prime Minister Josip Pintat walked into the office.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 22, 1989:
MONDAY
Atlantic Richfield Co
Mercury Svngs &amp; Ln Assn
Dana Corp
Philadelphia Elec Co
Johnson &amp; Johnson
Rubbermaid Inc
Lubrizol Corp
Zurn Inds Inc
TUESDAY
Ahmanson H F &amp; Co
Hexcel Corp
Amoco Corp
Kennnametal Inc
Ball Corp
Lawter Intl Inc
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc
Newell Co
Black Hills Corp
Noble Affiliates Inc
Cilicorp Inc
NUI Corp
Con Edison Co NY
Rollins Inc
Enserch Corp
Schering Plough
Fedders Corp
Smucker Co
Fleming Cos
SoWestern Pub Svc
Gannett Inc$


Abortion and the Real George Bush
LEAD: In 1980, private citizen George Bush said he opposed Federal funds for abortion except in cases of rape, incest or threats to the mother's life.
In 1984, Vice Presidential candidate George Bush couldn't recall having said that; indeed, he said he opposed exceptions.
A week ago, President George Bush repeated that opposition but left ''room for flexibility.


Nicaraguans Register in Huge Numbers
LEAD: Nicaraguans jammed voter registration stations here today for the fourth consecutive Sunday in what diplomats described as an ''overwhelming'' response to preparations for national elections in February.


'Machinal' Is Canceled
LEAD: The Equity Library Theater's production of Sophie Treadwell's 1928 play ''Machinal,'' which was to have opened Nov. 2, has been canceled because of financial problems.
The company plans to resume the season with Keith Reddin's ''Big Time'' on Nov. 30.
The theater's board will meet in the next two weeks to assess the continuation of the season.


Officer Is Wounded in Queens; 2 Are Held
LEAD: A New York City police officer was shot in the face and seriously wounded early this morning in the St.
Albans section of Queens, and two suspects were arrested, the police said.


La Russa Calm but A's Edgy After New Delay
LEAD: Some of them were unhappy that the delay had been extended until Friday night; some of them simply accepted this as a fact they could not alter.
But the Oakland Athletics all knew today that their season was going to last longer than expected, like it or not.
Many of them did not. ''I think it's getting to be ridiculous,'' Dave Parker said, clearly angry over the second World Series delay resulting from last Tuesday's earthquake.


2 TRAINS COLLIDE IN OHIO, HURTING 4
LEAD: An Amtrak passenger train struck a 116-car freight train broadside today, injuring four people and throwing a freight car into a residential yard.


Question Box
LEAD:  The Winning Runs  Q. Three World Series come to mind that ended when the winning run was scored in the bottom of the last inning: 1960, when Bill Mazeroski of Pittsburgh hit a leadoff home run off Ralph Terry that beat the Yankees in Game 7; 1953, when Billy Martin of the Yankees singled home Hank Bauer to beat the Brooklyn Dodgers in six games, and 1935, when Goose Goslin of Detroit singled home Mickey Cochrane in the sixth game against the Chicago Cubs.


Doomed Highway May Have Pulsed To the Rhythm of the Deadly Quake
LEAD: The fatal collapse of an elevated highway in the earthquake here Tuesday may have had as much to do with coincidence as it did with the deficiencies of man's handiwork.


New Jersey Seminar Focuses on Ethnic and Racial Relations


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We've been shaken, we've been jolted, but we're saying yes to life.
And it's important for us to be shaken - rich, poor and middle class.
This quake shook us all, and now we have a common problem and need common solutions.''  -the Rev.
Cecil Williams of San Francisco.  [ A1:1. ]


Study Says Medicaid Lags for Poor Children
LEAD: An association representing 100 children's hospitals in the United States and Canada has charged that the health and well-being of millions of American children are endangered because they are excluded from Medicaid coverage.


Mapplethorpe Show Opens in Hartford
LEAD: An exhibition of photographs that stirred a national debate over public financing of the arts drew an overflow crowd, including a few protesters, in its first showing since the uproar in Washington.


Players Are Back at Work But Series Won't Be the Same
LEAD: All around, there is a certain stillness, as if to laugh or to speak would somehow cause another aftershock where there have already been too many.
So as one day passes into the next, the players return to their clubhouses in San Francisco and Oakland, conduct their business and then go home, waiting for the 86th World


Suddenly Homeless in California, the Prosperous and the Poor Both Suffer; Homes on a Hilltop in Ruins, Families Help One Another
LEAD: With its sculptured gardens and cantilevered decks overlooking wooded canyons, Sandra and Forrest Hill's home high in the Santa Cruz Mountains was the kind of magic place only long years of hard work and personal care could make.


J. Donald Gartland, Coin Dealer, Dies at 45
LEAD: J. Donald Gartland 3d, a coin dealer who specialized in commemorative Olympic issues, died of cancer Thursday in Presbyterian Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 45 years old and lived in Ocean City, N.J.


Where to Send Donations
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.


The Voices of Namibia
LEAD: In the black township of Katatura, over supper, I listen to a former organizer and current supporter of the South West African People's Organization, which led the fight against South African occupation of Namibia and is now, by all accounts, its largest political party.
He tells of his detention and torture by the South Africans 11 years ago.


Review/Theater; Out of the Old South, the Words of a Witness
LEAD: Of all American storytellers, few are more popular than those elderly men and women whose memories reach back into the ashes of the Old South.
And few deserve that popularity more than the 84-year-old Alabama cotton farmer whose reminiscences were published in 1974 under the title ''All God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw.


Chile Plans to Create Strong Central Bank
LEAD: As it prepares to turn over power to elected civilians, the Government of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet is creating an autonomous central bank that it says will help preserve Chile's hard-won economic stability, growth and modernization.


Inner City Media Empire, Born of Politics, Grows to Profit
LEAD: As much as it was conceived as a business, the Inner City Broadcasting Corporation began as a political statement by black entrepreneurs who were critical of how blacks were treated in the mainstream news media.
Now the 17-year-old company finds itself at the center of the New York mayoral race.


China Austerity Cools Economy
LEAD: China's tough austerity policies have cooled off the overheated economy but have made few inroads in solving basic flaws in the system, the Government said last week.


Traders Look to 3d-Quarter G.N.P.
LEAD: After nervously tracking developments in the stock market after the market's plunge on Oct. 13, the focus of most credit market participants is likely to return to a more familiar determinant of fixed-income prices and interest rates: developments in the real economy.


Eagles' 10-7 Victory Doesn't Come Easy
LEAD: With a breeze swirling near both goal posts at Veterans Stadium today, Luis Zendejas and Jeff Jaeger played mind games with the wind, and with each other.


Giuliani and Dinkins See Need for Debates
LEAD: With only two weeks left in the campaign, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani each said yesterday that they should hold at least two debates before Election Day, but they did not agree on a date for even one.


Convex Net Climbs 87%
LEAD: Citing demand for its second generation of mini-supercomputers, the Convex Computer Corporation reported last week that its third-quarter earnings had increased 87 percent and its revenues had risen 50 percent.


Books of The Times; From Stephen King, A Writer's Demon
LEAD:  The Dark Half  By Stephen King  431 pages. Viking. $21.95.


U.S. Declines Offers of Help From Foreign Rescue Teams
LEAD: The United States says it has declined with thanks all offers of help from foreign rescue teams to deal with the aftermath of the earthquake in Northern California.


Kemp to Cut H.U.D. Region For New York
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp has decided to remove Puerto Rico from the jurisdiction of his agency's troubled New York regional office.
The move comes as inquiries continue to focus on political favoritism in the management of Federal housing programs in Puerto Rico during the Reagan Administration.


False Unity Shunned By Interfaith Group
LEAD: To the Editor:


Muslim Clothing Causes a Debate Over Religion in French Schools


Cleveland Mayoral Race Marked by a Bitter Feud
LEAD: A bitter feud between the old guard and a new generation of politicians is under way as Cleveland's most powerful black official campaigns for the Mayor's office against a onetime protege.


Linda S. Courtiss Wed to a Surgeon
LEAD: Linda Sue Courtiss, the owner of Metamorphosis Interior Designs in Boston and Cape Cod, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Laurence M. Rheingold, a plastic surgeon in Hyannis, Mass.
Rabbi Samuel Shiel performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carleton Hotel in Boston.


El Salvador Striving To Regain Prosperity
LEAD: As El Salvador's civil war enters its second decade, the country's new conservative Government has initiated an audacious liberalization program intended to rebuild a battered economy and alleviate the social injustice, unemployment and stagnation from which leftist insurgents have historically drawn their strength.


Suddenly Homeless in California, the Prosperous and the Poor Both Suffer; Life in '68 Plymouth for Family of 4
LEAD: When the house at 35 Carr Street shook last Tuesday, then sank a few inches as doors slammed and the front steps flattened and settled, Oscar Ramirez turned to a possession he had been meaning to get rid of: a faded green 1968 Plymouth.


Laura J. Zionts Weds Mark Yellin
LEAD: Laura J. Zionts and Mark C. Yellin were married yesterday by Rabbi Simeon I. Glaser at Temple Beth Israel in West Hartford, Conn.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Zionts of Bloomfield, Conn.
Her husband is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Yellin of West Hartford.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Thursday about insurance losses in the California earthquake misidentified one of the big insurers in the San Francisco Bay area.


Review/Music; A Harpist's World
LEAD: Five years ago, the Swiss harpist Andreas Vollenweider became an icon of the New Age musical movement almost overnight with ''Behind the Gardens - Behind the Wall,'' an album of swirling mood music evoking an Alpine fairy-tale world.
Since then, Mr.
Vollenweider has been struggling to expand the limited vocabulary of a musical style that in the beginning was mostly sylvan strumming and swishing.


Treasury Selling $10 Billion in 2-Year Bills
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues this week is active, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and continuing with an auction of $10 billion in two-year bills tomorrow.


Nancy A. Frumer, Therapist, Weds
LEAD: Nancy Augusta Frumer, a daughter of Mrs.
Louis Reshin Frumer of New York and the late Mr.
Frumer, was married yesterday to Charles Woodrow Styron Jr., the son of Dr.
Styron and Nell Joslin Styron, both of Raleigh, N.C.
William Karelis solemnized the marriage at the Dharmadhatu Buddhist Meditation Center in Newton,


Puzzling Pattern of the Quake May Hurt Ability to Predict
LEAD: The California earthquake has presented scientists with a puzzle, one that has left some of them wondering whether probability estimates of future quakes are too low.


Our Towns; The Gas Line That Moves With the Winds
LEAD: rrFifty-six-year-old Andrew Mills, a farmer and backhoe operator who owns 20 acres just off Highway 55 in this pastoral Dutchess County community, thinks of himself as community minded.
But he figures at this point that he has done more than his share.


Revamping Is Planned By Qintex
LEAD: Qintex Australia Ltd., whose $1.5 billion agreement to buy the MGM/ UA Communications Company collapsed two weeks ago when it was unable to produce a $50 million letter of credit, announced a reorganization plan today and an accelerated program of asset sales.


Careers; Arboretum Directors Are Sought
LEAD: MORE than $150 million is being spent to build arboretums and conservatories, and job opportunties are sure to follow, said Anne L. Crammond, executive director of the Atlanta Botanical Garden.


Panel Changes Dietary Standards for Calcium
LEAD: AFTER a delay of four years, a committee of the National Academy of Sciences has updated the recommended dietary allowances of vitamins and minerals, making two changes that could affect what Americans choose to eat.


Search for Commissioner: Act III
LEAD: The National Football League's owners hope that all of the dialogue, the rhetoric and the infighting are behind them now and that they can indeed elect a new commissioner in meetings scheduled to begin here Tuesday.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


S.&amp;P. Adds Harland
LEAD: Shares of the John H. Harland Company, a printer of bank checks, will be added to the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index at the close of trading Wednesday, replacing American Medical International, which is being acquired by the IMA Holdings Corporation, S.&amp;P. said yesterday.


Rink Opening Is an Oddball Affair


Patterns
LEAD:  Stripping Down to Basics


Trial Opens in Shooting That Led to Miami Riots
LEAD: The trial of a Miami police officer who killed a black motorcyclist, touching off three days of racial violence, opened today with the defense demanding that the case be moved as demonstrators clashed outside the courthouse.


President of Reebok Resigns to Rejoin Firm
LEAD: After less then three years in the job, C. Joseph Labonte has resigned as president and chief operating officer of Reebok International Ltd., the athletic-shoe company said yesterday.


American Television &amp; Comunications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Television &amp; Comunications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
244,246,000
205,210,000
Net inc
b22,418,000
c9,649,000
Share earns
.20
.09
9mo rev
717,052,000
599,803,000
Net inc
b65,462,000
c47,920,000
Share earns
.60
.44


Review/Music; Dohnanyi Civilizes the Wilder Symphonic Beasts
LEAD: The Cleveland Orchestra did its best over the weekend to civilize some of the wilder beasts of the symphonic repertory.
Christoph von Dohnanyi's regime as music director has brought a measured humanism to this naturally elegant ensemble.
Thus it was fascinating at Carnegie Hall on Friday night to hear logical discourse applied to the illogical passions of Berlioz's ''Symphonie Fantastique.


AMC Entertainment Inc reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMC Entertainment Inc (AMEX)
13wks to Sept 28
1989
1988
Revenue
135,096,000
136,201,000
Net inc
b7,272,000
c3,290,000
Share earns
.44
-
Shares outst
16,099,000
15,896,000
26wk rev
236,941,000
246,819,000
Net inc
b9,082,000
c10,926,000
Share earns
.54
-
Shares outst
16,038,000
15,883,000


Review/Theater; A Musical Inspired By a Trio Of Movies
LEAD: ''Slay It With Music'' is the latest and far from the cleverest in a seemingly endless torrent of camp musicals inspired by old movies.
Although shows of this sort usually send up vintage genre films, ''Slay It With Music,'' dares to set its satirical sights a bit higher by compresssing plot elements from ''Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?,'' ''Sunset Boulevard'' and ''The Bad Seed.


Medical Schools Open Doors to Minority Teen-Agers
LEAD: In the life of Melanie Rodriguez, there are few cheers for being a 16-year-old mother, a high school student and an aspiring physician.


Wood Banned 4 Games
LEAD: Randy Wood, the Islander left wing, was suspended by the National Hockey League for four games for deliberately attempting to injure Curt Giles, a Minnesota defenseman, with his stick in a game at Nassau Coliseum last Tuesday.


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insur Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insur Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
19,029,000
18,738,000
Share earns
.93
.92
9mo net inc
58,434,000
52,351,000
Share earns
2.85
2.57


Branford Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Branford Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
250,000
621,000
Per share
.16
.40
9mo net inc
1,365,000
1,803,000
Per share
.87
1.15


MGM Grand Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM Grand Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,828,000
54,207,000
Net inc
892,000
c955,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo rev
151,334,000
144,320,000
Net inc
b25,947,000
d356,000
Share earns
1.24
.02
b-After an extraordinary tax credit of $1,806,000, or 9 cents a share.


The California Quake; A Crippling Blow for Oakland's Poor
LEAD: When Jeanette Blackmon moved into her single room at the Oaks Hotel on 15th Street five weeks ago, she thought she had finally arrived.


In Quake Area, Rain Brings Some Problems and Some Relief


INSIDE
LEAD:  Factory Blast in Texas  Up to 22 workers were missing and one was dead in explosions at a plastics plant near Houston that injured more than 100 people.
Page A18.
Tokyo's Financial Influence  Japan, the world's biggest creditor and provider of financial assistance, is taking a larger role in global finance institutions.


Dow Corning Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Corning Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
390,000,000
365,000,000
Net inc
36,900,000
34,700,000
9mo sales
1,190,000,000
1,107,000,000
Net inc
122,000,000
112,000,000


Farmer and Rights Lawyer Among Victims of Jet Crash
LEAD: A Wisconsin farmer returning from a volunteer mission to Nicaragua and a lawyer working for a human rights group were among the 12 Americans killed when a Boeing 727 jet crashed in Honduras on Saturday.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jan Bell Marketing (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
35,301,000
24,140,000
Net inc
2,885,000
1,910,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
19,755,978
16,920,122
9mo sales
85,963,000
61,240,000
Net inc
7,220,000
b5,578,000
Share earns
.37
.35
Shares outst
19,317,475
16,038,039


Killings And Control
LEAD: Should the C.I.A. be allowed greater latitude in overthrowing foreign governments, even when such an attempt might lead to the death of that government's leader?


D.E.A. Agents Kill Suspect In Rockefeller Center Arrest
LEAD: A drug suspect was shot and killed and a Federal drug agent was slightly injured last night when an undercover operation involving four pounds of cocaine went sour at Rockefeller Center in midtown Manhattan, the police said.


Dinkins Forum In Jewish Center Becomes Nasty
LEAD: A forum between David N. Dinkins and Jewish civic and religious leaders in Queens - intended to reassure the audience about the Democratic mayoral nominee's support for Jewish causes - turned nasty yesterday when some attacked him for his friendship with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Mississippians Seek Inquiry to Determine If Tritium Is Leaking
LEAD: On the 25th anniversary of the first underground nuclear test in a salt dome here, some Mississippians are seeking a study to determine if radioactive material is leaking from the site.


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hershey Foods (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
682,375,000
597,642,000
Net inc
52,195,000
b102,159,000
Share earns
.58
1.13
9mo sales
1,740,093,000
1,495,798,000
Net inc
116,964,000
b167,717,000
Share earns
1.30
1.86


CVB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,078,715
1,560,402
Per share
.34
.26
9mo net inc
5,568,893
3,970,372
Per share
.91
.65


Panel Considers Immunity for H.U.D. Figure
LEAD: A House panel has opened immunity discussions with a principal figure in the Congressional investigations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development in hopes of obtaining his testimony about political favoritism at the department, people familiar with the talks said today.


Occidental Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occidental Petroleum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,826,000,000
4,913,000,000
Net inc
b108,000,000
c105,000,000
Share earns
.39
.38
Shares outst
270,000,000
269,000,000
9mo sales
15,019,000,000
14,133,000,000
Net inc
b255,000,000
c195,000,000
Share earns
.93
1.23
Shares outst
267,000,000
235,000,000


Copper Prices Drop Again While Heating Oil Plunges
LEAD: Copper speculators continued their flight from the weakening market yesterday, sending futures prices to their lowest levels in more than two months on New York's Commodity Exchange.


Nicaragua Coup in 30's Had U.S. Blessing
LEAD: To the Editor:


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBB Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,683,000
3,569,000
Per share
.39
.38
9mo net inc
11,372,000
10,194,000
Per share
1.21
1.08


Pinnacle in Talks
LEAD: The Pinnacle West Capital Corporation declined to confirm rumors that it was nearing an agreement with Federal regulators on the sale of its loss-ridden Merabank subsidiary.
Analysts said that if a sale is not arranged by Dec. 7, strict new capital rules could require Pinnacle West to inject some $300 million to $400 million into Merabank.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about experimental drugs given away by pharmaceutical companies misidentified a lawyer and consultant to the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund.
He is Jay C. Lipner.


Deluxe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
331,400,000
301,500,000
Net inc
39,200,000
34,700,000
Share earns
.46
.40
9mo sales
959,100,000
863,400,000
Net inc
103,900,000
98,400,000
Share earns
1.22
1.15


Spend Taxes for Quality of Life, Not Guns
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Embarrass Americans
LEAD: The plain truth is that it is getting a little embarrassing for an American to talk to foreigners.


Rangers Thwart Power Play to Beat Canucks
LEAD: If he has any genius, Roger Neilson, the Rangers' coach, would like people to believe he acquired it strictly by coincidence.
Neilson chalks up each successful strategy to accident.
So it was natural when he said his showing of a videotape on Vancouver's five-on-three power play yesterday morning to the


Baltimore Stadium Bonds
LEAD: To finance the construction of a new stadium for the Baltimore Orioles baseball team, the Maryland Stadium Authority is offering $137.55 million in tax-exempt sports facilities lease revenue bonds through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The maxmimum yield is 7.60 percent for bonds due in 2019.


Coal Mine Strike in Siberia
LEAD: As many as 20,000 Siberian coal miners defied an official ban and mounted a protest strike today, raising the prospect of more industrial unrest before of the harsh Russian winter.
Tass said pit workers in the city of Mezhdurechensk, who began a wave of strikes that paralyzed the Soviet coal industry in July, stopped work again for two hours to protest the failure to implement pledges made to them by management.


Penn Central Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
468,900,000
359,600,000
Net inc
29,200,000
c37,800,000
Share earns
.41
.53
Shares outst
70,500,000
70,900,000
9mo rev
1,256,200,000
1,077,900,000
Net inc
b148,800,000
c84,100,000
Share earns
2.10
1.18
Shares outst
70,800,000
71,100,000


Eliot Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eliot Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
4,822,000
b1,109,000
Per share
-
.59
9mo net loss
19,978,000
b2,589,000
Per share
.
1.38
b-Net income  The bank said the loss in the latest third quarter was primarily the result of loan-loss provisions and a $652,000 writedown of investment securities.


Condon Is Police Commissioner, at Least for Now


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Asher-Gould Receives Suzuki Motor Account
LEAD: Seeking to recover from the turmoil that followed a Consumer Reports finding last year that the Suzuki Samurai was unsafe, the American Suzuki Motor Corporation awarded its advertising account on Friday to Asher/Gould, a medium-sized Los Angeles agency.


Bemis Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
262,161,000
276,823,000
Net inc
12,055,000
10,407,000
Share earns
.46
.39
9mo sales
807,709,000
798,541,000
Net inc
32,392,000
27,019,000
Share earns
1.24
1.01


Chess
LEAD: In the two semifinal world championship candidates matches, which ended Oct. 17 in London, Anatoly Karpov of the Soviet Union defeated his countryman Artur Yusupov and Jan Timman of the Netherlands defeated Jonathan Speelman of Britain.
Karpov and Timman will meet in the final in London in March to determine the next challenger for the titleholder, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union.


Massbank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massbank Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
362,000
1,254,000
Per share
.13
.44
Shares outst
2,697,062
2,856,051
9mo net inc
2,393,000
3,763,000
Per share
.87
1.31
Shares outst
2,755,980
2,881,963


Cummins Engine Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cummins Engine Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
807,573,000
808,250,000
Net loss
39,739,000
17,625,000
9mo sales
2,654,909,000
2,440,888,000
Net inc
3,615,000
b8,428,000
Share earns
.31
-
b-Net loss


Helms Says Reds Overlook Him for Job
LEAD: Tommy Helms says the Cincinnati Reds' management has passed him over and is only identifying him as a managerial candidate as a courtesy while the Reds seek someone else.


Review/Music; Old and New Works Offered By Composers Orchestra
LEAD: The American Composers Orchestra serves the important double function of giving premieres of newly composed orchestral works, and offering second looks at older ones.
In the first concert of the orchestra's season, on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, Dennis Russell Davies led the ensemble in new works by Martin Bresnick and William Albright, a neglected score by Samuel Barber and a recent piece by Steve


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,139,000
1,937,000
Per share
.55
.46
9mo net inc
6,202,000
5,560,000
Per share
1.58
1.31


Eastern Quakes: Real Risk, Few Precautions
LEAD: AN EARTHQUAKE as powerful as the one that struck northern California last week could occur almost anywhere along the East Coast, experts say.
And if it did, it would probably cause far more destruction than the West Coast quake.


Bickering Splits Westchester's Legislature
LEAD: As Election Day draws near, any vestiges of civility have slipped out under the giant wood panel doors of the chambers here of the Westchester County Legislature, where every seat is up for grabs.


Reagan Given Top Award By Japanese
LEAD: Ronald Reagan was hailed, honored and generally treated like a head of state today while Japanese leaders fondly recalled his Presidency as a time of fewer frictions over trade and other issues.


Judge Hastings, Fairly Judged
LEAD: Impeachments by the House and trials in the Senate are so cumbersome and distasteful that Alcee Hastings of Florida is only the sixth Federal judge to be removed in this manner.
But in convicting and removing Judge Hastings, despite his acquittal of similar charges at a criminal trial, Congress acted responsibly, even judiciously.


Problems Loom in Effort to Control Use of Chemicals for Illicit Drugs
LEAD: FRUSTRATED by the failure to stop the flood of drugs into the country, leaders of America's battle against drugs are seeking to restrict supplies of key ingredients and processing chemicals required to make illegal substances.
But many experts believe the effort is doomed to failure by the seemingly endless alternative methods of synthesizing drugs that technically skilled criminals have devised.


'Attack' Politics Is Rife
LEAD: A wave of ''attack'' ads has buried hopes that last year's Presidential race would produce a backlash against negative politics.
Page A24.


The Welfare War Between the States
LEAD: Much has been written about the wars waged between states to attract new jobs.
A similar war is being waged in welfare reform.
Some states keep welfare benefits low so that some of their residents will move to more socially responsible states.


Susquehanna Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Susquehanna Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,963,000
4,712,000
Per share
.62
.59
9mo net inc
14,335,000
13,687,000
Per share
1.80
1.72


Israel Crausman, 90, Architect in New York
LEAD: Israel L. Crausman, an architect and engineer, died of heart disease on Sunday at his home in Spring Valley, N.Y.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Crausman was born in Bessarabia, now part of the Soviet Union, and came here with his family at the age of 13.
He graduated from Cooper Union six years later with architectural and engineering degrees.


China Whispers of Plots and Man Called Yang
LEAD: When people here lower their voices and speak frankly about politics, their suspicions and hostilities frequently focus on a sprightly 82-year-old man whose most important hour may not yet have arrived.


Even New York City School Principals Deserve Due Process
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quayle and Kean Buoy Courter
LEAD: Reminding their audience of uphill fights of their own, Vice President Dan Quayle and Gov.
Thomas H. Kean today encouraged the Republican candidate for governor, Representative Jim Courter, to strive for a come-from-behind victory on Nov. 7.


5 Ejected for Fighting As Devils Stop Leafs
LEAD: The officials worked harder than the players tonight, filling up the penalty boxes at Maple Leaf Gardens in an ugly hockey game that resulted in five ejections, including those of the starting goaltenders.


Irma A. Bloomingdale, 101, a Civic Leader
LEAD: Irma Asiel Bloomingdale, who was active in philanthropic and civic causes in Westchester County for many decades, died Friday at her home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
She was 101 years old.


New Indignities for Refugees in Japan
LEAD: Before a small group of Vietnamese were resettled in eastern Tokyo recently, the Japanese authorities had to assure nearby residents that the refugee centers would have showers.
The neighbors were worried that the refugees might mingle with them in the local public baths.


Koch Swears In Police Commissioner
LEAD: Richard J. Condon was sworn in yesterday as New York City's 35th Police Commissioner a few minutes after Mayor Edward I. Koch promised that he would not cut the hiring of police officers to balance the municipal budget.


Plastics Plant Explodes; Many Missing
LEAD: Huge explosions at a petrochemical complex on the Houston Ship Channel today injured more than 100 workers, sent debris flying for miles and started a fire that burned out of control for hours.


Inco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inco Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
848,700,000
784,500,000
Net inc
b129,300,000
c200,300,000
Share earns
1.23
1.88
9mo sales
3,032,400,000
2,291,500,000
Net inc
b601,300,000
c516,400,000
Share earns
5.67
4.86


CFS Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFS Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
822,000
923,000
Per share
.27
.31


Manville's Trust for Asbestos Victims Runs Low
LEAD: The trust set up by the Manville Corporation to compensate victims of asbestos has almost run out of money.
As a result, tens of thousands of people with asbestosis, lung cancer and other often fatal diseases who ask the trust for money this year will have to wait 25 years before being compensated, the trust estimates.


New England Electric System reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,584,830,000
1,489,246,000
Net inc
116,029,000
b32,400,000
Share earns
2.00
-
b-Net loss and included after-tax writedown of about $179 million from a rate settlement agreement.


Utilities Admit the Potential Silencing of Workers
LEAD: At least three electric utilities have told Federal regulators of secret labor settlements with workers at nuclear power plants that might be interpreted as buying their silence, Government records indicate.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Rise
LEAD: Investors bid up the prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday as the stock market weakened.


Browns Crush Bears
LEAD: Bernie Kosar's passing and a fired-up Browns' defense led Cleveland to a 27-7 victory over Chicago tonight, leaving the Bears with a three-game losing streak for the first time in eight years.


Giamatti Service Is Rescheduled
LEAD: The delay to the World Series caused by the earthquake here has also caused the memorial service for baseball's late commissioner, A. Bartlett Giamatti, to be pushed back.


DiMaggio, A Neighbor, The Quake
LEAD: rrJoe DiMaggio is her neighbor.
She has lived for about 10 years just a few doors down the block from the old Yankee ballplayer in the Marina District here, the lovely, snug area that took so terrible a jolt from last week's earthquake.


L.I. Man Buries Body in Parents' Backyard
LEAD: A man who panicked when a friend died in his car buried the friend in his parents' backyard here, then agonized for a week before telling his mother about it, the Suffolk County police said.


Detroit Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
861,752,000
867,917,000
Net inc
139,494,000
145,948,000
Share earns
.89
.91
Shares outst
146,830,598
146,764,155
9mo rev
2,410,318,000
2,341,474,000
Net inc
338,375,000
83,570,000
Share earns
2.11
.30
Shares outst
146,805,603
146,757,080


300,000 Reported to March in Largest East German Protest
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of East Germans marched peacefully through Leipzig tonight, demanding democratic changes, including legalization of opposition movements, independent labor unions and separation of powers between the Communist Party and the state.


Keystone Consolidated reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Consolidated (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,539,000
63,594,000
Net inc
b2,290,000
c1,202,000
Share earns
.62
-
9mo sales
230,487,000
190,433,000
Net inc
b9,303,000
c6,553,000
Share earns
2.53
-
Shares outst
3,676,000
2,463,000


HBO &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
53,003,000
47,612,000
Net inc
5,331,000
3,923,000
Share earns
.34
.25
9mo rev
143,597,000
135,826,000
Net inc
9,128,000
7,607,000
Share earns
.58
.49


Banks of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,155,260
5,664,462
Per share
1.58
1.44
Shares outst
2,888,544
2,856,668
9mo net inc
17,523,284
13,446,999
Per share
4.48
3.29
Shares outst
2,883,887
2,828,624


McDonald's Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,631,750,000
1,460,656,000
Net inc
217,904,000
191,349,000
Share earns
.59
.51
9mo rev
4,561,651,000
4,115,042,000
Net inc
555,622,000
494,383,000
Share earns
1.49
1.31


U.S. MOVES TO LIMIT RACKETEERING LAW IN BUSINESS CASES
LEAD: In moves that could significantly limit the use of criminal racketeering charges against white-collar defendants, the Justice Department has revised rules governing the use of the racketeering law by Federal prosecutors.


Amerada Hess reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,183,116,000
925,081,000
Net inc
51,813,000
15,765,000
Share earns
.64
.20
Shares outst
81,027,000
81,973,000
9mo rev
4,141,850,000
3,069,725,000
Net inc
405,520,000
57,940,000
Share earns
4.99
.71
Shares outst
81,207,000
82,031,000


Wadi Dahr Journal; Give Up Desert Ways? Not Queen of Sheba's Land
LEAD: The old is very old here, and the new is very new.
Sometimes, the collision is painful.


The California Quake; House Panel Votes $2.85 Billion in Quake Relief
LEAD: The House Appropriations Committee approved a $2.85 billion aid package today to help earthquake recovery efforts in the San Francisco Bay Area.
The legislation would provide low-interest loans and grants to rebuild homes, businesses and highways in the devastated area.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Acounts
LEAD: * Sunshine Biscuits Inc., to Waring &amp; LaRosa, with a budget of $10 million.


U.S. OFFICIALS HAIL NEW SOVIET STANCE
LEAD: American officials and specialists outside Government welcomed Moscow's admission today that its Krasnoyarsk radar station was a violation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.


Antarctic Accord Must Protect Environment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vast East German Protest
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of people marched through Leipzig in the biggest demonstration since protests began last month.
Page A14.


Union Carbide Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,141,000,000
2,108,000,000
Net inc
b139,000,000
213,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.56
9mo sales
6,659,000,000
6,185,000,000
Net inc
526,000,000
501,000,000
Share earns
3.74
3.71


American Maize-Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Maize-Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
161,754,000
150,965,000
Net inc
b1,090,000
2,301,000
Share earns
.16
.35
Shares outst
6,640,041
6,577,805
9mo sales
465,685,000
409,170,000
Net inc
9,012,000
5,966,000
Share earns
1.36
.91
Shares outst
6,611,518
6,576,994


3d GAF Trial Set for Today
LEAD: The stock manipulation case against the GAF Corporation and its vice chairman is scheduled to go to trial today for a third time, with jury selection beginning in Manhattan Federal court.


Pictures Come to Life in Minutes
LEAD: IMPEL is so much fun it's almost a shame that it's useful too.
With Impel you can create animated presentations for your computer screen.


The California Quake; NBC News Tells of Errors and Obstacles to Early Coverage of Quake
LEAD: Executives of NBC News said yesterday that errors in news judgment, transmission problems and a lack of experienced technical personnel had contributed to the division's failure last week to provide competitive coverage in the first 90 minutes after the earthquake struck San Francisco.


Big Leap for Texas After a 2d Upset
LEAD: The Texas Longhorns, lifted by a 24-20 upset of previously undefeated Arkansas, gained an impressive 10 positions yesterday in The New York Times's computer ranking of leading college football teams.


Stocks Drop Broadly; Dow Off 26.23 Points
LEAD: Stocks dropped broadly yesterday, as investors focused on a faltering economy, weakening corporate profits and a stagnant dollar.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 26.23 points, or about 1 percent, to 2,662.91.


Magazine Executives Celebrate Their Industry's Revival
LEAD: The publishers and editors of America's magazines have gathered at this resort community on Florida's southwest coast this week to celebrate their industry's renewed prosperity.
The Annual Magazine Conference comes at a time when circulation is rising, new titles are proliferating and advertising revenue share -coaxed away from television - is increasing.


New Hungary Marks '56 Uprising: 'Gorby!' and 'Russians Out!' Mix
LEAD: Hungary today marked the 33d anniversary of the violent uprising against Soviet rule in 1956 by peacefully scrapping the ''socialist people's'' label and proclaiming itself a republic.


Arbitragers Face Big Losses on UAL
LEAD: Arbitragers have paper losses of as much as $1 billion on their holdings of stock of the UAL Corporation, and some of the biggest losses are at conservative firms that generally do not buy into a takeover target until an agreement is reached with its board.


Bridge
LEAD: Four team events concluded the Regional Championships in Stamford, Conn.
Sunday.


Savings Outflow In August
LEAD: The savings industry lost billions of dollars in deposits in August as the tough new capital requirements set by the savings and loan rescue forced executives to shrink the size of their institutions, the Office of Thrift Supervision said today.


Betty B. Linker, County Commissioner, 67
LEAD: Betty B. Linker, vice chairman of the commissioners of Montgomery County, Pa., died of breast cancer Saturday at Chestnut Hill Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 67 years old and lived in Flourtown, Pa.


Hong Kong-Beijing Immigrant Rift Ends
LEAD: A diplomatic dispute between Hong Kong and China was resolved today when officials here announced that Beijing had agreed to resume accepting the return of Chinese illegal immigrants who have crossed into the colony.


Santa Fe Talking To Pension Fund
LEAD: The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation said its Santa Fe Pacific Realty Corporation unit is negotiating with the California Public Employees Retirement System to issue the pension fund stock representing a 20 percent stake in the unit.
Before the transaction is complete, the realty company would issue debt that, when combined with the money it will receive from the pension fund, will enable it to pay back more than $500 million of debt owed to the parent company.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Strategies That Sell Everywhere
LEAD: FIRST, American makers of consumer goods became multinational companies, says Hamish Maxwell, chairman and chief executive of the Philip Morris Companies.
These companies had ''many national strategies, different products and different marketing approaches from country to country.''


Detective Tells Of Confession In Jogger Rape
LEAD: One of the teen-agers indicted in the Central Park rape case confessed only after his father suggested that the boy's mother leave a police interrogation so that she would not feel ''embarrassed by the nature of the crime,'' a detective testified yesterday.


Freeway Survivor's Time Was Running Out
LEAD: BUCK Helm, the burly 57-year-old longshoreman plucked alive from the earthquake rubble last Saturday, was rescued just in time.
His doctors now say that he was on the verge of cardiac arrest, and experts expressed doubt that he would have survived another day trapped in his Chevrolet Sprint under the rubble that was once Interstate 880 in


'Attack' Politics, Rife in '88 Election, Comes Into Its Own for Lesser Stakes
LEAD: From the streets of New York to the Central Valley of California, American political campaigns have degenerated into nasty, name-calling affairs in which debate about the ''issues'' is often little more than a shouting match over which candidate is the bigger liar.


Suits Accuse White Supremacists in a Bias Death
LEAD: Two major civil rights organizations have filed suit in Federal court in Portland, Ore., charging that a California white supremacist group called the White Aryan Resistance incited two Oregon ''skinheads'' to beat an Ethiopian immigrant to death in Portland last November.


Baker Sees in Gorbachev a New Chance for Peace
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's program of change could provide the United States and the Soviet Union with the ''clearest opportunity to reduce the risk of war since the dawn of the nuclear age.''


Go Ahead, Sleep In
LEAD: For people seeking an excuse to sleep the extra hour in the morning, a new study may provide just the answer.


Finnish Ship Manufacturer Planning Bankruptcy Filing
LEAD: Wartsila Marine Industries, the Finnish shipbuilder that once built 30 percent of the world's cruise ships and more than half of the icebreakers, said today that it would file for bankruptcy protection.


Tandy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
985,977,000
936,953,000
Net inc
62,754,000
64,909,000
Share earns
.73
.72
Shares outst
86,319,000
90,004,000


United Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Bankshares Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,900,000
2,500,000
Per share
.37
.32
9mo net inc
8,700,000
7,900,000
Per share
1.11
1.03


Review/Television; AIDS Quilt and the Stories Behind Its Symbols
LEAD: As of this past summer, the number of deaths among Americans with AIDS rose to more than 59,000, higher than the total fatalities in the Vietnam War.
Yet the vast majority of people with AIDS remain virtually invisible on prime-time television.
There is one obvious reason.
The groups most affected so far, male homosexuals and drug users, are considered by many to be social outsiders.


People's Bank-Bridgeport reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Bank-Bridgeport
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,974,000
6,597,000
Per share
.28
.20
9mo net inc
28,853,000
28,446,000
Per share
.89
-
Year-ago 9 months' per share figure was unavailable; the company converted to a stock form of ownership in July 1988.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Salt in the Sea  Q.Why is the ocean salty?
A.Rocks that erode on the continents contain salt, which is brought by the rivers to the ocean, said Harmon Craig, professor of geochemistry and oceanography at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California at San Diego.


The California Quake; Where to Send Donations
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.


Safeco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
756,959,000
692,886,000
Net inc
81,598,000
51,299,000
Share earns
1.29
.79
Shares outst
63,201,000
65,172,000
9mo rev
2,190,751,000
2,012,364,000
Net inc
220,860,000
189,675,000
Share earns
3.50
2.88
Shares outst
63,182,000
65,769,000


Meritor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meritor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b12,832,000
12,178,000
9mo net loss
b21,820,000
c92,077,000
b-After extraordinary gains of $5,510,000, or 16 cents a share, for the quarter and $1,236,000, or 4 cents a share, for the 9 months, both from early extinguishment of debt; the 9 months also included a pre-tax gain on divestiture of operations of $27,757,000 and a pre-tax loss from sales of investments and loans of $13,575,000.


Crane Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
376,330,000
378,258,000
Net inc
15,487,000
b20,686,000
Share earns
.48
.61
Shares outst
32,217,000
33,810,000
9mo sales
1,108,417,000
969,267,000
Net inc
42,326,000
b49,951,000
Share earns
1.30
.39
Shares outst
32,217,000
33,746,000


Downey to Be Co-host Of Talk Show on CNBC
LEAD: The Consumer News and Business Channel has announced that it will present a new daily television talk show with Morton Downey Jr. as co-host, starting Dec. 4.


U.S. Hails Lebanon Accord and Urges Support
LEAD: The Bush Administration today hailed the Lebanese peace accord as an ''extraordinary opportunity'' for ending the country's 14-year-old civil war and urged all parties to support it even though it acknowledged a Syrian role in Lebanese affairs.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,245,948,000
1,966,016,000
Net inc
317,022,000
240,649,000
Share earns
.69
.53
9mo rev
8,485,124,000
7,433,097,000
Net inc
b336,009,000
672,668,000
Share earns
.56
1.44


Cresmont Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cresmont Federal Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,346,000
b1,536,000
Per share
-
.40
6mo net inc
446,000
2,945,000
Per share
.12
.77
b-Net income


In a First, U.S. to Sell Two Picture Postcards
LEAD: The United States Postal Service has decided to start selling picture postcards, but it will limit sales to cards bearing photographs of the White House and the Jefferson Memorial and they will be available only in Washington.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Leo Burnett U.S.A. has created a pro bono ad campaign to heighten awareness of Alzheimer's disease.
It will run in November, which is National Alzheimer's Month.


Capital Cities/ABC reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Cities/ABC (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
1,101,238,000
1,009,555,000
Net inc
80,781,000
62,634,000
Share earns
4.56
3.55
Shares outst
17,725,000
17,630,000
9mo rev
3,448,178,000
3,457,848,000
Net inc
303,707,000
246,865,000
Share earns
16.97
14.43
Shares outst
17,895,000
17,110,000


Melba Till Allen, Ex-Alabama Official, 56
LEAD: Melba Till Allen, a former Alabama state auditor and state treasurer who was convicted of using her office for personal gain, died of cancer Friday at Baptist Medical Center in Montgomery.
She was 56 years old and lived in Marbury, Ala.


Prime Planning 2,500 Layoffs
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. said today that it would lay off 2,500 employees, or about 20 percent of its employees.


Wall St. Journal To Raise Rates
LEAD: The Wall Street Journal said yesterday that it would raise national advertising rates 4 percent next year.
The increase is smaller than the 6.5 percent of 1989 because the cost of newsprint and postage has not risen this year, said Roger May, a spokesman for The Journal. ''We wanted to share that with our customers,'' he said.


Antarctic Accord Must Protect Environment; Support Gore Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


NFS Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NFS Financial Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
496,000
756,000
Per share
.18
.25
9mo net inc
1,450,000
2,048,000
Per share
.51
.67


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amoco Corp. agreed to exchange its 50 percent interest in a British onshore oilfield with Ultramar P.L.C. in return for Ultramar's stakes in two North Sea exploration blocks.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We violated the norms of proper behavior. We went against general human values.


Dana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dana Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,176,300,000
1,230,300,000
Net inc
29,600,000
40,700,000
Share earns
.72
1.00
Shares outst
40,800,000
40,700,000
9mo rev
3,945,800,000
3,875,900,000
Net inc
111,400,000
118,500,000
Share earns
2.73
2.91


Solidarity Struggles - With Democracy
LEAD: It's a thrill to watch former political prisoners and underground Solidarity activists sitting in the august chamber of Poland's new Parliament, debating budget bills and tax legislation.
This is the Communist world's most dramatic revolution so far.
It is also sobering to see how difficult the construction of a democratic system of government is proving to be, mechanically and psychologically.


New Haven Register Sold
LEAD: Goodson Newspaper Group Inc., headed by the television pioneer Mark Goodson, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell The New Haven Register to the Ingersoll Publications Company for more than $275 million.


Ogilvy Group's Chairman Resigns
LEAD: A little more than a year after becoming chairman and chief executive of the Ogilvy Group, the world's seventh-largest advertising agency, Kenneth Roman resigned yesterday.
His departure after 26 years at the company comes just five months after he lost a takeover battle to the WPP Group, the London-based marketing and communications company that also owns J.


Net Rises 14% At McDonald's
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation today reported a 14 percent increase in its third-quarter earnings, attributed largely to strong sales overseas and the success of domestic promotional programs.


Advo-System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advo-System Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
167,615,000
148,624,000
Net inc
4,648,000
b6,613,000
Share earns
.27
-
Shares outst
17,295,374
11,687,526
Yr rev
617,690,000
589,002,000
Net inc
5,299,000
b4,062,000
Share earns
.34
-
Shares outst
17,173,362
11,633,943


The California Quake; Bay Area's Commuters Find a New Way to Go: Mass Transit
LEAD: After surprisingly smooth traveling on the first full workday after last week's devastating earthquake, local transit and city officials wondered if the long weeks without the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge and one of its key feeder highways, the Nimitz Freeway, would substantially alter the travel habits of local residents.


David Victor Dies; Produced 'Kildare' And Other TV Series
LEAD: David Victor, a producer of numerous television series including ''Dr.
Kildare'' and ''Marcus Welby, M.D.,'' died after a heart attack on Oct. 18 while he and his wife, Florence, were vacationing in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 79 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


British TV on Eve of Competitive Era
LEAD: On the eve of legislation to change the face of British television by 1992, viewers, critics and broadcasters are debating whether more commercial competition will lead to lower standards on the air.


The Chancellor's Handcuffs
LEAD: Even though Joseph Fernandez will not take office formally until January as New York City's schools chancellor, he is off to a promising start.
His initiative deserves more energetic support than it's getting from Albany.


Even New York City School Principals Deserve Due Process; Risks of Transfer
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
883,000
1,052,000
Per share
.26
.30
Shares outst
3,277,500
3,450,000
12mo net inc
3,405,000
b4,314,000
Per share
.97
-
Shares outst
3,277,500
3,450,000


Tapes of School Officials: Ante Becomes 'Little Higher'
LEAD: These are excerpts from conversations taped by Colman Genn, superintendent of School District 27 in Queens, with James C. Sullivan, the school board treasurer, Samuel Granirer, board vice president, and William Sampol, a former Republican state legislative aide seeking a $42,000-a-year district job, and others over a course of seven months.


For Storage, New Disks Gain Ground On Floppies
LEAD: CD-ROM, which stands for Compact Disk Read Only Memory, is the nerdy cousin of the audio compact disk's that are replacing conventional phonograph albums.
While a single five-inch audio CD can hold an hour's worth of Beethoven or The Austin Lounge Lizards, an identical computer CD-ROM disk can hold 550 to 600 megabytes of data, the equivalent storage capacity of hundreds of floppy diskettes.


U.S. Attorney Is Said to Be Investigating Con Edison in Steam Blast
LEAD: Con Edison is under investigation by the United States Attorney's office in connection with the explosion of an asbestos-lined steam pipe in Gramercy Park, a top Federal environmental official told a Congressional hearing in Manhattan yesterday.


2 Forms of Skin Cancer Increase
LEAD: Two deadly forms of skin cancer are increasing at alarming rates in the United States, apparently because people are spending more time in the sun, researchers have found.


Net Off at Exxon and Phillips; Occidental and ARCO Gain
LEAD: Big oil companies reported mixed third-quarter earnings yesterday, with the Exxon Corporation and the Phillips Petroleum Company down, while the Occidental Petroleum Company, the Atlantic Richfield Company and the Amerada Hess Corporation reported gains.
Ashland Oil Inc. reported a loss for the quarter.


British Aerospace Strike
LEAD: Britain's main engineering unions said today that they would ask 7,000 workers to go on strike next week at two British Aerospace plants and a Rolls-Royce factory to support a shorter workweek.
The Confederation of Engineering and Shipbuilding Unions had conducted a poll of workers in seven factories to measure support for a strike on the issue of cutting the workweek to 35 hours, from 39.


Washington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Savings Bank
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
206,397
193,180
Per share
.10
.14
Shares outst
1,993,112
1,341,687
12mo net inc
469,085
1,093,738
Per share
.28
.81
Shares outst
1,694,490
1,341,687


Two Giants Receivers Dodge Major Injuries
LEAD: Mark Bavaro is all right. So is Zeke Mowatt. And therefore, so are the Giants.


As Plankton Fares, So Does a Reef Fish
LEAD:  Without the tiny plants, the larvae die.


Phillips Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,061,000,000
2,850,000,000
Net inc
87,000,000
215,000,000
Share earns
.36
.89
Shares outst
243,882,000
239,551,000
9mo rev
9,462,000,000
8,630,000,000
Net inc
474,000,000
515,000,000
Share earns
1.95
2.17
Shares outst
243,669,000
232,192,000


First Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Savings Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
427,000
461,000
Per share
.65
.70
9mo net inc
988,000
1,017,000
Per share
1.50
1.54


Central Illinois Public Service Co reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service Co (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
601,829,000
611,680,000
Net inc
87,057,000
86,463,000
Share earns
2.37
2.35


Gasoline Prices Drop
LEAD: The average price of gasoline nationwide dipped about a half-cent a gallon at the pumps in the last two weeks.
The Lundberg Survey of 12,000 gas stations showed the average retail price of all grades of gasoline, including taxes, at 109.12 cents a gallon on Friday, down 0.53 cent from Oct. 6, Trilby Lundberg said Sunday.


Fourth Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fourth Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
8,221,000
8,028,000
Per share
.62
.59
Shares outst
13,389,519
13,365,655
9mo net inc
25,009,000
22,194,000
Per share
1.87
1.65
Shares outst
13,409,604
13,405,461


Communications Satellite CorpN) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Satellite CorpN)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
110,900,000
94,100,000
Net inc
b20,100,000
17,700,000
Share earns
1.08
.96
9mo rev
311,100,000
267,000,000
Net inc
54,900,000
49,600,000
Share earns
2.96
2.69


2 Norway Banks Agree to Merger
LEAD: Two of Norway's biggest banks, Den Norske Creditbank and Bergen Bank A.S., agreed to merge effective Jan. 1.
In the merger, two D.N.C. shares will be worth one Bergen Bank share.
Trading in the stock of both banks was suspended before the terms were announced, with D.N.C. shares quoted at 99.5 kroner, about $14.4, and Bergen


Gilbert J. Sinnott, 82, Insurance Executive
LEAD: Gilbert J. Sinnott, a retired insurance executive, died of heart failure Saturday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 82 years old.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bowne &amp; Co., a communications company, named Catherine Godbille vice president of its Bowne International unit and director of Bowne Translation Services.


Corrections
LEAD: A caption on Sunday with an article about fashion industry reaction to the book ''Chic Savages'' misidentified the woman in the lower picture.
She was the designer Mary McFadden, not Anna Wintour, who was pictured above.


Walton Gives a 2d Opinion
LEAD: As if the Sunday results weren't bad enough, the Jets' bad news continued today.


Market Place; Behind the Surge In Rally's Stock
LEAD: RALLY'S Inc. has a goal of providing fast food faster than McDonald's.
But its new speed record has nothing to do with hamburgers.


Paribas Makes Offer For Navigation Mixte
LEAD: Compagnie Financiere de Paribas, the French investment banking group, said today that it would try to acquire two-thirds of Navigation Mixte, a holding company with interests in insurance and banking.


Tony Manero, Golf Champion, 84
LEAD: Tony Manero, the 1936 United States Open golf champion and a member of the 1937 United States Ryder Cup team, died of heart failure Sunday at Greenwich Hospital.
He was 84 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.76
8.68
8.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.57
7.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.56
7.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.90
7.97
8.71
30-YR.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Allegheny Ludlum Corp.
$ 34,100,000
-11.2
Allied-Signal Inc.
121,000,000
+1.7
Amerada Hess Corp.
51,800,000
+227.8
Ashland Oil Inc.
(39,400,000)
-
Atlantic Richfield Co.
379,000,000
-3.1
Capital Cities/ABC Inc.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: San Antonio's $575 million tax-exempt bond issue to refinance debt previously sold when interest rates were higher was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The maximum yield on the electric and gas system revenue refunding bonds is 7.30 percent for bonds due in 2009.


West German Rightist Party Does Well in Municipal Vote
LEAD: Candidates of the far right won six Stuttgart city council seats and received more than 10 percent of the vote in several other municipal elections in the southern state of Baden-Wurttemberg, officials said today.


Giuliani Calls for Road and Bridge Repairs
LEAD: Standing in front of the Williamsburg Bridge, which had to be closed for about two weeks last year because of poor maintainance, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday announced his plans for improving the city's infrastructure if he is elected mayor.


School Superintendent in Queens Tells of Costly Patronage Scheme
LEAD: A Queens schools superintendent who secretly tape-recorded conversations with school board members testified yesterday that dozens of unnecessary jobs in his district were awarded to friends and supporters of those board members at an annual cost of almost $1 million.


Teamster Leader Found Slain In Local Office in New Jersey
LEAD: An official of teamsters Local 478 was found shot to death today at the local headquarters in Union, officials said.
A co-worker found the official, Harry Serio, 68 years old, was found at 8 A.M., an assistant Union County prosecutor, David J. Hancock, said.


SEARCH IS STOPPED FOR PARTS OF JET
LEAD: After failing to find a part crucial to investigators, searchers have stopped looking for engine pieces from a jetliner that crashed in July, Some 90 volunteers with metal detectors turned up engine fragments over the weekend when they examined stubble from corn and soybean, but a flange from the engine remained missing.


Exxon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,657,000,000
21,888,000,000
Net inc
1,110,000,000
1,225,000,000
Share earns
.87
.93
9mo rev
69,512,000,000
65,522,000,000
Net inc
b2,540,000,000
3,880,000,000
Share earns
1.99
2.89


Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,420,000,000
c162,100,000
Per share
-
2.01
9mo net loss
b1,081,100,000
c462,200,000
Per share
-
5.80
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1.6 billion from a special provision for credit losses for both periods.


Lubrizol Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lubrizol Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
274,663,000
265,382,000
Net inc
21,351,000
b10,683,000
Share earns
.57
.28
9mo rev
947,300,000
848,092,000
Net inc
78,067,000
b65,514,000
Share earns
2.09
1.69


Reputed Organized-Crime Figure Agrees to Fine in Teamsters Case
LEAD: A reputed organized-crime figure who had high-level ties to the International Brotherhood of Teamsters is to pay the Government $250,000 in a civil settlement that will also permanently bar him from all labor union activities, the United States Attorney's office in New York announced yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Oct. 12 about Tass's reaction to the world attention given its report of extraterrestrial creatures in a Soviet city misidentified the chairman of the astronomy department at Cornell University.
He is Yervant Terzian.


Big Board's Trading Data
LEAD: Computer-driven program trading accounted for 13.8 percent of the average daily New York Stock Exchange trading volume in September, the exchange said yesterday.
The percentage is sharply higher that the 10.3 percent of average trading in August by the exchange's member firms.


Eaton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
864,100,000
840,400,000
Net inc
b40,000,000
c54,400,000
Share earns
1.04
1.47
Shares outst
38,404,000
37,400,000
9mo sales
2,791,200,000
2,577,600,000
Net inc
b170,600,000
c161,300,000
Share earns
4.54
4.32
Shares outst
37,555,000
37,240,000


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
154,294,000
135,876,000
Net inc
10,147,000
7,134,000
Share earns
.48
.34


Coliseum Sale Not Expected By Deadline
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch indicated yesterday that he did not believe a legal challenge to the Columbus Circle redevelopment plan would be resolved in time to lessen budget cuts and fee increases expected soon.


The Chanel Jacket: An Icon Adorned
LEAD: After the costumes and theatrics of the first days of the spring and summer ready-to-wear showings, the clothes have begun to demand some serious attention.
Well, maybe not all the clothes, but certainly the decorative elements.


Ashland Oil Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,132,503,000
2,098,572,000
Net loss
b39,408,000
cd66,241,000
Share earns
-
1.19
Yr sales
7,989,260,000
7,753,071,000
Net inc
b86,205,000
d223,944,000
Share earns
1.55
4.01


TW Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TW Services Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
981,737,000
934,704,000
Net loss
b3,316,000
c24,890,000
Share earns
-
.51
Shares outst
49,034,000
48,980,000
9mo rev
2,787,077,000
2,628,277,000
Net inc
26,316,000
49,665,000
Share earns
.54
1.02
Shares outst
48,924,000
48,914,000


Race Is Getting Closer, Mayoral Candidates Agree
LEAD: David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani remained apart yesterday on holding debates, but agreed that the New York City mayoral race had grown considerably closer.


Washington Journal; Vermont Ponders Spirit Of the Law on Drugs
LEAD: Federal efforts to seize the property of a Vermont man who was caught growing marijuana in his vegetable garden have aroused the ire of neighbors here.


Giants' Clark Rated Best Big-League Player
LEAD: Will Clark, the San Francisco Giants' first baseman, who was named the best player in the National League playoff earlier this month, gained the No. 1 ranking among all major league players today.


Lebanese Militia Leaders Fault Proposed Charter
LEAD: Lebanon's Muslim and Christian militia commanders today sharply criticized a new national charter for governing the country, a day after it was adopted by 62 Lebanese legislators in Saudi Arabia.


A 6-Foot-3, Blue-Eyed Taiwanese-American Is China's Top Rocker
LEAD: Dressed in a sequined jacket and white slacks, a slender blue-eyed, black-haired singer swivels his hips around the stage under the light of a flickering strobe as a crowd of 15,000 Chinese youngsters, officials and even grandparents watch the spectacle in fascination.





Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
267,047,000
320,480,000
Net inc
34,074,000
38,376,000
Share earns
1.51
1.70
Shares outst
22,502,000
22,575,000
9mo sales
964,783,000
913,233,000
Net inc
105,125,000
85,032,000
Share earns
4.66
3.76
Shares outst
22,550,000
22,575,000


Children Still Being Sold Vehicles
LEAD: Dealers are still selling all-terrain vehicles for use by children despite an agreement between the Federal Government and the manufacturers to curtail such sales, a consumer group charged today.


Japan's Maneuvering For a Big Global Voice
LEAD: Japan, the world's biggest creditor and provider of financial assistance, is quietly building its influence in global finance institutions long dominated by the United States and Western Europe.
Having gained the appointment of a Japanese official to the top ranks of the World Bank, Japan is moving to promote a candidate to run the International Monetary Fund when the term of its managing director expires in


By Design; The Little Black Suit
LEAD: The little black suit is this fall's surprise success story.
While all the fashion oracles were predicting a preponderance of brown, the return of gray and camel, or the ascension of red, women were out finding and buying their new fall suits - in solid black.


Ramada Alters Buyout Terms
LEAD: After failing to raise $230 million in ''junk bond'' financing for a plan to divide the company, Ramada Inc. altered the terms of its deal.
Under the new arrangement, Ramada investors will receive up to $1 for each share of stock instead of up to $7.
Investors in the company, which is planning to sell its hotel business to concentrate on gaming, will also receive one share of stock in the new Ramada company, to be called the Aztar Corporation, instead of one-half share for every Ramada share under the original plan.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-17  Moscow admitted violations in Afghanistan.
The invasion broke Soviet law and international norms of behavior, Foreign Minister Shevardnadze told the Soviet legislature.
Page A1


Plans for a Mayoral Debate Finally Appear to Be Firming
LEAD: After three weeks of politicking and posturing, David N. Dinkins and Henry F. Hewes agreed yesterday to three debates.
Rudolph W. Giuliani agreed to three debates, but two of them without Mr.
Hewes and Ronald S. Lauder, who is in Europe and is not sure what he will do.


Review/Dance; Royal Winnipeg's 'Anne of Green Gables'
LEAD: The Royal Winnipeg Ballet is a survivor.
Repeatedly defying adversity, it continues to prosper on the Canadian prairie, and it is now celebrating its 50th anniversary.
It was in a festive mood on Sunday afternoon at Lehman Center for the Performing Arts in the Bronx.
But what made the onstage merriment possible was a tradition of courage and determination.


Fischer-Dieskau Is Ill
LEAD: The baritone Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau has canceled his performances with the New York Philharmonic on Saturday and next Tuesday. saying he is suffering from the flu.
He was to have sung Mahler's ''Songs of a Wayfarer.'' Instead, the orchestra will present an all-Tchaikovsky program, including ''Romeo and Juliet,'' ''Francesca da Rimini'' and the Fourth Symphony, with Leonard Bernstein conducting.


Cincinnati Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
248,000,000
224,800,000
Net inc
b18,600,000
c28,000,000
Share earns
1.14
1.71
9mo rev
729,100,000
673,400,000
Net inc
b87,100,000
c99,100,000
Share earns
5.33
6.11


A 30-Year Feud Divides Experts On Meteorology
LEAD: REID A. BRYSON and Verner E. Suomi of the University of Wisconsin at Madison started their careers as best friends, colleagues who helped each other build homes on adjacent lots and who together ran the university's meteorology department, making it one of the best in the nation.


Time Warner Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Warner Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,194,000,000
1,133,000,000
Net loss
176,000,000
b81,000,000
Share earns
-
1.42
Shares outst
61,100,000
57,600,000
9mo rev
4,548,000,000
3,300,000,000
Net loss
33,000,000
b231,000,000
Share earns
-
4.00
Shares outst
58,600,000
57,900,000


Guarantees of Free Speech Aren't Unlimited
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Michael Cecere, 45, Labor Law Specialist
LEAD: Michael S. Cecere, a lawyer who specialized in employment litigation, died of cancer of the colon Thursday at Hackensack Medical Center in Hackensack, N.J.
He was 45 years old and lived in Tenafly.


Atlantic Richfield reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Richfield (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,714,000,000
4,592,000,000
Net inc
379,000,000
391,000,000
Share earns
2.19
2.17
Shares outst
172,600,000
180,300,000
9mo rev
12,010,000,000
13,776,000,000
Net inc
1,550,000,000
1,192,000,000
Share earns
8.87
6.56


Allied-Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied-Signal (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,827,000,000
2,864,000,000
Net inc
121,000,000
119,000,000
Share earns
.81
.80
Shares outst
149,966,208
149,293,776
9mo sales
8,884,000,000
8,864,000,000
Net inc
413,000,000
359,000,000
Share earns
2.77
2.40
Shares outst
149,043,964
149,675,970


Robinson Faces Knicks
LEAD: David Robinson, the center the National Basketball Association has been waiting for, will be the big attraction at 7:30 tonight as the San Antonio Spurs oppose the Knicks in a preseason game at Madison Square Garden.


Liz Claiborne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liz Claiborne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
410,372,000
317,660,000
Net inc
51,066,000
31,614,000
Share earns
.58
.36
9mo sales
1,034,819,000
893,988,000
Net inc
124,156,000
83,740,000
Share earns
1.41
.96


Glenmore Distilleries Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenmore Distilleries Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
88,361,000
53,135,000
Net inc
831,000
466,000
Share earns
.34
.19


Time Warner Reports Loss For Quarter
LEAD: Reflecting the costs of its recent merger, Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that it had lost $176 million in the quarter that ended Sept. 30, compared with a profit for Time Inc. alone of $81 million, or $1.42 a share, a year earlier.


Baseball Fans Are Mixed on Restart of World Series
LEAD: Baseball fans expressed mixed reactions today on the propriety and practicality of resuming the World Series on Friday.
But they generally seemed to agree that the slogan ''The Battle of the Bay'' had lost its ring of cheer since the earthquake struck northern California six days ago.


Let the Dollar Drift
LEAD: One reason the financial markets are jittery is the increasing tension between the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve over the value of the dollar.
The Treasury wants to push the dollar down and thus push exports up.
The Federal Reserve resists.


The California Quake; Children Live With Fear in Area of Disasters
LEAD: The lights were back on and children returned to class today at Lexington Elementary School near the summit of the Santa Cruz Mountains and just a few miles from the epicenter of the earthquake last Tuesday.
For children who lost their homes, who saw neighbors injured or who have spent nights sleeping in a strange place, today was a day of sharing their own stories.


Chinese Mushrooms Barred
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said today that it was blocking indefinitely all shipments of canned and pickled mushrooms from China after a number of food poisonings were associated with earlier shipments.


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
895,394,000
898,988,000
Net inc
205,533,000
196,861,000
Share earns
.87
.85
9mo rev
2,563,306,000
2,449,887,000
Net inc
457,788,000
468,299,000
Share earns
1.85
1.98


Integrated Agrees To Transfer Unit
LEAD: Integrated Resources Inc., an investment concern, said it had agreed in principle to transfer all of the stock of a broker-dealer subsidiary to Gerard M. Lavin and Gary W. Krat for undisclosed terms.
Integrated said it would retain the right to repurchase the unit, which will be renamed Royal Alliance Associates


The California Quake; Rains Halt Quake Cleanup; Rescued Driver Is Stronger
LEAD: Chill rains and gale-force winds halted rescue efforts today at a flattened highway overpass in Oakland and threatened new destruction in the hard-hit hills to the south.


John Archer Gifford, New York Lawyer, 88
LEAD: John Archer Gifford, a lawyer, died Sunday at Falmouth (Mass.) Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan and Woods Hole, Mass.


Defense Implies Witness Killed Student at Pratt
LEAD: A defense lawyer told a jury yesterday that his client had not fatally shot a Pratt Institute art student during a street robbery last year and suggested that the prosecution's key witness was actually the murderer.


DSC Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DSC Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
106,316,000
85,345,000
Net inc
8,414,000
b4,261,000
Share earns
.20
.10
9mo rev
300,407,000
242,338,000
Net inc
21,760,000
b12,450,000
Share earns
.52
.30


Courter and Florio Contrast Most Over Social Issues
LEAD: The two candidates running for governor of New Jersey appear in starkest contrast when they speak about social questions facing the state, like how to fight crime, drugs and AIDS, and whether government should place new restrictions on abortions.


Mahorn Italy Bound?
LEAD: Rick Mahorn, the latest National Basketball Association player to be courted by the Italian basketball league, is expected to arrive in Italy today to negotiate a deal with Glaxo Verona.


8 Top Pretoria Rebels Meet to Plan Strategy
LEAD: Eight African National Congress leaders, including seven freed from prison this month, held a strategy meeting today, unhindered by the police even though their movement remains outlawed.


Augat Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Augat Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
71,875,265
81,261,228
Net inc
4,100,000
c28,277,340
Share earns
.23
-
9mo sales
232,300,962
246,094,103
Net inc
b9,300,000
c24,664,480
Share earns
.52
-


Lake Shore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Shore Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,584,000
3,228,000
Per share
.40
.50
9mo net inc
8,306,000
8,752,000
Per share
1.28
1.35


Coca-Cola Bottling Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Bottling Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
101,497,000
86,932,000
Net loss
b6,165,000
c1,103,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo sales
291,485,000
249,654,000
Net loss
b7,142,000
c1,251,000
Share earns
-
.15


Namibia Rebel Leader: A Focus of Hope and Fear &lt;
LEAD: The most famous face in this land belongs to an avuncular Namibian with a white beard and ingratiating smile.
The portrait of Sam Nujoma, the leader of the South-West Africa People's Organization, beams from political posters, on the cotton print skirts worn by admiring women and in right-wing graffiti superimposed with a rifle target.


Capital Cities Profit Up 29% In Quarter
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. yesterday reported a 29 percent increase in its third-quarter net income, based largely on significantly stronger revenues for its broadcasting division, led by the ABC television network.


West Newton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Newton Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,427,000
c355,000
Per share
-
.20
9mo net loss
b925,000
c969,000
Per share
-
.55
b-Reflected an increase in the provision for possible loan losses to $2 million for the quarter, from $100,000 a year ago, and joint venture losses of $450,000.


Newport News Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport News Savings Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b960,000
c374,000
Per share
-
.27
b-Reflected an additional loan-loss provision of $987,000 and a loss of $265,000 on securities transactions.
c-Net income


An Editor's Cry From Gorbachev's Doghouse
LEAD: Vladislav A. Starkov was supposed to be in Canada today, promoting the wonders of life under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
But late Saturday night, a Communist Party underling phoned him at home to tell him his trip was ''not recommended.''


Ameribanc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameribanc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
605,000
b960,000
Per share
.28
.44
9mo net inc
1,801,000
b2,496,000
Per share
.82
1.15
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $189,000, or 9 cents a share, for the quarter and $607,000, or 28 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lone Star Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
100,990,000
107,074,000
Net inc
1,812,000
5,477,000
Share earns
.03
.25
9mo sales
255,498,000
279,143,000
Net loss
7,850,000
b4,917,000
b-After an extraordinary loss of $1,564,000 related to the extinguishment of debt.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Ewan MacColl Dies; Folk Singer Was 74
LEAD: Ewan MacColl, who led the folk music revival in Britain and wrote the Grammy Award-winning ballad ''The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,'' died on Sunday in a London hospital after heart surgery.
He was 74 years old.


First Michigan Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,099,000
3,631,000
Per share
.63
.57
9mo net inc
12,119,000
9,867,000
Per share
1.87
1.56


Congress Moves on Ethics, but Stalls on Campaign Spending
LEAD: In response to attacks this year on lawmakers' personal and professional behavior, Congress has developed several measures to tighten ethical standards but has made little progress on restricting campaign spending.


Dollar Ends Session Lower As Traders Await U.S. Data
LEAD: The dollar drifted lower in lackluster trading yesterday as currency markets around the world awaited direction from United States economic reports scheduled for release this week.


Rationing 'Dallas' in Europe
LEAD: Western Europe, the font of Western culture, now seeks to protect itself against foreign cultural subversion.
In an absurd effort to regulate public taste, the 12-nation European Community has put restrictions on foreign television shows.
Though the lid may have little practical effect, Washington is filing formal charges under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which sets the global rules for exporting and importing.


UAL Tries To Keep Itself Intact
LEAD: The board of the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, announced yesterday that it would seek to keep the company independent while it examines financial and strategic alternatives.


Ampco-Pittssburgh Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ampco-Pittssburgh Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
51,382,000
49,398,000
Net inc
b2,669,000
c19,275,000
Share earns
.28
-
9mo sales
166,516,000
152,817,000
Net inc
b8,896,000
c18,238,000
Share earns
.93
-


G.M. and Fuji Out
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and Fuji Heavy Industries of Japan have decided to withdraw from a planned car-making joint venture with a Chinese company in northern China, officials at both companies said.
Fuji said it had decided to drop the project because of a lack of components and worry about political instability.


Iran Offers Trade on Hostages, but U.S. Is Cautious
LEAD: President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran said today that Teheran would help the Bush Administration obtain the freedom of American hostages if Washington helped solve the case of three Iranians kidnapped in Lebanon or returned Iranian assets frozen in the United States since 1979.


Stock Documents From Inner City Could Bolster Dinkins's Assertions
LEAD: New details were released yesterday that could support David N. Dinkins's contention that he properly valued stock sold to his son for $58,000 in 1986, even though in 1983 he had put its market value at more than $1 million.


Ford Grantor Trust Certificates Priced
LEAD: The Ford Motor Credit Company yesterday priced the largest issue of any pass-through securities to date, with the sale of $2.575 billion in asset-backed certificates issued through Ford Credit 1989-A Grantor Trust.
The asset-backed securities, which are due in 1994, are secured by automobile loans sold to the trust by Ford Motor


Israelis Say Cache of Letters Shows P.L.O. Terrorist Plan
LEAD: Israeli authorities operating in the Gaza Strip say they recently discovered a cache of detailed, secret documents showing that the Palestine Liberation Organization is hiring local killers to assassinate other Palestinians and carry out ''military activity'' against Israelis.


Books of The Times; Vargas Llosa on the Role of Fiction and Its Making
LEAD:  The Storyteller  By Mario Vargas Llosa  Translated by Helen Lane. 246 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


The California Quake; Earthquake Casualties
LEAD: Following is a list of the dead who have been identified in the Northern California earthquake on Oct. 17, as reported by the coroner's office in each county or the county's Office of Emergency Services.
The names are followed by the victims' age and hometown when known.
Alameda County  ASFOUR, Ramzi, 51, Novato.


Jefferson Smurfit Offer Price Raised
LEAD: SIBV/MS Holdings Inc. said it had increased the price of its public tender offer for the Jefferson Smurfit Corporation, a maker of paper products, by $1.25 a share, to $43.
The increase of $12.2 million in its offer was made to settle shareholder litigation on the bid.
The company said terms of the settlement - but not the increase in price for the tender offer or the merger that is to follow - was subject to approval by the Delaware Court of Chancery.


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Federal Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
520,000
735,000
Per share
.13
-
9mo net inc
3,658,000
2,017,000
Per share
.74
-
Year-ago quarter and 9 months per share earnings unavailable as the company went public on Jan.


Giuliani Says Dinkins Lacks 'Respect for Law'
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani, brimming with confidence born of encouraging poll numbers, used the Liberal Party's annual dinner last night to drive home the points he believes are tightening the mayoral race - that David N. Dinkins lacks toughness, decisiveness, and respect for the law.


Allegheny Power System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
537,727,000
525,934,000
Net inc
43,759,000
49,115,000
Share earns
.83
.95
Shares outst
52,478,902
51,803,729
9mo rev
1,686,562,000
1,645,550,000
Net inc
148,771,000
153,710,000
Share earns
2.84
2.98
Shares outst
52,309,603
51,649,481


Texas Congressman Stricken
LEAD: Representative Jack Brooks, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, underwent hospital tests today after suffering abdominal pains during a flight from Texas to Washington, his office announced.
Mr.
Brooks, a 66-year-old Texas Democrat, was being treated at Bethesda Naval Hospital to determine the cause of the pain, his office said in a brief statement.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about do-it-yourself abortions referred incompletely to the author of the book ''When Birth Control Fails.'' It is by Suzann Gage, who teaches at Holistic Health for Women, a clinic in Los Angeles.


Business and Health; The Turnaround Of the H.M.O.'s
LEAD: MOST health maintenance organizations did well this year, recovering from two years of heavy losses.
Industry experts said most of the prepaid health plans should remain profitable at least through 1990, when the cycle may turn down again.


Galileo Sent on Way, Atlantis Returns Early
LEAD: Darting back to Earth between two storms, the space shuttle Atlantis landed safely here this morning after sending the Galileo spacecraft on a six-year journey to Jupiter.


USG Corp(M) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USG Corp(M)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
559,839,000
586,628,000
Net inc
8,678,000
c2,573,000
Share earns
.16
.04
Shares outst
54,172,711
52,989,411
9mo sales
1,667,567,000
1,707,997,000
Net inc
b20,665,000
82,860,000
Share earns
.38
1.59
Shares outst
54,129,994
52,250,471


Accord on Quebec's Status Meets Indifference
LEAD: No issue in Canadian politics has roused greater passions than the future of Quebec.


Critic's Notebook; A New York Rousseau Is a Hit in Leningrad
LEAD: The sensation of the loan show that marks the 225th anniversary of the foundation of the Hermitage in Leningrad is beyond a doubt ''The Sleeping Gypsy'' by the Douanier Rousseau.
Long familiar to every visitor to the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, where it normally hangs, it is now the Leningraders' favorite enigma.


Jane Bronson Philips, Professor, 69
LEAD: Jane Bronson Philips, an associate professor of English at Pace University, died of cancer Friday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 69 years old and lived in Briarcliff, N.Y.


Nixon to Visit China
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon will visit China around the end of the month, meeting with Chinese leaders and reporting to President Bush on his return, a spokesman said today.
The White House said Mr.
Bush looked forward to the report.


ADMITS BREAKING ARMS PACT
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze told the Soviet legislature today that the nine-year Soviet military role in Afghanistan had violated Soviet law and international norms of behavior.


Graf Gives Up Just 15 Points
LEAD: Top-ranked Steffi Graf gave up ust a point in the first five games and went on to beat Laura Garrone, 6-0, 6-0, in the first round of a tennis tournament here today.


Dynatech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatech Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
102,042,000
104,097,000
Net inc
3,993,000
7,010,000
Share earns
.39
.57
Shares outst
10,354,000
12,326,000
6mo sales
204,861,000
203,225,000
Net inc
7,970,000
13,351,000
Share earns
.75
1.08
Shares outst
10,565,000
12,323,000


First City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
26,099
64,656
Per share
.03
.10
Shares outst
749,917
677,960
9mo net inc
227,889
242,168
Per share
.32
.36
Shares outst
702,209
677,960


From Poverty to Literary Success to Poverty
LEAD:  Nelson Algren  A Life on the Wild Side  By Bettina Drew  416 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $27.95.


Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
638,000
1,052,000
Per share
.22
.34
Shares outst
2,836,545
3,137,330
9mo net inc
2,315,000
3,242,000
Per share
.82
.99
Shares outst
2,827,612
3,271,470


School Tapes: 'We Got a Dirty District Here'
LEAD: Following are excerpts of conversations taped this year by Colman Genn, superintendent in Community School District 27 in Queens, as transcribed by the Joint Commission on Integrity in the Public Schools.
The first was with Salvatore Stazzone, a member of the Community School Board; Richard Lipkowitz, a teacher in the district, and Mr.


Earnings Increase At Two Media Leaders
LEAD: Two marketing-communications concerns yesterday announced robust earnings.
Shandwick P.L.C., the British public relations conglomerate, said its net income jumped 67.2 percent, to $:9.84 million, or $15.8 million, from $:5.77 million, or $9.3 million, in the previous fiscal year.


Walker Returns to Jets
LEAD: Wesley Walker officially rejoined the Jets today and Mark Malone became the backup quarterback to Ken O'Brien.


Lawyer Studies Recipes, Suspects Fraud
LEAD: IN the beginning, there were cooks.
They were the people who stood over a fire turning flora and fauna into dinner.
Then the world changed.
History books are light on the details, but sometime after the invention of the wheel, someone decided to watch the cook and document the alchemy that turns trophies of the hunt into balms to the stomach and soul.


Citizens-Lakeland Deal
LEAD: Citizens First Bancorp Inc. said today that it had signed a letter of intent to buy Lakeland First Financial Group Inc.'s Lakeland Savings Bank for $50.6 million in cash and stock.
The deal provides Lakeland shareholders with the right to receive cash or convertible preferred stock having a value of $18 for each share of Lakeland common.


Consolidated Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,575,014,000
1,469,182,000
Net inc
282,608,000
266,330,000
Share earns
1.20
1.13
Shares outst
228,089,000
227,954,000
9mo rev
4,180,040,000
3,897,360,000
Net inc
500,790,000
505,054,000
Share earns
2.07
2.09
Shares outst
228,026,000
227,907,000


Comfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comfed Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
11,000
866,000
Per share
-
.10
6mo net loss
3,647,000
b1,375,000
Per share
-
.16
b-Net income


Informix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Informix Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
37,178,000
23,691,000
Net inc
2,078,000
b98,000
Share earns
.16
.01
9mo rev
101,788,000
75,588,000
Net inc
3,672,000
b4,071,000
Share earns
.29
.33


Oh, Those Cacophonous Car Burglar Alarms!
LEAD: To the Editor:


Abington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abington Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
304,000
563,000
Per share
.15
.25
Shares outst
2,038,000
2,245,000
9mo net inc
1,011,000
1,319,000
Per share
.49
.58
Shares outst
2,074,000
2,281,000


Ford May Seek All of Jaguar
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company might try to buy Jaguar P.L.C. outright when British Government restrictions on investors' shares in the luxury auto maker expire at the end of 1990, Ford said today.


Eating WEll
LEAD: HEALTH-CONSCIOUS shoppers who find it difficult enough to choose the nutritionally correct oil, life-enhancing crackers or the perfect yogurt might justifiably look forward to a time when products will carry a seal of approval from a reputable health organization.


Alexander's In the Bronx
LEAD: Alexander's Inc., the New York-based chain of 11 department stores, will open a new 147,000-square-foot department store in the East Bronx, which will be its first new store in nine years.


'College Age' Means Almost Any Age
LEAD: On college campuses around the country, more and more people in their mid-20's to their 90's are joining their younger counterparts in pursuit of knowledge for their careers or their fulfillment.


The Kremlin Apology: Excerpts From Speech
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze's speech on Monday to the Supreme Soviet, as translated by The Associated Press:  Krasnoyarsk Radar


People
LEAD: * David Reich has joined Madeline de Vries Ltd. as a senior vice president.


Eldec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Sales
28,094,000
23,529,000
Net inc
b2,068,000
c1,304,000
Share earns
.38
.24
6mo sales
53,460,000
46,620,000
Net inc
b2,953,000
c2,521,000
Share earns
.54
.47


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingersoll-Rand (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
845,300,000
715,400,000
Net inc
44,300,000
29,600,000
Share earns
.82
.54
Shares outst
51,457,000
51,885,000
9mo sales
2,554,400,000
2,206,300,000
Net inc
b145,900,000
103,300,000
Share earns
2.73
1.91
Shares outst
51,397,000
51,829,000


Motel 6 reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motel 6 (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 27
1989
1988
Revenue
124,300,000
97,400,000
Net inc
17,400,000
9,500,000
Share earns
.31
.19
Shares outst
51,817,000
49,432,000
9mo rev
319,200,000
256,300,000
Net inc
14,700,000
9,500,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
51,091,000
49,174,000


Mobil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,636,000,000
13,118,000,000
Net inc
532,000,000
557,000,000
Share earns
1.30
1.36
9mo rev
41,689,000,000
40,991,000,000
Net inc
1,362,000,000
b1,625,000,000
Share earns
3.32
3.95


American Heritage Life InFvestment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Heritage Life InFvestment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,923,165
2,455,732
Share earns
.65
.54
9mo net inc
9,092,207
b8,520,902
Share earns
2.02
1.88
b-Included an extraordinary gain on disposal of home office property of $707,189, or 15 cents a share.


Howard Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,048,000
4,526,000
Per share
.42
.31
9mo net inc
19,191,000
19,624,000
Per share
1.33
1.36


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodie Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
33,506,852
28,049,482
Net inc
2,045,056
1,293,976
Share earns
.39
.25
Yr sales
121,075,855
87,716,740
Net inc
5,430,939
b3,459,855
Share earns
1.05
.67


Chambers Sues for Courses
LEAD: Robert Chambers, who is serving a prison sentence in the slaying of Jennifer Levin, sued state prison officials yesterday, saying they would not allow him to take college courses.
Mr.
Chambers is a 22-year-old former addict serving a 5-to-15-year sentence for manslaughter in the August 1986 killing of Miss Levin.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
139,112,000
132,847,000
Net inc
b3,699,000
c3,339,000
Share earns
.42
.37
b-After an extraordinary loss of $220,000.
c-After an extraordinary credit of $206,000, or 2 cents a share.


Stake in Sealed Air
LEAD: A group led by the Fort Hill Investors Management Corporation, a Boston investment firm, has lowered its stake in the Sealed Air Corporation to 1.7 percent from 7.23 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the investment group gave no reason for the sale.
Sealed Air is a packaging materials concern based in East Saddle Brook, N.J.


Words Fly on Marx-Engels-Platz: 'We Want Democracy'
LEAD: ''Some heads must roll here,'' said the young philosophy graduate, looking straight into the eyes of a senior official of the Communist Party Central Committee. ''I mean Egon Krenz, whom you've just elected.
I have no confidence in the man.''


Kuhlman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kuhlman Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,860,000
41,367,000
Net inc
786,000
b10,087,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo sales
126,018,000
131,843,000
Net inc
4,279,000
b9,344,000
Share earns
.74
-


R. N. Rose Dies at 87; Oil Company Engineer
LEAD: R. Nelson Rose, an engineer whose knowledge of rust inhibitors helped preserve equipment salvaged from the French liner Normandie after she sank in New York Harbor Feb. 9, 1942, died of a pulmonary embolism Sunday at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.


No Way to Meet the Garbage Crisis
LEAD: New Yorkers had every reason to believe that the planned Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator would proceed on schedule.
But David Dinkins, running for mayor, now asserts that if elected, he would defer building the plant for three years pending study.
The incinerator needs no further study.
To delay its construction would only aggravate the impending garbage crisis.


Safeway Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeway Stores Inc.
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
3,310,000,000
3,200,000,000
Net inc
b7,100,000
c23,000,000
9mo sales
9,810,000,000
9,300,000,000
Net inc
23,500,000
c46,000,000
b-Included losses on company's equity investment in Vons Cos.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Birtcher Corp., El Monte, Calif., a maker of electromedical and electrosurgical instruments, said it would acquire the Bard/EMS electrosurgery division of C. R. Bard Inc., Murray Hill, N.J., for $11 million.


N.F.L. Owners Are Still Split
LEAD: After 11 hours of meetings and 4 ballots, the National Football League owners were unable to elect a new commissioner here today, with Paul Tagliabue falling three votes short of election on the final ballot.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* San Diego Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
500,920,000
538,700,000
Net inc
53,434,000
49,288,000
Share earns
.91
.83
Shares outst
55,893,000
55,873,000
9mo rev
1,504,641,000
1,550,172,000
Net inc
132,587,000
142,012,000
Share earns
2.22
2.38
Shares outst
55,893,000
55,873,000


Lam Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lam Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
37,397,000
26,392,000
Net inc
2,304,000
1,708,000
Share earns
.20
.16
Shares outst
11,750,000
10,900,000


Half-Price Tuition Plan
LEAD: Students attending parochial and public high schools in Hartford are being offered a 50 percent discount in tuition and fees at the University of Hartford, the school announced today.


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,000,000,000
7,200,000,000
Net inc
417,000,000
420,000,000
Share earns
1.22
1.23
9mo rev
23,900,000,000
22,000,000,000
Net inc
1,134,000,000
1,593,000,000
Share earns
3.31
4.66


Citicorp's Weekly Sale
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper yesterday.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chattem Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,496,000
12,260,000
Net loss
1,222,000
754,000


Tenneco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tenneco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,210,000,000
3,025,000,000
Net inc
90,000,000
b7,000,000
Share earns
.68
.02
Shares outst
127,100,000
147,200,000
9mo rev
10,194,000,000
9,634,000,000
Net inc
379,000,000
b224,000,000
Share earns
2.88
1.39
Shares outst
127,000,000
147,100,000


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aceto Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
25,640,000
20,707,000
Net inc
674,000
598,000
Share earns
.18
.16
Shares outst
3,815,431
3,799,761


The California Quake; RED CROSS MOUNTS 2-COAST OPERATION
LEAD: The American Red Cross, which mounted the largest relief operation in its recent history last month in the aftermath of Hurricane Hugo, is now fighting a two-coast battle as it stretches its resources to assist the victims of the San Francisco area earthquake.


Staggered Truck Hours Create Worse Problems
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drug Suspect Slashes Officer
LEAD: A New York City police officer was slashed in the left arm yesterday by a teen-age suspect he was trying to arrest on drug charges, the police said.
The officer, Philip Milano, 30 years old, was treated at Jamaica Hospital and released, said a police spokesman, Officer Hugh Barry.


Metropolitan Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
7,176,000
2,873,000
Per share
1.00
.47
9mo net inc
b16,954,000
6,146,000
Per share
2.54
1.01
b-After an extraordinary loss of $348,000.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  METS (NL) - Announced they will not offer new contracts to Bill Robinson, hitting coach and first-base coach, and Sam Perlozzo, third-base coach.
SAN DIEGO (NL) - Signed Garry Templeton, shortstop, to a two-year contract.
Signed Pat Dobson, pitching coach, to a two-year contract.


Intelligence Official Plans to Leave F.B.I. For Private Industry
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation's top counterintelligence official is leaving the agency to take a job in private industry, a spokesman for the bureau said today.


Get the Solution to Air Congestion Back on the Right Track
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Midwood, the Big Issue Is Still Jackson
LEAD: Many Jewish voters in Midwood, an increasingly Orthodox section of Brooklyn where Mayor Edward I. Koch won 8 of every 10 votes in the Sept. 12 Democratic primary, have harbored a single, almost obsessive concern about David N. Dinkins - the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  UAL's stock rebounded after plunging $33 early in the day and closed down $8.375, at $170.
The recovery was spurred in part by rumors of stock purchases by two large investors.  [ Page D1. ]  The proposed takeover of United Airlines is a certain nominee for Wall Street's worst deal of the year.


Lewis Starts Suit Over Drug Accusations
LEAD: Carl Lewis, the American sprinter, has initiated legal proceedings in Canada against a West German magazine and a Canadian cable network for having said that he used performance-enhancing drugs.


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
101,549,000
91,221,000
Net inc
3,064,000
663,000
Share earns
.15
.03
Shares outst
20,209,000
19,988,000
9mo rev
301,876,000
279,787,000
Net inc
15,103,000
7,624,000
Share earns
.74
.38
Shares outst
20,276,000
19,991,000


David Jacobson, Executive, 72
LEAD: David J. Jacobson, a marketing executive, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He was 72 years old.


Melville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,830,658,000
1,624,567,000
Net inc
74,111,000
66,377,000
Share earns
.62
.61
9mo sales
5,035,025,000
4,489,030,000
Net inc
159,967,000
149,250,000
Share earns
1.40
1.37


The California Quake; U.S. Relief Agency Seeks Relief From Criticism
LEAD: The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the White House office that provides relief for victims in disasters like the California earthquake last week and Hurricane Hugo last month, is at the center of a storm of its own.


Leontine Sharaga, Dentist, 95
LEAD: Leontine Sharaga, one of the first female dentists in New York City, died of colon cancer Saturday at Montefiore Hospital.
She was 95 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Mayweather Adds an Extra Dimension
LEAD: Mike Mayweather, the Army halfback programmed to run over Rutgers at West Point on Saturday, adds an extra dimension to the Black Knights' wishbone offense that Coach Jim Young has not previous enjoyed.


3 Distinct Cultures In a Spicy Pork Dish
LEAD: GROWING up in Puerto Rico, my wife, Gloria, loved pork dishes, especially those with beans and rice or with plantain bananas or sweet potatoes.
As a result, pork, in one form or another, is featured often at our house, especially when cool weather sets in.


More Jobs Are Cut At G.E. Division
LEAD: The General Electric Company said it would eliminate the jobs of 1,100 salaried employees in its major appliance group in seven states because of weakening sales.
The company said it hoped to cut most of the affected jobs by offering early retirement and transfers, but a spokesman said some layoffs may might required.


Astral Bellevue Pathe reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astral Bellevue Pathe
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
68,007,000
60,400,000
Net inc
b2,626,000
c1,892,000
Share earns
.33
.28
Shares outst
7,928,000
6,760,000
6mo rev
133,795,000
116,277,000
Net inc
b4,667,000
c3,221,000
Share earns
.61
.48
Shares outst
7,664,000
6,738,000


Partisan Battle Looms Over Deficit Bill
LEAD: The most powerful committee barons in the House and Senate will face off again across the bargaining table on Wednesday to try to shave a modest sum from the Federal deficit for the 1990 fiscal year, without bringing the Government to a halt in the process.


Santa Fe Realty Spinoff Is Planned
LEAD: The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, which is negotiating to sell 20 percent of its real estate subsidiary to the California Public Employees Retirement System, intends to spin off the remaining 80 percent to shareholders by Jan. 1, 1992, the company said.
Santa Fe, the Chicago-based railroad company, said it was still negotiating with the pension plan to sell a stake in the Santa Fe Realty Corporation.


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
62,001,000
52,247,000
Net inc
3,429,000
1,003,000
Share earns
.40
.12
6mo rev
121,404,000
104,023,000
Net inc
6,483,000
2,307,000
Share earns
.75
.27


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
841,300,000
806,400,000
Net inc
b31,100,000
31,200,000
Share earns
.86
.87
9mo sales
2,605,600,000
2,419,200,000
Net inc
b112,000,000
93,200,000
Share earns
3.11
2.60


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.68
8.75
8.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.52
7.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.50
7.56
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.90
8.70
30-YR.


Homefed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homefed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
23,914,000
27,883,000
Per share
1.10
1.30
9mo net inc
82,520,000
79,062,000
Per share
3.82
3.71


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
3,031,000
3,800,000
Per share
.41
.51
9mo net inc
9,314,000
9,638,000
Per share
1.26
1.30


Procter &amp; Gamble Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procter &amp; Gamble Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,575,000,000
5,267,000,000
Net inc
b551,000,000
400,000,000
Share earns
1.66
1.18
b-Included the $125 million consent judgment three cookie companies will pay it to settle a long-standing lawsuit on cookie patents.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  David Byrne's Rhythms


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fruit of the Loom (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
333,300,000
258,000,000
Net inc
19,400,000
15,500,000
Share earns
.31
.25
9mo sales
994,900,000
761,400,000
Net inc
52,900,000
36,400,000
Share earns
.86
.59


Goodyear Net Advances 11%
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company reported today that its third-quarter profit rose 11 percent over a year ago because of improved tire sales.


Dollar Ends Day Lower; Sales Spurred by Stock Dip
LEAD: The dollar finished lower against most leading currencies yesterday, depressed by the volatility of stock prices and by expectations of lower United States interest rates.


Florida School Bond Offering
LEAD: The Broward County School District in Florida priced a public bond offering of $185 million in general obligation school bonds yesterday with a maximum yield of 7.25 percent for an issue due in 2008 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Mercedes Two-Seater
LEAD: Mercedes-Benz of North America, fighting a competitive onslaught of new Japanese luxury cars, took the wraps off its latest weapon today: a high-performance roadster embodying new safety technology.


AMCA International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMCA International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
362,655,000
354,900,000
Net inc
b35,419,000
c10,119,000
Share earns
.22
.04
Shares outst
135,482,000
102,434,000
9mo rev
1,030,170,000
916,143,000
Net inc
b61,587,000
c8,702,000
Share earns
.32
-
Shares outst
135,482,000
66,680,000


Bakker Sentenced to 45 Years For Fraud in His TV Ministry
LEAD: The evangelist Jim Bakker's long, slow fall from grace clattered to a crushing finale here today when Federal District Judge Robert Potter sentenced him to 45 years in prison and fined him $500,000.


Review/Film; Two Bears Who Are Just Plain Folks
LEAD: The nervous young actor warily edges up to his older, more seasoned co-star.
They stare at each other for a long moment.
Then, very tentatively, they move closer.
They embrace.
They begin to nuzzle.
They kiss.
It's a big, wet, messy one.


Enserch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enserch Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
633,302,000
645,599,000
Net inc
6,847,000
b257,963,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
58,721,000
57,825,000
9mo rev
1,971,531,000
2,026,825,000
Net inc
47,140,000
b173,332,000
Share earns
.62
-
Shares outst
58,520,000
57,694,000


Ranking of 'Best Colleges' Rankles Many Educators
LEAD: Two years ago two dozen presidents of top American colleges and universities paid a visit to U.S.
News &amp; World Report to complain about the magazine's ''America's Best Colleges'' rankings.
They said the methodology was flawed and the survey was a disservice to thousands of high school students seeking direction in choosing a college.


Loewy and de Harak Join Hall of Fame
LEAD: The Art Directors Club bestowed a measure of immortality on two famous designers last week, inducting Rudolph de Harak and Raymond Loewy into its Hall of Fame.


2 Expulsions in Hazing Death
LEAD: Morehouse College announced Monday that two students have been expelled because of a fraternity hazing that led to a potential member's death last week.
Eight other students were suspended for one year.
The college said all were members of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, the nation's oldest black Greek-letter fraternity.


Rome Journal; Conservative Catholic Group Casts Off Its Cloak
LEAD: For a religious organization with a legendary penchant for secrecy, it seems appropriate that only a street number, 73, should identify the imposing building on Viale Bruno Buozzi, three miles from the Vatican, as the headquarters of Opus Dei.


First Union Real Estate Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Real Estate Investments (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,398,000
18,323,000
Net inc
b14,121,000
c5,326,000
Share earns
.80
.29
9mo rev
57,513,000
54,480,000
Net inc
b24,386,000
c17,948,000
Share earns
1.38
.99


As Edmonton's Center, Carson Was an Outsider
LEAD: Last year's Wayne Gretzky trade is still jolting the Edmonton Oilers, sometimes in unexpected ways.


Higher Offer For Utility Due Today
LEAD: Heating up the bidding for the bankrupt Public Service Company of New Hampshire, Northeast Utilities and the Public Service shareholders' committee will file a $2.25 billion purchase plan with the bankruptcy court today, Northeast said last night.


Shell Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Oil Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,399,000,000
5,467,000,000
Net inc
340,000,000
364,000,000
9mo rev
16,442,000,000
15,940,000,000
Net inc
1,141,000,000
1,027,000,000
Shell Oil is a unit of Royal Dutch Petroleum.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: Exposing the ignorance of the young is perennially popular with their elders.
The latest example is ''50 Hours: A Core Curriculum for College Students'' by Lynne V. Cheney, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Plan Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,868,000
9,571,000
Net inc
9,408,000
7,477,000
Share earns
.29
.28
Shares outst
33,359,000
26,812,000
Yr rev
43,540,000
37,320,000
Net inc
27,110,623
23,450,136
Share earns
.95
.88
Shares outst
28,620,000
26,734,000


Sterling Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
20,388,000
23,195,000
Net loss
322,700
b830,400
Share earns
-
.22
6mo sales
42,444,000
44,438,000
Net loss
219,800
b1,501,200
Share earns
-
.39


American Colloid reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Colloid (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
30,364,000
28,023,000
Net inc
b1,847,000
1,186,000
Share earns
.35
.22
9mo sales
93,500,000
80,438,000
Net inc
b3,935,000
2,939,000
Share earns
.75
.55


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 20
Oct. 13
Oct. 21
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.7
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
223.2
225.3
216.0
Distillate stocks
120.0
120.3
127.2
Crude imports, daily
5.2
6.5
5.3
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
2.1
Crude stocks
336.5
342.8
333.6
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
8.0
Refinery utilization (%)
85.9
87.4
83.4


3 in Bush Cabinet to Join Giuliani Effort
LEAD: Signaling President Bush's unusually strong support for Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign, three Cabinet secretaries and the President's chief of staff will be the main attractions at Giuliani fund-raisers in the next week.


Clashes in Southern Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and killed two guerrillas in the buffer zone in southern Lebanon today, military headquarters reported.
The clash, north of Merj 'Uyun, came hours after the army said Israeli-backed Lebanese militiamen shot and killed two other guerrillas in the zone.
Officials were unable to say if the victims were Palestinian or Lebanese guerrillas.


New S.E.C. Chief Defines Goals
LEAD: In his first public discussion of the future policy of the Securities and Exchange Commission since he took office as chairman two weeks ago, Richard C. Breeden sent reassuring signals to the markets today, saying that his agency would not press Congress to grant the commission power to close the nation's securities markets in times of crisis.


La Petite Academy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Petite Academy (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
42,819,000
37,925,000
Net inc
1,243,000
b349,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
128,161,000
113,283,000
Net inc
5,349,000
6,181,000
Share earns
.34
.39


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M. and 6 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.


Citgo Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citgo Petroleum Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,200,000,000
1,200,000,000
Net inc
28,600,000
29,900,000
9mo rev
3,600,000,000
3,100,000,000
Net inc
104,400,000
105,600,000
The company said a non-cash lower- of-cost-or-market adjustment to book inventory values increased latest third quarter net income by $6.6 million while it reduced 1988 third quarter net by $16.1 million.


Shell, Mobil and Chevron Profits Fall
LEAD: Shell, Mobil and Chevron reported yesterday that third-quarter profits were down slightly from the year earlier, following a pattern set by Exxon on Monday.
Texaco reported higher total profits but a decline on a per-share basis.


Treasury Issues Continue Up
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities continued to climb and yields decline yesterday as more investors moved from the stock to the fixed-income market.
Dealers attributed the latest ''stocks for bonds'' move to a sharp selloff in equities that pulled the Dow Jones industrial average down at one point by as much as 85 points.


Renaissance Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Renaissance Energy
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
34,595,000
21,812,000
Net inc
4,808,000
2,014,000
Share earns
.17
.07
9mo rev
92,509,000
65,243,000
Net inc
12,143,000
6,796,000
Share earns
.42
.27


The California Quake; Repairs Under Way on Damaged Bay Bridge


New Orleans Journal; In the Birthplace of Jazz, Fans Fight Its Decline
LEAD: Jazz, live, hot and syncopated, once splashed through streets here nonstop, through open doorways and at honky-tonks, dime-a-dance halls and society balls.
But in the age of rap music and MTV, jazz has fallen on hard times.


The Right Place for Baseball
LEAD: Seven weeks after he succeeded the late A. Bartlett Giamatti as Commissioner of Baseball, Fay Vincent confronted a delicate decision.
Should he cancel the World Series?
Some people argued that it would be unnatural to continue play after the earthquake that plunged the two cities whose teams are represented - Oakland and San


The California Quake; Power of the Quake Raised by New Measure
LEAD: The United States Geological Survey today raised its estimate of the magnitude of the California earthquake on Tuesday to 7.1 on the Richter scale from 6.9.


Xerox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xerox Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,400,000,000
4,100,000,000
Net inc
155,000,000
146,000,000
Share earns
1.41
1.37
9mo sales
13,000,000,000
12,000,000,000
Net inc
492,000,000
465,000,000
Share earns
4.55
4.32


U.S. Concern Rises Over North Korea Atom Plant
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said today that they were increasingly worried that North Korea may be trying to develop nuclear weapons.


Mayor Offers Trims in Social Services
LEAD: The blueprint offered yesterday by Mayor Edward I. Koch for balancing the city budget would reduce spending for day care, foster care, education, fire investigation, street cleaning and library services, among other things.


Interstate Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
67,018,000
70,348,000
Net inc
10,213,000
6,642,000
Share earns
1.01
.62
Yr rev
270,173,000
273,005,000
Net inc
27,033,000
23,418,000
Share earns
2.55
2.15


Index-Contract Gyrations Buffet Underlying Stocks
LEAD: Stock index futures prices gyrated wildly in hectic, heavy trading yesterday, contributing greatly to huge swings in stock prices on Wall Street.


From London, 90's Mod, and From Belgium, Urban-Savage
LEAD: Fashion interlopers of every stripe have invaded Paris in the last decade or so.
Japanese like Issey Miyake and Yohji Yamamoto, Italians like Valentino and Romeo Gigli, even an American, Patrick Kelly, have essayed the risky French fashion runway, and emerged trailing clouds of glory.


Engelhard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engelhard Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
586,376,000
614,419,000
Net inc
b38,973,000
c16,924,000
Share earns
.87
.38
9mo sales
1,776,711,000
1,655,567,000
Net inc
b68,450,000
c44,472,000
Share earns
1.52
.99


International Microelectronic Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microelectronic Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Revenue
17,100,000
14,900,000
Net inc
236,000
1,800,000
Share earns
.01
.07
6mo rev
32,030,000
27,924,000
Net loss
704,000
b3,240,000
Share earns
-
1.3


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
183,209,000
175,111,000
Net inc
18,420,000
21,979,000
Share earns
.54
.65
9mo rev
612,696,000
582,356,000
Net inc
49,817,000
65,537,000
Share earns
1.45
1.96


Review/Dance; Christine Dakin in Graham's 'Rite'
LEAD: Christine Dakin has danced with extraordinary passion and artistry during the season of the Martha Graham Dance Company that just ended at City Center.
Her performance on Saturday afternoon in Miss Graham's version of ''The Rite of Spring'' was no exception.


Illinois Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
391,813,000
391,961,000
Net inc
62,425,000
95,936,000
Share earns
.70
1.21
Shares outst
75,504,280
71,267,275
9mo rev
999,486,000
996,497,000
Net loss
287,263,000
b183,577,000
Share earns
-
2.22
Shares outst
74,886,157
70,156,176


Choosing Paper or Plastic at the Store
LEAD: If you are at a grocery-store checkout counter and are offered a choice of plastic or paper shopping bags, which is the best choice in terms of the impact on the environment?
Although most people assume it is paper, that is not always the case, said Jan Beyea, a senior scientist at the National Audubon


Microamerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microamerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
124,992,000
99,369,000
Net inc
845,000
1,694,000
Share earns
.06
.13
9mo sales
383,553,000
294,460,000
Net inc
5,231,000
5,950,000
Share earns
.39
.44


On Jersey Shore, a Crucial State Race
LEAD: The 10th Assembly District in Ocean County has been one of the country's fastest-growing areas over the last two decades as retirees and former summer visitors have taken up permanent residence.


An Ohio Fair Where Big (and Orange) Is Beautiful
LEAD: AS the time approached to set his entry on the scales for the city's 83d Pumpkin Show weigh-in, David Mangione, an agricultural extension agent in nearby Chillicothe, shook his head.


HOMOSEXUALS GAIN MORE ACCEPTANCE
LEAD: Public tolerance of homosexual relations between consenting adults has increased, returning to a level that existed in 1982 before public concern over the spread of AIDS caused a backlash against homosexuals, according to the latest Gallup Poll.


The Mainstreaming of Marxism in U.S. Colleges
LEAD: As Karl Marx's ideological heirs in Communist nations struggle to transform his political legacy, his intellectual heirs on American campuses have virtually completed their own transformation from brash, beleaguered outsiders to assimilated academic insiders.


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra Pacific Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
108,014,000
97,386,000
Net inc
9,470,000
8,073,000
Share earns
.43
.38
Shares outst
22,236,924
21,287,989
9mo rev
331,986,000
302,920,000
Net inc
32,204,000
29,442,000
Share earns
1.48
1.39
Shares outst
21,884,183
21,170,641


Earnings More Than Double At Salomon in 3d Quarter
LEAD: Reflecting increased business in the securities and energy businesses, Salomon Inc.'s earnings more than doubled in the third quarter to $177 million, or $1.28 a share, from $65 million, or 38 cents a share, for last year's third quarter.


Forget Romeo and Juliet; Meet the Brands
LEAD: NOTICE to all those who consider themselves the Ideal American Couple: forget it, you're not.
Vicki and Keith Brand of Baton Rouge, La., are.


Cominco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Ltd.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
330,500,000
372,800,000
Net inc
34,200,000
49,800,000
Share earns
.42
.60
9mo sales
1,195,300,000
1,155,000,000
Net inc
175,500,000
b130,000,000
Share earns
2.16
1.53


Deficit Reduction: A Love Story; I Want A Divorce
LEAD: After four years in a shotgun marriage called Gramm-Rudman-Holl ings, I'm filing for divorce on grounds of infidelity and irreconcilable differences.


Foreign Ownership Worries American Film Makers
LEAD: The film director Milos Forman and the head of the American Film Institute, George Stevens Jr., expressed concern today over foreign ownership of American movie companies.


Saudis Ask Beirut Legislators to Meet
LEAD: Saudi Arabia proposed today that Lebanon's Parliament meet in Beirut in two weeks to elect a new President and start putting into effect political changes intended to end 14 years of civil war.


Yields End Mixed for C.D.'s And Bank Market Accounts
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Elco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elco Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
36,494,000
35,481,000
Net inc
1,335,000
1,705,000
Share earns
.28
.36
Yr sales
156,403,000
143,848,000
Net inc
7,473,000
7,786,000
Share earns
1.58
1.63


Italian Court Bans Ads in TV Films
LEAD: ''Serafino,'' a pleasant comic romance by the late director Pietro Germi, caused no great stir when it was released 19 years ago; lately, however, it has been sending ripples throughout the Italian entertainment world.


SJW Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SJW Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
17,331,000
20,514,000
Net inc
1,945,000
3,237,000
Share earns
.68
1.15
9mo rev
42,599,000
49,613,000
Net inc
3,529,000
6,263,000
Share earns
1.23
2.18


In New Jersey, Silence on Fiscal Squeeze
LEAD: Unlike any other issue in New Jersey, the issue of raising taxes or cutting government programs brings out a certain reticence in the two candidates running for governor.


Capitol Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
4,100,000
b960,000
Per share
-
.31
9mo net loss
5,800,000
b3,100,000
Per share
-
1.00
b-Net income


First Federal S&amp;L (Fla.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S&amp;L (Fla.)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,079,150
2,674,561
Share earns
.34
.86
Yr net inc
5,586,660
8,700,777
Share earns
1.79
2.81
The company attributed the decline in earnings to decreased net interest income, increased operating expenses, and to a lesser extent, the implementation of SFAS 91, which requires the deferral of loan origination fees.


As Tension Subsides, A's Feel a Bit Readier
LEAD: The aftershocks have not yet subsided, nor has the memory of the earthquake that shook the Bay Area last week, but there was finally a sense today that things were back to normal with the Oakland Athletics.


Ryder System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryder System Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,276,790,000
1,267,283,000
Net loss
b27,574,000
c55,295,000
Share earns
-
.68
9mo rev
3,788,007,000
3,716,133,000
Net inc
b31,087,000
d149,260,000
Share earns
.33
1.82


Urban Jobless Joined to Suburban Jobs
LEAD: Tenants of a Chicago public housing project last week joined the nation's growing ranks of low-income, long-distance commuters, riding a new bus service designed to connect inner city people unable to find jobs with suburban employers who cannot find enough workers.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,601,000
5,178,000
Per share
.51
.46
9mo net inc
16,685,000
15,678,000
Per share
1.51
1.38


Sun Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,730,000,000
2,460,000,000
Net inc
85,000,000
72,000,000
Share earns
.80
.67
Shares outst
106,931,907
106,327,769
9mo rev
8,300,000,000
7,280,000,000
Net inc
271,000,000
b69,000,000
Share earns
2.54
-
Shares outst
106,843,427
105,993,744


AFTER SETBCKS, A BUSH OFFENSIVE
LEAD: Scrambling to recover from legislative setbacks that one aide said had left the White House ''reeling,'' the Bush Administration today sought to focus attention on the Federal budget and away from emotional issues like abortion.


Reviews/Music; Schubert, Hindemith and Prokofiev, by Dutoit
LEAD: Many successful conductors carve out special spaces for themselves in the repertory, areas in which they are temperamentally and technically comfortable with general types of music or specific historical styles.
As a consequence, they may steer away from large blocks of the orchestral literature in which they feel less than entirely at home.


Berry Joining WPP Group
LEAD: Norman C. Berry, who resigned as creative director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather/New York in June, will take a senior position with Ogilvy's British parent, the WPP Group.
Mr.
Berry, who was also


Federal Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Mogul Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
250,225,000
295,475,000
Net inc
6,338,000
c11,282,000
Share earns
.22
.45
9mo sales
833,773,000
908,827,000
Net inc
b31,353,000
d32,363,000
Share earns
1.22
1.29


Forest City Jobs
LEAD: The Forest City Ratner Companies has assigned its marketing and communications business to Della Femina McNamee WCRS and two other WCRS companies.
Forest City, a real estate developer, is building the Metrotech office complex, a 16-acre commercial and academic project in Brooklyn.
Della Femina will handle the advertising component of the $5 million to $6 million account, while WCRS's Creamer Dickson Basford will handle public relations, and its Cohn &amp; Wells will handle direct response.


Lessons
LEAD: Ever since tuitions at private colleges began soaring in the early 1980's, college officials have been bracing for a revolt.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genentech Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
100,047,000
81,619,000
Net inc
11,415,000
5,302,000
Share earns
.13
.06
9mo rev
289,037,000
245,329,000
Net inc
28,441,000
35,987,000
Share earns
.33
.42


On the Road With Art: A Mission for 80 Years
LEAD: Eighty years ago, when art in America was the all-but-exclusive domain of the Eastern elite, Theodore Roosevelt's Secretary of State, Elihu Root, urged that an organization be created to bring ''exhibitions of original works of art on tour to the hinterlands of the United States.''


Crying 'Sellout,' Beirut Christians Rally Against Lebanese Accord
LEAD: Thousands of Christians marched, burned tires and shut down businesses in Christian areas of central Lebanon today in demonstrations of support for Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Christian who commands the Lebanese Army and who has rejected an accord reached by the Lebanese Parliament to end 14 years of civil strife.


Exxon Capital
LEAD: The Exxon Capital Corporation is offering $200 million of notes due in 1999 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
Underwriters gave the notes an 8 1/4 percent coupon and priced them at 99.60, to yield 8.31 percent, or about 45 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Durables Orders Down In September
LEAD: Orders for ''big ticket'' durable goods edged down one-tenth of 1 percent in September, but the drop would have been more pronounced if not for the second-biggest increase in military orders on record.


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleming Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 7
1989
1988
Sales
2,766,810,000
2,662,624,000
Net inc
b17,774,000
c9,418,000
Share earns
.57
.35
Shares outst
29,305,000
26,785,000
9mo sales
9,168,136,000
7,356,312,000
Net inc
b59,218,000
c44,327,000
Share earns
1.87
1.66
Shares outst
29,174,000
26,733,000


New Strawberries Chief To Expand Music Chain
LEAD: Melvin A. Wilmore, a former president of the Zale Corporation's jewelry store division, has been named chief executive and president of Live Entertainment Inc.'s retail group, a chain of 85 Strawberries record stores in New England, upstate New York and the Philadelphia area.


Ex-Agent in Spy Case Will be Freed on Bail
LEAD: At the direction of an appeals court, a Federal district judge who had ordered a former Federal agent held without bail in an espionage case ordered Monday that he be freed on bond of $357,000.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atlas Copco Roctec, Pine Brook, N.J., a mining and engineering company, named Alan Weiner president.


Genuine Parts Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genuine Parts Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
814,163,000
777,707,000
Net inc
50,257,000
46,220,000
Share earns
.65
.60
Shares outst
77,459,000
77,328,000
9mo sales
2,397,393,000
2,225,508,000
Net inc
145,264,000
132,192,000
Share earns
1.88
1.71
Shares outst
77,434,000
77,296,000


Ford Opening Office in Tokyo
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company, seeking to gain a greater foothold for sales in Asia, said it was creating a headquarters in Tokyo for its Asia-Pacific business and assigning a corporate vice president to Japan.


Food Notes
LEAD:  Fruit With Sparkle


McGill Rejects $72-a-Share Bid
LEAD: The McGill Manufacturing Company said its board had unanimously rejected an unsolicited tender offer of $72 a share from SKF A.B. of Sweden as inadequate and not in the best interests of McGill.
But SKF, whose United States operations are based in King of Prussia, Pa., said it would continue its tender offer, which is scheduled to expire Nov.


Lin Broadcasting Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lin Broadcasting Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
61,702,000
54,837,000
Net inc
24,591,000
20,590,000
Share earns
.46
.39
9mo rev
180,835,000
162,875,000
Net inc
72,371,000
56,177,000
Share earns
1.36
1.05


Economic Scene; Unleashing Ma Bell
LEAD: COULD A.T.&amp;T.'s rivals in long-distance phone service survive no-holds-barred competition?
Since the breakup of the telephone monopoly in 1984, the Federal Communications Commission has kept A.T.&amp;T. on a short leash to prevent the giant company from chewing up the ''small fry.''


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hope Fades in Blast Rescue  Rescue workers at a Texas chemical plant said up to 24 people may have died in the explosion there.
Page A18.
The Reverse Commuter  In increasing numbers, low-income inner-city residents are taking daily trips to jobs in the suburbs.
Page A16.
North Korea and the Bomb  Washington is increasingly worried that North Korea may be trying to develop nuclear weapons.


Atomic Plant Bonuses Stir Second Thoughts
LEAD: The Energy Department acknowledged today that it might have erred in rewarding the private operators of several of its nuclear weapons plants with millions of dollars in bonuses despite serious failings to protect the health and safety of workers and nearby residents.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Chevron Corp.
$ 417,000,000
-0.7
Combustion Engineering Inc.
22,800,000
*-
Cray Research Inc.
30,600,000
+35.4
Genentech Inc.
11,400,000
+115.1
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.


Wine Talk
LEAD: AS descriptives go, ''sweet wine'' has some unfortunate connotations for many Americans.
When it comes to food and drink, sweet means fat.
It also means childlike and unsophisticated.
Wine lovers in particular, like arrivistes trying to shed their embarrassing past, point their noses up and wrinkle them at the mention of sweet wine.


Car Sales Are Down 19 Percent
LEAD: Sales of United States-built cars plunged 19 percent in mid-October and sales of domestic light trucks dropped 22.8 percent as auto makers continued to feel the effects of earlier aggressive discounting.


Sheraton Moscow
LEAD: The Sheraton Moscow, the first luxurious American hotel in the Soviet capital, will be built one mile from Red Square, Soviet and United States officials said.
Sheraton officials described the six-floor, 450-room hotel as unprecedented in the Soviet Union.
It will cost $75 million to construct at 26 Gorky Street, one mile from Red Square in the heart of Moscow, and is expected to be complete by 1992.


How C.I.A. Concocts Soviet Defense Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amoco Production
LEAD: The Amoco Production Company, a unit of the Amoco Corporation, said it plans to install two platforms and drill as many as 22 wells to develop significant oil reserves it has discovered in the Atlantic Ocean about 25 miles off the coast of Congo.
It said production is expected to be about 40,000 barrels of oil a day.


Nunn Reinstated
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals announced yesterday that the defensive end Freddie Joe Nunn has been reinstated by the N.F.L. after serving a 30-day suspension for substance abuse.
The 27-year-old Nunn, who was second in the league last season with 14 quarterback sacks, was suspended and placed on the team's nonfootball illness list without pay on Sept.


Rookies Lead Spurs Over Knicks
LEAD: David Robinson has every physical skill to become an outstanding pro center.


Beckman Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beckman Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
186,700,000
190,300,000
Net inc
9,400,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.33
.33
9mo sales
586,200,000
571,200,000
Net inc
31,500,000
31,300,000
Share earns
1.11
1.10


Open Positions on Short Sales Increase by 6% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported a 6 percent rise in short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended on Oct. 13.
In the previous reporting period from mid-August to mid-September, the increase was 1.1 percent.


How C.I.A. Concocts Soviet Defense Numbers; Exchanges Work
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Last, Shearson Makes Debut
LEAD: AFTER almost a two-week delay, the new corporate advertising campaign of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. made its debut this week on ''ABC Monday Night Football.''


Scott Paper Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
124,991,000
81,195,000
Net inc
3,377,000
4,573,000
Share earns
.22
.30
9mo sales
323,537,000
242,986,000
Net inc
10,640,000
12,765,000
Share earns
.70
.84


Tapes Show Pair Sought Control Of Queens School District Hiring
LEAD: While a new batch of secretly recorded tapes deepened a picture of school boards run as patronage factories, Chancellor Bernard Mecklowitz yesterday suspended a nine-member board in Queens, saying some board members made appointments in their district that were based on ''political agendas.''


Koch Outlines 'Painful' Plan To Close Deficit
LEAD: Declaring that ''bad news can't wait,'' Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday presented a program of spending cuts, fee increases and other measures to close a $530 million budget deficit this year and reduce an even larger one that had been expected next year.


Soros Sues Shearson
LEAD: The international money manager George Soros has sued Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., contending that the investment firm cheated a mutual fund out of $60 million by manipulating futures prices after the 1987 stock market crash.


Rumors Lift UAL After $33 Plunge
LEAD: Rumors of stock purchases by two major investors and of a revival of the original buyout offer helped the stock of the UAL Corporation recover strongly yesterday after it plunged by $33 a share earlier in the day.


Reagan Finally Meets His Match


China Says Hong Kong Apologized in Dispute
LEAD: Chinese officials bitterly insisted today that the Hong Kong government had made concessions and apologies to persuade Beijing to resume accepting the return of Chinese illegal immigrants from the colony.


First Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,053,000
3,480,000
Per share
.88
.76
Shares outst
4,585,449
4,581,510
9mo net inc
11,422,000
10,519,000
Per share
2.49
2.30
Shares outst
4,582,855
4,581,263


Figgie International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Figgie International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
314,567,000
288,338,000
Net inc
16,140,000
13,537,000
Share earns
2.19
1.93
Shares outst
7,368,192
7,009,983
9mo rev
975,490,000
856,634,000
Net inc
44,560,000
40,471,000
Share earns
6.03
5.99
Shares outst
7,394,564
6,758,446


BOOK NOTES
LEAD:  Global Shultz Strategy


Fireman's Fund Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fireman's Fund Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
904,400,000
873,838,000
Net inc
b7,201,000
c49,144,000
Share earns
-
.99
Shares outst
39,228,000
49,362,000
9mo rev
2,615,848,000
2,794,110,000
Net inc
b88,767,000
cd164,072,000
Share earns
1.54
3.16
Shares outst
45,349,000
51,840,000


Psychological Preparation Is Giants' Primary Concern
LEAD: Roger Craig, the San Francisco Giants' manager and resident psychologist, said today that his primary plan between now and the resumption of the World Series on Friday is to let his players have fun.


Grow Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grow Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
105,716,000
105,881,000
Net inc
10,352,000
b707,000
Share earns
.89
-
b-Net loss  The company said net earnings included $10 million gain on sale of U.S.


Customs Eases Rule On Seizing Vessels That Contain Drugs
LEAD: The Federal guidelines instituted to hit hard at illegal drug users by seizing their cars and boats have been altered, allowing some people to pay fines and go on their way, a Customs Service official said today.


End Sought to Trade Barriers in Some Services
LEAD: The Bush Administration put forward a blueprint today for ending trade barriers in a large number of services that account for more than a quarter of the world's $2 trillion of annual trade.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about Samuel C. Pulitzer, a manufacturer of neckware, omitted a survivor.
She is a daughter, Melanie Pulitzer Feldman of New Orleans.


East German Chief Elected, Not Unanimously
LEAD: Egon Krenz, who became East Germany's Communist leader last week, was formally elected President today, although there were some votes against him in Parliament, which is usually a rubber stamp for the party.


Third World Debt Plea
LEAD: Third world countries asked the European Community Monday to forgive $200 billion of African debt under a new trade agreement that will go into effect next year.


Beazer Plc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beazer Plc (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,151,700,000
2,149,300,000
Net inc
b139,400,000
c147,400,000
Share earns
1.76
1.46
b-After an extraordinary charge of $8,800,000.
c-Included an extraordinary gain of $26,400,000.


Soviet Legislature Votes to Abolish Official Seats
LEAD: The Soviet legislature voted today to eliminate special seats for the Communist Party and other official organizations in national and local elections, responding to sharp popular criticism that such reserved slots were undemocratic.


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
106,401,000
50,669,000
Net inc
13,084,000
6,042,000
Share earns
.17
.08
9mo rev
272,130,000
113,672,000
Net inc
28,525,000
12,103,000
Share earns
.37
.17


Boeing Jet Order
LEAD: Canadian Airlines International Ltd., a unit of the PWA Corporation, said it would buy 16 more Boeing jets by 1994 and phase out its Airbus Industrie and McDonnell Douglas jets.
In a statement, the company said it would buy six of Boeing's 747-400 aircraft and 10 of its 767-300er jets by 1994.
Canadian Airlines said it would phase out its Airbus A310-300 jets between now and early 1992 and that it plans to sell at least four A310's in 1990.


Olajuwon in Doubt
LEAD: Coach Don Chaney of the Houston Rockets said on Monday that Akeem Olajuwon, his 7-foot center from Nigeria, may not be ready to play at full speed when the Rockets open their National Basketball Association season on Nov. 3 against the Clippers in Los Angeles.
Since preseason practices began, Olajuwon has been restricted to conditioning drills while continuing rehabilitation from a blood clot in his leg.


Debating Face to Face - to Face
LEAD: In 13 days New Yorkers go to the polls to choose their next mayor, yet no televised debate has been scheduled between David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani.
The voters, who for the first time are contributing tax dollars to help finance a mayoral campaign, have every right to feel cheated.
New Yorkers are entitled to see the candidates together on the same platform and, at long last, to hear them ventilate their views of the central problems facing the next mayor.


Standard Pacific L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Pacific L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
102,138,998
115,499,550
Net inc
20,600,687
17,367,967
Share earns
.75
.63
9mo sales
315,076,603
327,261,855
Net inc
70,281,792
43,002,613
Share earns
2.56
1.57


Cray Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
210,163,000
145,212,000
Net inc
30,645,000
22,612,000
Share earns
1.04
.73
9mo rev
454,561,000
425,421,000
Net inc
36,568,000
68,103,000
Share earns
1.24
2.19


Ponce Federal Bank F.S.B.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ponce Federal Bank F.S.B.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,323,054
1,511,515
Per share
.27
.31
Shares outst
4,914,461
4,910,219
9mo net loss
5,594,021
b2,979,471
Per share
-
.60
Shares outst
4,914,461
4,966,000


Review/Recital; A Prize-Winning Pianist
LEAD: One of Norman Krieger's rewards for winning the Palm Beach Invitational International Piano Competition was his solo piano recital at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday night.
Mr.
Krieger is from Los Angeles, studied at the Juilliard School and has been on the performing circuit since the 1970's.


Numerica Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Numerica Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,033,000
b1,005,000
Per share
-
.23
9mo net loss
13,772,000
b3,025,000
Per share
-
.68
b-Net income


USLife Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLife Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
299,501,000
279,634,000
Net inc
b14,736,000
14,783,000
Share earns
.83
.82
Shares outst
17,296,000
17,758,000
9mo rev
894,899,000
821,109,000
Net inc
b53,716,000
49,710,000
Share earns
3.08
2.77
Shares outst
17,296,000
17,758,000


USAir Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USAir Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,531,340,000
1,482,884,000
Net loss
77,680,000
b68,507,000
Share earns
-
1.58
Shares outst
44,362,000
43,369,000
9mo rev
4,750,980,000
4,224,061,000
Net inc
38,537,000
142,212,000
Share earns
.76
3.28
Shares outst
44,090,000
43,336,000


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
678,775,000
692,016,000
Net inc
b14,739,000
14,012,000
Share earns
.87
.83
Shares outst
16,930,801
16,950,933
b-Included an accounting adjustment of $7,984,000, or 47 cents a share, from the adoption of FAS 96.


Freeport-McMoran Resource Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Resource Partners L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
304,003,000
274,954,000
Net inc
17,494,000
48,300,000
Share earns
.22
.61
9mo rev
890,353,000
847,041,000
Net inc
116,588,000
163,334,000
Share earns
1.44
2.23


Trust May Sell Manville Or Shift It to Private Control
LEAD: The trust that owns the majority of the Manville Corporation's stock and was intended to help the company resolve its asbestos liability is exploring the sale of the company or putting it into private hands, trust officials said yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Those of us who do have a religion are sick of being saps for money-grubbing preachers and priests.''  - Judge Robert Potter, in sentencing Jim Bakker to prison.  [ A1:4. ]


Grossman's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grossman's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
306,200,000
321,900,000
Net inc
b11,200,000
10,100,000
Share earns
.43
.38
9mo sales
869,600,000
855,800,000
Net inc
b14,400,000
12,600,000
Share earns
.55
.48


Euro Disney Shares Climb
LEAD: Shares in Europe's Disney theme park soared 18 percent today when London's Stock Exchange allowed gray market trading to begin.


Turning Stars Into Environmentalists
LEAD: There was Morgan Fairchild, her golden mane unusually prim and preppy, lecturing the self-deprecatingly pompous anchor Murphy Brown, also known as Candice Bergen, about the environment.
A funny flip-flop of stereotypes, of sorts; a sitcom turned morality tale.


Komag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Komag Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
24,308,000
24,376,000
Net inc
915,000
b2,543,000
Share earns
.07
.20
Shares outst
14,043,000
12,856,000
9mo sales
56,770,000
63,797,000
Net loss
7,143,000
bc8,318,000
Share earns
-
.65
Shares outst
13,019,000
12,849,000


Reporter's Notebook; Hungary Hits Ruts on Road To Pluralism
LEAD: heady wine of freedom, Hungarians are learning, is like the deep red wine they call Bull's Blood: the headaches can be as strong as the high.


Comdial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,914,000
22,637,000
Net inc
142,000
659,000
Share earns
.01
.04
9mo rev
65,814,000
70,659,000
Net loss
2,279,000
b764,000
Share earns
-
.04


Reverberations for Industries But Not for U.S. Households
LEAD: Severe damage from the lethal explosions and fire Monday at Phillips Petroleum's sprawling petrochemical plant near Houston will cause occasional shortages of some commonly used plastic containers in the coming months, but American consumers will see little impact, analysts said today.


The California Quake; No Quake Pictures for the Japanese
LEAD: Japanese tourists visiting this city since the earthquake have been cautioned to keep their lens caps on.


LITTLE HOPE HELD BY TEXAS RESCUERS
LEAD: Rescue workers today held out little hope of finding any survivors in the smoldering wreckage of a petrochemical complex devastated by an explosion and fire on Monday, acknowledging that as many as 24 people may have died.


White House, Noriega And Battle in Congress
LEAD: Behind the debate that has erupted over the failed coup in Panama lies a history of secret Bush and Reagan Administration plans that went awry or were resisted by Congress.


Lin's Profit Up 19.4% in Period
LEAD: The Lin Broadcasting Corporation, a cellular telephone, television and specialty publishing concern based in New York, said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings rose 19.4 percent, to $24.6 million, or 46 cents a share, from $20.6 million, or 39 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenue rose 12.6 percent, to $61.7 million, from $54.8 million a year earlier.


Clark Equipment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clark Equipment Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
344,543,000
324,865,000
Net inc
b17,418,000
c12,278,000
Share earns
1.01
.72
9mo sales
1,014,425,000
932,707,000
Net inc
b48,546,000
c34,094,000
Share earns
2.83
2.00


Asarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asarco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
522,254,000
499,399,000
Net inc
52,717,000
46,160,000
Share earns
1.25
1.10
9mo sales
1,679,747,000
1,388,833,000
Net inc
172,052,000
134,108,000
Share earns
4.08
3.18


Kentucky Drops Plans for Football Lottery
LEAD: In the face of opposition from the horse racing industry, Kentucky has abandoned a plan to have its lottery corporation take parimutuel bets on professional football.


Rivals Adjust Their TV Ads In Mayor Race
LEAD: David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani are turning to new television advertisements as they adjust their strategies to what they see as a tightening of the New York City mayoral race.


After the Dawn, a New Day
LEAD: In two recent speeches, Secretary of State James Baker showed that the Bush Administration had at last grasped some sense of the vast, historic changes taking place in the Communist East.


Pinochet, to Avert a Walesa Visit, Frees 2
LEAD: Just days before Lech Walesa of Poland was to come to Chile in sympathy with two labor leaders banished to internal exile, President Augusto Pinochet has pardoned the men.


No Headline
LEAD: The police were called last night to a raucous meeting of Community Board 3 on the Lower East Side, in which the board rejected a proposal to establish a curfew in Tompkins Square Park, the scene of clashes a year ago between the police and homeless people.


Move to Dismiss a Tenured Professor Is a First at Kansas
LEAD: For the first time since the University of Kansas opened in 1866, administrators are trying to dismiss a tenured professor, a rare action in any American college.


McKesson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,858,500,000
1,721,000,000
Net inc
26,400,000
b21,300,000
Share earns
.59
.50
Shares outst
40,500,000
42,600,000
6mo rev
3,676,200,000
3,371,300,000
Net inc
50,400,000
b44,400,000
Share earns
1.16
1.04
Shares outst
40,700,000
42,500,000


Financial Corp. of Santa Barara reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Corp. of Santa Barara (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b14,381,000
c902,000
Share earns
-
.13
9mo net loss
b22,963,000
c2,415,000
Share earns
-
.35
b-Included extraordinary charges of $44,000 for the quarter and $93,000 for the 9 months, and the 9 months also included income from discontinued operations of $450,000, or 8 cents a share.


McDonnell to Buy Applied Solar
LEAD: The Applied Solar Energy Corporation, a maker of photovoltaic devices, said it and its majority shareholder, the American Cyanamid Company, had agreed to sell Applied Solar to the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, for $10 a share at closing plus contingent payments of up to 80 cents a share.


Sears Profit Falls 15.6% In Quarter
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck and Company said today that its third-quarter profit fell 15.6 percent, reflecting a sharp drop in retailing income and a large number of claims filed against the Allstate Insurance Company by victims of Hurricane Hugo.


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ITT Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,900,000,000
4,700,000,000
Net inc
b221,000,000
c230,000,000
Share earns
1.55
1.60
9mo rev
15,000,000,000
14,200,000,000
Net inc
b665,000,000
c637,000,000
Share earns
4.65
4.44


Oilers Catch the Islanders for Tie
LEAD: The Islanders still don't have a victory at home and the Edmonton Oilers still aren't out of their slump.
But almost everyone, especially Dave Chyzowski, went home with something to be happy about after the teams tied, 3-3, in overtime tonight before 10,409 at Nassau Coliseum.


Harley-Davidson Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harley-Davidson Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Sales
181,878,000
167,468,000
Net inc
b6,263,000
c5,030,000
Share earns
.73
.58
9mo sales
587,390,000
519,890,000
Net inc
b23,385,000
c19,123,000
Share earns
2.71
2.48


Henry Burnett Jr., 59, Direct-Mail Specialist
LEAD: Henry Bowen Burnett Jr., a specialist in direct-mail marketing, died Friday at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif., after a long illness.
He was 59 years old.


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JWP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
442,830,000
251,830,000
Net inc
10,605,000
7,225,000
Share earns
.50
.38
9mo rev
1,181,230,000
608,950,000
Net inc
27,415,000
19,800,000
Share earns
1.37
1.06


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: JUDY TWERSKY is leaving her office at Broadway and 50th Street, heading for home.
There is a larger-than-usual crowd on the sidewalk; Ms.
Twersky sees that a section of the street is roped off, Hollywood-type lights are on, cameras are rolling.
Action involves a snappily dressed couple and a taxi.


I.B.M. and Digital Expand Product Lines
LEAD: In a move to increase its presence in the factory automation market, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday introduced an array of machines and software packages to promote computer-integrated manufacturing.
More than 50 separate items are involved, the company said.


Atlantique Video reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantique Video
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
49,500,000
46,900,000
Net loss
2,300,000
927,000
6mo sales
84,952,000
76,612,000
Net loss
3,400,000
1,600,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Too Much Fight In The Irish
LEAD: Take your average, high-powered college football institution.
Feature it in three angry confrontations in the moments before nationally televised games within a period of just over 13 months.
Recall an ugly blemish at the end of what had seemed a perfect season - again, with a coast-to-coast audience - when the coach, in the final two minutes of a bowl-game victory for a national championship, feels compelled to go on the field and into the huddle to determine the reason for the unsportsmanlike conduct penalties against his team.


Revamping Set For Allied Group
LEAD: Allied Group Inc. said its directors and its parent company, the Allied Mutual Insurance Company, had approved a series of transactions to enhance its core business of property casualty insurance and to give employees a long-term stake in the organization.
First, Allied Mutual will buy Allied Group's life insurance subsidiary for 2.7 million shares of Allied Group common stock, valued at $36.5 million.


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,176,500,000
12,567,400,000
Net inc
b257,500,000
c305,000,000
Share earns
.75
.80
Shares outst
343,100,000
379,800,000
9mo rev
38,618,300,000
35,687,900,000
Net inc
b906,400,000
c1,336,300,000
Share earns
2.56
2.08
Shares outst
353,900,000
379,300,000


Judge Views Confession Tape in Jogger Rape
LEAD: A videotaped statement in which a defendant in the Central Park rape case described his part in the attack on a jogger was played yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Investors Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Investors Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,018,000
3,718,000
Per share
.12
.43
9mo net inc
4,940,000
15,271,000
Per share
.57
1.78


Senate Votes 6 Pacts To Track Drug Money
LEAD: Despite objections raised by some Republicans over the past two years, the Senate approved treaties today that are intended to help American investigators track money laundering and prosecute drug traffickers in six countries.


Restricting Airline Deals Is Criticized
LEAD: Officials of the Transportation and Treasury departments told a House subcommittee today that proposed legislation to restrict airline takeovers would not be good for the industry or the economy.


For More Youths, It's Always Halloween
LEAD: FOR many American teen-agers, Halloween is the one night they can freely act out their fantasies.
Dressed in ghoulish masks and grisly costumes, they can become ax murderers, blood-sucking vampires or demons in search of bodies to possess.
But a growing number appear to be embracing the morbid, pagan rituals of Halloween year round, cloaking themselves in what Dr.


How Off Broadway Maneuvers To Get Good Word of Mouth
LEAD: ''Word of mouth is without a doubt the single most important factor in leading to a play's long-term success,'' said Jerry Sterner, the author of ''Other People's Money.'' ''Good reviews are necessary to allow you to reach that first rush of public that will go out and give you the word of mouth.
But even if you do get the reviews, if you don't get the word of mouth you'll close, and you'll close quickly.


Xerox Profit Rises by 6.2%
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation today reported third-quarter net income of $155 million, up 6.2 percent from $146 million in the comparable quarter last year.


Xerox Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xerox Canada
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
250,564,000
279,931,000
Net inc
15,076,000
19,399,000
Share earns
.39
.50
9mo rev
819,899,000
791,620,000
Net inc
47,547,000
48,422,000
Share earns
1.23
1.25


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
103,413,000
141,498,000
Net inc
11,001,000
33,576,000
Share earns
.30
.90
9mo rev
369,321,000
398,001,000
Net inc
65,345,000
83,139,000
Share earns
1.76
2.24


Corrections
LEAD: A list of California earthquake victims published yesterday rendered a first name incorrectly.
The victim was Marc A. Zambetti of San Francisco.


The California Quake; Where to Send Donations
LEAD: Interaction, a voluntary relief assistance group supported by the Federal Government, has issued the following list of agencies to which money may be sent to assist earthquake victims:  American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 4691, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y. 10163.
Telephone: 800-453-9000.


Singapore Chief Fears for Cambodia
LEAD: Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore is in an awkward position, and once again the intricacies of Cambodian politics have put him there.


The California Quake; Tangle of Paperwork Snarls Path to Aid For Farm Workers and Shop Owners
LEAD: Homeless farm workers and owners of boarded-up businesses in this community devastated by the earthquake are encountering a hastily erected bureaucracy that is supposed to help them prop up their lives.


A.T.&amp;T.-Sun Alliance Nears Software Victory
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and Sun Microsystems Inc., whose strategic alliance angered their competitors and divided the computer industry last year, are close to winning the race to establish a new software standard.


Crystal Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crystal Brands (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
265,812,000
125,367,000
Net inc
11,465,000
3,112,000
Share earns
1.27
.35
9mo sales
664,666,000
298,846,000
Net inc
15,136,000
3,526,000
Share earns
1.67
.39


Edward W. Barrett, 79, Ex-Journalism Dean, Dies
LEAD: Edward W. Barrett, a journalist, government official and public-relations executive who was dean of the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism from 1956 to 1968, died of a ruptured aneurysm Monday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Shevardnadze Is in Poland for Talks
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, arrived in Warsaw today for talks with Polish officials on Moscow's relations with the new Government and with Warsaw Pact foreign ministers on the future of the Soviet-led alliance.


Texaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,400,000,000
8,700,000,000
Net inc
305,000,000
274,000,000
Share earns
1.10
1.12
Shares outst
265,900,000
244,300,000
9mo rev
26,400,000,000
26,700,000,000
Net inc
b2,126,000,000
c1,008,000,000
Share earns
8.19
4.14
Shares outst
255,200,000
243,400,000


Penguins Trade Buskas
LEAD: Rod Buskas, a defenseman who is one of only nine players in Pittsburgh Penguins' history to play in more than 400 career games, was traded yesterday to the Vancouver Canucks for a sixth-round draft choice.


Knicks Lose 4th Straight in Preseason


Medical Care International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Care International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
35,023,000
25,838,000
Net inc
b4,757,000
c3,512,000
Share earns
.27
.24
9mo rev
101,274,000
73,175,000
Net inc
b13,178,000
c9,095,000
Share earns
.81
.64


Lack of Witnesses in Killing of Concertgoer Puzzles Officials
LEAD: The killing of a college student who was attending a Grateful Dead concert at the Meadowlands Sports Complex has left investigators wrestling with a puzzling circumstance: No witnesses have been found among the thousands of concertgoers.


Fittipaldi and Marlboro Join Penske Team
LEAD: In a development that had been rumored for months, it was announced in Manhattan yesterday that Marlboro would join the Penske Racing team as a sponsor on the Championship Auto Racing Teams Indy-car series next year and bring along this year's champion, Emerson Fittipaldi.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson &amp; Johnson (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,451,000,000
2,199,000,000
Net inc
265,000,000
240,000,000
Share earns
.80
.71
9mo sales
7,286,000,000
6,800,000,000
Net inc
879,000,000
790,000,000
Share earns
2.64
2.31
Shares outst
333,200,000
342,600,000


Pressed on the Homeless, Subways Impose Rules
LEAD: With riders expressing unease about the increasing presence of panhandlers and homeless people in the subway, the New York City Transit Authority is to begin enforcing rules of conduct today that prohibit behavior considered disruptive, including begging and lying down on train seats.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
722,711,000
429,965,000
Net inc
25,588,000
b20,584,000
Share earns
.66
.53
Shares outst
38,767,000
38,792,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $2,443,000.


USAir Reports Quarterly Loss
LEAD: USAir Group Inc., the holding company for the nation's seventh-largest airline, today reported a net loss of $77.7 million in the third quarter, which it attributed to flat demand and higher operating expenses.


It's Not Yet Time to Ease Up on South Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Decaffeinated Coffee: A New Brew
LEAD: AT a benefit party tomorrow evening for the Fresh Air Fund at Roseland in Manhattan, only decaffeinated coffee will be served.
Two weeks ago at a dinner for the New York Public Library, the waiters poured decaffeinated coffee exclusively for the 400 or so guests, who included Barbara Bush.


National Pizza reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Pizza (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1989
1988
Sales
42,673,000
35,612,000
Net inc
3,676,000
2,417,000
Share earns
.26
.18
Shares outst
13,914,307
13,702,046
6mo sales
82,132,000
68,280,000
Net inc
7,329,000
5,067,000
Share earns
.53
.37
Shares outst
13,879,072
13,691,957


Interpublic Group of Compaies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpublic Group of Compaies Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
283,270,000
268,641,000
Net inc
b6,934,000
c6,014,000
Share earns
.21
.18
9mo rev
876,828,000
794,026,000
Net inc
b43,245,000
c36,841,000
Share earns
1.29
1.12
Shares outst
33,688,591
32,844,640


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,679,100,000
2,656,000,000
Net inc
70,500,000
63,500,000
Share earns
1.22
1.11
Shares outst
57,810,887
57,339,833
9mo sales
8,133,000,000
7,983,200,000
Net inc
192,100,000
b293,700,000
Share earns
3.33
5.13
Shares outst
57,683,420
57,274,836


Ohio Casualty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Casualty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
20,267,000
27,369,000
Per share
.95
1.26
Shares outst
21,385,000
21,640,000
9mo net inc
95,049,000
85,461,000
Per share
4.42
3.91
Shares outst
21,246,000
21,645,000


Bridge
LEAD: Bridge players are generous contributors to worthwhile causes.
In 1988, events around North America raised $425,000 for the Charity Foundation of the American Contract Bridge League, which makes grants to a number of major charities.
And the charity games for specific causes probably raise more than that total.


Deficit Reduction: A Love Story; We Made A Commitment
LEAD: Those who call the 1985 Gramm-Rudman-Hollings balanced budget law a bad law because deficit targets have been missed and accounting gimmicks have been used to avoid tough decisions would probably also suggest that religion is a failure because there are so few saints in the world.


Control Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Data Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
763,000,000
841,400,000
Net inc
b9,800,000
c2,400,000
Share earns
.23
-
9mo rev
2,410,800,000
2,695,300,000
Net loss
b484,000,000
d14,500,000
Share earns
-
.34


Commercial Bancorp of Colo.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Bancorp of Colo.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
265,000
268,000
Per share
.17
.18
9mo net inc
904,000
b1,471,000
Per share
.59
.96
b-After a gain of $491,000, or 32 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
302,548,000
286,911,000
Net inc
b203,051,000
c37,313,000
Share earns
3.50
.59
Shares outst
57,880,000
62,507,000
9mo rev
882,463,000
810,570,000
Net inc
b215,735,000
c100,598,000
Share earns
3.68
1.56
Shares outst
58,448,000
64,050,000


U.S. Decides to Scale Back Military Exercise in Europe
LEAD: The United States has decided to scale back its major military exercise in Europe, American officials said today.


Edmonton Pride Brings In Tyson
LEAD: The quick endings of Mike Tyson's bouts against Michael Spinks (93 seconds) and Carl (the Truth) Williams (91 seconds) have soured the casinos in Atlantic City and Las Vegas on Tyson as a spectacle for their high rollers.
When the champion's promoter, Don King, sought a $2 million site fee for Tyson's defense against Donovan (Razor) Ruddock, a Jamaican who grew up in


Cobe Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobe Laboratories Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
56,850,000
54,841,000
Net inc
2,353,000
2,278,000
Share earns
.36
.35
Shares outst
6,612,000
6,577,000
9mo sales
174,206,000
167,210,000
Net inc
7,162,000
8,784,000
Share earns
1.09
1.34
Shares outst
6,596,000
6,554,000


Ban on Chinese Mushrooms Is Announced by the F.D.A.
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration on Monday ordered all Chinese mushrooms detained at United States ports because of a bacteria contamination that can cause severe food poisoning.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-15  President Bush spoke of Germany,predicting major changes in its status in the next decade and playing down European fears about the possibility of reunification.
Page A1  East Germany elected Egon Krenz President, although there were votes against him in the usually deferential Parliament.


Blackstone Financial Plans To Establish Mutual Fund
LEAD: Blackstone Financial Management, a New York investment bank, will establish by the end of the year a new international mutual fund for the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation's mortgage-backed securities.


Cadence Design Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadence Design Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
32,036,000
18,053,000
Net inc
6,672,000
4,375,000
Share earns
.26
.19
Shares outst
25,499,000
22,700,000
9mo rev
86,549,000
46,386,000
Net inc
18,169,000
b8,343,000
Share earns
.73
.37
Shares outst
24,976,000
22,308,000


Doubts Are Voiced on 'Degradable' Plastic Waste
LEAD: An innovative and widely promoted effort to sell plastic products that are ''degradable'' could be causing more environmental problems than it is solving.


Robinson Is Let Go As Mets Coach
LEAD: Nearly three weeks after they decided to keep Dave Johnson as their manager, the Mets today dismissed two of his five coaches, Bill Robinson and Sam Perlozzo.


Louisville Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisville Gas &amp; Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
171,682,000
180,687,000
Net inc
32,758,000
39,059,000
Share earns
1.45
1.79
Shares outst
20,896,980
20,463,371
9mo rev
509,570,000
504,989,000
Net inc
73,815,000
74,578,000
Share earns
3.21
3.32
Shares outst
20,794,960
20,352,245


STRINGENT CURBS ON ABORTION GAIN IN PENNSYLVANIA
LEAD: The Pennsylvania House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved stringent new restrictions on abortions, the first such legislative move since the United States Supreme Court's July ruling giving states wider authority to limit abortion.


Market Place Added Volatility Expected in 'Junk'
LEAD: AFTER going their separate ways most of this year, the ''junk bond'' and stock markets now seem to share anxieties.
When the Dow Jones industrial average plunged almost 86 points yesterday morning, prices of some high-risk, high-yield bonds fell sharply as well.
Then when stock prices later recovered, junk bonds rose slightly.


United Airline Deal: A Costly Fiasco
LEAD: Wall Street's nominee for this year's worst deal is clearly the proposed takeover of United Airlines.


American National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Insurance (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
29,137,000
27,258,000
Share earns
1.03
.96
9mo net inc
81,518,000
76,546,000
Share earns
2.88
2.71


Dr. Phyllis Greenacre, 95, a Psychoanalyst
LEAD: Dr.
Phyllis Greenacre, a psychoanalyst and author, died yesterday at a nursing home in Ossining, N.Y.
She was 95 years old and lived in Garrison, N.Y.


GNW Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GNW Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
914,000
586,000
Per share
.45
-
9mo net inc
b2,661,000
c1,340,000
Per share
1.32
-
b-After a credit of $86,000, or 4 cents a share.
c-After an extraordinary charge of $53,000.


Israel Accepts U.S. Plan on Talks, With a Catch
LEAD: Israel has informed Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that it accepts ''in principle'' Mr.
Baker's five-point proposal for an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, but has ''reservations'' about two important points, the Israeli Embassy said today.


Governments' Illegal Killings Are Reported by Rights Unit
LEAD: Tens of thousands of men, women and children were illegally slain by government agents in at least two dozen countries in 1988, and the wave of such killings has continued this year, according to a report issued today by Amnesty International.


Tough Classic Field Keeps Entries Low
LEAD: The 7 Breeders' Cup races at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale, Fla., on Nov. 4 have attracted 101 horses, but only 8 of them will run in the afternoon's last and richest race, the $3 million Classic.


Washington Post Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Post Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
346,341,000
329,371,000
Net inc
44,778,000
38,060,000
Share earns
3.50
2.96
Shares outst
12,780,000
12,873,000
9mo rev
1,062,675,000
996,856,000
Net inc
146,764,000
232,184,000
Share earns
11.44
18.04
Shares outst
12,824,000
12,873,000


German Return For Rothschilds
LEAD: The Rothschild banking family ended an 88-year absence from Germany this week by opening an office in Frankfurt, the family's historic hometown.
The Rothschilds, who had lived in Frankfurt since the Middle Ages, closed their last German firm in 1901.
By that time, financial activity had shifted elsewhere, and family interests in Paris and London had eclipsed those in Frankfurt.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE integration of Oriental cooking techniques and Western cuisine is well established by now.
Many concepts that are now part of seafood cooking vernacular are a result of travel by French and American chefs, particularly in Japan.


Dow Ends 3.69 Lower In Wild Day
LEAD: The stock market fluctuated wildly yesterday on heavy volume.
The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 85 points in the first hour of trading but recovered in the late afternoon to close only 3.69 points lower, at 2,659.22.


Inner City: Estimating The Worth
LEAD: In 1983, David N. Dinkins valued his stock in a privately held communications company at more than $1 million.
In 1986, when he sold the shares to his son, he placed the value at $58,000.


Roland Winters, 84; Played Charlie Chan
LEAD: Roland Winters, an actor whose film portrayals included Charlie Chan and Elvis Presley's father, died of a stroke on Sunday at the Actors' Fund Nursing Home in Englewood, N.J.
He was 84 years old.


Woman Shot in a Robbery Gives Birth and Then Dies
LEAD: A woman who had been robbed and shot along with her husband gave birth by Caesarian section early today and then died of a head wound that she received in the assault.


Seoul Agrees to Buy 120 U.S. Fighters
LEAD: In a long and painstaking negotiation, South Korea has agreed to buy 120 jet fighter planes from the United States but under terms that are a setback for Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and that are likely to cause some criticism in Congress.


Earthquake Cuts Ratings Of Networks
LEAD: The three major television networks held just 64 percent of the prime-time audience last week, in part because of the earthquake.
ABC was hardest hit, with the postponement of the World Series and the loss of its Tuesday night comedy lineup (although reruns of two hit programs - ''Roseanne'' and ''The Wonder Years'' - were shown before earthquake coverage began).


Salomon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salomon Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,623,000,000
1,293,000,000
Net inc
177,000,000
65,000,000
Share earns
1.28
.38
Shares outst
125,500,000
130,200,000
9mo rev
6,490,000,000
4,333,000,000
Net inc
402,000,000
318,000,000
Share earns
2.82
2.07
Shares outst
126,000,000
131,100,000


Greyhound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyhound Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
906,200,000
857,351,000
Net inc
30,185,000
25,769,000
Share earns
.75
.67
9mo rev
2,673,449,000
2,466,453,000
Net inc
80,669,000
b80,240,000
Share earns
2.05
2.09


Freeport-McMoran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
491,324,000
458,150,000
Net inc
23,151,000
103,224,000
Share earns
.34
1.40
Shares outst
54,811,000
69,984,000
9mo rev
1,481,612,000
1,385,807,000
Net inc
123,839,000
250,243,000
Share earns
1.75
3.35
Shares outst
62,434,000
69,967,000


Excerpts From Interview With the President
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview today with President Bush in the Oval Office:  On the Crisis in Panama  Q. From here, looking from Washington, what do you think the chances are of another rising in Panama?
A.
I think any time you have somebody that is demonstrably evil as Noriega and who is frustrating the will of the people, as he continues to do, there's bound to be upheaval.


AST Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AST Research (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
114,496,000
108,352,000
Net inc
2,854,000
306,000
Share earns
.24
.03


Johnson Net Rises 10.4%
LEAD: Johnson &amp; Johnson, the diversified health-care products company, said yesterday that net income rose 10.4 percent in the third quarter.


Centerior Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerior Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
637,619,000
586,510,000
Net inc
108,857,000
110,911,000
Share earns
.78
.79
Yr rev
2,231,437,000
1,984,714,000
Net loss
73,270,000
b315,232,000
Share earns
-
2.34


About New York; 35 Years Showing Warm Welcome At Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Beginning with Andrew Carnegie, philanthropists have supported one of the world's most renowned concert halls.
Boxes, rehearsal studios and recital halls bear the names.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knight-Ridder Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
540,973,000
503,126,000
Net inc
b37,829,000
c31,996,000
Share earns
.72
.57
Shares outst
52,670,000
56,422,000
9mo rev
1,660,417,000
1,508,680,000
Net inc
b185,171,000
c110,791,000
Share earns
3.53
1.94
Shares outst
52,406,000
57,221,000


World Series Receives Mayor's Go-Ahead
LEAD: Mayor Art Agnos of San Francisco, satisfied with the condition of Candlestick Park and Bay Area traffic, gave his final blessing today to the resumption of the World Series on Friday night.


Combustion Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Combustion Engineering (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
884,001,000
897,149,000
Net inc
b22,801,000
c91,747,000
Share earns
.56
-
9mo sales
2,759,571,000
2,561,021,000
Net inc
b66,084,000
c62,904,000
Share earns
1.68
-


Northern Telecom Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,414,800,000
1,249,300,000
Net inc
80,100,000
60,100,000
Share earns
.31
.23
9mo rev
4,318,300,000
3,874,100,000
Net inc
208,000,000
200,700,000
Share earns
.80
.79


Bestar Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bestar Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,680,000
8,266,000
Net inc
649,000
b142,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo sales
27,754,000
21,295,000
Net inc
5,000
b1,496,000
b-Net loss  Results are in Canadian dollars.


The California Quake; Museums Find Most Pieces Unscathed
LEAD: Most of the pins, hooks, wires and clips that secure the artworks at San Francisco's fine arts museums held tight through an earthquake strong enough to shake down a freeway overpass.


McGillion Sworn In as No. 2 Police Official
LEAD: Alice T. McGillion was sworn in as First Deputy Police Commissioner of New York yesterday, the first woman to hold the second-highest post in the city's Police Department.


William Joseph McKeon, Professor, 80
LEAD: William Joseph McKeon, a former marketing professor at New York University's School of Business, died yesterday at his home in New Milford, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 80 years old.


The California Quake; House Approves Aid Package For Quake and Storm Victims
LEAD: In a swift response to the California earthquake, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a $2.85 billion disaster aid package.


Making a 'Dumb' Movie Into a Hit
LEAD: A surprise hit rarely surprises Hollywood. ''Look Who's Talking,'' which has sold more than $30 million worth of tickets in 10 days, is an exception.


York Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* York Financial Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,455,000
2,569,000
Per share
.49
.88
The per share earnings were adjusted for the 10 percent stock dividend announced Friday, Oct. 20.


Inter-Regional Financial Gr reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Regional Financial Gr (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
81,805,000
60,605,000
Net inc
b1,446,000
c2,634,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo rev
233,461,000
187,200,000
Net inc
b3,277,000
c2,495,000
Share earns
.41
-


Muted, Ungaro and Valentino Still Flatter
LEAD: A calmer Emanuel Ungaro is ready for the next fashion decade.
He has toned down his ebullient color schemes and eased up the sexy fit of his clothes, so everything looks a little more realistic than it has been, but not dreary.


Mbongeni Ngema In Lincoln Center Series
LEAD: Mbongeni Ngema, the director and co-composer of ''Sarafina!,'' will be the guest tomorrow in the Lincoln Center Off Stage series at the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center (Amsterdam Avenue at 65th Street.


The Sins of the Client
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Cold War Becomes Bad Politics
LEAD: A single day's news brings three striking signs of change toward a less threatening world order: Hungary's Parliament proclaims its nation a republic, dropping the adjectives ''Socialist People's'' and dramatically distancing the country from the Soviet empire.
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union says the nations of Eastern Europe have ''absolute freedom of choice.


Templeton Re-signs
LEAD: Garry Templeton, the 33-year-old shortstop for the San Diego Padres, has signed a two-year contract, according to his agent, Richie Bry.
Templeton will reportedly receive $1.2 million over the life of the contract, which includes playing incentives and award bonuses.
In 142 games last season, Templeton batted .255, with 6 home runs and 40 runs batted in.(


Maazel Cancels All Berlin Philharmonic Dates
LEAD: Lorin Maazel has announced a four-year extension of his contract as music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony, and says that he is relinquishing all his contracted dates to conduct the Berlin Philharmonic for concerts and recordings.


On Riders' Complaints, Transit Authority Moves to Enforce Conduct Rules


How Mississippi Clung to Segregation in a Speech
LEAD: A former Mississippi state agency dedicated to preserving segregation supplied state lawmakers, officials and educators with a standard pro-segregation speech to deliver before Northern audiences in 1963.


Nationwide Health reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nationwide Health (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,047,000
8,786,000
Net inc
b3,453,000
2,404,000
Share earns
.42
.29
9mo rev
26,739,000
25,629,000
Net inc
8,436,000
8,497,000
Share earns
1.03
1.04


The California Quake; Victims of Quake in Bay Area
LEAD: Following is a list of the dead who have been identified in the Oct. 17 earthquake, reported by the coroner's office in each county or the county's office of emergency services.
The list includes deaths from traumatic injuries only, not from heart attacks, except in the case of Santa Clara County, where the count from the emergency agencies is at odds with that of the coroner.


P.&amp;G. Profit Rises by 38%
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the huge consumer products concern based in Cincinnati, announced yesterday that its first-quarter profit jumped by 38 percent, to $551 million, from $400 million a year earlier.


PGA Policy Board Upholds Limit for Foreign Players
LEAD: The PGA Tour Policy Board on Monday rejected a proposal to cut from 15 to 12 the number of American tour events a foreign player must enter in order to retain membership in the PGA Tour and have freedom to play pro tournaments anywhere he wishes at any time.


Quaker Oats Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Oats Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,442,100,000
1,431,600,000
Net inc
55,700,000
45,000,000
Share earns
.70
.57
Shares outst
78,236,000
79,226,000


Income Climbs at Tenneco
LEAD: Helped by the turnaround this year in its farm equipment business, a restructured Tenneco Inc. today reported net income of $90 million, or 68 cents a share, for the quarter ended Sept. 30.
Last year, the company earned $7 million, or 2 cents a share, for the corresponding period.


Control Data Posts Profit
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation said today that an extensive reorganization earlier in the year had enabled it to post a third-quarter profit of $9.8 million.
In the period last year, it recorded a loss of $2.4 million.


Judge Sentences Gabor To Three Days in Jail
LEAD: Saying Zsa Zsa Gabor was ''without a hint of remorse'' for slapping a Beverly Hills police officer who stopped her car last June, a judge today sentenced her to three days in jail.


Times Mirror Earnings Drop 13.4%
LEAD: The Times Mirror Company reported today that its third-quarter earnings dropped 13.4 percent, reflecting a special gain in the 1988 quarter, while two other newspaper companies reported advances for the 1989 quarter.


Possibility of a Reunited Germany Is No Cause for Alarm, Bush Says
LEAD: President Bush said today that he did not share the worries of some European leaders about the possibility of German reunification, and he predicted major changes in Germany's status in the next decade.


Magnetek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magnetek Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
237,640,000
227,212,000
Net inc
5,261,000
3,625,000
Share earns
.21
.16
Shares outst
23,520,000
17,915,000


Tony Manero, Golf Champion, 84
LEAD: Tony Manero, the 1936 United States Open golf champion and a member of the 1937 United States Ryder Cup team, died of heart failure Sunday at Greenwich Hospital.
He was 84 years old.


The California Quake; Toll of Quake On the Freeway Is Still Disputed
LEAD: State and Oakland police said today that they believe they have recovered all the bodies from the Oakland freeway that collapsed in last week's earthquake and that the number of victims there has reached 39.


Massachusetts Bond Yields Set
LEAD: A $220 million Massachusetts general obligation bond issue was priced yesterday through competitive bidding and won by a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Amoskeag Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoskeag Bank Shares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
17,957,000
b1,891,000
Per share
-
.17
9mo net loss
33,763,000
b11,344,000
Per share
-
1.03
b-Net income


Real Estate; 2 Hotels Build For Business Travelers
LEAD: BUSINESS travelers have long been the bread and butter of the hotel industry in Manhattan, but competition for this segment of the traveling public is heating up as the city's overall hotel occupancy rate drops and more hotels go up.


Review/Television; Washington, a Useful Peg for Plot Concepts
LEAD: How do you perceive Washington?
Impressions of the city may range from, at one extreme, intellectual think tanks pondering the essays of Francis Fukuyama to, at the other, enormous drug problems and soaring crime rates.
In between, of course, there is the steady flow of scandals, political and personal.


POINDEXTER WINS ACCESS TO PAPERS KEPT BY REAGAN
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled today that John M. Poindexter is entitled to the personal papers and diaries of former President Ronald Reagan to demonstrate that his former boss authorized many of his actions in the Iran-contra affair.


Times Mirror Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Times Mirror Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
873,862,000
814,779,000
Net inc
70,140,000
c80,965,000
Share earns
.54
.65
9mo rev
2,582,096,000
2,407,479,000
Net inc
b223,915,000
c235,073,000
Share earns
1.73
1.82


Exxon Sues Alaska, Charging Cleanup Delay
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation has sued the State of Alaska, charging that the cleanup of the nation's worst oil spill was hindered because the state opposed the use of oil-dispersing chemicals.


Magna Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,907,000
4,201,000
Per share
.42
.39
9mo net inc
14,719,000
12,875,000
Per share
1.27
1.19


Profit Up 19% For Du Pont
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company reported today that its third-quarter profit jumped 19 percent despite a stronger dollar and weaker housing market.


Mary McCarthy, 77, Is Dead; Novelist, Memoirist and Critic
LEAD: Mary McCarthy, one of America's pre-eminent women of letters, died of cancer yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 77 years old and lived in Castine, Me., and Paris.


Mine Safety Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mine Safety Appliances (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
100,247,000
94,133,000
Net inc
6,026,000
5,735,000
Share earns
.93
.87
9mo sales
304,595,000
288,796,000
Net inc
19,278,000
16,404,000
Share earns
2.94
2.48


Practice Puts Life Into Athletics
LEAD: It was just batting practice, not much more, but the element of excitement seemed to make the Oakland Athletics' unexpected visit seem like more.


S.E.C. Acts To Smooth Trading
LEAD: In an effort to smooth the big swings that have plagued the stock market because of computerized trading techniques, the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday approved for trading a new financial instrument that would allow investors to buy and sell a ''basket'' of 500 stocks in a single order on the New York Stock Exchange.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You know the Frank Sinatra song, 'I Did It My Way'?
Hungary and Poland are doing it their way.''  - Gennadi I. Gerasimov, Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman.  [ A1:3. ]


Bill Considered to Suspend Program Trades Sometimes
LEAD: Representative Edward J. Markey, chairman of the House subcommittee that oversees the financial markets, said today that he was considering legislation to give Federal regulators the power to suspend program trading in times of market stress.


Review/Ballet; Fan Dances, Charlestons And Other Flapper Fare
LEAD: Inviting a spiffily dressed audience to check its collective intellect in the cloak room, the Joffrey Ballet opened a new season on Tuesday night with a recycled piece of entertaining fluff.


H.U.D. Economist Says Bosses Pressed Him to Approve Grants
LEAD: The economist for the Department of Housing and Urban Development in New York says two former regional administrators improperly pressured him and other subordinates several times to support favored grant applicants.
Two examples that he cited as the worst involved projects with ties to Senator Alfonse M.


Emerson Radio Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Radio Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
262,022,000
210,402,000
Net inc
5,275,000
3,255,000
Share earns
.15
.09
6mo sales
483,218,000
373,758,000
Net inc
8,782,000
b4,568,000
Share earns
.24
.13


D'Amato Confirms Inquiries To Giuliani in Crime Cases
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday that he had spoken to Rudolph W. Giuliani, then the United States Attorney in Manhattan, three times about pending criminal cases in 1984 and 1985, but he denied any effort to pressure the prosecutor - an account that Mr.
Giuliani backed up.


Total Petroleum (N. America) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum (N. America) (A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
584,300,000
487,322,000
Net inc
10,446,000
39,271,000
Share earns
.30
1.37
9mo rev
1,564,956,000
1,341,957,000
Net inc
38,543,000
33,102,000
Share earns
1.27
1.15


Beverly Hills Bond Offering
LEAD: The City of Beverly Hills, Calif., is tentatively offering $116.4 million in refunding certificates of participation with a maximum yield of 7.19 percent for an issue due in 2016 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


John A. McLaughlin, A Microbiologist, 65
LEAD: John A. McLaughlin, chairman emeritus of the biology department at Fordham University, died Tuesday at Southside Hospital in Bay Shore, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 65 years old and lived in Oakdale, L.I.


Effort to Move Officer's Trial Focuses on Fear of Race Riots
LEAD: A local police officer's effort to have his manslaughter trial moved out of Miami is centering on what the defense, the prosecution and the judge all agree would be the likelihood of racial disturbances if he was ever acquitted here.


Transco Energy Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transco Energy Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
631,691,000
566,829,000
Net inc
40,838,000
842,000
Share earns
1.20
-
Shares outst
28,717,000
28,679,000
9mo rev
2,082,621,000
2,116,547,000
Net inc
88,333,000
14,541,000
Share earns
2.48
.14
Shares outst
28,622,000
28,718,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Move at Lintas Unit
LEAD: In a move that reflects a realignment of its European and international agencies, Lintas Worldwide has moved the chief executive of its international division from London to New York.
Ken Robbins, who is also deputy chairman of Lintas, will now manage the agency's international subsidiaries from the company's New York headquarters.


Esselte Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esselte Business Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
329,146,000
319,937,000
Net inc
9,477,000
10,116,000
Share earns
.46
.49
9mo sales
1,034,788,000
1,022,963,000
Net inc
b39,364,000
40,453,000
Share earns
1.91
1.97


Preserving the Hues and Aromas of Summer's Array
LEAD: FORGET plastic.
The garden's bounty may fade quickly, but you can fool nature without resorting to artifice.
The secret to continued pleasure from summer's sunny colors and the vibrant hues of fall lies in drying flowers, herbs, weeds, seed pods and branches.
With moisture removed, many plants last for months or even years.


Credit to Erie Museum
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Index-Participation Appeal Declined
LEAD: A Federal court in Chicago has declined to hear an appeal of its decision that the Securities and Exchange Commission was wrong when it decided that a new type of financial instrument traded on several exchanges was a security and not a futures contract.


Philharmonic Chairman
LEAD: Stephen Stamas, a former executive of the Exxon Corporation who has been president of the Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York since 1984, has been named chairman, the New York Philharmonic has announced.
The post, which has been vacant for some years, was most recently held by Carlos Moseley.


13 Face Indictment In Vineland Protest Over Police Shooting
LEAD: A Cumberland County grand jury has indicted 13 people on charges of looting and rioting in downtown Vineland last August during protests over the shooting death of a black man by a white police officer.


Youth Service Proposal Doesn't Offer Stipends
LEAD: To the Editor:


Knicks' Tucker Returns
LEAD: Trent Tucker, who suffered a bruised back in the Knicks' exhibition game against the Detroit Pistons last Sunday and sat out the 104-99 loss to the San Antonio Spurs Tuesday night, returned to practice yesterday.
Tucker, the Knicks' best 3-point shooter, is expected to play tonight against the Minnesota Timberwolves at the New Haven Coliseum.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Oct. 16 about the appearance of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato on WNBC-TV's ''News Forum'' program misidentified the author of a memorandum about his requests for Federal financing for housing rehabilitation in Puerto Rico.


Israeli Restraint Allows Uprising to Drag On; 'Tell Jacob's House'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court Awards $1.3 Million to Inmate Victims of Attica Attack
LEAD: The State Court of Claims today awarded seven former inmates or their estates almost $1.3 million for injuries they sustained in the state police's bloody suppression of the Attica prison riot in 1971.


MEDICARE CUTBACK EXPECTED TO ADD TO PRIVATE RATES
LEAD: Insurance experts and members of Congress say millions of older Americans will face higher health insurance costs if Congress repeals or cuts back the Medicare program that pays for the catastrophically high costs of a major illness.


America West Air reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* America West Air (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
243,437,000
201,189,000
Net inc
b5,769,000
d4,058,000
Share earns
.28
.24
Shares outst
19,207,539
15,458,101
9mo rev
715,158,000
563,843,000
Net inc
b18,870,000
cd9,705,000
Share earns
.97
-
Shares outst
18,089,790
14,767,780


The New Republic Tries to Stay Young at 75
LEAD: When the editors of The New Republic were making plans for a special issue to mark their 75th anniversary, they invited Alfred Kazin, a former literary editor and occasional critic of the publication, to write an article expressing, as one editor put it, ''his intellectual grievances against us.''


Qaddafi Says He Sponsored And Now Forsakes Terrorists
LEAD: A Cairo weekly magazine reports that the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, said he sponsored terrorists but stopped when he discovered that the terrorists were working for themselves and not for all Arabs.


49er's Status Uncertain
LEAD: Jeff Fuller of the San Francisco 49ers is less seriously hurt than originally feared but it is uncertain whether the defensive back will be able to play in the National Football League again, the club said yesterday.


Anheuser-Busch Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anheuser-Busch Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,701,500,000
2,545,200,000
Net inc
238,300,000
226,500,000
Share earns
.83
.78
Shares outst
286,200,000
289,100,000
9mo sales
7,791,100,000
7,337,500,000
Net inc
639,100,000
590,400,000
Share earns
2.23
2.01
Shares outst
286,300,000
293,800,000


Review/Music; Helping George Crumb Celebrate His Birthday
LEAD: No matter how insistently scholars and metaphysicians wave their dowsing wands, the sources of creative artistry remain largely undiscovered.
Secret underground rivers of imagination can bubble up at unexpected times and places.
If the geology of talent were a completely developed science, it might explain George


Jorgensen (Earle M.) Co(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jorgensen (Earle M.) Co(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
125,945,000
119,188,000
Net inc
935,000
1,375,000
Share earns
.15
.22
9mo sales
400,283,000
352,665,000
Net inc
b13,275,000
6,920,000
Share earns
2.09
1.09


Bid Procedures Set At Dunkin' Donuts
LEAD: Dunkin' Donuts Inc. announced it had set up procedures to accept bids to buy the company from interested parties.
The international chain of doughnut shops, which battled takeover attempts for months before deciding in September to accept bids on a friendly basis, set a Nov. 10 deadline for receiving bids.


Chairman May Bid For Cineplex
LEAD: The Cineplex Odeon Corporation, the movie theater company, said yesterday that its chairman, Garth H. Drabinsky, had offered to buy the company at $16.40 a share (Canadian), or about $14 in United States currency, if he is able to raise the money for the deal.


In Capital, Jersey Rivals Behave Like Statesmen
LEAD: During the months they have been vying for New Jersey's top office, James J. Florio and Jim Courter have appeared as likely adversaries if not natural enemies.
But here in Washington, where both candidates for governor are members of the House of Representatives, they do not seem to be cut from very different cloths.


Fischer-Dieskau, Ill, Cancels More Concerts
LEAD: Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau has canceled two recitals at Carnegie Hall, Nov. 3 and 5, and an appearance with the Cherubini String Quartet on Nov. 9 at Alice Tully Hall.
The baritone, who had previously canceled concerts with the New York Philharmonic, has a severe case of the flu.


DiMaggio to Go Home
LEAD: Joe DiMaggio, who was forced to leave his home when the earthquake last week heavily damaged the Marina district of San Francisco, said today that he had finally been cleared to return to the house, where he has lived since he was born here nearly 75 years ago.


The California Quake; From Homes to Hospitals, Dimension of Loss Emerges
LEAD: As the dust continues to settle, public officials and the insurance industry are beginning to get a clearer picture of the vast toll of the earthquake that struck Northern California last week.


Baker's Point Spread
LEAD: Observe the Middle East point spread:


The California Quake; Aftershocks Damaging Frail Psyches
LEAD: The aftershocks keep rumbling through the cities and mountains in the San Francisco Bay area, sparing roads and buildings but rattling spirits.


Chief Rejoins Qintex
LEAD: Qintex Entertainment Inc. said today that David Evans, who resigned last week as president and chief executive, had reconsidered and would resume both positions until the end of the year or until a successor was named.
Qintex, which has filed for bankruptcy protection for itself and its Hal Roach Studios and Qintex Productions units, added that its chief financial officer, Jonathan Lloyd, had been named to the board of directors.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug reports earnings for 13wks to Sept30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith's Food &amp; Drug (NYSE)
13wks to Sept30
1989
1988
Sales
432,457,000
360,824,000
Net inc
7,217,000
4,516,000
Share earns
.29
.23
Shares outst
25,272,000
19,440,000
39wk sales
1,253,543,000
997,540,000
Net inc
18,850,000
12,988,000
Share earns
.87
.67
Shares outst
21,545,000
19,482,000


Region and State at Odds Over Adirondack Park
LEAD: Concerns about the environment and home rule run deep here in the heart of the Adirondack Park, a place that is both the year-round home of 130,000 people and the greatest surviving wilderness east of the Mississippi.
On Tuesday its residents had a chance to speak their minds.


Edward Johnson, 69, Scientist and Inventor
LEAD: Edward O. Johnson, a scientist and inventor with RCA for 34 years, died of cancer on Oct. 11 at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 69 years old.


Libraries Can Counteract Adult Illiteracy, but They Need Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bethlehem Steel Falls 53.7%; Armco's Profits Down 8.3%
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation and Armco Inc., reflecting a slackening of orders and a decline in steel prices, yesterday announced lower third-quarter earnings.
Bethlehem said its net income was down 53.7 percent, while Armco said its earnings were down 8.3 percent.
Bethlehem


Sara Lee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sara Lee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,748,000,000
2,750,100,000
Net inc
93,800,000
75,600,000
Share earns
.75
.65
Shares outst
120,000,000
111,500,000


Three G.M. Subsidiaries Report Mixed Results
LEAD: The three major non-automotive subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation posted mixed third-quarter financial results, reflecting weaker domestic automotive production, higher credit costs and a stronger data processing business.


Orange &amp; Rockland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange &amp; Rockland (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
127,725,913
123,638,777
Net inc
14,964,043
16,897,553
Share earns
1.09
1.26
9mo rev
396,247,715
360,812,604
Net inc
32,802,374
37,638,166
Share earns
2.34
2.74


Mapco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mapco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
595,357,000
457,378,000
Net inc
22,407,000
23,508,000
Share earns
.58
.59
Shares outst
38,470,000
39,855,000
9mo rev
1,598,731,000
1,345,272,000
Net inc
86,195,000
87,266,000
Share earns
2.20
2.19
Shares outst
39,128,000
39,845,000


Sara Lee Profit Increases 24.1%
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation reported record first-quarter earnings today, showing a 24.1 percent increase over the corresponding period a year ago.


A Benefit for AIDS Ends Paris Season
LEAD: The curtain came down on this Paris fashion season tonight with a benefit party at the Bastille Opera, just hours after the last model had come down the runway in a flower-draped Yves Saint Laurent dress.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Khmer Rouge Reported to Seize a District Capital
LEAD: Western diplomats said today that the Khmer Rouge appeared to have taken a district capital in northwest Cambodia that the Phnom Penh Government had vowed to hold.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: FOR many adults, telling their parents that they are getting a divorce brings about feelings and concerns they may not have felt for years.
Will their parents reject them?
Can they still live up to their parents' expectations?
They worry about how their parents will react and they vividly recall what happened during times of crisis when they were younger.


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
371,738,000
299,475,000
Net inc
13,542,000
11,990,000
Share earns
.84
.75
6mo rev
713,823,000
598,772,000
Net inc
26,658,000
23,682,000
Share earns
1.66
1.48


CDI Corp N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CDI Corp N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
229,263,000
190,681,000
Net inc
5,939,000
5,077,000
Share earns
.30
.27
9mo rev
654,618,000
534,053,000
Net inc
15,885,000
11,862,000
Share earns
.81
.63


The Two Faces Of Saint Laurent
LEAD: Yves Saint Laurent had a wonderful op portunity to tie up all the disparate threads of the spring and summer fashion openings today, and he muffed it.
His was the last of 60 scheduled and innumerable unscheduled showings that have ranked high in theatrics and low in content over the past nine days.


Soviet Miners Strike in Defiance of Ban
LEAD: In a powerful challenge to the new Soviet ban on strikes in energy and other crucial industries, thousands of coal miners in the Arctic Circle walked off their jobs today, demanding political and economic changes.


Zenith Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zenith Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
376,800,000
360,700,000
Net loss
b24,100,000
cd3,000,000
Share earns
-
.11
9mo sales
1,105,700,000
961,200,000
Net loss
b41,100,000
c8,700,000
Shares outst
26,700,000
26,000,000


When Sports Equipment Is Ailing
LEAD: HIS tools: nylon thread, leather laces, cowhide, cotton and horsehair.
His task: fixing the glove ''that makes the catch.''


'Junk Bond' Shift Hurts Columbia Savings
LEAD: The Columbia Savings and Loan Association said today that its third-quarter earnings would be reduced by $130.2 million to reflect provisions of the new savings and loan legislation.
One effect is that most ''junk bond'' holdings must be carried at market value.


L&amp;N Housing Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L&amp;N Housing Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
899,000
b5,162,000
Share earns
.41
-
9mo rev
2,654,000
b3,265,000
Share earns
1.21
-
b-Net loss


Marion Harper Jr., 73, a Leader In the Advertising Industry, Dies
LEAD: Marion Harper Jr., a leader in the advertising industry, died, apparently of a heart attack, yesterday, at his home in Oklahoma City.
He was 73 years old.


Celebrating a Builder Of the Big Band Sound
LEAD: ''Mel Lewis has been an innovator who has redefined the role of jazz drums,'' said Loren Schoenberg, the manager of the American Jazz Orchestra. ''And he's done it by making a concerted effort to stay away from the obvious - which few drummers have done and even fewer within a big band context.''


Amid the Shouts, Dinkins Remains Calm
LEAD: As two electric guitars and a clarinet struck up ''New York, New York,'' David N. Dinkins strolled into the rococo ballroom of Antun's restaurant in Queens Village the other night for a fund-raiser sponsored by the Queens Democratic organization.
Representative Thomas J. Manton, the county leader, made the introduction.


Workshops on Making Holiday Decorations
LEAD: A variety of workshops are being offered in November, some for the family and some looking ahead to the holidays.
Here are a few:


As Bavaro Mends, Giants Waive Shaw
LEAD: Mark Bavaro, the Giants' outstanding tight end, was listed today as doubtful for the big game here Monday night against the Minnesota Vikings.


Gorbachev, in Finland, Disavows Any Right of Regional Intervention
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev declared today that the Soviet Union has no moral or political right to interfere in the affairs of its East European neighbors, and held up neutral Finland as a model of stability in stormy Europe.


AMP Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMP Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
681,225,000
632,628,000
Net inc
68,812,000
72,371,000
Share earns
.64
.67
Shares outst
106,490,326
108,352,547
9mo sales
2,117,045,000
1,974,264,000
Net inc
211,908,000
234,013,000
Share earns
1.98
2.17
Shares outst
106,788,052
107,884,034


Houghton Mifflin Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houghton Mifflin Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
167,498,000
162,054,000
Net inc
24,894,000
27,036,000
Share earns
1.75
1.91
9mo sales
321,541,000
296,492,000
Net inc
24,145,000
27,021,000
Share earns
1.70
1.91


Kennedy Center Chairman To Leave
LEAD: The board of trustees for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, dissatisfied with the performance of the chief executive officer, Ralph P. Davidson, announced today that it will not renew Mr.
Davidson's contract when it expires in February 1991.
But a search is already under way for his successor, and Mr.


Motorola Joins I.B.M. Effort On Semiconductor Research
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said today that the Motorola Corporation had become the first company to participate in its effort to develop a crucial new X-ray technology for the manufacture of semiconductors as part of its drive to maintain the nation's leadership in making the most advanced computer chips.


Results Plus
LEAD:  SOCCER  Sweden and Belgium in Finals: Sweden, Belgium and South Korea clinched spots yesterday in the 1990 World Cup finals, bringing to 11 the number of nations that have qualified for the 24-team tournament in Italy.
Sweden and South Korea both scored 2-0 victories away from home.
Belgium clinched a spot by struggling to a 1-1 tie at home against Luxembourg.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,487,482,000
1,390,438,000
Net inc
b97,891,000
c50,537,000
Share earns
1.15
.60
9mo rev
4,395,391,000
4,134,459,000
Net inc
b171,374,000
c158,064,000
Share earns
2.01
1.87


Assailant Punches Glenn in Television Interview    He told a televison reporter that a worldwide catastophe was imminent and that he hit Mr. Glenn to ''get attention.'' (AP)


Engineers Wipe Out an East German Fighter Squadron


Ametek Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ametek Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
146,559,000
131,731,000
Net inc
8,778,000
b9,442,000
Share earns
.20
.21
9mo sales
435,775,000
394,063,000
Net inc
30,980,000
b27,757,000
Share earns
.70
.63


Boy Is Saved by Umbilical Blood of Sister
LEAD: Medical researchers in France and the United States have replaced the blood-producing cells of a 5-year-old boy seriously ill with anemia by using frozen blood saved from the umbilical cord of his newborn sister.


Copper's 3-Day Fall Halted; Precious Metals Down a Bit
LEAD: A steadier stock market and Japanese buying allowed copper futures prices to end a three-day decline yesterday.
On other futures markets, precious metals were slightly lower, while oil products, most grains and livestock generally climbed.


League Backs Wolves
LEAD: Gary Bettman, a senior vice president and general counsel of the National Basketball Association, said yesterday the league would assist the Minnesota Timberwolves in any legal action that the expansion team took against Rick Mahorn, a former Detroit Piston.


Tax Break Is Coming For the Self-Employed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baines Gets New Pact
LEAD: Harold Baines, a .288 career hitter for his 10 seasons, has agreed to a new contract with the Texas Rangers that extends through the 1992 season.
The Rangers acquired Baines, a 30-year-old designated hitter, on July 29 in a five-player deal with the Chicago White Sox.
He had been signed through 1990 with an option for 1991.


Nuclear Reactor in Spain Catches Fire
LEAD: A turbine at Spain's oldest nuclear reactor caught fire last week, increasing concern over the country's nuclear safety standards and giving fresh impetus to what had been a background issue in the campaign for Sunday's general election.


Newell Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
296,777,000
264,480,000
Net inc
24,540,000
18,898,000
Share earns
.81
.69
Shares outst
30,142,000
23,764,000
9mo sales
844,381,000
734,488,000
Net inc
55,138,000
32,990,000
Share earns
1.84
1.40
Shares outst
29,985,000
23,604,000


Neighbors With a History
LEAD: Until 1917, Finland was an autonomous territory of czarist Russia, and it did not proclaim its independence until the Russian Revolution shook the lands under czarist rule.


Review/Dance; Meditations on Misfits
LEAD: Strength expressed weakness and weakness revealed unexpected strength on Monday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Chris Kaufman - a dancer of remarkable authority - offered a program of solos about social misfits.
Yet some of her unfortunates proved quietly defiant.


Jets' Lineup Against 49ers Is All If's
LEAD: After half a season, Coach Joe Walton still is not sure which players he wants performing for him.


Rio Journal; Cariocas Live for Carnival, but Live With Crime
LEAD: One day, radios flash the latest Brazilian record: a $2.5 million ransom paid for a kidnapped Sao Paulo businessman.


LPL Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LPL Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
158,806,000
141,851,000
Net inc
3,485,000
1,852,000
Share earns
.47
.17
Shares outst
7,427,874
8,620,200
9mo sales
459,021,000
434,837,000
Net inc
23,812,000
5,276,000
Share earns
3.12
.47
Shares outst
7,614,625
8,610,656


Tyco Toys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Toys (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
159,367,000
96,476,000
Net inc
9,261,000
5,043,000
Share earns
1.11
.86
Shares outst
9,350,000
5,828,000
9mo sales
268,911,000
200,432,000
Net inc
12,321,000
8,988,000
Share earns
1.92
1.55
Shares outst
7,734,000
5,799,000


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.68
8.68
8.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.52
7.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.47
7.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.87
8.67
30-YR.


Ferro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
266,729,000
247,726,000
Net inc
11,881,000
11,808,000
Share earns
.51
.56
9mo sales
813,645,000
748,208,000
Net inc
37,411,000
34,860,000
Share earns
1.69
1.69


Merieux Bid Gains
LEAD: Institut Merieux S.A. agreed to spend about $42.5 million to pay for biotechnology research in Canada, clearing an obstacle in its friendly bid of $942 million (Canadian) for the vaccine maker Connaught Biosciences Inc.
The agreement was reached with Connaught's founder, the University of Toronto, which had been opposing the bid on the ground that a foreign takeover would mean a loss of research spending and jobs in Canada.


Electronic Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Data Systems
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,369,600,000
1,224,700,000
Net inc
110,900,000
95,900,000
Share earns
.93
.79
9mo rev
4,034,100,000
3,543,100,000
Net inc
315,800,000
280,700,000
Share earns
2.62
2.30


Lawter International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lawter International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
32,612,000
30,160,000
Net inc
4,832,000
5,425,000
Share earns
.20
.23
9mo sales
99,009,000
91,160,000
Net inc
14,732,000
15,540,000
Share earns
.61
.66


Tecumseh Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tecumseh Products Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
314,900,000
244,800,000
Net inc
16,700,000
14,400,000
Share earns
3.05
2.64
9mo sales
1,161,500,000
834,300,000
Net inc
63,900,000
52,200,000
Share earns
11.68
9.55


Long-Distance Choices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lincoln Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Telecom (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
42,693,000
42,089,000
Net inc
6,629,000
7,006,000
Share earns
.79
.83
9mo rev
125,810,000
124,280,000
Net inc
18,272,000
19,499,000
Share earns
2.17
2.27


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about negative political campaigns misidentified a Democratic consultant.
He is Robert Squier.


Beirut Christians Urge 'Flexibility' on Pact
LEAD: The agreement reached last weekend aimed at ending Lebanon's 14-year civil war gained momentum today when a coalition of Christian parties and militias called for ''flexibility'' in dealing with the accord.


Mesa Airlines Rebuffs StatesWest
LEAD: Mesa Airlines Inc. rejected a proposal by StatesWest Airlines Inc. to combine the two companies.
Mesa's board considered the proposal too vague and ill defined to merit further consideration, said Gary Risley, Mesa's vice president for corporate affairs.


Next Step for Ruble
LEAD: Yesterday's dramatic reduction in the exchange value of the ruble for Soviet citizens traveling abroad reflects both the continuing trials of shaking the Soviet economy out of its lethargy and the Soviet leadership's willingness to act boldly in pursuit of the goal of integration into the world economy.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Anheuser Cutting Its Beer Prices
LEAD: In a move that may spark a beer price war, the Anheuser-Busch Companies said yesterday that it would begin cutting prices on all its brands, including Budweiser, the nation's best-selling beer.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Section yesterday about Paris fashion shows misidentified a designer who showed a collection on Tuesday evening.
He is Valentino Garavani, known professionally as Valentino; he is not Mario Valentino.


Mays (J.W.) Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mays (J.W.) Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,935,633
1,388,379
Net inc
b1,237,679
c953,874
Share earns
.57
-
Yr rev
26,705,325
4,580,133
Net inc
b11,963,797
c1,800,726
Share earns
5.49
-
b


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Asher/Gould Sees Suzuki Opportunities
LEAD: ASHER/GOULD, a medium-size Los Angeles ad agency, has had a fair amount of experience with clients whose public image is less than stellar.
Among its biggest accounts is the American Savings and Loan Association; until the completion of a Federal bailout plan at the end of last year, it was the nation's largest insolvent savings institution.


Renewing A Dowager Of a Hotel
LEAD: THE turn-of-the-century building at Madison Avenue and 92d Street, which began its life as the Hotel Chastaigneray, has been given a major face lift.
The Hotel Wales is the newest of Manhattan's boutique hotels, an Edwardian-flavored companion to the Royalton and Morgan's.


Both Giuliani And Dinkins Claim to See Dual Standard
LEAD: It began with Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican mayoral candidate, complaining that his Democratic opponent, David N. Dinkins, was getting off easy.
Then, after a week of public grilling about his personal finances, Mr.
Dinkins began asking why his opponent was not being subjected to the same scrutiny.


The California Quake; Hunt for Victims in Freeway Is Called Too Risky for Now
LEAD: The Oakland police said today that it was too dangerous to continue the search for bodies amid the wreckage of the Nimitz Freeway until the shaky structure was demolished.


At High Point, Fantasies Old (Mostly) and New
LEAD: Armed with the High Point survival kit - flat shoes and a sense of humor - more than 50,000 decorators, retailers and manufacturers' representatives made their way through some 1,600 showrooms at the semiannual International Home Furnishings Market.
The nine-day event, billed as ''the largest concentration of home furnishings in the world,'' introduces the furniture that consumers will see in retail stores next spring.


Bush Would Change Rules On Regulation of Pesticides
LEAD: President Bush is expected to announce proposals on Thursday to allow the Government to remove dangerous agricultural chemicals more quickly from the marketplace.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
162,700,000
181,500,000
Net inc
7,800,000
c55,000,000
Share earns
.27
-
Shares outst
29,100,000
30,800,000
9mo rev
563,700,000
574,200,000
Net inc
b33,900,000
cd34,300,000
Share earns
1.14
-
Shares outst
29,600,000
31,000,000


The California Quake; Disaster Relief Aid Poses Delicate Deficit Problem
LEAD: Congress and President Bush have been unable to agree on how to bring this year's budget deficit down to the level required by the budget law, a process, they agree, that requires less spending.
Meanwhile, more spending keeps getting added to the pot.


HEALTH: Psychology; Doctors Find That Surgical Patients May Still 'Hear' Despite Anesthesia
LEAD: To the dismay and disbelief of many surgeons and anesthesiologists, new studies have bolstered the idea that patients who are completely anesthetized can still register some of what goes on around them.


Commerical Metals Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerical Metals Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
317,933,000
298,366,000
Net inc
7,057,000
b5,286,000
Share earns
.61
.46
Shares outst
11,607,175
11,516,173
Yr sales
1,294,920,000
1,129,172,000
Net inc
28,451,000
b24,449,000
Share earns
2.46
2.10
Shares outst
11,571,353
11,617,218


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Cement on Quarry Tile  Q.I cemented down some tiles that had worked loose on the landing outside my front door, but I failed to clean up, and left streaks of cement on the surface of these tiles.
How can I remove these streaks without loosening the tiles, and is there anything I can apply to make them shiny after they are cleaned?


Statement May Cast Doubt On Allegation Against Pierce
LEAD: The Inspector General of the Department of Housing and Urban Development has submitted a statement to lawyers for former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. that could cast doubt on a key accusation of favoritism leveled against Mr.
Pierce.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SHEET vinyl flooring is popular because of its appearance, relatively easy installation and durability.
But vinyl floors require cleaning and polishing, and precautions must be taken to avoid damage from heavy furniture.
Vinyl flooring can be repaired.
If done skillfully, the repairs are often invisible.


Big Gain Expected By Westinghouse
LEAD: The chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation told securities analysts the company expects to exceed a 10 percent operating margin by the end of 1990 and to have a return on equity in the range of 18 to 21 percent.
John C. Marous also predicted ''double digit'' earnings growth in this year's fourth quarter.


Maxicare Accord
LEAD: Maxicare Health Plans Inc. said it had reached agreement with its court-appointed creditors' committees on terms of the company's restructuring in Federal Bankruptcy Court.
The health maintenance organization company said creditors and shareholders would receive no less than $78.8 million in cash, 10-year 13.5 percent notes with a face value of $67 million, and common stock and warrants.


'Tis Better to Laugh At the Darkness
LEAD: THE working title of Leland and Crystal Payton's book in progress - a look at a wide range of wacky, witty and just plain ugly lamps made in the 1950's - was ''Outrageous Lamps.''


Compaq Computer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compaq Computer Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
682,980,000
501,634,000
Net inc
87,107,000
57,870,000
Share earns
2.02
1.40
Shares outst
44,182,000
43,283,000
9mo sales
2,087,919,000
1,397,895,000
Net inc
254,248,000
163,337,000
Share earns
5.94
4.06
Shares outst
43,901,000
41,831,000


Greenspan Supports Anti-Inflation Legislation
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that ending inflation in the next five years might lead to higher interest rates and lower economic growth temporarily, but would not lead to recession.


Norfolk Southern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norfolk Southern (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,142,100,000
1,162,500,000
Net inc
150,500,000
179,400,000
Share earns
.87
1.00
9mo rev
3,428,100,000
3,302,400,000
Net inc
458,000,000
456,100,000
Share earns
2.61
2.51





Saab Gets Plane Order
LEAD: Saab-Scania A.B. said this week that the United States carrier Express Airlines 1 had placed an order worth 2 billion crown, about $310 million, for 25 of its commuter aircraft.
The Swedish company said the order was for 15 Saab 340's and 10 Saab 2000's, with an option for 10 additional 340's.
Saab said Express Airlines 1, part of Northwest Airlink, was the first company to place a firm order for its 2000.


Home Resale Rise Is 4.3%
LEAD: Sales of existing homes rose for the second consecutive month in September, climbing 4.3 percent to the highest level this year, a real estate trade group said today.


Uncle Scrooge
LEAD: Washington sets the pace for contributions to international aid agencies, and once again it is dawdling.
The International Development Association - the World Bank agency that lends to the world's neediest - needs another refill.
But the Bush Administration can't seem to find $100 million in next year's budget to keep I.D.A.


Scana Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scana Corp (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,108,799,000
1,065,679,000
Net inc
122,046,000
115,521,000
Share earns
3.03
2.87
Shares outst
40,296,000
40,296,000


Extra Innings for Some Veterans
LEAD: Fourteen years after his finest moment, pitching a shutout for the Boston Red Sox in the opening game of the 1975 World Series, Luis Tiant found himself working for the Massachusetts State Lottery, uncomfortable in a business suit and unhappy that his life seemed to be behind him.


Ultimatum for Panel as Vote for N.F.L. Chief Stalls
LEAD: Seven months after announcing his retirement, Pete Rozelle named a five-man committee tonight in yet another effort to choose his successor as commissioner of the National Football League.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Brother International Corp., Somerville, N.J., an office products manufacturer, appointed Dean F. Shulman vice president for sales and marketing of its consumer products division.


Spiegel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spiegel Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
372,127,000
336,409,000
Net inc
10,786,000
6,552,000
Share earns
.21
.13
9mo rev
1,023,420,000
841,469,000
Net inc
23,792,000
16,203,000
Share earns
.46
.34


Rule of Law?
LEAD: The United States Government has just made amends, of a kind, for an act of lawless cruelty.
It has agreed to pay $170,000 to the widow of William Albertson, a leading Communist Party figure who was a victim of J. Edgar Hoover's paranoid rage.


Review/Jazz; A Pianist Comes Into His Own
LEAD: It is a common experience for those listening to jazz groups led by the saxophonist Lou Donaldson to become suddenly riveted by a pianist who emerges from the ensemble to turn it in volatile, joyful directions.
The pianist is Herman Foster, who spends much of his time in groups led by Mr.
Donaldson and others, and as accompanist to a variety of singers.


Market Place; Coniston Stymied In Its TW Deal
LEAD: IF all had gone as planned, Coniston Partners' acquisition of TW Services Inc. would have left the partnership controlling the food-service company after taking out every cent it had invested in it.


Richard Norwood, 73, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: Richard Harland Norwood, a former executive with Rockefeller Center Inc., died Tuesday at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J., after suffering a heart embolism.
He was 73 years old and lived in Bay Head, N.J.


Note and Bond Prices Up in Sluggish Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds inched higher in sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers placed bids on $4.5 billion worth of 30-year bonds issued by the Resolution Funding Corporation.


42 Are Hurt in Melee In Pennsylvania Prison
LEAD: At least 42 people were hurt today in a prison disturbance that was touched off by an inmate's assault on a prison employee, officials said.


Bush on Capital Gains: A Matter of Experience
LEAD: Like other mortals, Presidents have only so much time and so much energy (although George Bush spent his vacation this year trying to disprove that self-evident proposition).


Analyzig Success Stories of Products
LEAD: THE perfect screwdriver isn't everybody's Holy Grail.
Not everybody puts the Dustbuster, the Taurus and the Walkman on a pedestal.
And how many remember when ''Made in Japan'' was an esthetic epithet?


Magma Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Copper (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
174,504,000
141,212,000
Net inc
16,814,000
12,344,000
Share earns
.53
.32
Shares outst
28,199,000
38,127,000
9mo rev
459,965,000
417,816,000
Net inc
52,633,000
40,868,000
Share earns
1.68
1.07
Shares outst
28,198,000
38,116,000


Interface Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interface Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
141,051,000
90,810,000
Net inc
5,750,000
4,782,000
Share earns
.33
.28
9mo sales
429,932,000
246,420,000
Net inc
16,889,000
14,150,000
Share earns
.98
.83


Morgan Products Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Products Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
111,495,000
121,036,000
Net inc
171,000
2,490,000
Share earns
.02
.30
9mo sales
331,759,000
335,193,000
Net inc
2,065,000
7,052,000
Share earns
.25
.84


Yields Down For Week
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday, reflecting anticipation of lower interest rates and a ''flight to quality'' by stock market investors.


Giants Seek to Regain Competitive Edge
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants, who worked out for two hours today while workmen continued to repair earthquake damage in Candlestick Park, reported that they were getting back their competitive edge for the World Series and wondered why the Oakland Athletics had flown all the way to Phoenix when the sun was shining over the Bay


More on Down's Syndrome
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Dinkins Unveils TV Ad Enlisting Aid of Kennedy to Assail Giuliani
LEAD: David N. Dinkins continued to wrap his mayoral aspirations in New York City's warm affection for the Democratic Party yesterday, telling business executives that Rudolph W. Giuliani is ''a loyal servant of the national Government'' and unveiling a television commercial that features Senator Edward M.


Delta Air Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Air Lines (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,173,400,000
1,881,600,000
Net inc
133,142,000
100,000,000
Share earns
2.53
2.03


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: IT'S sitting on the sideboard, the pumpkin I bought for Halloween, waiting for a new face.
I bought it for my daughter, actually, my hand reaching out in automatic response to the pyramid of orange globes at the farm stand.
For a moment I forgot that she was years past trick-or-treating and cutting up sheets for ghost wear.


Arab Gets Life in Israeli's Killing
LEAD: Judges in Tel Aviv sentenced a West Bank Palestinian today to life in prison plus 20 years after he pleaded guilty to killing an Israeli construction worker and trying to careen a crowded public bus into a ravine last month.


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,289,716,000
1,090,368,000
Net inc
68,057,000
57,724,000
Share earns
.65
.56
Shares outst
105,139,000
101,724,000
9mo rev
3,678,817,000
3,065,049,000
Net inc
177,861,000
149,665,000
Share earns
1.72
1.47
Shares outst
103,423,000
101,642,000


Tyson Ill; Title Bout Off Till '90
LEAD: The world heavyweight championship fight scheduled for Nov. 18 between Mike Tyson and Donovan (Razor) Ruddock has been postponed until at least early next year because Tyson has a condition similar to pneumonia, Garry Stevenson, the promoter, said tonight.


Books of The Times; Ugly Racial Feelings and Murder in a Not-So-Idyllic Vermont
LEAD:  A Stranger in the Kingdom  By Frank Howard Mosher  421 pages. Doubleday. $18.95.


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Union Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
131,697,000
125,922,000
Net loss
19,006,000
8,864,000
Yr rev
969,187,000
898,698,000
Net inc
64,263,000
61,728,000
Share earns
2.52
2.49


The Setting Glitters Like the Jewels
LEAD: FOR two years, Constantin Wickenburg and Marco Carrano have been partners in their own architectural firm.
Recently they have been proudly showing off their newest joint venture: a small jewel of a shop for Henryk Demner's precious jewels.


Witco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Witco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
395,022,000
402,662,000
Net inc
20,461,000
20,036,000
Share earns
.86
.85
Shares outst
25,395,000
25,251,000
9mo sales
1,207,991,000
1,201,864,000
Net inc
63,962,000
b71,542,000
Share earns
2.69
3.00
Shares outst
25,325,000
25,245,000


Alaska Spill Jolts Chevron, Too
LEAD: Public outrage over the 11 million gallons of crude oil that the Exxon Valdez spilled into Alaska's Prince William Sound in March has lashed the industry in many ways.
But perhaps no company, Exxon included, has been jolted as badly as the Chevron Corporation.


Scramble Gives Oilers A Goal And a Tie
LEAD: The Rangers, up a goal and down a man, had just survived Edmonton's attack with the extra player in the waning minutes of the third period.
But the puck, sliding elusively in front of Bob Froese's goal, was still loose as the power play ended.


Hannaford Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hannaford Brothers (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
394,367,000
329,058,000
Net inc
10,278,000
8,095,000
Share earns
.52
.43
Shares outst
19,482,684
18,790,126
9mo rev
1,115,519,000
907,844,000
Net inc
b31,443,000
22,177,000
Share earns
1.61
1.18
Shares outst
19,406,974
18,723,644


Edward J. Fahy, 79, Retired Navy Admiral
LEAD: Rear Adm.
Edward J. Fahy, a World War II submarine officer and later chief of the Navy's Bureau of Ships, died of cardiac arrest yesterday in Delray Beach, Fla., where he lived in retirement.
He was 79 years old.


Panhandle Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Panhandle Eastern Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
720,954,000
270,371,000
Net inc
385,000
c243,069,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
85,467,000
55,139,000
9mo rev
1,657,980,000
986,380,000
Net inc
b28,349,000
c139,354,000
Share earns
.42
-
Shares outst
66,896,000
54,446,000


INSIDE
LEAD:  Wave of Assassinations Threatens Peru Elections  Leftist guerrillas in Peru have mounted the biggest terror campaign in the nine-year history of their insurgency in an effort to disrupt municipal elections scheduled for mid-November.
Page A6.
Damages for Attica Inmates  Almost $1.3 million was awarded to seven inmates hurt in the suppression of the 1971 prison riot.


Review/Art; The Master of the Macabre, Francis Bacon
LEAD: Since he exhibited ''Three Studies for Figures at the Base of the Crucifixion'' at the Lefevre Gallery in London 44 years ago, Francis Bacon has remained master of the macabre.
The writhing half-human, half-animal forms he painted in that triptych may have owed something to the German Expressionists and something to Picasso.


Rebels Step Up Killings in Peru to Disrupt Election
LEAD: A leftist rebel group is mounting the biggest terror campaign in its history in an effort to disrupt Peru's municipal and presidential elections.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,573,000,000
1,556,000,000
Net inc
49,000,000
65,000,000
Per share
.69
1.00
Shares outst
65,028,000
64,009,000
9mo rev
4,979,000,000
4,342,000,000
Net inc
169,000,000
181,000,000
Per share
2.49
2.90
Shares outst
64,478,000
60,905,000


Amdahl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
534,319,000
464,676,000
Net inc
32,940,000
52,151,000
Share earns
.30
.48
9mo rev
1,475,274,000
1,256,096,000
Net inc
111,342,000
147,539,000
Share earns
1.01
1.36


Grace Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
96,894,000
86,591,000
Net inc
5,876,000
4,428,000
Share earns
.24
.18
9mo rev
280,558,000
265,552,000
Net inc
17,912,000
16,102,000
Share earns
.73
.66


Compaq Profits Up 50.4%
LEAD: Continuing its dazzling performance in the personal computer industry, the Compaq Computer Corporation today posted a 50.4 percent increase in net income on a 36 percent rise in sales for the third quarter ended Sept. 30.


2 School Districts Accused of Phone Abuses
LEAD: Workers in the schools and offices of two New York City school districts ran up nearly $90,000 in unnecessary phone charges, including hundreds of calls to lines that provide pornographic sex conversations, a commission investigating educational corruption charged yesterday.


Mack Chairman Resigns
LEAD: John B. Curcio resigned this week as chairman of Mack Trucks Inc., effective when a successor is named, the company said.
Mr.
Curcio, 56 years old, had relinquished the post of president to Ralph Reins in June, when expectations of a loss in the second quarter were announced.
He surrendered the chief executive's job to Mr.


Acuson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acuson Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
58,465,000
43,725,000
Net inc
9,805,000
7,137,000
Share earns
.41
.30
9mo sales
166,426,000
119,469,000
Net inc
27,713,000
19,326,000
Share earns
1.16
.82


BONN GIVING POLES AID OF $1 BILLION
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl's trip to Poland, delayed by a dispute over the amount of economic aid he will offer, is to begin Nov. 9.
Mr.
Kohl will arrive in Warsaw with more than $1 billion in aid to help rebuild a devastated economy, according to West German officials.


Mississippi Is Urged to Reopen Evers Case
LEAD: More than a quarter-century after the black civil rights leader Medgar Evers was murdered here, the City Council has asked the state and the county to reopen the case.


Reagan Sees Virtue in Sale of Studio to Sony
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan told Japanese audiences today that he welcomed Japanese investment in the United States and that Sony's recent takeover of a big motion picture studio might even ''bring back decency and good taste'' to American movies.


'Little Toot' Has a Birthday


Bush, Citing 'Threat,' Reaffirms Need to Keep Nicaragua Embargo
LEAD: President Bush told Congress today that he would continue the American trade embargo against Nicaragua because the Central American country represented ''an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States.''


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


L. J. Hooker Sells Merksamer Stake
LEAD: The L. J. Hooker Corporation said it had sold its 80 percent stake in the 79-store Merksamer Jewelers chain to a group led by Sam Merksamer for an undisclosed amount.
L.
J.
Hooker, the American unit of the Hooker Corporation of Australia, bought its stake in Merksamer in 1986.
Since then, Hooker ran into financial difficulty.


China-South Africa Deal
LEAD: China, which has traditionally shunned ties with the white supremacist Government of South Africa, is buying coal from Pretoria, a private Dutch group said today.
The first of 10 shipments was unloaded in the southern province of Guangdong in June, according to the Shipping Research Bureau, a body that monitors the oil and coal trade.


American Fructose reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Fructose (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
52,189,000
45,238,000
Net inc
8,059,000
5,234,000
Share earns
.84
.54
Shares outst
9,598,913
9,606,008
9mo sales
149,653,000
115,914,000
Net inc
19,688,000
10,409,000
Share earns
2.05
1.05
Shares outst
9,583,525
9,910,377


Arlington Journal; Prosperity Threatens Refugee Of Vietnam
LEAD: Kham Dinh Do is a survivor.


Honeywell Sells 16% of Yamatake
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. announced the sale of 16 percent of the outstanding common stock of its Tokyo-based partner, Yamatake-Honeywell, for $280 million.
The interest in Yamatake-Honeywell was acquired by a group of 10 Japanese financial institutions and industrial corporations, Honeywell said.


Armor All Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armor All Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,296,000
27,627,000
Net inc
3,618,000
4,371,000
Share earns
.17
.21
6mo rev
60,653,000
62,000,000
Net inc
9,250,000
10,813,000
Share earns
.44
.52


Wang Agreement On Selling Assets
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. said it had agreed in principle to sell $200 million of nonstrategic assets as part of its continuing drive to reduce debt and return to profitability.
Richard Miller, president of the Lowell-based computer maker, said the nonstrategic assets include the company's lease portfolio, money credit operations and a manufacturing plant in


Get Me Rewrite, Comrade
LEAD: An isolationist columnist once so angered Franklin Roosevelt that the President bestowed an Iron Cross on him, implying that he was pro-Nazi.
Richard Nixon's enemies' list bulged with journalists.
In this light, Mikhail Gorbachev's outburst against Vladislav Starkov can be viewed as one more example of the unending adversarial tension between president and press, regardless of system.


Micropolis Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micropolis Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
66,502,000
95,010,000
Net loss
23,657,000
12,645,000
9mo sales
226,408,000
273,041,000
Net loss
47,576,000
4,281,000


Cowboys' Fans Keep Too Tall's Streak Going
LEAD: Caving in to the pressure exerted by phone calls from more than 200 fans, Jimmy Johnson, the coach of the Dallas Cowboys, has relented in the matter of Ed (Too Tall) Jones.


Bethlehem Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethlehem Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,269,700,000
1,431,500,000
Net inc
b46,900,000
c101,400,000
Share earns
.54
1.27
Shares outst
74,800,000
74,400,000
9mo sales
4,105,800,000
4,156,600,000
Net inc
b195,700,000
cd337,300,000
Share earns
2.35
4.56
Shares outst
74,700,000
69,600,000


'The Straw' by O'Neill Is to Open a Season
LEAD: A production of ''The Straw'' by Eugene O'Neill is to open the season of the new Salamander Repertory Theater on Nov. 3 at the Walker Street Theater, Walker Street, south of Canal Street.


Striking It Rich in Japan
LEAD: A Japanese insurance company sent prices on the world art market soaring when it paid $40 million for Van Gogh's ''Sunflowers'' a few years ago.
Now a Japanese media giant has pushed up the price for former Presidents of the United States.
Ronald and Nancy Reagan are reportedly being paid a breathtaking $2 million for their current visit to the land of the lustrous yen.


GM Hughes Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GM Hughes Electronics Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,577,000,000
2,633,800,000
Net inc
147,800,000
179,600,000
Share earns
.37
.45
Shares outst
89,500,000
127,400,000
9mo rev
8,470,700,000
8,178,300,000
Net inc
598,200,000
632,600,000
Share earns
1.48
1.58
Shares outst
98,000,000
128,200,000


Los Angeles Project Aids Illegal Aliens, In Challenge to U.S.
LEAD: To the dismay of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Los Angeles has established a formal program to help find jobs for day laborers, many of whom do not have the documentation to work legally in the United States.


Stocks Mixed as Dow Slips 5.94, to 2,653.28
LEAD: Stocks turned in a mixed performance in relatively calm trading yesterday on sharply lower turnover.
Although the widely watched Dow Jones industrial average closed down 5.94 at 2,653.28, the 784 advances on the New York Stock Exchange managed to stay ahead of the 700 declines.


AZT to Be Widely Given Out To Children With AIDS Virus
LEAD: AZT, the only proven treatment for the AIDS virus, will be widely distributed to children for the first time, Federal health officials said today.


Yugoslav Communists Back Multiparty Plan
LEAD: The governing Communist Party has for the first time indicated that it may allow a multiparty democracy.


Joslyn Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Joslyn Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
51,168,000
51,398,000
Net inc
2,380,000
3,028,000
Share earns
.50
.64
9mo sales
165,896,000
156,926,000
Net inc
10,460,000
10,023,000
Share earns
2.20
2.10


Oryx Energy Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oryx Energy Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
295,000,000
306,000,000
Net inc
6,000,000
c29,000,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
905,000,000
970,000,000
Net inc
b125,000,000
c307,000,000
Share earns
1.18
-


American Barrick reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Barrick (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
50,208,000
38,477,000
Net inc
11,383,000
7,449,000
Share earns
.18
.13
9mo rev
142,310,000
97,750,000
Net inc
23,685,000
18,754,000
Share earns
.39
.32


Medusa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medusa Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
61,497,000
61,017,000
Net inc
5,597,000
6,788,000
Share earns
.53
.64
9mo sales
137,697,000
138,746,000
Net inc
7,434,000
13,297,000
Share earns
.70
1.26


Europe Critical Of Trade Plan
LEAD: A United States proposal on promoting agricultural trade drew sharp criticism from the European Community at the latest round of multilateral trade talks.
However, many of the 105 countries participating in the talks supported the plan.
In a statement, the European


Campaign Matters; Where's the Fat? Only the Auditor Knows for Sure
LEAD: Ask Representative James J. Florio how he would get a handle on New Jersey's $12 billion budget as governor and he will say that the state needs to conduct a comprehensive audit of how it spends its money.


Michigan to Ban Marshmallows
LEAD: University of Michigan officials have announced plans to add marshmallows to the list of objects banned from Michigan Stadium during Wolverine football games.
Now banned are umbrellas, coolers, chairbacks, backpacks and alcoholic beverages.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower; Gold Prices Off in New York
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly lower against major foreign currencies in thin, narrow trading yesterday.


NATO Ministers Call for Military Strength
LEAD: NATO defense ministers said today that the alliance needs to maintain its military might, including a strong nuclear strategy, despite political changes in the Soviet Union and parts of Eastern Europe.


Review/Recital; The Organ Works Charles Ives Wrote or Played
LEAD: Before Charles Ives attained fortune as an insurance executive and fame as a part-time composer, he was an organist at churches in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York.
His last post, which he held from 1899 through 1902, was at the Central Presbyterian Church in Manhattan.


A Proposal to Revamp And Buy Sharon Steel
LEAD: Two investment concerns said yesterday that they would sponsor a reorganization plan to bring the Sharon Steel Corporation out of bankruptcy.


Sysco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,878,026,000
1,558,106,000
Net inc
31,609,000
26,113,000
Share earns
.35
.29
Shares outst
90,928,171
89,913,462
Share earnings have been adjusted for 2-for-1 stock split on Oct.


Baby of Slain Mother Is Near Death
LEAD: Doctors were struggling today to save a premature baby delivered by Caesarean section before the mother died of a gunshot wound.
The father was also shot after the couple were abducted as they left a birthing class Monday night, and he was reported in critical condition.


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
364,100,000
307,900,000
Net inc
1,000,000
24,200,000
Share earns
.05
1.10
Yr sales
1,343,600,000
1,170,600,000
Net inc
31,500,000
27,800,000
Share earns
1.53
1.27


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Martinair Holland, a commercial airline, to Kaufman &amp; Maraffi for its North American advertising, with an undisclosed budget.


Harsco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harsco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
300,900,000
324,457,000
Net inc
14,566,000
11,296,000
Share earns
.55
.43
Shares outst
26,208,000
26,435,000
9mo sales
1,025,918,000
941,916,000
Net inc
b15,518,000
49,065,000
Share earns
.59
1.84
Shares outst
26,278,000
26,680,000


Richard Sterba, 91, Psychoanalyst, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
Richard Sterba, a psychoanalyst who was a disciple of Sigmund Freud and practiced for nearly 50 years in Detroit, died Tuesday at his home in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
He was 91 years old.


Syrup Pitchers of Yore
LEAD: HE had been in the antiques business for 22 years, but Jim Bishop was taken off guard when he discovered a cache of vintage small appliances and kitchen accessories in their original boxes in a warehouse near Scranton, Pa.





Events: A Harvest Festival
LEAD:  Bronx Harvest, New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; 212-220-8777.


Searchers Find More Bodies At Texas Plant Explosion Site
LEAD: Investigators searching for the victims and the cause of a huge explosion at a Phillips Petroleum plastics plant here faced ''a very hazardous situation'' in the rubble of twisted metal and concrete left by the blast, an official said.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to a possible cash distribution to shareholders of Property Capital Trust of Boston.
The distribution was called off after the company did not receive what it considered an acceptable offer for the properties it planned to liquidate.


President of Equifax Adds the Job of Chief
LEAD: Equifax Inc., a leading provider of credit information, yesterday named its president, C.B.
Rogers Jr., to the added post of chief executive.


GM Acceptance Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GM Acceptance Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
234,500,000
241,900,000
9mo net inc
859,500,000
930,200,000
General Motors Acceptance Corp. is a wholly owned subsidary of General Motors.


Telerate Criticizes Its Parent, Dow Jones, for Offer
LEAD: Telerate Inc., a computerized financial data company that is two-thirds owned by Dow Jones &amp; Company, tried to denounce the business media giant yesterday in an advertisment in The Wall Street Journal, the Dow Jones flagship newspaper.
However, the advertisement was withdrawn before publication.


Japanese Retailer May Buy A Stake in Bloomingdale's
LEAD: At least one large Japanese department store group has expressed interest in participating in a $1 billion global buyout of Bloomingdale's, the New York-based department store chain, people involved in planning the buyout said today.


Noland Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noland Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
116,106,960
122,823,468
Net inc
1,027,197
1,923,685
Share earns
.28
.52
9mo sales
342,547,785
344,853,160
Net inc
3,331,255
5,175,005
Share earns
.90
1.40


Banta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banta Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
148,575,000
139,237,000
Net inc
7,181,000
c6,781,000
Share earns
.56
.53
9mo sales
422,159,000
337,860,000
Net inc
b28,359,000
c18,193,000
Share earns
2.23
1.47


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alcan Aluminium Ltd., Montreal, a maker of aluminum and aluminum products, received approval from the Toronto and Montreal stock exchanges to buy back 15 million of its own common shares, or about 6.5 percent of the shares outstanding.
Purchases will be made starting Friday.


4 Days Short of 'Fall Back,' It Feels More Like 'Spring Forward'


American Precision Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Precision Industries Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,972,000
12,820,000
Net inc
1,183,000
1,024,000
Share earns
.20
.17
9mo rev
39,778,000
37,864,000
Net inc
3,262,000
2,515,000
Share earns
.56
.43


Leadership Shuffle Likely in Turkey
LEAD: What do you do with a political leader whose personal approval rating is put by polltakers at 28 percent?
Whose party finished an embarrassing third in local elections earlier in the year?
Whose candidates won only 22 percent of the popular vote and, opinion surveys indicate, would be lucky now to scrape together 14 percent?


Fuqua Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuqua Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
233,674,000
246,653,000
Net inc
874,000
c11,412,000
Share earns
.04
.53
Shares outst
21,540,000
21,552,000
9mo sales
712,222,000
710,293,000
Net inc
b8,161,000
c102,469,000
Share earns
.38
4.74
Shares outst
21,504,000
21,650,000


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Amdahl Corp.
$ 32,900,000
-37.0
AMP Inc.
68,800,000
-5.0
Anheuser-Busch Cos.
238,300,000
+5.2
Armco Inc.
33,000,000
-8.3
Bethlehem Steel Corp.
46,900,000
-53.7
Compaq Computer Corp.
87,100,000
+50.4
Consolidated Freightways
9,500,000
-70.6
Cooper Industries
68,100,000
+19.5
Delta Air Lines Inc.


Kemper Shuns 4 Brokers
LEAD: Kemper Financial Services Inc., the Chicago-based investment management firm, will no longer do business with four Wall Street investment firms that do index arbitrage for their own accounts, officials at the company said.


Clark Beise, 91; Headed Bank of America
LEAD: S. Clark Beise, retired president and chief executive of the Bank of America, died Saturday at his home in Hillsborough, Calif.
He was 91 years old.


Konrad Wolff, Pianist And Author, Dies at 82
LEAD: Konrad Wolff, a pianist and the author of several books about the piano, died of heart failure Monday in Cologne, West Germany, where he was performing and lecturing.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Design As Usual From Italy
LEAD: ALTHOUGH modern design has permeated Italian life for decades, it takes a display like the one at the Italian Trade Center (499 Park Avenue, at 59th Street) to really make the point.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Farm Credit System Banks yesterday priced three consolidated systemwide bond issues totaling $2.45 billion.
The bonds are being offered through the FFCB Funding Corporation and various securities dealers and banks.


Ruble Is Devalued in Some Cases; Step to Spur Soviet Economy Seen
LEAD: The Soviet Union today announced a drastic cut in the ruble exchange rate that applies mainly to foreigners in the country and to Soviet citizens traveling abroad.
The move, which puts a more realistic value on its currency, is apparently a step along a difficult path toward making it possible for anyone to exchange rubles for other world currencies.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; G.M. Spending On TV Specials
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said this week that it would spend $11 million to be the sole sponsor of several television specials next season.


VETO ON ABORTION IS UPHELD IN HOUSE
LEAD: Opening a season of trench warfare on abortion, the House of Representatives today upheld President Bush's veto of legislation that would have allowed Federal financing of abortions for victims of rape or incest.


U.S. Trust Promotes Officers to Top Posts
LEAD: The U.S.
Trust Corporation, a bank company that serves wealthy investors and institutions, yesterday named H. Marshall Schwarz chairman and chief executive, effective Feb. 1.


HEALTH: Diagnostics; Test Unmasks a Parasitic Disease
LEAD: By using a highly specific new test, a New York internist has found that many people believed to be suffering from irritable bowel syndrome actually have the common intestinal parasitic disease giardiasis.


Utility Gets Two Sweetened Offers
LEAD: Two Connecticut utilities sweetened their offers yesterday for the Public Service Company of New Hampshire in filings with the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manchester, N.H.


Millipore Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millipore Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
157,865,000
150,749,000
Net inc
10,003,000
12,778,000
Share earns
.36
.46
9mo sales
485,699,000
451,434,000
Net inc
35,896,000
37,788,000
Share earns
1.29
1.36


Chilean Barred for Life
LEAD: Roberto Rojas, the Chilean national team's goalkeeper, was barred for life from international competition yesterday after accusations he faked an injury at a Brazil-Chile World Cup qualifying match on Sept. 3.
The Federation Internationale de Football Association, soccer's governing body, also suspended Rojas for three months from all activity, including domestic games, and fined the Chilean team about $31,000.


Power Plays Work for Winnipeg
LEAD: Three power-play goals, including Dave Ellett's tie-breaker in the third period, eased the Winnepeg Jets to a 6-4 victory over the Washington Capitals tonight.


Gesture to French Muslims
LEAD: Education Minister Lionel Jospin of France, seeking to resolve a national dispute, ruled today that Muslim girls could wear traditional head scarves but could not refuse to attend classes.
The suspension early this month of three students who wore the head scarves had stirred debate over whether their mode of dress violated France's long tradition of secular public schools.


Foster-Home Arson Kills Counselor; Ex-Resident Arrested
LEAD: A 27-year-old counselor died early yesterday in a fire in Brooklyn at a city-run foster-care home.
And the police arrested a 19-year-old former resident, saying they believed he had set the fire because he was expelled from the home two weeks ago.


Former Labor Secretary Is Named As U.S. Mediator in Coal Strike
LEAD: Calling for a ''time of healing now,'' Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole turned today to a predecessor, W. J. Usery Jr., to mediate a violent, six-month-old coal strike in Virginia, West Virginia and Kentucky.


Alleghany Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alleghany Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
263,300,000
259,600,000
Net inc
15,300,000
14,000,000
Share earns
2.38
2.21
9mo rev
749,400,000
721,500,000
Net inc
39,700,000
32,600,000
Share earns
6.21
5.15


Actor, Playing Nixon, Has His Star Role at Last
LEAD: Not many actors can say that a former President of the United States tried to suppress their best performance, but Lane Smith has that distinction.


Businessland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Businessland Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
315,857,000
271,554,000
Net inc
4,263,000
7,522,000
Share earns
.14
.26
Shares outst
34,483,000
30,436,000


Senators See Delay in Capital Gains Tax Cut
LEAD: Senate Democrats who generally favor reducing capital gains taxes warned President Bush today that his only realistic hope of achieving a lower rate was to include it in a broader budget compromise, one that might have to wait until next year.


Crane Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
376,330,000
378,258,000
Net inc
15,487,000
b20,686,000
Share earns
.48
.61
Shares outst
32,217,000
33,810,000
9mo sales
1,108,417,000
969,267,000
Net inc
42,326,000
b49,951,000
Share earns
1.30
1.48
Shares outst
32,217,000
33,746,000


Machinists Shift Stance On UAL Deal
LEAD: A leader of the machinists' union at United Airlines whose opposition contributed to the collapse of a proposed buyout two weeks ago said yesterday that his union might be willing to participate in a deal to help the company defend itself against a takeover.


8 Acts to Join the Rock Hall of Fame
LEAD: The Who, the Four Tops, the Four Seasons, the Kinks, the Platters, Hank Ballard, Bobby Darin and Simon and Garfunkel have been selected for induction to the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame Jan. 17.


Del E. Webb Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Del E. Webb Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
53,733,000
31,285,000
Net inc
3,754,000
b5,271,000
Share earns
.35
.54
9mo rev
105,469,000
71,768,000
Net inc
1,095,000
b314,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $5,858,000, or 63 cents, and $2,964,000, or 32 cents, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Earnings listing of Business Day on Friday for W. R. Grace &amp; Company misstated its latest third-quarter net income.
It was $97,891,000.
The Profits Scoreboard chart with the listing also misstated the percentage increase in income from the same quarter last year, when the company earned $50,537,000.


Soviet Grain Approved
LEAD: The Soviet Union has been given the go-ahead to buy up to 16 million metric tons of United States grain in the year that began Oct. 1, the Agriculture Department said today.
John B. Campbell, Acting Under Secretary for international affairs and commodity programs, said the clearance to buy more grain resulted from recent communication between the two countries.


Crack of the Bat First Sounded in Hoboken
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fly-Fishing Connoisseurs to Gather for Seminars
LEAD: As the fly-fishing season for trout draws to a close for most Easterners - there is a small band of fanatics who will be dodging ice floes on the no-kill sections of the Beaverkill in the Catskills all winter - members of the Theodore Gordon Flyfishers of Manhattan have set up the first half of their annual arts of angling seminars.


Ngema Discussion Rescheduled to Nov. 9
LEAD: A discussion with Mbongeni Ngema, the writer, director and co-composer of the musical ''Sarafina!,'' has been rescheduled from today to Nov. 9 at 6 P.M. at the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street.
Mr.
Ngema was called out of town, a library spokesman said.


Old Stars Relive the Past, and Are Paid


National Intergroup Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Intergroup Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
747,779,000
623,498,000
Net inc
8,601,000
b50,347,000
Share earns
.33
-
6mo rev
1,476,722,000
1,222,613,000
Net inc
21,586,000
b40,858,000
Share earns
.87
-


Union Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
618,775,000
656,780,000
Net inc
137,952,000
146,336,000
Share earns
1.31
1.36
9mo rev
1,980,710,000
2,020,673,000
Net inc
261,677,000
305,922,000
Share earns
2.35
2.67


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
Six months after changing its name from Grybauskas, Moss &amp; Overall, Grybauskas/Overall has changed its name to Grybauskas &amp; Partners and appointed Dan Hanover and Thomas Upshur co-creative directors.


Talking Deals; Generosity Leads To a Bank Merger
LEAD: WHEN the Banco Popular de Puerto Rico contemplated the takeover of the BanPonce Corporation earlier this year, it was confronted with the problem of how to reach a friendly agreement with a competitor that said it wanted to remain independent.


Review/Opera; A Safe Bet and a Risk in Philadelphia
LEAD: The Opera Company of Philadelphia, a troupe of modest means but lofty ambitions, has made its reputation over the last 14 years by balancing safe bets with calculated risks.
It has presented works that have never been staged here, and a few that are rarely staged anywhere.
And although its productions are hardly the gilded spectaculars one sees at the


Bridge
LEAD: An imaginative bid on the diagramed deal helped the winners of the Flight A Regional Swiss Team Championship in Stamford, Conn., Sunday.
Glenn Milgrim of Whitestone, Queens, overcalled one heart with one spade and heard his partner respond two clubs.
This suggested moderate values with at least six clubs and a misfit in spades.


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Southern Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
129,300,000
132,100,000
Net inc
9,600,000
4,600,000
Share earns
.91
.43
9mo rev
379,000,000
379,700,000
Net inc
26,400,000
b26,600,000
Share earns
2.52
2.56


Wm. Wrigley Jr.  Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wm. Wrigley Jr.  Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
242,289,000
232,051,000
Net inc
b30,329,000
23,024,000
Share earns
.77
.57
9mo sales
763,077,000
688,772,000
Net inc
90,817,000
73,653,000
Share earns
2.31
1.83


How to House the Mentally Ill
LEAD: Here's a way for the Department of Housing and Urban Development, lately known for scandal, to gain some positive notice and give some real relief to the nation's cities: Create a new housing voucher for the homeless mentally ill.


France Buys U.S. Butter
LEAD: France has bought 5,000 metric tons of United States surplus butter at cut-rate prices, the United States Agriculture Department said Tuesday.
The salted butter was sold to Fromageries Dischamp of Sayat, France, a privately owned dairy products company, for $1,620 a ton, an average of less than 74 cents a pound.


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,589,000,000
7,852,000,000
Net inc
547,000,000
461,000,000
Share earns
2.36
1.91
9mo sales
26,541,000,000
24,052,000,000
Net inc
1,997,00,000
1,690,000,000
Share earns
8.46
7.03


Political Killings Go On in Sri Lanka


Review/Dance; Choreographers' Benefit
LEAD: Steve Gross founded the Field in 1985 to offer moral and financial support to promising new modern-dance choreographers.
Some of the results were seen in ''The Best of the Field,'' a benefit on Saturday night at the Dia Art Foundation in SoHo.
To judge by the general level of work, Mr.
Gross and Emily Schottland, his co-director, are on to something valuable.


Armco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
441,100,000
820,400,000
Net inc
33,000,000
b36,000,000
Share earns
.35
.39
9mo sales
2,006,500,000
2,396,000,000
Net inc
149,500,000
b113,400,000
Share earns
1.63
1.23


Kelly Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kelly Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
358,799,000
335,773,000
Net inc
20,630,000
18,257,000
Share earns
.69
.61
9mo rev
1,025,775,000
947,357,000
Net inc
54,273,000
45,803,000
Share earns
1.81
1.53


Adirondack Residents Speak Out on Plan for Park


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about Irma A. Bloomingdale listed some of her survivors incorrectly.
Joseph and Lewis Bloomingdale, both of Scarsdale, N.Y., are her sons, not her brothers.
In addition to her daughters Laura Goeldlin and Beatrice Steinhaus, survivors include a third daughter, Elinor B. Preis of Rancho Bernardo, Calif.


Jordan Vote Stirs Fervor Where Fiat Is the Rule
LEAD: Six months ago, many of the young men of this town were throwing rocks at the police in what they called their version of the Palestinian uprising in the Israeli-occupied lands across the Jordan River.


Bid for Arby's Of $205 Million
LEAD: Richard and Steven Buckley, the 40-year-old twins who took Nathan's Famous Inc. national, said yesterday that they had offered to buy Arby's Inc., the fast-food chain, for $205 million in cash.


Keystone International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
95,836,000
79,555,000
Net inc
9,053,000
c7,865,000
Share earns
.27
.24
9mo sales
275,994,000
241,286,000
Net inc
b25,707,000
c23,332,000
Share earns
.77
.70


Israeli Restraint Allows Uprising to Drag On
LEAD: To the Editor:


The California Quake; CONGRESS ADOPTS DISASTER AID BILL
LEAD: After a day of frantic legislative activity, Congress approved and sent to President Bush a $4.15 billion disaster aid package to finance earthquake recovery efforts in Northern California and help the victims of Hurricane Hugo.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-12  Moscow has no right to interfere in the affairs of its Eastern European neighbors, President Gorbachev said.
He held up neutral Finland as a model of stability in stormy Europe.
Page A1


3,000 Meet as East Germans Find Their Voices
LEAD: A few hundred paces from the seat of leadership of the Government and the Communist Party, about 3,000 opponents of the regime met tonight to voice their critical views, which have not changed since Egon Krenz replaced Erich Honecker as party leader one week ago.


EG&amp;G Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EG&amp;G Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
426,056,000
348,494,000
Net inc
16,490,000
14,610,000
Share earns
.57
.49
Shares outst
28,704,000
29,720,000
9mo sales
1,227,686,000
1,020,127,000
Net inc
50,659,000
50,279,000
Share earns
1.73
1.68
Shares outst
29,236,000
29,902,000


Imperial Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,668,000,000
1,774,000,000
Net inc
112,000,000
130,000,000
Share earns
.59
.79
9mo rev
7,335,000,000
5,349,000,000
Net inc
369,000,000
428,000,000
Share earns
2.10
2.61


Turner to Make Films
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System Inc. says it has formed a unit to make movies and distribute them to theaters.
Gerry Hogan, president of the new division, said this week that the new branch would be called Turner Pictures and would go into operation immediately.
Its first two releases will be ''The Secret Life of Ian Fleming,'' a dramatization about the former British spy who wrote the James Bond novels, and ''Treasure Island,'' starring Charlton Heston.


Golf; Complaining All the Way To the Bank
LEAD: The $5.5 million Nabisco Championship, which concludes the official money competitions on the PGA Tour, has such a big purse that it has drawn criticism from the golfers who have qualified for the tournament, although not one of the 30 competitors has turned his back on it.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the race in the 10th Assembly District in New Jersey misidentified the town where John A. Peterson Jr. is mayor.


Rorer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
260,463,000
244,552,000
Net inc
19,614,000
15,207,000
Share earns
.59
.48
Shares outst
32,016,000
31,664,000
9mo sales
778,664,000
716,423,000
Net inc
41,787,000
34,932,000
Share earns
1.29
1.11
Shares outst
31,922,000
31,568,000


Consolidated Freightways Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,005,940,000
704,387,000
Net inc
9,508,000
32,337,000
Share earns
.22
.86
9mo rev
2,768,861,000
1,971,621,000
Net inc
39,152,000
72,841,000
Share earns
.97
1.93
Shares outst
37,400,745
37,713,935


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Francis C. Powers Jr. has been named international advertising director of USA Today.


UST reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
173,717,000
157,851,000
Net inc
51,533,000
43,938,000
Share earns
.44
.38
Shares outst
116,894,000
114,696,000
9mo sales
504,429,000
462,334,000
Net inc
145,515,000
122,795,000
Share earns
1.25
1.07
Shares outst
116,736,000
114,894,000


Stone Container Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone Container Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,373,300,000
1,022,200,000
Net inc
b70,400,000
89,100,000
Share earns
1.17
1.48
9mo sales
3,880,600,000
2,762,200,000
Net inc
220,800,000
232,500,000
Share earns
3.68
3.87


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The West Virginia Parkways, Economic Development and Tourism Authority is offering $143 million in tax-exempt parkway revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.279 percent for an issue due in 2019 through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


When Straw Responded To Jim Frey
LEAD: rrIn shuffling Davey Johnson's coaching staff, the Mets found it simpler to dismiss Bill Robinson than to trade Darryl Strawberry, at least for now.


Personal Health
LEAD: As the influenza season nears, doctors are issuing their annual warnings that people at risk of life-threatening complications should get flu shots.
But the vaccinations can also be valuable for otherwise healthy people.


Noble Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noble Affiliates (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
47,267,000
40,693,000
Net inc
2,406,000
929,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
43,754,000
43,711,000
9mo rev
160,971,000
144,631,000
Net inc
b29,638,000
10,307,000
Share earns
.68
.23
Shares outst
43,736,000
43,710,000


Philip Morris Sets 'Poison Pill' Tactic
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies adopted a ''poison pill'' defense against unfriendly takeover attempts.
Philip Morris said that it was not aware of any takeover attempt but that the plan would guard against ''abusive tactics to gain control of the company without paying all shareholders a premium value.


China Announces Nixon Visit
LEAD: The Chinese Foreign Ministry announced today that former President Richard M. Nixon would arrive this weekend as a guest of the Government.
The Chinese have regarded Mr.
Nixon as a friend since he reopened relations by visiting as President in 1972.


Indiana Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
392,000
b343,000
Per share
.63
-
Shares outst
620,498
502,899
9mo net inc
1,061,000
83,000
Per share
1.71
.16
Shares outst
620,297
504,511
b


Developer Tries Suburb in a City, And Lines Form
LEAD: The line of cars streaming into Liberty State Park had been crawling along for better than an hour, and the motorcycle officer helping to direct it was incredulous. ''It's like the Fourth of July,'' he said. ''No, it's worse than the Fourth of July.''


Michigan Bill on Consent for Abortion Gains
LEAD: The Michigan Senate has approved a bill that would require girls 17 or younger to obtain a parent's consent for an abortion.


Ted Malone, 81; Was Radio Pioneer With Talk Programs
LEAD: Ted Malone, a radio pioneer who won a national following as a genial, soft-spoken reader of homey and sentimental poems and philosophy, died of liver cancer last Friday at his home in Stratford, Conn.
He was 81 years old.


Review/Dance; Alwin Nikolais's 'Intrados' Is Given World Premiere
LEAD: Nikolais and Louis Dance, the new company jointly directed by Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis, is in the midst of a festive and well-attended season that alternates new works by both choreographers.


Sears Roebuck Acceptance Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sears Roebuck Acceptance Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
45,400,000
34,700,000
9mo net inc
134,500,000
b107,300,000
b-Reflected $11.4 million of additional non-recurring net income resulting from the adoption of the new income tax standard, FAS 96.


Some Haunting Places
LEAD: The annual Greenwich Village Halloween Parade takes place on Tuesday, beginning at 7 P.M. on West Street; the parade heads east on Houston Street, north on Avenue of the Americas to 14th Street, and east on 14th Street to Union Square.
Here is a sampling of Halloween events this weekend.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.


Costa Rica Debt Plan Held Near
LEAD: Costa Rica and its commercial bankers are near a debt agreement under which the country would buy back 60 percent of its debt at a substantial discount with money from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and other sources.


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chrysler Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,883,000,000
7,878,000,000
Net inc
b331,000,000
113,000,000
Share earns
1.42
.50
Shares outst
233,488,000
223,323,000
9mo sales
27,947,000,000
25,784,000,000
Net inc
b1,023,000,000
c617,000,000
Share earns
4.38
2.77
Shares outst
233,576,000
222,136,000


Topics of The Times; Caring in California
LEAD: The resumption of the World Series tonight in Candlestick Park is one sign that normalcy is returning to the San Francisco Bay Area.
For many, the damage of the deadly quake cannot be repaired; yet most are beginning to pick up the pieces and, slowly, rebuild.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Ames Department Stores, Rocky Hill, Conn., reopened 254 former Zayre stores under the Ames name.


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Side Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,216,000
1,675,000
Per share
.55
.41
Yr net inc
2,621,000
4,930,000
Per share
.65
1.22
The results reflected the operations of Richmond Hill Savings Bank, which was merged with and into North Side on Oct.


Medicare and Social Security Aren't Welfare; Benefits Will Increase
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Agrees to Notify Congress on Covert Actions
LEAD: President Bush has agreed to give Congress notice within days of nearly all covert operations, but has insisted on retaining the right to withhold such information in rare instances, Administration officials and legislators said tonight.


Harland (John H.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harland (John H.) Co.(N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
86,115,761
83,644,909
Net inc
13,834,457
13,600,650
Share earns
.37
.36
Shares outst
37,778,505
37,938,352
9mo sales
259,149,255
250,108,692
Net inc
43,013,271
39,250,422
Share earns
1.14
1.04
Shares outst
37,832,206
37,920,304


N.A.M., in Shift, Picks Economist as President
LEAD: Jerry J. Jasinowski became president of the National Association of Manufacturers this week, setting a sort of precedent.
Normally the association recruits an executive of a manufacturing company to be president.
Mr.
Jasinowski is the first economist named to the group's top job, and he has never even worked in the private sector, except for odd jobs while in college.


Southdown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southdown Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
162,034,000
154,653,000
Net inc
b13,437,000
c11,406,000
Share earns
.70
.74
Shares outst
16,947,000
13,468,000
9mo rev
451,872,000
397,548,000
Net inc
b27,104,000
c43,012,000
Share earns
1.33
3.04
Shares outst
16,796,000
13,347,000


Hammond Takes a Two-Shot Lead
LEAD: The race for the biggest purse in golf began today at the Harbour Town Golf Links and the hottest golfer on the PGA Tour, Donnie Hammond, shot a six-under-par 65.
This gave the 32-year-old Hammond a two-shot lead over Greg Norman and Mark O'Meara.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher, While the Pound Plunges
LEAD: The dollar gained against most major currencies in New York trading yesterday, while the British pound plunged after Nigel Lawson, the country's top finance official, announced his resignation.


Net Off 54.2% at McDonnell
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that it had earned $38 million, or 98 cents a share, in the third quarter, down 54.2 percent from $83 million, or $2.18 a share, in the corresponding period last year.


Ameribanc Investors Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameribanc Investors Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
632,000
3,296,000
Per share
.10
.52
9mo net inc
5,803,000
6,382,000
Per share
.91
1.02


Crown Central Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Central Petroleum Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
319,449,000
301,897,000
Net inc
8,786,000
15,317,000
Share earns
.88
1.97
Shares outst
10,023,472
7,213,205
9mo rev
906,989,000
868,833,000
Net inc
17,869,000
22,932,000
Share earns
1.93
2.71
Shares outst
8,696,093
7,213,206


And What Did The Cat Know?
LEAD: After any earthquake the San Francisco Zoo routinely checks to see if any of its 1,000 or so animals acted strangely before the shock.


MARTIAL LAW'S END IS SEEN IN CHINA
LEAD: China's top leaders decided in principle last week to revoke martial law, which now applies to most of Beijing, but the exact date has not been set, according to a Communist Party official.


Ford Motor Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ford Motor Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,242,300,000
20,381,400,000
Net inc
477,100,000
856,300,000
Share earns
1.03
1.78
Shares outst
462,000,000
481,700,000
9mo rev
72,001,000,000
68,533,600,000
Net inc
3,521,200,000
4,142,300,000
Share earns
7.51
8.53
Shares outst
468,700,000
485,600,000


Stewart Finds Solace In Disaster Rescue
LEAD: In the fitful hours that passed after the earthquake, when he was back home and trying to regain a sense of security, Dave Stewart could not sleep.


Gorbachev Plans to Destroy His A-Armed Subs in Baltic
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced plans today to destroy four Soviet nuclear-missile submarines based in the Baltic Sea, as a step toward ridding the region of nuclear weapons.


Milton Roy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milton Roy Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
30,040,000
34,803,000
Net inc
1,619,000
1,442,000
Share earns
.28
.27
Shares outst
5,723,000
5,382,000
9mo sales
94,283,000
106,292,000
Net inc
6,649,000
4,339,000
Share earns
1.18
.81
Shares outst
5,655,000
5,348,000


Ford Motor Co. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ford Motor Co. of Canada (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,108,000,000
3,286,100,000
Net inc
48,300,000
34,200,000
Share earns
5.84
4.12
9mo sales
11,466,100,000
11,549,400,000
Net inc
289,900,000
156,500,000
Share earns
34.97
18.87


Market Place; Revolt Spreading on Street Against Index Arbitrage Use By KURT EICHENWALD
LEAD: After about a year of relative calm, a revolt is spreading across Wall Street against index arbitrage, a trading technique that is one of the most well-known forms of program trading.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Kinder Essington, Mel Foster and Roy Field have been named senior vice presidents of J. Walter Thompson/Detroit.


First Federal Savings (CharFlotte) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings (CharFlotte)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
752,626
805,747
Per share
.25
.27


Presidential Airways In Bankruptcy Filing
LEAD: Presidential Airways Inc. filed today for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act.


Tribe Rejects Sale of Right To Spearfish in Wisconsin
LEAD: Members of the Lac du Flambeau Chippewa tribe have rejected an offer of $35.6 million to give up their right to spearfishing on Wisconsin's 250 lakes.


Vista Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
186,911,000
197,631,000
Net inc
b21,098,000
c25,412,000
Share earns
1.89
1.53
Shares outst
11,158,000
16,559,000
9mo sales
778,902,000
781,351,000
Net inc
b119,902,000
c113,111,000
Share earns
8.56
6.48
Shares outst
14,011,000
17,455,000


First Executive Stake Is Increased
LEAD: An investment group that includes the Bass family of Fort Worth has raised its stake in the First Executive Corporation to 8.8 percent from 6.7 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the group said it might seek talks with the Los Angeles life insurance company's management and big shareholders.


Japan Internees Voted Funds
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to begin making $1.2 billion in reparations next year to Japanese-Americans who were confined to internment camps during World War II.


Portland General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portland General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
187,625,000
176,556,000
Net inc
4,114,000
16,692,000
Share earns
.09
.36
9mo rev
584,681,000
557,865,000
Net inc
42,024,000
58,111,000
Share earns
.91
1.26


Imasco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imasco Ltd.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,096,438,000
1,231,828,000
Net inc
103,530,000
88,956,000
Share earns
.81
.71
9mo rev
3,142,927,000
3,574,994,000
Net inc
247,919,000
210,889,000
Share earns
1.93
1.67


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EAB
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
18,300,000
19,300,000
9mo net inc
61,100,000
51,000,000


Ruddick Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ruddick Corp. (NYSE)
Year to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
1,300,672,000
1,127,218,000
Net inc
20,190,000
18,379,000
Share earns
2.07
1.89
Shares outst
9,772,000
9,773,000


Sun Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Microsystems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
538,511,000
388,469,000
Net inc
5,185,000
20,563,000
Share earns
.07
.26
Shares outst
91,957,000
82,082,000


Novel Wins Awards
LEAD: ''The Remains of the Day'' by Kazuo Ishiguro won the Booker Prize yesterday for the best novel published in Britain this year.
The alternately humorous and sad novel, which concerns an English butler who ponders his life during a vacation to the country in 1956, was published in the United States this month by Alfred A.


Exxon Will Move Its Headquarters To Texas
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation said yesterday that it would move its corporate headquarters and 300 employees from the Exxon Building in Manhattan to a 132-acre office park near Dallas.


Reviews/Film; Good Woolens vs. Motorcycle Garb
LEAD: ''It used to be that adoption was about a child needing a home,'' one character in ''Immediate Family'' says. ''Now it's about a couple needing a child.''


National Sanitary Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Sanitary Supply
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
69,168,000
67,226,000
Net inc
1,542,000
1,370,000
Share earns
.25
.22
Shares outst
6,121,000
6,107,000
9mo sales
198,085,000
117,326,000
Net inc
3,476,000
b3,852,000
Share earns
.57
.64
Shares outst
6,117,000
6,039,000


Security Pacific In Deal for La Jolla
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation signed a letter of intent to acquire the La Jolla Bancorp in a deal worth about $111 million.
Security Pacific said it would pay $15 in Security Pacific stock for each share of La Jolla, whose stock jumped $3 a share, to $13, on the American Stock Exchange.
Its 30 percent gain was the best of the day.


Tultex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tultex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
107,262,000
101,146,000
Net inc
4,013,000
5,581,000
Share earns
.15
.20
Shares outst
27,621,000
27,589,000
9mo sales
211,026,000
203,890,000
Net inc
2,991,000
8,187,000
Share earns
.11
.30
Shares outst
27,615,000
27,572,000


Wheat Drops Amid Dismay Over Russian Grain Deal
LEAD: Wheat futures prices fell below $4 a bushel for the first time in a month on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, reflecting disappointment that a newly expanded Soviet grain deal contains no incentives to increase wheat sales.


Review/Art; Ashley Bickerton's Pleas to Rescue a Threatened Earth
LEAD: Ashley Bickerton's ''Landscapes and Seascapes'' may be this season's conversation piece at the Sonnabend Gallery.
With its leathery and black futuristic surfaces and its catalogue of ecological problems, the show is like a heavy-metal band asking its audience to join hands and pray for the whales.


Profits Fall, Revenues Up at UAL
LEAD: The UAL Corporation said yesterday that its revenues in the third quarter rose 7.1 percent from the corresponding period last year, but earnings fell 72.4 percent.
Even excluding a large one-time gain last year, profits dropped 38 percent.


M.S. Carriers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M.S. Carriers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,569,072
18,005,151
Net inc
2,056,564
1,517,240
Share earns
.39
.29
9mo rev
70,238,325
48,781,425
Net inc
5,930,170
4,283,154
Share earns
1.12
.81


Experts Advise Ending Age Limit for the Pill
LEAD: Experts advising the Food and Drug Administration recommended today that it no longer put an upper age limit on the use of birth control pills by healthy women who do not smoke.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10:30 A.M.
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M., 3 P.M. and 6 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Dissidents Trying To Control Rally's
LEAD: A group of dissident directors led by Burt Sugarman, the Hollywood producer, filed for permission from Federal antitrust regulators to acquire more than 50 percent of the outstanding shares of Rally Inc., a Louisville, Ky., restaurant chain that went public last month.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums  ''MERLIN,'' a magic-and-comedy show with Jack Adams, presented by Theaterworks/ USA, 12:30 P.M. tomorrow and 10:30 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
Sunday, at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and 76th Street.
Tickets, $12 and $15.
Reservations: 677-5959.  ''FAMOUS TALES,'' a puppet show by Laurent Devime, 11 A.M.


After a Record 11-Day Delay, World Series Ready to Resume
LEAD: Lest anyone forget, Dennis Eckersley pitched the ball, Matt Williams hit it, Tony Phillips fielded it and Mark McGwire caught it for the last out of the second game of the World Series.


Knicks Win in Overtime
LEAD: The Minnesota Timberwolves, an expansion team whose projected front line of Rick Mahorn, Steve Johnson and Tyrone Corbin has yet to report a week before the National Basketball Association season opens, have been using players from the Continental Basketball Association during the preseason.


Bach and Berio
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to perform Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 3 and the Cantata No. 169, as well as Luciano Berio's ''Chemins IV'' for oboe and strings and Aaron Copland's Nonet, at Alice Tully Hall tonight at 8.
The program will be repeated tomorrow at 2 P.M. and on Sunday at 5 P.M.


Valley Bancorp (Wisc.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Bancorp (Wisc.) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
7,738,392
6,658,082
Per share
.65
.57
9mo net inc
21,954,086
18,865,295
Per share
1.85
1.62


Aquino Reaffirms Her Pledge to Not Run for a Second Term
LEAD: With her approval rating slipping in the opinion polls and criticism of her administration rising, President Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines is saying more unequivocally than ever that she will keep her pledge not to run again in 1992.


Sonat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
279,985,000
267,899,000
Net inc
15,630,000
b18,048,000
Share earns
.38
.44
9mo rev
1,331,879,000
1,029,077,000
Net inc
85,847,000
b86,137,000
Share earns
2.11
2.12


Review/Art; Subtleties of Yoruba Art Over the Centuries in Africa
LEAD: ''Yoruba: Nine Centuries of Af-rican Art and Thought,'' the latest exhibition at the Center for African Art, is a show that proves that less can be more.
Using only about 100 objects, the exhibition takes the viewer on an extended journey through the various kingdoms and city-states that have waxed and waned in West


Drug Result May Idle Valenzuela At Breeders'
LEAD: Pat Valenzuela, who won this year's Kentucky Derby and Preakness aboard Sunday Silence, was suspended indefinitely yesterday by the Santa Anita Park stewards for testing positive for cocaine use.


Avon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avon Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
785,100,000
725,600,000
Net inc
34,600,000
b405,900,000
Share earns
.46
-
9mo sales
2,267,700,000
2,051,800,000
Net inc
80,300,000
b461,100,000


10 Get Awards for Writers
LEAD: Ten writers, including established novelists, a playwright and authors who have not yet written a book, have each been named recipients of $25,000 Whiting Writers' Awards.
The awards program, now in its fifth year, is the largest privately financed program offering individual support exclusively for writers.


The E.T. Answer to Doctor Bills
LEAD: Congress is moving to control the relentless escalation of Medicare payments to doctors.
Different versions of the plan, known as expenditure targets, or E.T., have been approved by committees in both the House and Senate.
The Senate version settles for puffery; the House plan merits support.


Charles Pedersen, 85, Nobel Winner in Chemistry
LEAD: Charles J. Pedersen, who shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1987 for wide-ranging research that included the creation of artificial molecules that can mimic vital chemical reactions of the processes of life, died yesterday at his home in Salem, N.J.
He was 85 years old.


Fight to Survive
LEAD: Rod Douglas spent his 25th birthday in intensive care in a London hospital yesterday after surgery to remove a blood clot close to his brain, one day after he lost a British middleweight title fight to Herol Graham of Britain. (AP)


Baker Blocks Expert's Speech About Gorbachev's Chances
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d prevented the delivery of a speech by the deputy national security adviser because he regarded the address as excessively pessimistic about President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's prospects for success, Administration officials said today.


A Meteor in Thatcher's Political Constellation
LEAD: The spectacular leap of John Major to the top ranks of British Government might be thought of by some as belying the adage that nice guys finish last.


Servicemaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servicemaster L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
400,213,000
386,870,000
Net inc
17,191,000
16,476,000
Share earns
.53
.51
9mo rev
1,186,102,000
1,137,117,000
Net inc
51,674,000
49,142,000
Share earns
1.59
1.55


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Unionfed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unionfed Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,099,000
3,592,000
Per share
.96
.72


Review/Music; Shostakovich and Dvorak By Philharmonia Virtuosi
LEAD: Richard Kapp's 15-year-old Philharmonia Virtuosi chamber orchestra is one of those curious New York institutions that reminds one what a mixture of big-town and small-town our metropolis really is.





FirstFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFed Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,154,000
4,882,000
Per share
.70
.56
9mo net inc
14,206,000
13,517,000
Per share
1.64
1.55


Rulings on Job Bias: Chilling Effect on Lawsuits
LEAD: When the Supreme Court issued a series of rulings last June cutting back the scope of Federal laws restricting employment discrimination, civil rights lawyers feared - and many employers hoped - that the balance in civil rights lawsuits had tilted dramatically in favor of defendants.


Regulatory Victory for A.T.&amp;T
LEAD: In a big victory for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the Federal Communications Commission ruled yesterday that the company could continue to offer customized networks for large business customers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Colleagues Remember Founder of Interpublic
LEAD: Colleagues of Marion Harper Jr. remembered the advertising executive yesterday as a larger-than-life figure, whose blueprint for a diverse marketing-communications firm presaged industry giants like Saatchi &amp; Saatchi and the WPP Group.


Ford Motor Credit Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ford Motor Credit Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
122,200,000
134,400,000
9mo net inc
366,300,000
505,400,000
Ford Motor Credit, a wholly owned subsidiary of Ford Motor Co., is part of Ford Financial Services Group.


Bush Administration Is Divided Over Move to Halt Global Warming
LEAD: The Bush Administration is facing increasing pressure from other nations, Congress and environmental groups to take more aggressive action on the problem of global warming.
But members of the Administration are divided on what course to follow.


Chamber Symphony
LEAD: Hermann Michael, a conductor from West Germany, will lead the New York Chamber Symphony in Benjamin Britten's ''Suite on English Folk Tunes,'' Debussy's ''Boite a Joujoux'' and the Haydn Cello Concerto in D, tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue.
Janos Starker will be the soloist in the Haydn.


West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
69,426,000
69,019,000
Net inc
3,244,000
3,729,000
Share earns
.20
.23
Shares outst
16,212,000
16,270,000
9mo sales
228,973,000
212,799,000
Net inc
16,075,000
12,168,000
Share earns
.99
.75


Review/Theater; Bad Sister vs. Good Sister In Hare's 'Secret Rapture'
LEAD: In the one moving scene in David Hare's new play, ''The Secret Rapture'' - the last - the audience is suddenly overwhelmed by pity for a young woman it has hated all night long.
The woman is Marion French, a Tory junior cabinet minister whose faith in dog-eat-dog capitalism is so unshakable and whose contempt for her adversaries is so patronizing that she makes Margaret Thatcher seem like Mary Poppins.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Coke Revives Popular Song and Slogan
LEAD: COCA-COLA hopes that by early next year millions of Americans will be humming ''I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing'' -all over again.


Southwest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Airlines (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
266,419,000
239,117,000
Net inc
b24,566,000
b26,586,000
Share earns
.81
.85
Shares outst
30,177,000
31,450,000
9mo rev
759,452,000
634,614,000
Net inc
63,448,000
41,879,000
Share earns
2.09
1.33
Shares outst
30,356,000
31,495,000


Bell Atlantic Cuts
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation expects to reduce its work force by 1,200 to 1,500 employees, P. A. Campbell, the company's vice chairman and chief financial officer, said.
Mr.
Campbell said the company expects fourth-quarter earnings to be at or slightly above the break-even point.


G.M. Seeking Jaguar Shares
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it had filed for permission from Federal antitrust regulators to purchase up to 15 percent of Jaguar P.L.C., the British car manufacturer.
G.M. and the Ford Motor


Indecent Broadcasts Lead to F.C.C. Fines On 4 Radio Stations
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission fined four radio stations today, saying they had broadcast indecent material in the daytime.


Ryland Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryland Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
368,487,000
344,201,000
Net inc
10,872,000
13,910,000
Share earns
.80
1.06
Shares outst
13,368,000
13,132,000
9mo rev
1,004,406,000
934,281,000
Net inc
25,970,000
30,174,000
Share earns
1.93
2.30
Shares outst
13,319,000
13,124,000


Campbell Keeping Busy
LEAD: John Campbell, the leading driver with a dozen victories, nine second-place finishes and more than $4.5 million in profits through the first five years of Breeders Crown events, will have a full card tonight at Pompano Harness Track in Pompano Beach, Fla.


Delta Air Pact In Singapore
LEAD: Delta Air Lines Inc. announced a linkup with Singapore Airlines in a deal worth $360 million in which the companies would buy a stake in each other and develop joint marketing programs.


Allied Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
903,000
1,069,000
Per share
.17
.20
Shares outst
5,276,000
5,226,000
9mo net inc
2,958,000
3,332,000
Per share
.56
.64
Shares outst
5,276,000
5,198,000


Curtiss-Wright Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtiss-Wright Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
61,174,000
47,853,000
Net inc
b13,239,000
c8,355,000
Share earns
2.65
1.68
9mo rev
165,337,000
143,539,000
Net inc
b28,738,000
c20,397,000
Share earns
5.75
4.10


119 Seized in Drive to Halt Indoor Marijuana Growing
LEAD: Federal drug agents arrested 119 people today and raided retail stores in 46 states that sell specialized horticultural equipment that investigators say is used for growing marijuana indoors.


Imperial Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Corp. of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b103,051,000
c11,771,000
Per share
-
.82
9mo net loss
b136,171,000
c27,737,000
Per share
-
1.93
b-After extraordinary gains of $11,013,000, or 77 cents a share, for the quarter and $13,812,000, or 96 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Centurion Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,381,000
5,176,000
Per share
.31
.25
9mo net inc
18,695,000
17,410,000
Per share
.92
.84


Medicare and Social Security Aren't Welfare; Share the Load
LEAD: To the Editor:


British Airman, Child Die in West Germany
LEAD: Two gunmen killed a British serviceman and his year-old child near a Royal Air Force base today, officials reported.


Review/Film; Lemmon As a Codger In 'Dad'
LEAD: Any movie titled ''Dad,'' with Jack Lemmon playing a lovable old codger of 78, would seem to be something to be avoided by everyone except charter members of the Jack Lemmon Fan Clubs of America.
It sounds pretty sticky.


Number of Untaxed Companies Is Said to Decline
LEAD: Many large and profitable companies that once managed to pay little or no Federal income tax have been pushed back onto the tax rolls by the 1986 overhaul of the tax code, Citizens for Tax Justice said today, citing its own survey.


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chubb Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
101,700,000
90,200,000
Per share
2.37
2.14
9mo net inc
313,700,000
275,700,000
Per share
7.39
6.55
The latest periods included tax benefits of $4.8 million, or 11 cents a share, for the quarter and $14.4 million, or 33 cents a share, for the 9 months, compared with $5.1 million, or 12 cents a share, and $15.3 million, or 36 cents a share, for year-ago periods, respectively.


Take Me Out to the Ball Game
LEAD: Barring, the gods willing, anything unforseen, other than your conventional and not so treacherous, in retrospect, pelting rainstorm, Game 3 of the longest, shakiest, most harrowing and most memorable World Series in history will be played tonight in Candlestick Park in San Francisco.
It is 10 days and some 27 minutes after they had tried to play it the first time.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  'Slippery Horn'


Treasury Prices Move Downward
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities edged lower in sluggish trading yesterday, despite another drop in stock prices, a larger-than-expected advance in economic activity in the third quarter and a stable dollar.


Chrysler Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chrysler Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
76,000,000
59,000,000
9mo net inc
198,000,000
185,000,000
Chrysler Financial is a wholly owned subsidiary of Chrysler Corp.


Medicare and Social Security Aren't Welfare; Add That Up Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colombia Police Bus Bombed
LEAD: A bomb today destroyed a bus filled with police officers in Medellin, killing at least 4 policemen and injuring 40, a radio station reported.
The station, RCN, said without identifying the source of its report that 66 pounds of dynamite exploded beneath the bus in Belo Horizonte, a suburb of Medellin, the base for the most powerful drug cartel in Colombia.


Lockheed Division To Reduce Jobs
LEAD: The Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Company, a unit of the Lockheed Corporation, will cut several hundred jobs in the next two months as part of the company''s cost control program, a spokesman said.


Quake Behind It, Bay Area Is Ready to Play Ball
LEAD: The Bay Area readied itself today for the resumption of the World Series, hoping that a baseball game at Candlestick Park on Friday would speed the healing of a region rocked to its foundation just 10 days before.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  BIG APPLE CIRCUS TIME


First United Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First United Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,530,000
1,780,000
Per share
.72
.83
9mo net inc
4,580,000
5,100,000
Per share
2.14
2.39


SPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
154,707,000
139,062,000
Net inc
b5,400,000
c9,600,000
Share earns
.36
.78
Shares outst
15,208,000
12,329,000
9mo sales
482,576,000
414,990,000
Net inc
b59,200,000
c35,200,000
Share earns
4.18
2.86
Shares outst
14,156,000
12,321,000


Howard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,731,000
2,001,000
Per share
.55
.64
Shares outst
3,158,916
3,153,654
9mo net inc
5,342,000
5,053,000
Per share
1.69
1.61
Shares outst
3,157,513
3,147,802


Mr. D'Amato's Idea of Justice
LEAD: Senator Alfonse D'Amato has failed to distinguish between helping his constituents, for which he is widely known, and intervening in justice.
Three times during Rudolph Giuliani's tenure as U.S.
Attorney in Manhattan, the Senator called the prosecutor to express an interest in pending cases.


Man, Woman and Chimp
''Animal Behavior,'' opening today at the Paris theater, has the manner of a proposal for a snappy screwball comedy that has still to be made.
There is Susan Rice's promising screenplay about a music professor and the pretty absent-minded psychology professor with whom he falls in love.
She loves him in return, but she also loves Michael, her chimpanzee, the key to her experiments in interspecies communication.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bell Atlantic Corp., Philadelphia, the telecommunications company, named C. Hyde Tucker president and chief executive of Bell Atlantic International.


U.S. Checking Reports of Pressure at H.U.D.
LEAD: Federal prosecutors and Congressional staff members are investigating assertions that two former regional administrators in the New York office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development pressured housing workers to approve projects with ties to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Goodbye Rubles, Hello Baubles: Russians Rush to Get Rid of Cash
LEAD: The people standing three deep in line today in front of the jewelry store on the Arbat pedestrian mall did not need the official announcement on Wednesday that the exchange rate for the ruble would be slashed to know the waning value of their currency.


An Avenging Convoy Stalks Contractors
LEAD: After massing its forces like a small army going into battle, the New York City Transportation Department made a dramatic foray yesterday morning against construction contractors who were blocking the streets and sidewalks of mid-Manhattan with their building materials and delivery vehicles.


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
48,476,000
c523,000
Per share
-
.06
9mo net loss
b74,456,000
c9,658,000
Per share
-
1.18
b-After an extraordinary credit of $801,000, or 10 cents a share, from early retirement of debentures.


Japan's Output Declines
LEAD: Japan's industrial production in September fell 2 percent from the previous month, but growth should resume in October, the Government said today.
September's fall was the first since July, and despite the drop production was still 3.9 percent higher than a year earlier.
The ministry also said September sales at Japan's leading department stores and supermarkets grew 9.4 percent from a year earlier.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
443,066,000
493,797,000
Net inc
16,274,000
11,696,000
Share earns
.45
.33
Shares outst
38,561,000
35,742,000


Pop/Jazz; Pakistani Musicians Who Deal in Ecstasy
LEAD: We live in a shrinking auditory world, in which even the most hermetic of musical cultures becomes familiar through recordings and tours.
But Qawwali, Pakistan's music of Sufi Muslim mysticism, has remained relatively exotic, even for our ethnographic musical gourmands.


Baseball Makes a Donation
LEAD: With officials of four affected communities at his side, Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, announced today that major league baseball would contribute a minimum of $1.4 million to the Northern California Earthquake Relief Fund.


Soviet Arctic Miners Return After Just a Day of New Strikes
LEAD: Thousands of striking coal miners in the Arctic city of Vorkuta voted today to return to work at midnight, preventing a confrontation with the authorities over the legality of their one-day work stoppage.


Seles Qualifies
LEAD: Monica Seles, the 15-year-old Yugoslav who went from No. 86 to No. 7 in the world ranking in 1988-89, has qualified for the $1 million Virginia Slims championships Nov. 13-19 at Madison Square Garden.
She brings to nine the number who have qualified for the 16-player field. (AP)


50 Waste Disposal Plans Help and Hinder Project
LEAD: Federal efforts to assure safe disposal of hazardous waste over the next 20 years have yielded a hodgepodge of plans from the 50 states and the District of Columbia that have both reinforced regional cooperation and hardened barriers to it.


3 to Sing
LEAD: Peter Stampfel, Jimmy Dale Gilmore and David Halley, three singers and songwriters, are to perform tonight at 10 at Gonzalez y Gonzalez, 625 Broadway, at Houston Street (473-8787).
There is no cover charge but there is a two-drink minimum.


Adobe Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adobe Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
40,872,000
35,521,000
Net loss
b12,819,000
c1,073,000
9mo rev
121,005,000
122,042,000
Net loss
b12,299,000
c14,588,000
b-Included an extraordinary charge of $569,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $390,000, or 1 cent a share, for the 9 months.


Flaw in Chip Made by Intel Is Discovered
LEAD: The Intel Corporation said yesterday that design flaws had been discovered in its top-of-the-line microprocessor chip but that the errors would be corrected quickly and would not hurt its ability to ship ''tens of thousands'' of the chip before the end of the year.


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BIC Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
84,531,000
73,252,000
Net inc
5,599,000
6,415,000
Share earns
.46
.53
9mo sales
260,411,000
235,670,000
Net inc
19,771,000
b26,372,000
Share earns
1.63
2.18


Homestake Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homestake Mining (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
110,380,000
105,368,000
Net inc
b2,013,000
c11,212,000
Share earns
.02
.12
Share outst
97,773,000
97,398,000
9mo rev
323,175,000
305,679,000
Net inc
b30,071,000
c50,584,000
Share earns
.31
.52
Shares outst
97,644,000
97,357,000


Topics of The Times; The Contrarian
LEAD: In the 1930's, New York boasted something very like a European literary subculture.
Its house organ was The Partisan Review; its luminaries included Philip Rahv, Dwight Macdonald and the two Trillings, Lionel and Diana.
But its most vivid presence was Mary McCarthy, who came to be known, half in awe, as the Dark Lady of


Bigger Shortfall Now Faced By Cuomo for Next Budget
LEAD: New York State will enter the next fiscal year with a budget shortfall that could be twice what the Cuomo administration had originally forecast, adminstration officials say.


Ayodhya Journal; Among Marigolds, a Holy Place and Unholy Fury
LEAD: At the end of a pilgrims' hilly path, where temple monkeys sun themselves and peddlers hustle their marigold garlands and gilded images of Hindu gods, the ugly iron bars of a police barricade are rising this week around a shrine that threatens to become a religious battlefield.


Correction
LEAD: The caption of a picture by The Associated Press in SportsMonday this week about preparations for the World Series misidentified a San Francisco Giants pitcher.
He was Jeff Brantley, not Don Robinson.


Galoob (Lewis) Toys (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galoob (Lewis) Toys (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
76,037,000
50,053,000
Net inc
7,293,000
4,686,000
Share earns
.75
.51
9mo rev
169,648,000
94,463,000
Net inc
14,394,000
3,306,000
Share earns
1.49
.36


U.S. Divided From Allies on Easing Export Bans
LEAD: As a meeting of high-level trade officials ended today, the United States remained divided from most of its allies over proposals to relax controls on shipping machine tools and other high-technology goods to Eastern Europe.


SOVIET URGES END OF MILITARY PACTS
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze struck a familiar refrain of Soviet European policy today by calling for a phasing out of Eastern and Western military alliances.
He spoke as the foreign ministers of the Warsaw Pact began a two-day meeting here.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Filming 'The Bear'


Conferees Near Accord On '90 Arms Programs
LEAD: A Congressional conference has narrowed differences between Senate and House versions of the 1990 military programs bill, including the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program.


Monarch Machine Tool Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monarch Machine Tool Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,959,240
21,100,604
Net inc
271,942
208,992
Share earns
.07
.06
9mo rev
71,579,531
63,293,955
Net inc
1,182,872
596,911
Share earns
.31
.16


Rexene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rexene Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
139,745,000
185,881,000
Net loss
b9,070,000
c35,473,000
Share earns
-
1.21
9mo sales
471,706,000
535,380,000
Net loss
b48,336,000
c91,151,000
Share earns
-
3.22


G.O.P. Sponsor of Repealing Plan For Elderly Hints at Compromise
LEAD: The chief Republican sponsor of a House measure to repeal the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act said today that he could accept the Senate's scaled-down version of health insurance to cover the cost of major illness.


Books of The Times; A Hollywood Legend's Passions and Peccadillos
LEAD:  The Hustons  By Lawrence Grobel  812 pages. Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
456,162,000
383,997,000
Net inc
39,404,000
30,176,000
Share earns
.38
.31
Shares outst
104,907,000
98,017,000
Yr rev
1,632,522,000
1,314,721,000
Net inc
118,316,000
94,485,000
Share earns
1.17
.96
Shares outst
101,386,000
98,683,000


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 476 money market mutual funds increased by $1.26 billion, to $357.49 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 144 institutional funds decreased by $751.40 million, to $84.82 billion.
The assets of the 236 general-purpose funds were up by $300.10 million, to $116.91 billion.


Eagle Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Financial (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
832,000
b17,000
Per share
.31
-
Year net inc
3,466,000
1,829,000
Per share
1.29
.68
b-Net loss


Ex-New York Senator Guilty of Tax Evasion
LEAD: Former State Senator Richard E. Schermerhorn of Newburgh was found guilty today of tax evasion, obstruction of justice and lying on a bank loan application.


Constitution Bancorp of New England reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constitution Bancorp of New England
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,001,000
1,303,000
Per share
.29
.39
9mo net inc
1,120,000
3,553,000
Per share
.33
1.05


Terex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
260,773,000
89,001,000
Net inc
5,707,000
4,073,000
Share earns
.72
.56
Shares outst
7,915,000
7,273,000
9mo sales
486,459,000
236,641,000
Net inc
14,635,000
10,257,000
Share earns
1.86
1.41
Shares outst
7,874,000
7,253,000


LITTLE EFFECT SEEN FROM SOVIET MOVE
LEAD: American experts on military affairs said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to remove nuclear-armed submarines from the Baltic Sea would not significantly change the balance of power between the Soviet bloc and NATO.


British Cabinet in a Flurry; Treasurer and Rival Both Out
LEAD: One of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's longest-serving ministers, Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson, angrily resigned tonight in a dispute over who was in charge of British economic policy - the Chancellor or Mrs.
Thatcher's economic adviser at 10 Downing Street.


Sterling Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
4,132,704
b1,049,651
Per share
-
.17
Shares outst
6,322,404
6,350,890
9mo net loss
6,124,433
b4,251,915
Per share
-
.67
Shares outst
6,322,961
6,367,304


Review/Ballet; Joffrey Revival of the 1932 'Cotillon'
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet performance of ''Cotillon'' on Wednesday at City Center (131 West 55th Street) did not look much like period descriptions of this 1932 ballet by Balanchine.
Long lost and remembered with great pleasure by those who saw the original, ''Cotillon'' was an instance of Balanchine's gift for using what he had, in this case the technique and poignant sophistication of Tamara Toumanova, who at 13 was one of the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo's ''baby ballerinas'' and for whom Balanchine created the role of the Young Girl.


Canada Would Extradite Suspect
LEAD: The Canadian Government said today that it had ordered the extradition of Charles Ng, a 28-year-old former United States marine who could be sentenced to death in California if he is convicted in one of the state's worst mass-murder cases.


Braniff Adviser
LEAD: Braniff Inc. the financially troubled airline, said it had hired Merrill Lynch to explore the possible sale of the airline.
In late September, Braniff filed for protecion from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act.
It was the airline's second such filing in seven years.


Trustcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustcorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
9,557,000
15,158,000
Per share
.59
.95
9mo net loss
71,909,000
b39,514,000
Per share
-
2.46
b-Net income  The latest 9 months' results included a pre-tax charge of $96.6 million recorded in the second quarter in connection with an increase in loan- loss reserves.


Port Chester Project Defies Doubts
LEAD: When James Harvie &amp; Partners, waterfront development specialists of Purchase, N.Y, were selected by the officials of Port Chester, N.Y, in 1988 to redevelop the town's rundown harbor area, there was uncertainty over whether the residential and commercial project would go forward.


New Kerkorian Move at MGM
LEAD: Kirk Kerkorian, the California financier, has donated five million shares of the MGM/UA Communications Company, or almost 10 percent of the common stock, to a tax-exempt foundation.


Canada Packers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canada Packers
Qtr to Sept 23
1989
1988
Sales
777,447,000
824,173,000
Net inc
3,315,000
7,541,000
Share earns
.10
.20
6mo sales
1,580,096,000
1,618,660,000
Net inc
8,140,000
12,926,000
Share earns
.23
.35


Medicare and Social Security Aren't Welfare
LEAD: To the Editor:


25 Bulgarian Ecologists Detained
LEAD: The Bulgarian police detained at least 25 environmentalists today, beating and kicking them as they campaigned against a hydroelectric project, Westerners in Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, said.


Works and Process
LEAD: The French choreographer Maguy Marin and her company are to perform excerpts from her new work ''Hey, What's All This to Me?'' tonight and tomorrow as part of the Works and Process series at the Guggenheim Museum, Fifth Avenue and 89th Street.
The work includes popular songs inspired by political and social crises from the French Revolution to the Spanish Civil War.


Boston Edison Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Edison Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
383,895,000
367,310,000
Net inc
b58,961,000
54,571,000
Share earns
1.42
1.36
9mo rev
962,877,000
923,342,000
Net inc
b71,895,000
67,501,000
Share earns
1.54
1.53


Erie Journal; A Mayor For Whom The Office Equals Life
LEAD: A City Hall parking space with a sign saying ''Erie's first six-term Mayor'' has been empty for more than six months, and secretaries are packing up political souvenirs in the Mayor's pink office, a few blocks from Lake Erie here in the northwest corner of the state.


Celebrity Opinions Always Have an Audience
LEAD: To the Editor:


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,064,261,000
976,718,000
Net inc
b93,258,000
c97,555,000
Share earns
.77
.77
Shares outst
128,552,000
132,504,000
9mo rev
3,145,996,000
2,735,267,000
Net inc
b380,421,000
c335,166,000
Share earns
3.01
2.59
Shares outst
131,309,000
135,186,000


International Flavors &amp; FraFgrances reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Flavors &amp; FraFgrances (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
216,897,000
200,064,000
Net inc
34,171,000
30,716,000
Share earns
.90
.81
9mo sales
680,877,000
658,271,000
Net inc
114,180,000
105,442,000
Share earns
3.01
2.78


Helix Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helix Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,818,000
13,742,000
Net inc
496,000
884,000
Share earns
.20
.35
9mo sales
41,912,000
40,365,000
Net inc
2,427,000
2,635,000
Share earns
.97
1.05


Stocks Fall As Dow Drops 39.55
LEAD: Stocks finished broadly lower yesterday on moderate volume as the market continued a week of turbulent activity.


Tenace Named a Coach
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays have signed Gene Tenace as batting coach, the job held until last May 15 by Cito Gaston, who then replaced Jimy Williams as the Blue Jays' manager.


Ideal Basic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ideal Basic Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
75,466,000
66,615,000
Net loss
5,158,000
b723,000
9mo sales
183,570,000
173,120,000
Net loss
26,071,000
bc12,372,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
176,196,000
176,063,000


Kay Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kay Jewelers Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
90,625,000
88,783,000
Net loss
2,391,000
b70,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
261,191,000
244,792,000
Net loss
7,201,000
2,929,000
b-Net income


Giants to Start Tough Part Of Schedule
LEAD: In the first seven weeks of the National Football League season, the Giants have rolled up a 6-1 record and lead their division.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1989
From '88
Avon Products Inc.
$ 34,600,000
*-
Brunswick Corp.
(103,100,000)
-
Chrysler Corp.
331,000,000
+192.9
R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons
62,700,000
+6.3
Ford Motor Co.
477,100,000
-44.3
General Motors Corp.
516,900,000
-39.8
Interlake Corp.


Auctions
LEAD:  Mapplethorpe at Home


36 Arrested During Protest Over Squatters
LEAD: At least 36 people were arrested yesterday and early this morning during protests over the eviction of about 20 squatters from an abandoned school building in the East Village, the police said.
Four police officers and three protesters suffered minor injuries, officials said.


Union Texas Petroleum HoldFings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Texas Petroleum HoldFings (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
232,361,000
236,344,000
Net inc
20,593,000
27,641,000
Share earns
.10
.19
Shares outst
84,091,000
84,523,000
9mo rev
905,627,000
897,189,000
Net inc
156,277,000
b94,498,000
Share earns
1.44
.70
Shares outst
83,997,000
84,752,000


Disputed Antibiotic Recalled
LEAD: Because of new evidence of irregularities in testing, a major manufacturer of generic drugs has agreed to recall completely an antibiotic that it had previously withdrawn from the market only partly, the Food and Drug Administration said today.


Scrutiny for Irish Pre-game Routine
LEAD: Now that Notre Dame's preparation for the game Saturday evening against Pittsburgh includes a revised alignment for the end of its pre-game warm-ups, followers of the top-ranked team in the country will seek answers to at least two questions:


Browns Relying on Kosar To Overcome the Oilers
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns are known as the Dogs, and make no mistake, Bernie Kosar is the top dog.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Sparks Steakhouse


Fred E. Katzner, Executive, 88
LEAD: Fred E. Katzner, a former president of the Forest Hills Jewish Center in Queens, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at his home in Forest Hills.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Katzner was president of the Comfy Manufacturing Company, which made slipcovers, until he retired in 1965.
He was also a former chairman of the


Citytrust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citytrust Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,057,000
5,745,000
Per share
.49
1.37
Shares outst
4,157,944
4,184,168
9mo net loss
26,228,000
b17,215,000
Per share
-
4.12
Shares outst
4,153,464
4,175,023


John Hancock Investors Tr reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hancock Investors Tr (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Assets
146,680,483
143,747,167
Per share
20.89
20.74
Assets represented net assets.


For Want of a Trestle . . .
LEAD: Here's how to reduce New York City's traffic congestion and air pollution dramatically, and save many millions yearly: Build a railroad trestle in the Bronx.
When will the State Legislature understand the importance of this plan?


Verdict Awaited on Rebuilding in Hills
LEAD: People living on ridges outside this city are waiting for geologists to deliver a verdict on whether officials should allow them to rebuild homes wrecked in the recent earthquake.


PS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PS Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
72,289,000
155,175,000
Net inc
4,807,000
b43,715,000
Share earns
.73
6.11
Shares outst
6,627,000
7,149,000
9mo rev
199,925,000
281,039,000
Net inc
7,748,000
b45,768,000
Share earns
1.16
6.36


On City Problems, Mayoral Rivals Are Not Far Apart
LEAD: Though David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have produced much smoke and heat lately in attacking each other over matters like personal finances and campaign associates, their differences on New York City issues are more a matter of nuance than substance.


It's Comedy! From Skit To Song To Satire
LEAD: ''IT is the duty of the humor of any given nation in time of high crisis to attack the catastrophe that faces it in such a manner as to cause the people to laugh at it in such a way that they cannot die before they are killed.''


UAL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UAL Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,581,778,000
2,411,777,000
Net inc
110,862,000
b402,407,000
Share earns
5.11
18.68
9mo rev
7,426,093,000
6,759,806,000
Net inc
317,362,000
b1,103,431,000
Share earns
14.66
34.35


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerr-McGee Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
749,830,000
635,703,000
Net inc
b20,139,000
c30,499,000
Share earns
.42
.63
Shares outst
48,356,805
48,317,170
9mo sales
2,288,154,000
1,999,806,000
Net inc
b118,752,000
c76,632,000
Share earns
2.45
1.58
Shares outst
48,345,457
48,280,638


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  He Walks the Line


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
15,563,000
c214,437,000
9mo net inc
b219,773,000
d14,637,000
Per share
4.26
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $29.9 million, or 64 cents a share, from the utilization of tax loss carryforwards, and a gain of $16,105,000, or 35 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of an accounting change to mark- to-market accounting for swap transactions.


Kings Sign Ellison And Tisdale for 5 Years
LEAD: The Sacramento Kings solidified their front line yesterday when they signed Pervis Ellison and Wayman Tisdale.
Both Ellison, the center-forward who was the first choice in the National Basketball Association college draft this year, and Tisdale, the veteran forward who was traded to the Kings last February, signed five-year contracts.


Utilicorp United reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utilicorp United (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
140,462,000
134,355,000
Net inc
11,263,000
10,320,000
Share earns
.45
.49
Shares outst
20,762,000
19,691,000
9mo rev
494,512,000
485,889,000
Net inc
34,378,000
30,147,000
Share earns
1.48
1.49
Shares outst
20,753,000
18,986,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ogilvy &amp; Mather Names New Creative Director
LEAD: Three days after the appointment of Graham Phillips as chairman of the Ogilvy Group, the agency yesterday filled another important position, naming Bill Hamilton creative director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather/New York.


Quake Forces Court Into Plebeian Quarters
LEAD: An office building above a hamburger franchise is a far cry from the stately courtrooms of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
But this is the immediate reality for the court, improvising like dozens of other institutions since last week's earthquake.


TV Weekend; 'Show Boat' Skirts Nuances To Concentrate on the Fun
LEAD: Looking for a great old Broadway musical, the kind whose songs keep you humming for days?
Tonight at 9, make yourself comfortable and settle in for the three-hour ''Great Performances'' presentation on Channel 13.
It's ''Show Boat,'' with music by Jerome Kern and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein 2d, who also adapted the book from a novel by Edna


Connecticut Offers Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: The Connecticut Housing Finance Authority is offering $132.8 million in housing mortgage finance program bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.


Fort Wayne National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Wayne National
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,741,000
4,714,000
Per share
.62
.62
9mo net inc
14,193,000
12,846,000
Per share
1.85
1.68


Quantum Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
557,700,000
724,400,000
Net loss
b21,400,000
cd99,800,000
Share earns
-
3.92
Shares outst
24,866,014
24,855,882
9mo sales
2,044,300,000
2,115,200,000
Net inc
b229,300,000
c285,400,000
Share earns
9.23
10.51
Shares outst
25,417,099
27,145,722


2 Officers Wounded In Newark Shooting During Drug Check
LEAD: Two Essex County police officers were shot and seriously wounded while checking a car during a drug stakeout in Newark's Central Ward last night, the police said.


General Motors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Motors Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,793,100,000
28,221,300,000
Net inc
516,900,000
859,200,000
Share earns
.72
1.23
9mo rev
95,567,900,000
91,210,800,000
Net inc
3,524,100,000
b3,458,000,000
Share earns
5.32
5.05


Players Facing Questions On Values
LEAD: What value judgment can you make on playing in the World Series when it's resumed after a major earthquake has changed lives and fortunes?


No to 2 Royals' Options
LEAD: The Kansas City Royals announced yesterday that they would not pick up the options for next year on the contracts of Willie Wilson, their longtime center fielder, and the pitcher Floyd Bannister.
General Manager John Schuerholz, however, said he was interested in negotiating new contracts for both players.


Leo Stillman, 85, Dies; An Art Deco Architect
LEAD: Leo Stillman, a retired architect who was noted for his Art Deco designs in the 1930's and for later innovations in the use of poured concrete in apartment house construction, died of a stroke on Oct. 18 at the Ocala (Fla.) Geriatric Center.
He was 85 years old.


Otter Tail Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Otter Tail Power (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
39,318,000
42,428,000
Net inc
5,666,000
5,011,000
Share earns
.43
.37
9mo rev
173,305,000
175,561,000
Net inc
25,940,000
24,725,000
Share earns
1.98
1.87


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
184,352,000
67,786,000
Net inc
11,774,000
6,845,000
Share earns
.31
.19
Shares outst
38,340,000
35,856,000
9mo sales
479,193,000
160,461,000
Net inc
26,861,000
14,572,000
Share earns
.73
.43
Shares outst
36,801,000
33,796,000


Dining Out Guide: Contemporary American
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
An American Place  ** (April 14, 1989), 2 Park Avenue, entrance on 32d Street (684-2122) -The menu covers the American map at this restaurant where the chef stresses native-grown provender.


On Stage
LEAD:  Feiffer in the Spring?


Champion Parts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Parts Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
31,312,000
33,598,000
Net loss
393,000
c496,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
3,642,034
3,631,307
9mo sales
90,429,000
95,599,000
Net loss
b1,460,000
c1,301,000
Share earns
-
.37
Shares outst
3,638,590
3,586,818


New Co-Anchor for 'Today' Is Expected
LEAD: Deborah Norville is expected to be named co-anchor of NBC's ''Today'' show during this morning's telecast, with Jane Pauley making the official announcement on camera, an NBC News executive said yesterday.


Anchor Savings Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anchor Savings Bank FSB (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
12,300,000
b3,900,000
Per share
-
.02
b-Net income and after extraordinary income of $2.6 million representing the tax effect from utilization of net operating loss carryforwards.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DPL Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
202,065,000
217,261,000
Net inc
28,556,000
17,311,000
Share earns
.69
.42
9mo rev
691,437,000
725,696,000
Net inc
111,240,000
106,955,000
Share earns
2.68
2.58


Former Helmsley Employee Admits Guilt in State Tax Case
LEAD: Harry and Leona Helmsley's former business manager pleaded guilty yesterday to state tax-fraud charges after incriminating the Helmsleys in the state's case against them.


U.S. Sees Israeli Help in Pretoria's Missile Work
LEAD: American officials say there are indications from intelligence reports that Israel has helped South Africa developed a medium-range missile.


JAPAN LEADING U.S. IN RAISING CAPITAL FOR CORPORATIONS
LEAD: At a time when volatile swings and uncertainty on Wall Street have made it increasingly tough for American companies to raise money, the comparatively stable and strong Japanese stock market has been churning out record levels of fresh capital for Japanese corporations.


3 New Yankee Coaches
LEAD: When the Yankees' first spring training under Manager Bucky Dent opens next year, half the coaching staff will be new.
The Yankees announced yesterday that Mark Connor (bullpen coach), Joe Sparks (third base) and Buck Showalter (game scouting) would join the three holdover coaches, Mike Ferraro (first base), Billy Connors (pitching) and Champ


Cup TV Rights Deferred
LEAD: World soccer's governing body put off a showdown over television rights for the 1994 World Cup by asking the United States Soccer Federation today to provide more details on a reported agreement with NBC.


Interlake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interlake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
225,662,000
214,497,000
Net loss
b17,575,000
c8,225,000
Share earns
-
.79
9mo sales
690,445,000
647,001,000
Net inc
b551,000
26,921,000
Share earns
.05
2.53


John Hancock Income SecuriFties Tr reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hancock Income SecuriFties Tr (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Assets
148,951,018
145,530,265
Per share
15.58
15.43
Assets represented net assets.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Le Pistou


AIDS Led to Dismissal, Choreographer Says
LEAD: Michael Shawn recently left the AIDS unit of Roosevelt Hospital, where he learned that along with everything else, he now had liver cancer.
Still, this visit was easier than his last, 15 months ago.
That time, he lost his dream job as choreographer for a Broadway show called ''Legs Diamond.''


Fairfield County Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairfield County Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
58,958
734,568
Per share
.03
.32
9mo net inc
1,056,499
2,017,052
Per share
.47
.89
The company said latest quarter earnings were negatively affected by it increased loan loss provision, as well as by a loss of $183,436 related to the sale of a real estate joint venture project and a $106,000 writedown of the value of other real estate owned through foreclosure.


Trading Begins in Stock 'Baskets'
LEAD: Trading in stock ''baskets'' began yesterday in New York and Chicago, marred by a computer problem in New York that led to two basket trades being canceled.
The new product, approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday, allows investors to buy or sell all the stocks in the Standard &amp;


U.N. Refugee Chief Quits Over His Use of Funds
LEAD: The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has resigned in a scandal over allegations that he misused agency money to pay for entertainment and first-class air travel for himself and his wife, officials said today.


Review/Theater; Japan's Answer to the Ziegfeld Follies
LEAD: One of the first laws of stage entertainment - one that made Florenz Ziegfeld a Broadway legend - is that there is something intrinsically awesome in the sight of rows of showgirls, decked out like floats, descending a grand staircase in formation.


Diligent Whalers Defeat Devils
LEAD: Coach Jim Schoenfeld of the Devils lashed out at his players again tonight after the team's fourth loss in the last five games at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Sweden's Social Democrats Veer Toward Free Market and Lower Taxes
LEAD: The governing Social Democrats, who have made Sweden a generous welfare state and the world's most highly taxed nation, have reached a crossroads and are taking a distinct turn toward the free market.


Savings and Loan Executives Accused of Tapping Phones
LEAD: State and Federal regulators today accused senior officials of a California savings and loan of using wiretaps, political pressure and inducements to regulators to avoid any action against the institution.


Daily Flights to Be Offered at Stewart Airport
LEAD: In a deal that State Economic Development Commissioner Vincent Tese said was worked out with ''smoke and mirrors and no money,'' American Airlines reversed its position and announced today it would begin daily passenger service from Stewart International Airport to connecting hubs at Chicago and Raleigh/Durham, N


Economic Scene; The Changes Forced by Deficits
LEAD: THE White House and Congress still pay lip service to the importance of getting rid of the budget deficit.
But virtually nobody believes that the Government will come close to balancing its budget in the foreseeable future.
This means that with the budget deficit subtracting from the already low national savings rate, the United


Taiwan Flight Crashes; 54 Deaths Are Feared
LEAD: A China Airlines Boeing 737 crashed into a mountain today minutes after takeoff from the eastern city of Hualien, and airline officials said all 54 people on board were feared dead.


Bell Savings Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Savings Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
646,000
839,000
Per share
.26
.34
The year-ago results included a one- time pre-tax profit of $940,000 from sale of the company's investment in the stock of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Review/Art; New From David Reed, A Modern Traditionalist
LEAD: David Reed's latest show at the Max Protetch Gallery includes seven works, all completed during the past year, that recapitulate what have been abiding themes with this painter.
Mr.
Reed prefers long, narrow canvases that look like unfurled scrolls.
These are hung either lengthwise or vertically and they feature abstract images closely resembling enlarged photographs of swirling brushstrokes.


DEALS
LEAD:  Baseball


Corroon &amp; Black Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corroon &amp; Black Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
116,768,000
111,671,000
Net inc
10,699,000
12,569,000
Share earns
.63
.75
9mo rev
346,490,000
318,265,000
Net inc
29,025,000
b107,900,000
Share earns
1.71
6.29


Law firm, in pursuit of Haitian property, finds the chase can be tedious and frustrating.
LEAD: International law can be full of glamour, panache, money and, particularly when human rights are involved, satisfaction.
But it can have its frustrations, too.
Consider the recent experience of New York's Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


More Rioting at Pennsylvania Prison
LEAD: State troopers and firefighters struggled to regain control of the state prison here this morning as more than 1,000 inmates rioted for the second night in a row.
The authorities said the prisoners had taken eight hostages and set several cellblocks on fire.


Airborne Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airborne Freight Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
237,501,000
196,258,000
Net inc
5,291,000
2,221,000
Share earns
.72
.32
9mo rev
687,878,000
558,155,000
Net inc
12,326,000
b5,308,000
Share earns
1.71
.76


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
627,700,0000
767,900,000
Net loss
b103,100,000
c43,200,000
Share earns
-
.50
9mo sales
2,190,700,000
2,530,000,000
Net loss
b65,400,000
c176,100,000
Share earns
-
2.00


INSIDE
LEAD:  Giuliani and Dinkins: Differ Little on the Issues  All the heat in the New York City mayoral race has been over personal matters.
On the issues, the candidates offer similar solutions to the problems facing the city.
Page B1.
Baltic Arms Cut  Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, said his country would scrap four nuclear-missile submarines based in the Baltic Sea.


Bill to Allow Death Penalty For Terrorists Passes Senate
LEAD: The Senate today approved capital punishment for the murder of Americans overseas by terrorists, brushing aside a move to change the maximum penalty under the bill to life in prison.


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Bankcorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
21,187,000
b28,673,000
Per share
-
4.31
9mo net inc
23,980,000
72,572,000
Per share
3.60
10.89
b-Net income


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
71,238,000
57,577,000
Net inc
877,000
b15,168,000
Share earns
.18
-
9mo rev
205,193,000
178,069,000
Net inc
b6,194,000
c14,493,000
Share earns
1.29
-


Norton Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norton Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
368,500,000
340,700,000
Net inc
b20,600,000
c22,000,000
Share earns
.98
1.03
9mo sales
1,149,000,000
1,058,400,000
Net inc
b81,200,000
c77,200,000
Share earns
3.66
3.31


Producers and Warner File Court Papers
LEAD: Lawyers for Jon Peters and Peter Guber, the production team the Sony Corporation wants to hire to run its newly acquired Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., argued in papers filed in Los Angeles Superior Court yesterday that both their contractual agreement with Warner Communications Inc. and verbal commitments from its top management permit the pair to join Columbia Pictures.


Control Data Set To Sell Division
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation has agreed to sell its 1,000-employee United States computer maintenance business to the Bell Atlantic Corporation of Philadelphia for an undisclosed price.
The business involves maintenance services for computers not made by Control Data, which is retaining service operations for its own products.


Meridian National reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,973,593
15,038,743
Net loss
256,749
34,199
Shares outst
4,753,090
4,107,290
6mo rev
24,043,226
29,578,645
Net loss
205,819
b145,916
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
4,430,190
4,106,472


FLS Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FLS Holdings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
144,414,664
135,090,403
Net inc
4,493,133
4,882,669
9mo sales
532,436,724
476,243,287
Net inc
13,114,135
19,700,648
The share earnings are not available; the company's common stock is all privately held.


Zero Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zero Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
49,047,000
41,259,000
Net inc
4,251,000
4,008,000
Share earns
.27
.26
6mo sales
98,374,000
81,731,000
Net inc
8,679,000
7,929,000
Share earns
.55
.51


Retail Shift In U.S. Seen
LEAD: The chief executive of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., told a retailing meeting yesterday that half of the existing retailers in the United States ''won't be in business 10 years from now.''


FirstFed America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFed America Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,051,000
2,514,000
Per share
.54
.66
Yr net inc
9,315,000
11,045,000
Per share
2.45
2.84


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.68
8.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.57
7.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.46
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.87
7.87
8.59
30-YR.


Pennzoil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennzoil Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
644,350,000
616,904,000
Net inc
35,424,000
39,348,000
Share earns
.87
.93
Shares outst
36,293,000
38,054,000
9mo rev
2,108,462,000
1,649,089,000
Net inc
206,006,000
b439,364,000
Share earns
5.36
36.07
Shares outst
36,238,000
39,581,000


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
71,413,000
69,552,000
Net inc
3,270,000
1,828,000
Share earns
.10
.06
9mo sales
139,161,000
133,469,000
Net inc
5,500,000
3,373,000
Share earns
.17
.11


Richard K. Parsell, 89, Ex-Patent Attorney
LEAD: Richard Kendrick Parsell, a retired patent attorney, died Oct. 14 at Church Homes, a retirement community in Hartford.
He was 89 years old and until two years ago, lived in Manhasset, L.I., and in Center Harbor, N.H.


New York Post to End Its Sunday Paper
LEAD: After eight months of steady losses, The New York Post plans to stop publishing on Sundays, the newspaper's publisher and owner, Peter S. Kalikow, announced yesterday.
The last Sunday issue will appear on Nov. 26.


Standard Labels for Tampons
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration announced standard labels today for tampons that will permit consumers to compare the absorbency of different brands.


Herman Roth
LEAD: Herman Roth, a retired district manager for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the father of Philip Roth, the novelist, died of a brain tumor on Wednesday at St.
Elizabeth Hospital in Elizabeth, N.J.
He was 88 years old and lived in Elizabeth.


Roosevelt Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,529,000
4,335,000
Per share
.80
.78
9mo net inc
13,657,000
12,449,000
Per share
2.42
2.24


Interest Reported In Hershey Oil
LEAD: The Transamerica Corporation said undisclosed third parties had got in touch with it about purchasing its 26.4 percent stake in the Hershey Oil Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Transamerica said it had held preliminary discussions with one group and might hold further talks.


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meditrust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,401,000
11,811,000
Net inc
5,435,000
4,631,000
Share earns
.35
.29
9mo rev
51,869,000
32,413,000
Net inc
15,935,000
11,826,000
Share earns
1.62
1.55
Shares outst
15,720,859
13,859,545


Church &amp; Dwight reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Church &amp; Dwight (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
99,986,499
88,602,774
Net inc
7,185,539
4,720,394
Share earns
.35
.21
Shares outst
20,685,402
22,098,608
9mo sales
286,668,378
255,993,558
Net inc
11,331,672
13,559,310
Share earns
.55
.61
Shares outst
20,737,923
22,135,267


Washington TV Job May Go To Sharon Rockefeller
LEAD: WETA, the major public television and radio station in Washington, is expected to name Sharon Percy Rockefeller on Monday as president and chief executive.
Ms.
Rockefeller, a former chairman of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, would succeed Ward B. Chamberlin Jr., who has held that position since 1975 and who is to become vice chairman of WETA in


Imperial Chemical Industries Plc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Chemical Industries Plc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,240,000,000
4,630,000,000
Net inc
297,000,000
b337,000,000
Share earns
1.71
1.98
9mo sales
16,060,000,000
14,190,000,000
Net inc
1,213,000,000
b1,030,000,000
Share earns
7.06
6.08


Pan Am Is Adding New Miami Flights
LEAD: Pan American World Airways plans to add to its winter schedule more than 60 flights a week from Miami.


Pierce Again to Refuse to Testify; He Asks Delay in Hearing Today
LEAD: Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. informed a House subcommittee today that he would once again cite his Fifth Amendment right to silence by refusing to testify Friday about allegations of political favoritism and mismanagement in Federal housing programs.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Paul John Tagliabue; Family Man, Sports Fan, N.F.L. Chief
LEAD: As someone who grew up rooting for the Brooklyn Dodgers and dreaming of playing for the Boston Celtics, Paul J. Tagliabue would not, at first glance, appear to be a natural choice to become commissioner of the National Football League.


Fannie Mae Prices Real Estate Issue
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced $500 million in real estate mortgage investment conduit securities through Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Fischer &amp; Porter reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischer &amp; Porter (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
58,703,000
49,273,000
Net inc
1,425,000
b547,000
Share earns
.27
-
Shares outst
4,916,000
4,878,000
9mo sales
164,660,000
151,420,000
Net inc
1,490,000
b479,000
Share earns
.25
-
Shares outst
4,919,000
4,868,000


First Oak Brook Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Oak Brook Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
297,000
867,000
Per share
.24
.72
9mo net inc
1,356,000
2,440,000
Per share
1.12
2.02


Hydraulic Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hydraulic Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,149,000
17,972,000
Net inc
2,582,000
2,854,000
Share earns
.55
.60
9mo rev
51,374,000
50,626,000
Net inc
5,851,000
6,711,000
Share earns
1.24
1.41


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We will show the world that we have a can-do spirit in San Francisco that is alive and well.
Our ability to successfully put on this World Series will show the rest of the country that San Francisco is back.''  - Mayor Art Agnos.  [ A1:4. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-11


Medicare and Social Security Aren't Welfare; All in the Same Boat
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Will Send Walker Deep, But Can O'Brien Reach Him?
LEAD: There are games during a season when one team seems so superior that a minor miracle, and a healthy quarterback, are needed by the underdog.


President's Gains Tax Maneuver
LEAD: In an effort to regain momentum in its battle to cut capital gains taxes, the Bush Administration today announced extraordinary Government borrowing measures to insure that next month's Social Security checks would not be delayed by the political fight.


Empire of America Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire of America Federal Savings Bank (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
158,184,000
5,986,000
9mo net loss
209,336,000
39,877,000
The latest periods included charges of $83,710,000 for the third quarter and a $71,261,000 charge for the 9 months, reflecting the planned sale of corporate real estate and the portfolios of fixed-rate mortgage-backed securities and bonds.


Citizens Savings (Ithaca) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Savings (Ithaca)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
298,000
745,000
Per share
.13
.32
9mo net inc
1,732,000
1,703,000
Per share
.75
.74


MTM Enterprises
LEAD: Arthur L. Price, the president and chief executive of MTM Enterprises Inc., the Hollywood production company, resigned today, 15 months after MTM was acquired for $320 million by Television South P.L.C., a British broadcasting and entertainment company.
MTM, which Mr.
Price co-founded with Mary Tyler Moore and Grant Tinker in 1969, has been one of the most successful independent television production houses in Hollywood.


Ubu Rep's New Play
LEAD: ''Your Handsome Captain,'' a play by the Guadeloupian writer Simone Schwartz-Bart, will open at the Ubu Repertory Theater, 15 West 28th Street, on Sunday at 3 P.M.
The play, a love story about a Haitian couple forced by economic necessity to live in different countries, will be performed in English.


Merchants Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,456,000
1,343,000
Share earns
.67
.62
9mo net inc
4,217,00
3,963,000
Share earns
1.93
1.82


Leggett &amp; Platt reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leggett &amp; Platt (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
251,300,000
217,400,000
Net inc
12,100,000
8,100,000
Share earns
.69
.47
9mo sales
748,100,000
598,600,000
Net inc
35,600,000
28,400,000
Share earns
2.06
1.66


Heritage Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
8,901,000
b3,002,000
Per share
-
.40
9mo net loss
10,857,000
b8,345,000
Per share
-
1.12
b-Net income


Review/Film; A Lady's Man Accepts a Bet And Takes Off Wooing
LEAD: Mark Harmon is such a harmless, hapless actor that audiences watching ''Worth Winning'' will probably feel sorry for him.
That's not so bad.
Considering the character Mr.
Harmon plays here, it could be a whole lot worse.


Benj. Franklin Fedl Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Benj. Franklin Fedl Savings (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b7,749,000
c1,770,000
Per share
-
.23
9mo net loss
b1,223,000
c11,753,000
Per share
-
1.53
b-After extraordinary losses of $4,540,000 for the quarter and $8,722,000 for the 9 months.


Rivals in Nassau Offer Differing Visions of County
LEAD: As Richard Korn travels through Nassau County, campaigning for its highest office, he says he sees a place where people who came to pursue the American dream are being driven out by rising taxes.


Profits on Autos Sales Off Sharply for Big 3
LEAD: The downturn in the United States automotive industry was clearly evident today as the Big Three auto makers posted third-quarter results that showed each had sharply lower profits from domestic car and truck sales.


IN THE NATION
LEAD: The passage of severe anti-abortion laws in the Pennsylvania Legislature may well have looked to President Bush like a single point of light on a darkening horizon.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
794,518,000
701,700,000
Net inc
62,726,000
58,971,000
Share earns
.81
.76
9mo sales
2,224,473,000
1,998,090,000
Net inc
153,774,000
140,804,000
Share earns
1.98
1.81


McDonald's Plastic Recycling Plan
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation and eight of the nation's largest plastics producers announced yesterday that they would set up a national program to recycle plastic hamburger containers and other packages.
The $16 million program will begin in New England and will later be extended to four metropolitan areas in other sections of the country, participants said.


Dean Alfange, Liberal Leader, Is Dead at 91
LEAD: Dean Alfange, a lawyer who ran unsuccessfully for governor of New York in 1942 as a candidate of the American Labor Party and who two years later was a leader in forming the Liberal Party, died of cancer on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.


Castle (A.M.) Co.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle (A.M.) Co.(A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
117,596,000
127,122,000
Net inc
1,264,000
3,520,000
Share earns
.17
.49
9mo sales
389,870,000
374,400,000
Net inc
7,524,000
11,836,000
Share earns
1.04
1.65


Haverty Furniture Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Haverty Furniture Cos. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
57,990,000
56,923,000
Net inc
1,737,000
1,770,000
Share earns
.30
.30
9mo sales
168,512,000
166,776,000
Net inc
4,038,000
5,314,000
Share earns
.70
.91


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
569,102,000
589,549,000
Net inc
68,248,000
66,781,000
Share earns
.83
.81
9mo rev
2,100,545,000
2,082,191,000
Net inc
237,830,000
198,374,000
Share earns
2.89
2.42


2d Sailor on Carrier Convicted of Espionage
LEAD: For the second time in five weeks, a sailor stationed aboard the aircraft carrier Midway has been convicted of espionage.


Governor Joins Dinkins Attack Against Rival
LEAD: New York State's leading Democrats shifted the focus of the mayor's race to ideology yesterday, with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo accusing Rudolph W. Giuliani of producing ''a whole lot of smoke'' to obscure Republican positions on urban issues.


Tagliabue Is Elected N.F.L. Commissioner
LEAD: Under the glare of camera lights, after a marathon of public and private meetings, of civil discussion and heated debate, Paul Tagliabue wiped sweat from his brow and pledged to be a leader for all.
The promise came after Tagliabue, a Washington-based lawyer, was elected today as the National Football


Metropolitan Baedeker; Getting to Know A Quirky Island Off Manhattan
LEAD: ROOSEVELT ISLAND confounds almost every expectation of what life in New York is all about.
A cross between a quiet, waterside village and a high-rise, 1960's version of Futureworld, this cigar-shaped island in the East River is perhaps the city's strangest piece of real estate.
It has one street, one church, four restaurants, a handful of shops, lots of open space, magnificent vistas of Manhattan, two chronic-care hospitals, a small lighthouse and eerie, fenced-off ruins dating from the island's


What the New West Germans Can Expect
LEAD: To the Editor:


William F. Poten, 79, A Retired Ship Broker
LEAD: William F. Poten, a retired ship broker in Manhattan who specialized in chartering oil tankers, died Tuesday at his home in St.
Simons Island, Ga., after a long illness.
He was 79 years old.


WPL Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WPL Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
138,500,000
140,700,000
Net inc
b7,869,000
17,999,000
Share earns
.26
.64
9mo rev
604,400,000
586,600,000
Net inc
48,618,000
65,471,000
Share earns
1.68
2.33


Citizens First Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens First Bancorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
9,226,000
8,167,000
Per share
.43
.38
9mo net inc
27,731,000
22,391,000
Per share
1.29
1.05


A TOP EAST GERMAN MEETS 2 LEADERS OF THE OPPOSITION
LEAD: In a another first in East Germany's three-week experiment with tolerance and openness, a member of the ruling East German Politburo met today with leaders of New Forum, a month-old opposition movement that the Government originally branded as hostile to the state.


Economic Growth in 3d Quarter Maintained Pace of Early 1989
LEAD: The economy grew at a 2.5 percent rate in the quarter that ended in September as a surge in consumer spending offset weakness in exports and the industrial sector, Commerce Department reported today.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Blackhawks 5, Canadiens 3: Steve Thomas scored twice last night in Chicago as the Blackhawks defeated Montreal for the first time in 13 games, moving into first place in the Norris Division.
The team last beat Montreal on Jan. 2, 1985, and was 0-7-5 since.
Jacques Cloutier stopped 14 shots before Guy Carbonneau put in a 10-footer with 3:13 remaining in the middle period.


Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
5,040,000
6,019,000
Per share
.42
.50
9mo net inc
17,393,000
17,623,000
Per share
1.45
1.46


McDonnell Douglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,715,000,000
3,682,000,000
Net inc
b38,000,000
c83,000,000
Share earns
.98
2.18
9mo rev
10,325,000,000
10,334,000,000
Net inc
b159,000,000
c205,000,000
Share earns
4.16
5.34


CALIFORNIA CHIDES BUSH ON PESTICIDES
LEAD: California environmentalists today voiced strong opposition to President Bush's proposals to increase Federal control over pesticide use, contending that they would threaten the health of consumers while pre-empting stricter state guidelines.


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
210,211,000
164,357,000
Net inc
2,792,000
1,820,000
Share earns
.28
.26
Shares outst
10,196,000
7,010,000
6mo sales
413,511,000
319,375,000
Net inc
5,159,000
b8,062,000
Share earns
.52
1.16
Shares outst
9,261,000
6,976,000


Singapore's Example
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Digest
LEAD:  Economy


How to Be Crazy in New York
LEAD: New York Jews who vote against David Dinkins just because they do not like Jesse Jackson are doing a disservice not only to the candidate but to the city, Jews, blacks, Israel - yes, and maybe to Jesse Jackson, too.


Nerco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nerco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
174,500,000
163,000,000
Net inc
17,100,000
11,300,000
Share earns
.46
.34
Shares outst
37,300,000
33,400,000
9mo rev
495,600,000
483,100,000
Net inc
51,600,000
b53,400,000
Share earns
1.48
1.60
Shares outst
34,800,000
33,400,000


RJR Nabisco Bonds Tumble on Asset Rumor
LEAD: Prices of RJR Nabisco's ''junk bonds'' tumbled yesterday on unconfirmed rumors that a proposed deal by the company to sell its Del Monte division was in trouble.
Bonds of distressed companies like Federated Stores and Southland also fell sharply, dealers said.
Some Federated bonds were quoted as low as 12 cents on the dollar.


Despite Good Intentions, Political Ads on TV Still Accentuate the Negative
LEAD: Time again for hand-wringing over negative political advertising on television.
In the New York City mayoral contest, ads for Rudolph W. Giuliani charge David N. Dinkins with a habit of not coming clean on his financial delinquencies until caught.
Just as Mr.
Giuliani begins to accentuate the positive, the


Premark International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premark International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
615,500,000
565,200,000
Net inc
13,500,000
19,000,000
Share earns
.38
.55
Shares outst
35,300,000
34,900,000
9mo sales
1,894,100,000
1,745,800,000
Net inc
59,600,000
b73,400,000
Share earns
1.70
2.12
Shares outst
35,100,000
34,700,000


Lin and BellSouth Sweeten Proposal to Thwart McCaw
LEAD: In another move aimed at thwarting a proposed takeover of the Lin Broadcasting Corporation by McCaw Cellular Communications, Lin and the BellSouth Corporation yesterday sweetened their offer to shareholders for the merger of their cellular telephone properties.


Center-Left Coalition Is Set for Netherlands
LEAD: Queen Beatrix asked Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers today to form the Netherlands' first center-left coalition government in seven years.
The move, seven weeks after parliamentary elections, means the new govenment could be completed in a few days.


Noble Drilling Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noble Drilling Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
30,712,000
11,276,000
Net inc
714,000
b1,881,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
22,749,000
20,337,000
9mo rev
75,172,000
31,457,000
Net loss
7,048,000
6,180,000
Shares outst
22,388,000
19,955,000


Filtertek Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Filtertek Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,106,000
8,948,000
Net inc
795,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.12
.19
9mo sales
28,378,000
28,168,000
Net inc
3,877,000
3,829,000
Share earns
.57
.54


Sunday Silence's Rider Is Suspended
LEAD: Pat Valenzuela was suspended for 60 days by the Santa Anita Park stewards yesterday for testing positive for cocaine last Friday, and Chris McCarron will ride Sunday Silence in the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic on Nov. 4.


Vacu-Dry Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vacu-Dry Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,472,000
6,635,000
Net inc
b54,000
b48,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
1,668,171
1,688,164
b-Included tax credits of $21,000, or 1 cent a share, and $18,000, or 1 cent a share, for the latest and year-ago quarter, respectively.


Weldwood of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weldwood of Canada
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
208,900,000
232,600,000
Net inc
23,400,000
17,800,000
Share earns
.64
.49
9mo sales
590,200,000
679,000,000
Net inc
55,600,000
53,600,000
Share earns
1.52
1.55


Craig's 'Killer Bees' Fall Short
LEAD: The Giants were neither denying reality nor moping around tonight as they unwound in their clubhouse for what might be the next-to-last-time this year.


COSTA RICA GAINS LOAN AGREEMENT
LEAD: After years of negotiations, Costa Rica and its commercial bankers agreed yesterday on a proposal to reduce the country's foreign debt substantially and provide new incentives for bankers to take part.


Goody Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goody Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
53,753,000
56,657,000
Net loss
992,000
bc1,914,000
Share earns
-
.29
9mo sales
180,239,000
175,029,000
Net inc
2,345,000
c9,933,000
Share earns
.36
1.53
Shares outst
6,523,962
6,510,050


Officer Kills Brooklyn Man After He Attacks With Knife
LEAD: A police officer shot and killed a Brooklyn man last night after the man charged at officers with a butcher knife at his grocery, the police said.


Pioneer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,487,000
13,689,000
Net inc
3,658,000
4,615,000
Share earns
.60
.76
9mo rev
45,216,000
41,191,000
Net inc
10,431,000
10,877,000
Share earns
1.71
1.79


World Series Reopens With Tribute to Dead
LEAD: At 5:04 P.M. today, in a solemn baseball stadium where 10 days ago to the minute they feared for their lives, a crowd of 62,000 World Series fans stood silent to mourn those who died in the earthquake here.


Potash Corp. of Saskatchean reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potash Corp. of Saskatchean
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
73,700,000
71,600,000
Net inc
11,400,000
10,400,000
9mo rev
246,400,000
259,000,000
Net inc
69,400,000
73,100,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


3 GUILTY IN CASE TIED TO COLOMBIAN
LEAD: A Federal jury here has convicted three men and acquitted two others of charges that they conspired with Carlos Lehder Rivas, one of the world's leading drug traffickers, to smuggle cocaine into the United States and distribute it.


United Westburne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Westburne
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
679,613,000
662,644,000
Net inc
11,719,000
14,209,000
Share earns
.31
.65
9mo rev
1,964,870,000
1,622,638,000
Net inc
28,158,000
27,936,000
Share earns
.96
1.41
Shares outst
29,273,918
19,818,012


Northern States Power Co. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern States Power Co. (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,974,100,000
1,951,500,000
Net inc
203,600,000
221,300,000
Share earns
2.93
3.23


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Tseng Labs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tseng Labs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,382,980
7,889,396
Net inc
886,275
1,250,473
Share earns
.05
.07
Shares outst
18,413,000
17,999,000
9mo sales
24,832,484
15,435,617
Net inc
4,241,708
2,093,849
Share earns
.23
.12
Shares outst
18,288,000
17,998,000


Witness List Includes Gators
LEAD: Five current or former University of Florida athletes, including the basketball team's center, Dwayne Schintzius, are among the possible witnesses in the upcoming trial of 11 men facing drug charges, a newspaper reported today.


John D. Brundage, 70; Led Heart Association
LEAD: John Denton Brundage, a retired insurance executive and former chairman of the American Heart Association, died of liver failure yesterday at his home in Winnetka, Ill.
He was 70 years old.


Two Are Seized In the Shooting Of Two Officers
LEAD: Two men were arrested early today, and two more were being sought in the shooting on Thursday of two Essex County police officers.
Officials speculated that the shooting was related to a turf war over drugs.


E. C. Fraze, 76; Devised Pull Tab
LEAD: Ermal Cleon Fraze, an engineer who invented the pull-tab opener that is used on aluminum beer and soda cans, died of a brain tumor Thursday at Kettering Memorial Hospital in Dayton, Ohio.
He was 76 years old and lived in Dayton.


Buffets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buffets Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 4
1989
1988
Sales
28,617,000
19,133,000
Net inc
1,604,000
1,286,000
Share earns
.17
.14
9mo sales
85,506,000
52,329,000
Net inc
4,547,000
2,994,000
Share earns
.48
.33


Patents; New Method Of Finding Tumors
LEAD: Capitalizing on the ''leakiness'' of dead cancer cells, two doctors at the University of Southern California Medical Center have patented a new technique for detecting and possibly treating tumors.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, part of an article yesterday about Michael Shawn, a choreographer who says he was dismissed because he tested positive for the AIDS virus, was overprinted in some copies by a misplaced section from another article.


Johnston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnston Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
26,335,000
28,506,000
Net inc
628,000
2,306,000
Share earns
.12
.45
Share earnings were restated to give effect to a 3-for-2 stock split in May 1989.


East Germans Declare Amnesty for Those Who Fled
LEAD: East Germany announced an amnesty today for all citizens who have fled or tried to flee the country, as well as for most of those arrested in the recent wave of anti-Government demonstrations.


Personal Income Up 0.3% in Month
LEAD: Americans' personal income, dealt a blow by Hurricane Hugo, rose a lackluster three-tenths of 1 percent in September as consumer spending posted its weakest advance in a year.


Unisys Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unisys Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,351,500,000
2,267,700,000
Net loss
648,200,000
b151,000,000
Share earns
-
.77
Shares outst
159,644,000
161,101,000
9mo rev
7,127,800,000
7,028,100,000
Net loss
673,300,000
b462,600,000
Share earns
-
2.38


Pierce Balks Again in H.U.D. Inquiry
LEAD: Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. invoked the Fifth Amendment again today in refusing to answer lawmakers' questions about political favoritism in Federal housing programs, prompting new calls for appointment of a special prosecutor.


I.B.M. Strategy On Upgrading
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it was offering incentives for some customers to postpone upgrading certain models of mainframe computers from this year until next June.


Bridge
LEAD: Few bridge players ever achieve a 75% score in a duplicate game and fewer still ever celebrate a 65th wedding anniversary.
The parlay, both events on one day, is almost certainly singular.
It occurred October 11 at the Riverdale Yacht Club, in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, and the record-setter was Reginald Johnson, 89 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in Weekend yesterday about the Women in Comedy festival of the Manhattan Punch Line Theater misidentified the performer in the foreground.
She was Patricia Scanlon, not Nancy Mura.


Healthwatch Inc. reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthwatch Inc.
12mo to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,503,732
5,581,085
Net inc
1,749,692
429,979
Share earns
.85
.21
Shares outst
2,342,384
1,873,024


Alfred Wilson, 85, 1924 Olympic Medalist
LEAD: Alfred M. Wilson, a retired executive vice president of the Minneapolis-Honeywell Company, died after a heart attack yesterday at Vineyard Haven Hospital on Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
He was 85 years old and lived on the island.


A Case of Cultural Misperception
LEAD: Whenever Kazuo Ishiguro goes on the road to promote his books, he has to spend much of his time explaining himself.


Gorbachev Ends Three-Day Visit to Finland


Leiner (P.) Nutritional Prodcts Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leiner (P.) Nutritional Prodcts Corp.(A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
36,723,000
26,632,000
Net inc
1,012,000
759,000
Share earns
.19
.15
6mo sales
68,918,000
48,246,000
Net inc
1,941,000
1,359,000
Share earns
.37
.26


Too Soon Darkness
LEAD: In Australia, with summer coming on, they'll be setting their clocks forward one hour this weekend - the start of daylight time Down Under.
Up here in the Northern Hemisphere, it's back to darkness in the afternoon.
Too soon.


Lifetime Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifetime Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
114,936,000
94,911,000
Net inc
2,522,000
1,330,000
Share earns
.38
.22
Shares outst
6,600,000
6,160,000
9mo rev
327,989,000
279,906,000
Net inc
b1,560,000
3,591,000
Share earns
.23
.59
Shares outst
6,661,000
6,104,000


School for Patronage
LEAD: ''I'm a political leader - that's why I'm here. . . .
I make sure my people  [ get jobs ] .''


'Hispanic' Is No More Racist Than 'Asian'; First Rainbow Coalition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alfred C. Bruce, 88, An Ex-Civil Engineer
LEAD: Alfred C. Bruce, a retired civil engineer and business executive, died of heart disease Thursday at a nursing home in East Haven, Conn.
He was 88 years old and had lived for many years in Southport, Conn.


U.S. Won't Challenge Los Angeles Hiring Plan
LEAD: The Immigration and Naturalization Service has decided that it will not challenge the efforts of Los Angeles to help coordinate the hiring of day laborers, at least for now.


About New York; On Special Night, Ecstatic Dances Celebrate Torah
LEAD: Every week, Jews read successive passages of the Torah, the Five Books of Moses.
In a year's time, they are finished.
It is time to start over.


Free Soviet Press Depends on Attitude, Not Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stocks Close Hectic Week With a Slide
LEAD: Stock prices fell broadly yesterday, ending one of Wall Street's most turbulent weeks in recent months.


Review/Recital; The Issue Of Crescendo For a Pianist
LEAD: Peter Orth, who played Hoiby, Chopin, Brahms and Ravel on Tuesday night at the 92d Street Y, is a pianist capable of communicating real musical ideas.
This puts him ahead of most young instrumentalists, even if some aspects of his musical and technical approach are not fully persuasive.


Reagan Warns Japanese on Trade
LEAD: In a tougher warning on trade than he issued as President, Ronald Reagan said today that Americans did not think their products had fair access to Japan and that trade barriers must be lowered to avoid rising anger in the United States.


Soon the Republicans Will Choke on Success
LEAD: There has been a lot of talk recently about the seeming free fall of the Democratic Party and despair about whether it will ever again take back the White House from the Republicans.
As someone who first came to Washington in the early 60's, when the city was dominated by the Democrats, this speculation bears an uncanny resemblance to what was then being said about the moribund Republican


Crane Gets 8.9% Of Milton Roy
LEAD: The Crane Company, a New York-based engineering products concern, has acquired an 8.9 percent stake in the Milton Roy Company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Crane said it had acquired the shares to obtain ''a significant equity interest'' in Milton Roy, and left open the possiblility of seeking control of the gas-monitoring equipment concern based in St.


Ciba-Corning Deal
LEAD: Ciba-Geigy A.G. said it had agreed to buy Corning Inc.'s share of the Ciba-Corning Diagnostics Corporation, a joint venture in which each company had owned half.
Terms were not disclosed.
Ciba-Corning, based in Medfield, Mass., provides diagnostic systems and related products.
It has 2,500 employees and had 1988 sales of about $300 million.


DINKINS IS SEEKING TO WIDEN APPEAL
LEAD: In an effort to assure voters that his administration will be broad-based, David N. Dinkins has told associates that he will appoint Victor L. Kovner, a longtime ally and a politically active Manhattan lawyer, as his corporation counsel if he is elected mayor of New York City.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Halloween Safety
LEAD:  Tuesday is Halloween, a time for ghosts and goblins and little children.
With a little planning and some common sense, adults can make Halloween festivities safe.
Here are some tips.
In the Street: Plan trick-or-treat routes in advance, picking well-lit streets.
Choose costumes in light colors so drivers can see them.


Multi-Color Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multi-Color Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
15,495,000
15,217,000
Net inc
489,000
410,000
Share earns
.22
.19
Shares outst
2,237,000
2,183,000
6mo sales
31,058,000
29,496,000
Net inc
948,000
844,000
Share earns
.43
.39
Shares outst
2,223,000
2,268,000


Patents; Quigg, Leaving Office, Cites Patent Speed-Up
LEAD: The Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Donald J. Quigg, who will step down Tuesday, is claiming at least one victory for efficiency: The average time needed to process a patent application is now 18 months, down from almost two years when he took office in 1985.


Fansteel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fansteel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,486,771
53,270,398
Net inc
160,628
1,391,165
Share earns
.02
.16
9mo sales
150,738,865
152,865,921
Net inc
2,369,012
4,198,519
Share earns
.28
.49


Mayoral Candidates Walk Away From Koch's Idea for a Tax Rise
LEAD: In the New York City mayoral primaries, the incumbent, Edward I. Koch, was alone among the six candidates in endorsing a tax increase - a proposal to pay for more police officers.


Relational Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Relational Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,872,000
26,503,000
Net loss
2,135,000
b1,540,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
11,001,000
12,444,000
b-Net income


Patents; Device Distinguishes 'Killer' Bee From Others
LEAD: Engineers at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee obtained a patent this week on a device that distinguishes African ''killer'' bees from ordinary European bees by measuring the buzzing of their wings.


Martin Lawrence Ltd. Editions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Lawrence Ltd. Editions Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,550,000
8,328,000
Net inc
1,987,000
1,332,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
8,628,000
7,019,000
9mo sales
34,063,000
25,032,000
Net inc
5,547,000
4,146,000
Share earns
.69
.60
Shares outst
8,089,000
6,928,000


USLico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USLico Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
107,300,000
93,300,000
Net inc
8,000,000
6,900,000
Share earns
.74
.63
9mo sales
312,400,000
283,500,000
Net inc
22,500,000
26,200,000
Share earns
2.07
2.39
Shares outst
10,888,195
10,941,787


Soviet Official Explains Ruble Devaluation
LEAD: Slashing the value of the ruble this week was a small step toward making the Soviet currency freely convertible but a big step toward cutting back the country's flourishing black market, a Soviet state bank official said today.


Aquino Ban on Marcos Is Upheld
LEAD: The Supreme Court today narrowly upheld President Corazon C. Aquino's right to ban the return to the Philippines of the body of her predecessor, Ferdinand E. Marcos.


Henderson Outdoes His Dream
LEAD: On the bus that carried the Oakland Athletics across the bay and into another grand moment in the 86th World Series, Dave Henderson allowed himself a few moments to dream.


Tanker, After Being Barred, Docks in Alaska
LEAD: A tanker that has been anchored in Cook Inlet for lack of a state-approved contingency plan for cleaning up any oil spill began unloading oil Friday night after the ship's owner agreed temporarily to adopt the cleanup plan of another company.


Michael Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michael Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,441,000
50,645,000
Net inc
3,142,000
3,677,000
Share earns
.28
.34
Shares outst
11,381,316
10,934,672
9mo sales
191,895,000
135,391,000
Net inc
7,993,000
8,589,000
Share earns
.70
.87


Student Is Slain On Packed IRT After Argument
LEAD: A 19-year-old student at Julia Richman High School in Manhattan was shot and killed by another student on a subway train yesterday afternoon after an argument that started in the school cafeteria, the police said.


Review/Dance; Maximum-Energy Minimalism
LEAD: Wim Vandekeybus, a 26-year-old Belgian choreographer who is one of the most original and powerful talents on the experimental scene, has returned to the Kitchen this weekend with a premiere, ''Les Porteuses des Mauvaises Nouvelles'' (''The Messengers of Bad News'').


INSIDE
LEAD:  Pierce Refuses to Testify


C-Tec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Tec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,079,000
36,365,000
Net inc
1,807,000
3,369,000
Share earns
.11
.20
9mo rev
115,621,000
105,736,000
Net inc
8,297,000
10,549,000
Share earns
.50
.63


Ionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ionics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
27,315,000
21,437,000
Net inc
932,000
672,000
Share earns
.22
.17
9mo rev
78,871,000
61,930,000
Net inc
2,517,000
1,624,000
Share earns
.60
.43


Concord Camera Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Camera Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,265,235
4,675,493
Net inc
825,405
604,622
Share earns
.20
.15


IPL Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPL Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,843,000
2,235,000
Net inc
569,000
339,000
Share earns
.11
.07
9mo rev
9,310,000
6,275,000
Net inc
1,270,000
1,226,000
Share earns
.25
.24


Fallout From Testimony Worries Queens District
LEAD: Like most educators and parents in School District 27 in Queens this week, Toby Sohn, a special-education teacher, was mesmerized by her superintendent's testimony before the Gill Commission - tales of racial and religious bias in hiring, unnecessary jobs and a plot by some school board members to run the schools as patronage mills.


Dataproducts Sought by DPC
LEAD: DPC Acquisition Partners began an unsolicited $10-a-share cash tender offer for all the shares of the Dataproducts Corporation that it does not already control, in a transaction that would value the company at more than $200 million.
DPC Acquisition is controlled by Crescott Inc., a New York investment firm that already controls 7.5 percent of Dataproducts' 21 million shares outstanding.


Eunice Taylor Vanderhoef, Horticulturist, 91
LEAD: Eunice Taylor Vanderhoef, a horticulturist in Connecticut, died Wednesday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
She was 91 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Mahorn Traded to 76ers
LEAD: Rick Mahorn, who refused to report to the Minnesota Timberwolves this fall after they made him their first selection in the expansion draft last June, was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers yesterday for a first-round pick in the 1990 college draft and second-round choices in 1991 and 1992.
The trade is conditional on Mahorn's reporting to


Unusual Bond Trading Disturbs the Market
LEAD: Unusual and very large trading by a single party, thought to be Japanese, has captivated and disrupted the government bond market, contributing to price swings and setting off fears of a corner in one issue of government bonds.


Aydin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aydin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
40,573,000
44,422,000
Net inc
2,604,000
2,381,000
Share earns
.51
.48
9mo sales
120,002,000
127,681,000
Net inc
6,726,000
5,991,000
Share earns
1.33
1.19


For Ortega, a Pose With Bush
LEAD: The heads of state of the Western Hemisphere had gathered to talk about the large issues: democracy and the environment and the North-South axis.
But in the end, the main focus of attention was a small, symbolic event: Would the American President and the Nicaraguan President meet and shake hands?


Eva Crossman-Hecht; Ballet Pianist Was 59
LEAD: Eva Crossman-Hecht, a pianist with the Frankfurt Ballet and a composer of music for several ballets, died on Oct. 16 in Frankfurt after a long illness.
She was 59 years old.


Canron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canron Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
124,600,000
113,000,000
Net inc
b2,033,000
d1,330,000
Share earns
.21
.14
9mo sales
321,700,000
321,000,000
Net loss
b1,023,000
cd2,702,000
Share earns
-
.28


Opera by Rameau
LEAD: A concert version of Jean Philippe Rameau's opera ''Hippolyte et Aricie'' is to be presented by the Concert Royal Baroque Orchestra on Nov. 29 and 30 at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The performance is part of the Original Instruments series.
Tickets are $20.
Information: 362-8719.


Advest Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advest Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
55,115,000
49,175,000
Net inc
1,922,000
584,000
Share earns
.19
.06
Shares outst
10,275,000
10,257,000
Yr rev
215,468,000
204,926,000
Net inc
7,180,000
3,235,000
Share earns
.70
.32
Shares outst
10,261,000
10,263,000


Plasti-Fab Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Fab Ltd.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,963,000
10,948,000
Net inc
143,000
c86,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
28,725,000
30,622,000
Net loss
b497,000
d124,000
Share earns
-
.05
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Police Seal Building After a Protest by Squatters
LEAD: After a night of violent clashes between squatters and the police, city workers began sealing the windows and doors of an East Village school building yesterday morning where about 20 homeless people had been living.


Darwin Klingman, 45, Computer Authority
LEAD: Darwin Klingman, a professor at the University of Texas who was an authority on mathematical models and computer applications in policy and decision-making, died of a brain tumor yesterday at St.
David's Hospital in Austin, Tex.
He was 45 years old and lived in Austin.


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noranda Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,203,000,000
2,291,000,000
Net inc
101,000,000
139,000,000
Share earns
.49
.72
9mo rev
6,881,000,000
6,740,000,000
Net inc
384,000,000
453,000,000
Share earns
1.94
2.36


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
31,896,000
27,961,000
Net inc
b8,035,000
c3,496,000
Share earns
.84
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $3.3 million, or 34 cents a share, from utilization of a net operating loss carryforward.


Giants' Pitching Mistakes Are Athletics' Homers
LEAD: If the 11-day hiatus between World Series games produced any changes in the fortunes of the teams, those changes favored the Oakland Athletics.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
81,054,000
67,260,000
Net loss
b21,883,000
c22,678,000
Yr sales
867,295,000
759,005,000
Net inc
b98,164,000
c65,128,000
Share earns
3.09
2.05


Case Against LaRouche Groups Is Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge has dismissed bankruptcy proceedings that the Government brought against three organizations associated with Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr.
Judge Martin V. B. Bostetter Jr. of the Federal Bankruptcy Court ruled that the Government had acted in bad faith in filing the involuntary bankruptcy petitions against Caucus Distributors Inc., Campaigner Publications Inc.


Mylan Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mylan Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
23,153,000
21,094,000
Net inc
4,584,000
4,609,000
Share earns
.13
.13
6mo sales
44,212,000
44,125,000
Net inc
8,343,000
10,751,000
Share earns
.23
.30


Genrad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genrad Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
46,097,000
50,055,000
Net loss
b3,579,000
c9,739,000
9mo rev
143,417,000
151,637,000
Net loss
b2,615,000
c8,015,000
b-Included net charge of $3 million from reorganization costs for the quarter and 9 months.


A's Overwhelm Giants As Series Resumes
LEAD: Eleven days after it was halted by the great earthquake, the 86th World Series was resumed tonight with a mixed mood of solemnity and cheer, and with a barrage of five home runs by the Oakland Athletics that thrust them within one game of completing a sweep over the San Francisco Giants.


Banister Continental reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banister Continental (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
216,980,000
109,550,000
Net loss
4,118,000
b1,395,000
Share earns
-
.24
9mo rev
454,164,000
255,990,000
Net loss
3,832,000
2,886,000
b-Net income


Bay Area Survived, Beautifully
LEAD: Just by coincidence, we happened to be driving toward the Golden Gate Bridge on Tuesday, exactly a week after the earthquake.


Mobil Plans to Cut About 400 Jobs
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation said a previously announced reorganization of its American operations would involve eliminating about 400 jobs nationwide.
The company, the nation's second-largest oil concern behind the Exxon Corporation, said the biggest reduction would come in its Denver office, which will be reduced to 105 employees from 430.


First Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mississippi (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
102,543,000
81,931,000
Net inc
911,000
4,467,000
Share earns
.05
.22


Nicolet Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicolet Instrument (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
30,285,000
31,472,000
Net inc
661,000
b9,372,000
Share earns
.10
-
6mo rev
56,737,000
64,959,000
Net inc
853,000
b10,751,000
Share earns
.13
-


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Nets 108, Bucks 100: Dennis Hopson had 19 points and seven other Nets reached double figures last night in an exhibition game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Sam Bowie had 8 blocked shots, 11 points and 5 rebounds for the Nets.
Randy Breuer led Milwaukee with 22 points.


British Cabinet Shift: Will Policies Change?
LEAD: The shock of the resignation Thursday evening of Nigel Lawson, Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, roiled the financial markets here today.


Chili's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chili's Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
83,006,000
70,031,000
Net inc
4,689,000
3,440,000
Share earns
.44
.35


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
4,967,000
5,615,000
Share earns
.46
.53
Shares outst
10,892,000
10,669,000
Yr net inc
19,946,000
20,577,000
Share earns
1.85
1.94
Shares outst
10,800,000
10,603,000


So Cool, So Tense, So What?
LEAD: What I like about David Dinkins is his refusal to let tax laws get him down.
I envy that.
I've often thought I could get my chin up off the floor and feel good again about being alive if I weren't so dumb about taxes.


The Big Oil Spill From Home Mechanics
LEAD: Only the biggest oil spills get much attention, but the smallest ones add up.
The amount of oil dumped by do-it-yourself auto mechanics every two and a half weeks is roughly equivalent to the amount spilled by the Exxon Valdez, experts say.


Energen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energen Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
46,387,000
46,858,000
Net loss
b4,768,000
c1,897,000
Shares outst
9,684,000
7,970,000
Yr rev
307,651,000
353,135,000
Net inc
b8,586,000
c12,769,000
Share earns
.92
1.67
Shares outst
9,321,000
7,630,000


Macy (R.H.) &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Macy (R.H.) &amp; Co.
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
1,589,236,000
1,437,754,000
Net loss
43,121,000
105,989,000
Yr sales
6,974,141,000
5,729,095,000
Net loss
b53,651,000
c188,160,000
b-After an extraordinary charge of $7,885,000 and a gain of $17,243,000, or $10.34 a share, from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting.


Nabisco Candy Units Being Sold to Nestle
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. said yesterday that it was selling its Baby Ruth, Butterfinger and Pearson candy businesses to the Nestle Foods Corporation for $370 million.


Johanna Roth Is Wed To George Comstock
LEAD: Johanna Deborah Roth, a third-year student at the New York Law School, and George Foster Comstock, a civil engineer in Manhattan, were married yesterday at the Larchmont, N.Y., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold I. Roth.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated.


Farr Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farr Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,164,000
18,444,000
Net inc
577,000
515,000
Share earns
.20
.18
9mo sales
56,448,000
53,938,000
Net inc
1,917,000
2,074,000
Share earns
.67
.73


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 28, 1989
LEAD:  Markets


Wyse Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyse Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
119,052,000
129,435,000
Net loss
3,579,000
b3,271,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
14,790,000
16,697,000
6mo sales
231,435,000
281,553,000
Net loss
7,643,000
b11,716,000
Share earns
-
.78
Shares outst
14,788,000
16,787,000


Nicaraguans Begin Sweep Against Contra Stronghold
LEAD: Heavy fighting broke out today in this rugged mountain region as Government troops began what appeared to be a coordinated combat operation against several hundred rebels encamped here.


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southam Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
395,425,000
389,550,000
Net inc
10,772,000
c14,580,000
Share earns
.18
.25
9mo rev
1,230,721,000
1,194,068,000
Net inc
b59,207,000
c55,316,000
Share earns
1.00
.93


Munsingwear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 7
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Munsingwear Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 7
1989
1988
Sales
46,556,000
46,650,000
Net loss
3,878,000
2,300,000
9mo sales
130,391,000
130,620,000
Net loss
7,305,000
3,856,000


Texas Utilities Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Utilities Co. (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,238,498,000
4,131,229,000
Net inc
695,778,000
674,486,000
Share earns
4.05
4.31
Shares outst
171,848,000
156,580,000


Unless Liberalization Takes Hold in East, Bonn Fears a Swelling Tide of Emigres
LEAD: As change sweeps across Eastern Europe into East Germany, officials in West Germany are growing anxious about the possible consequences.
Their preoccupation is not reunification, which might be possible if the transformation in the East succeeds, but a flood of emigres if the changes fail.


Agra Industries reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agra Industries
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
247,089,000
231,116,000
Net inc
b56,800,000
b7,775,000
Share earns
3.90
.58
b-After extraordinary credits of $63,118,000, or $4.33 a share, for the latest year and $1,651,000, or 12 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


Florida State the Favorite? Miami Disagrees.
LEAD: The Miami Hurricanes, after winning 48 of their last 49 regular-season games and four in a row over Florida State at the Seminoles' Doak Campbell Stadium, were a bit miffed this week to learn they were likely to be slight underdogs today when they make another visit to Tallahassee.


Torstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torstar Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
249,561,000
233,690,000
Net inc
18,527,000
c26,064,000
Share earns
.47
.65
9mo rev
712,655,000
697,564,000
Net inc
b68,480,000
c73,860,000
Share earns
1.72
1.84


I.R.A. Says It Regrets Killing
LEAD: The Irish Republican Army said today that its gunmen killed a Royal Air Force corporal and his 6-month-old daughter in West Germany, and it expressed ''profound regret'' for killing the child.
Cpl.
Maheshkumar Islania, 34 years old, died when two gunmen opened fire at his car in a snack-bar parking lot outside the British air base at Wildenrath.


A Midwestern Radio Host Wears Keillor's Shoes
LEAD: Given 20 words to describe how he spent his summer vacation, the eager caller from Minneapolis began, ''I went to Thailand, China, Japan, Russia, Poland, East Germany . . .''


2 Brokers Drop Index Arbitrage
LEAD: Responding to a recent groundswell of opposition, Morgan Stanley &amp; Company and Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, two of Wall Street's largest investment houses, announced yesterday that they would no longer conduct one of the best-known forms of program trading for their own accounts.


Liggett Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liggett Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
128,106,000
108,963,000
Net inc
3,513,000
7,363,000
Share earns
.15
.31
6mo sales
259,078,000
231,268,000
Net inc
8,823,000
12,696,000
Share earns
.37
.53


Hidden Billions in the Budget
LEAD: It's no secret that Federal spending is still growing, despite all the fuss about the budget deficit.
But it's well concealed that ''tax expenditures'' are growing even faster, adding to the deficit just like spending.
They warrant scrutiny that they don't get now.


800 Numbers Off Map For Foreign Customers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television; Soviet Afghan Reporting
LEAD: Sunday's edition of ''60 Minutes,'' on CBS at 7 P.M., or whenever the Jets game ends, is smack on the news.
As Soviet officials have, startlingly, begun apologizing for their invasion of Afghanistan, Harry Reasoner introduces us to Artyom Borovik, the first Soviet reporter to send home candid dispatches about some of the 120,000 Soviet troops who fought there.


Buckeye Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buckeye Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
27,646,000
27,277,000
Net inc
b556,000
c948,000
Share earns
.21
-
9mo rev
82,504,000
88,528,000
Net inc
b1,792,000
c851,000
Share earns
.68
-


Changes at Units Planned by Boeing
LEAD: The Boeing Company announced plans for a revamping of its military and space exploration businesses to cut losses on military projects and reduce general overhead costs on its Government work.
Paul Binder, a company spokesman, said the changes were largely a matter of redrawing flow charts and executive assignments.


Going Below the Surface of La Guardia as Legend
LEAD:  Fiorello H. La Guardia  And the Making of Modern New York  By Thomas Kessner  Illustrated. 700 pages.
McGraw-Hill. $24.95.


Acting Chief Named for Nuclear Weapon Program
LEAD: In the face of Congressional criticism of the Bush Administration's nominee to head the nation's troubled nuclear weapons program, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins has appointed a top aide to assume the role on an acting basis.


Lee Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct. 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Data Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct. 1
1989
1988
Revenue
16,392,000
21,361,000
Net loss
17,994,000
750,000
6mo rev
32,406,000
42,859,000
Net loss
23,237,000
1,505,000
The latest periods' losses included charges of $12 million, which included severance costs, charges associated with inventory and equipment writedowns and anticipated field upgrade costs.


When Relatives Take Children In
LEAD: Three years ago New York City set up a sensible-sounding program called ''kinship foster care,'' in which relatives received foster care stipends for taking in children in danger of abuse or neglect by their parents.
Now city officials wonder if they have created a monster.
The well-intentioned program needs careful reassessment.


Little Alarm, Big Sound
LEAD: The orange and white plastic device, about the size of a cigarette pack, looks like a small radio.
But it is both a flashlight and an alarm.
It comes with hardware for installation as a removable door alarm.


Empire District Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire District Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,678,000
44,278,000
Net inc
6,956,000
7,523,000
Share earns
1.19
1.32
Shares outst
5,734,444
5,598,673
9mo rev
137,908,000
151,887,000
Net inc
16,514,000
16,837,000
Share earns
2.80
2.91
Shares outst
5,675,130
5,547,462


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
52,206,000
58,111,000
Net loss
911,000
b1,084,000
Share earns
-
.20
Yr rev
219,678,000
230,227,000
Net loss
864,000
b1,412,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
5,330,000
5,295,000


CDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CDI Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
229,263,000
190,681,000
Net inc
5,939,000
5,07,000
Share earns
.30
.27
9mo rev
654,618,000
534,053,000
Net inc
15,885,000
11,862,000
Share earns
.81
.63


British Shift Puts Spotlight On an Obscure U.S. Journal
LEAD: The resignation of Nigel Lawson as Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer has lifted an obscure American economic journal into the limelight.


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tambrands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
153,214,000
145,625,000
Net inc
16,567,000
25,174,000
Share earns
.74
1.13
Shares outst
22,372,000
22,297,000
9mo rev
449,257,000
428,403,000
Net inc
60,751,000
70,526,000
Share earns
2.72
3.17
Shares outst
22,348,000
22,283,000


Bay State Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bay State Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
37,451,000
33,529,000
Net loss
2,969,000
3,673,000
Shares outst
10,249,000
9,062,000
Yr rev
302,365,000
270,188,000
Net inc
18,159,000
15,870,000
Share earns
1.81
1.72
Shares outst
9,405,000
9,031,000


Universal Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Medical (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
17,427,873
12,798,937
Net loss
3,379,724
1,949,602
9mo rev
53,598,480
46,543,851
Net loss
2,621,874
b2,583,764
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


MDU Resources Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDU Resources Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
65,500,000
63,700,000
Net inc
4,700,000
5,800,000
Share earns
.24
.29
Shares outst
19,000,000
18,800,000
9mo rev
251,800,000
256,600,000
Net inc
26,200,000
23,900,000
Share earns
1.38
1.28
Shares outst
19,000,000
18,600,000


Dravo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dravo Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
76,865,000
75,790,000
Net inc
b6,574,000
c5,991,000
Share earns
.40
.39
9mo rev
210,688,000
205,616,000
Net inc
b12,930,000
c10,388,000
Share earns
.74
.69


President Vetoes Second Measure To Relax U.S. Limts on Abortion
LEAD: President Bush vetoed a budget measure for the District of Columbia today because it would expand the District's use of Federal and local funds to pay for abortions.


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stelco Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
662,495,000
670,359,000
Net inc
22,699,000
b29,061,000
Share earns
.54
.65
9mo rev
2,157,780,000
2,071,071,000
Net inc
83,266,000
b72,056,000
Share earns
2.05
1.35


Kenya Court Finds Foul Play In Briton's Death at Reserve
LEAD: Ending a four-month inquiry, a Nairobi court ruled today that there was foul play in the death of a British photographer at the Masai Mara Game Reserve last year.


Peace Corps Triumphs
LEAD: Peace Corps, the queen of harness racing, and John Campbell, the king of Breeders Crown drivers, shined in the rain tonight at Pompano Park.
The pair, who teamed to win the Breeders Crown 2-year-old Filly Trot last year, scored an impressive victory in the 3-year-old Filly Trot.


Red Lion Inns L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Lion Inns L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
23,695,000
22,430,000
Net inc
1,415,000
26,000
Share earns
.32
.01
9mo rev
68,711,000
64,969,000
Net inc
3,192,000
b809,000
Share earns
.72
-


Lumex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lumex Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
21,425,000
19,259,000
Net inc
841,000
283,000
Share earns
.20
.07
9mo sales
63,554,000
56,745,000
Net inc
1,652,000
370,000
Share earns
.39
.09


Review/Dance; Affectionate Tributes From a Ballet Collector
LEAD: Robert Joffrey was frequently described as a collector of ballets, intent on putting together a repertory for his company that included as many genres and contemporary classics as possible.
The Joffrey Ballet's program on Thursday evening at City Center suggested that Gerald Arpino, the company's artisic director since Mr.


Transport Secretary Opposes Airline Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


South Africa March Banned
LEAD: A magistrate today prohibited without explanation a protest march by the nation's black labor federation.
But the Congress of South African Trade Unions threatened to proceed with the march on Saturday in Vereeniging.
The Government has recently permitted marches by unions and other anti-apartheid groups.


Now What's All This Fuss About Fast Food?
LEAD: To the Editor:


CB Pak Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CB Pak Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
36,125,000
132,641,000
Net inc
b60,259,000
5,995,000
Share earns
2.91
.28
9mo sales
226,643,000
377,549,000
Net inc
b97,459,000
19,911,000
Share earns
4.71
.96


Tarpley Misses Practice
LEAD: Dallas Mavericks officials are not overly concerned that the forward Roy Tarpley, a two-time offender of the National Basketball Association's anti-drug policy, did not attend practice yesterday and remained unaccounted for, a team spokesman said.
Tarpley was suspended from the team last January for drug violations and returned to the roster in


Friends Mark Birthday of U.S. Hostage in Lebanon


San Salvador Journal; Where Dollars Talk, Unfettered by Law or War
LEAD: Outside the main post office here, the noise and the bustle recall the stock market on a busy day.
As customers come and go, on foot or in cars, with letters or checks in hand, they are immediately set upon by dealers waving wallets or pocket calculators, elbowing each other aside as they shout the latest exchange rates.


Loan Puts Widow, 91, In Jeopardy
LEAD: Even in the glow of Indian summer, Luella Wilson rarely goes outdoors anymore.
She does not like to sit in the warm sunshine on her front porch because she fears that the neighbors will look at a tiny 91-year-old woman and see a criminal.


LDB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LDB Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,938,000
15,869,000
Net loss
b10,673,000
c3,875,000
Shares outst
1,902,370
1,923,401
Yr rev
65,393,000
64,057,000
Net loss
b11,042,000
cd1,903,000
Share earns
-
.72
Shares outst
1,904,347
2,019,589


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.61
8.75
8.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.61
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.47
7.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.94
7.87
8.56
30-YR.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Inv reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Inv (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
29,066,087
30,230,366
Net inc
4,717,168
7,202,225
Share earns
.40
.62


Patents; A New Seat to Improve A Baby's Comfort
LEAD: Arguing that ordinary infant seats are uncomfortable and sometimes unhealthy, two pediatricians have patented a new seat that replicates the position some parents call the ''football hold.''


Review/Film; A Viking Antihero Runs Amok With Idealism
LEAD: Killing and pillaging.
Pillaging and killing.
The life of a Viking warrior is not an easy one, especially for strapping Erik (Tim Robbins) who is all thumbs when it comes to the obligatory rape.


Price of Gold Rises Sharply As Investors Seek Havens
LEAD: Gold futures prices surged to their highest levels in three and a half months on New York's Commodity Exchange yesterday as investors unnerved by the stock market's gyrations sought the perceived safety of precious metals.


3 New York Mothers Face Charges
LEAD: Three New York City women - including one who had been working as a police 911 operator - face charges ranging from neglect and abandonment to murder of their children in separate incidents, the police said yesterday.


Mortgage Rate Declines
LEAD: The average interest rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage fell to 9.82 percent in the week ended today, from 9.92 percent last week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''As a friend, I tell you that Americans are not as patient as the Japanese.
We don't want a Japanese tea party.
Yet fairness is a real issue when it comes to trade between the U.S. and Japan.''  - Former President Ronald Reagan.  [ 31:3. ]


Kansas Power &amp; Light Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Power &amp; Light Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
206,559,000
222,304,000
Net inc
19,442,000
24,722,000
Share earns
.56
.72
9mo rev
834,114,000
903,531,000
Net inc
59,639,000
65,812,000
Share earns
1.73
1.90


Buses to Filter Exhaust To Meet Pollution Rules
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority unveiled a breadbox-size device yesterday that it says will bring the city's newest fleet of diesel-powered buses into compliance with 1991 Federal clean-air standards.


Tritium Puzzle Halts Shipment
LEAD: The Energy Department has again suspended all commercial shipments of tritium, the radioactive gas used in nuclear warheads, after failing to find missing quantities of it.


6 Women on Broadway Are Stuck With Pins
LEAD: At least six women walking along Broadway on the Upper West Side were stuck from behind with needles or pins by young women who then ran away, the police said yesterday.


Review/Jazz; A Salute to Mel Lewis
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra's tribute to its regular drummer, the band leader Mel Lewis, at Cooper Union on Thursday night opened and closed with deserved standing ovations.
Mr.
Lewis, who has been sick recently and looked a bit thinner, played his typically generous and large-hearted way, using his immense drum sound, loose yet controlled, to help swing the 17-piece band.


NOW Goes to Court to Deter Blocking of Abortion Clinics
LEAD: The National Organization for Women went to court today in an attempt to stop the militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue from blocking abortion clinics.


Great Amer Management reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Amer Management (OTC)
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,637,901,000
1,223,091,000
Net inc
2,160,000
8,645,000
Share earns
.06
.82


Burritt Interfinancial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burritt Interfinancial
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,537,800
1,300,900
Share earns
.46
.40
9mo net inc
4,015,100
3,380,600
Share earns
1.21
1.05


St. Luke's Orchestra
LEAD: The Orchestra of St.
Luke's will play American works at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 6 to open its fifth season at Carnegie Hall and to celebrate American Music Week.
On the program will be John Adams's ''Fearful Symmetries,'' conducted by the composer; Charles Wuorinen's ''Five: Concerto for Amplified Cello and Orchestra,'' which Mr.





Curtice-Burns Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtice-Burns Foods (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Sales
213,400,000
174,758,000
Net inc
3,242,000
3,050,000
Share earns
.58
.55
Shares outst
5,608,562
5,572,554


Your Money; Making Best Use Of Benefit Plans
LEAD: Most companies offer employees choices within their benefit plans, and give them an opportunity at this time of year to revise their choices for the coming year.
By reviewing their needs and options, employees can significantly increase their financial security.


Kellogg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,195,400,000
1,140,300,000
Net inc
123,100,000
145,700,000
Share earns
1.02
1.18
9mo sales
3,563,500,000
3,256,800,000
Net inc
b412,300,000
379,500,000
Share earns
3.38
3.08


ORTEGA DECLARES HE WILL ABANDON NICARAGUAN TRUCE
LEAD: As leaders of the Western Hemisphere gathered for a meeting here, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua said today that he would end a 19-month-old cease-fire with the Nicaraguan rebels and order the Nicaraguan Army to resume military operations next week.


Junior-Books Publisher Leaving Harper &amp; Row
LEAD: Harper &amp; Row announced Wednesday that Elizabeth Gordon, the senior vice president and publisher of its junior books, was leaving the company but would remain as a consultant through the end of the year.
No replacement has been named for Ms.
Gordon, who has been publisher since 1982.


Northwest Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Natural Gas (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
34,612,000
37,375,000
Net loss
2,020,000
787,000
9mo rev
181,220,000
199,734,000
Net inc
18,615,000
15,332,000
Share earns
1.54
1.28
Share earnings reflected preferred and preference stock requirements.


Boston Agonizes Over Street Violence
LEAD: The slaying of a pregnant woman abducted outside a hospital here has focused national attention on a recent spate of street violence in a city seldom preoccupied with crime.


Dinkins and Bradley Fill Air, Not Baskets
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani occasionally needles David N. Dinkins about spending too much time on the tennis court, but it became clear yesterday that Mr.
Dinkins should stay on clay and off the hardwood.


Praxis Biologics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Praxis Biologics (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,020,000
1,391,000
Net loss
1,892,000
2,100,000
Shares outst
14,025,000
13,690,000
9mo rev
11,083,000
3,741,000
Net loss
9,206,000
7,974,000
Shares outst
13,935,000
13,594,000


Jackson's Half Brother Is Indicted In Hiring of Killers and Skimming
LEAD: A Federal grand jury today charged Noah Robinson, half brother of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, with skimming receipts from Wendy's restaurants he owns and hiring a street gang to kill a man who uncovered the scheme.


A 66 Puts Kite Ahead by 4 at Hilton Head
LEAD: Winds came off the Atlantic Ocean strong enough to be to Tom Kite's liking today: 25 to 30 miles an hour, and swirling through the big trees lining the Harbour Town Golf Links.


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
23,700,000
25,800,000
Per share
.85
.90
9mo net inc
77,700,000
80,500,000
Per share
2.75
2.74
Results for the latest quarter and 9 months included a net realized gain on security sales of $5.7 million and $11.2 million, respectively, compared to $300,000 and $1.7 million for the comparable year-ago periods, respectively.


Foremost Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foremost Corp. of America (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
967,000
590,000
Share earns
.08
.05
Net inc
17,247,000
b24,191,000
Share earns
1.43
1.95
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $666,000.


National Presto Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Presto Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
33,812,000
28,580,000
Net inc
5,920,000
5,104,000
Share earns
.80
.69
9mo sales
82,315,000
62,563,000
Net inc
14,906,000
11,523,000
Share earns
2.03
1.56


Mate at Helm of Grounded Ship Is Arrested
LEAD: A freighter that ran aground on a protected coral reef has been refloated and the Coast Guard has filed charges against the vessel's captain and mate.


Nasta International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nasta International (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
26,929,000
20,085,000
Net inc
4,447,000
3,003,000
Share earns
.87
.59
9mo sales
46,928,000
36,830,000
Net inc
5,826,000
4,442,000
Share earns
1.14
.87


General Binding reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Binding (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,298,000
62,055,000
Net inc
5,793,000
3,603,000
Share earns
.36
.23
9mo sales
209,455,000
184,900,000
Net inc
15,500,000
11,086,000
Share earns
.97
.69


China Loosens Free-Enterprise Rules
LEAD: In an unexpected departure from their harsh line against private enterprises, the authorities announced new regulations today that would encourage unemployed people to establish private and collective enterprises in the capital.


Polly Peck In Accord For Sansui
LEAD: The Sansui Electric Company, a financially ailing consumer electronics concern, announced today that it would sell a controlling interest to London-based Polly Peck International P.L.C. in what was said to be the first foreign acquisition of a major Japanese company listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Tagliabue Coming In For N.F.L.'s 2d Half
LEAD: A day after his election as commissioner of the National Football League, Paul Tagliabue announced yesterday that he would formally take over from Pete Rozelle at 12:01 A.M. on Nov. 5, the day that marks the start of the second half of the 16-week N.F.L. season.


Loyola Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loyola Capital (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
2,585,000
3,025,000
Share earns
.51
.60
9mo net inc
7,862,000
8,542,000
Share earns
1.56
1.70


Prague Seizes Dissidents On Eve of Anniversary
LEAD: In an effort to thwart or blunt unauthorized demonstrations on Saturday, the police today rounded up some of the country's major dissidents, including Vaclav Havel, Czechoslovakia's most prominent writer and a founder of the Charter 77 human rights group.


La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
58,835,000
52,229,000
Net inc
4,489,000
3,278,000
Share earns
.34
.25


Computer Advances Assist Drug-Money Investigations
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that recent advances in computer technology were helping uncover illegal schemes to conceal narcotics profits and transfer them offshore.


Family to Keep Farm in Vermont Drug Case
LEAD: A couple in the town of Washington will be allowed to keep their farm despite their admission that marijuana was grown there.


Masco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Masco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
793,000,000
733,000,000
Net inc
62,400,000
81,700,000
Share earns
.40
.52
9mo sales
2,369,000,000
2,172,000,000
Net inc
214,600,000
259,300,000
Share earns
1.38
1.66


National Healthcorp L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Healthcorp L.P.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
33,861,000
28,194,000
Net inc
3,611,000
2,853,000
Share earns
.52
.41
9mo rev
98,607,000
84,797,000
Net inc
10,363,000
8,883,000
Share earns
1.50
1.29


Potomac Electric Power Co. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potomac Electric Power Co. (NYSE)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,378,717,000
1,344,838,000
Net inc
211,961,000
209,426,000
Share earns
2.14
2.12


Bill Prices Fall on Debt-Ceiling Fears
LEAD: Treasury bill prices plunged and discount rates soared yesterday as the annual Congressional wrangle over raising the debt ceiling unsettled the government securities market.


Danaher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Danaher Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
184,237,000
170,786,000
Net inc
10,673,000
b8,450,000
Share earns
.45
.34
Shares outst
23,571,045
24,739,703
9mo rev
577,816,000
536,872,000
Net inc
34,631,000
b36,122,000
Share earns
1.45
1.53
Shares outst
23,888,682
23,533,521


Dollar Substantially Lower, Following Stocks and Bonds
LEAD: The dollar weakened substantially against all major currencies except the British pound yesterday.
Currency traders said the dollar was undermined by another poor session in the stock market and expectations of lower interest rates.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Oct. 19 about the rescue of a 6-year-old boy, Julio Berumen, after the California earthquake misstated the circumstances of his removal from a car.
Rescuers were impeded by the body of a family friend, later identified as Yolanda Orozco, not by the body of the boy's mother, Petra Berumen.


Forum Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forum Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,621,000
20,175,000
Net inc
10,047,000
b1,170,000
Share earns
.31
-
6mo rev
61,976,000
38,151,000
Net inc
7,313,000
c391,000
Share earns
.23
.01


Sherman Walt Dies; Bassoonist Was 66
LEAD: Sherman Walt, a former principal bassoonist of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, died on Thursday evening at Beth Israel Hospital in Brookline, Mass., a few hours after he was struck by an automobile.
He was 66 years old and lived in Chestnut Hill, Mass.


In Beijing, the 'First Terror' Fades As the Crackdown Seems to Ease
LEAD: He is still jittery, still afraid that every policeman can peer into his heart and see the fervor with which he supported the democracy movement, but the young university teacher has given up life as a fugitive.
After spending months visiting friends and relatives in other cities, he sent his wife back to scout around and recently returned himself.


Compucom Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compucom Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
72,850,000
48,300,000
Net inc
442,000
273,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
27,015,000
27,002,000
9mo sales
189,420,000
102,971,000
Net inc
869,000
1,177,000
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
27,191,000
25,130,000


New Tactic For Giuliani: Praise Koch As a Leader
LEAD: As Election Day draws closer, Rudolph W. Giuliani is turning kinder toward the man he once vilified and wants to succeed, Mayor Edward I. Koch.


Strickland to Sit Out
LEAD: Rod Strickland, who has started all seven preseason games thus far, while Mark Jackson works his way back into playing shape, sat out yesterday's Knick practice with a swollen left knee.
Strickland suffered the injury Thursday night in the Knicks' 103-100 overtime victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves at the New Haven Coliseum.


Teck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teck Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
105,730,000
92,298,000
Net inc
24,150,000
26,395,000
Share earns
.30
.34
9mo rev
315,581,000
259,998,000
Net inc
82,630,000
71,355,000
Share earns
1.02
.91


WAR-POWERS CURB ON KREMLIN SEEN
LEAD: A top adviser to Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that the Soviet President could not order military intervention in another country unless he first consulted closely with the new Soviet Parliament.


Employers Casualty Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Employers Casualty Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
53,921,251
3,565,630
9mo net loss
69,977,020
b21,566,566
Share earns
-
2.14
b-Net income  Included in the latest quarter and 9 months results were investment gains of $371,087 and $897,822, respectively, and the year-earlier quarter and 9 months included an investment loss of $291,701 and an investment gain of $353,780, respectively.


Iran Ends Flooding of Iraqi Truce Line
LEAD: The Iranian Army has stopped flooding a section of its cease-fire line with Iraq on the eve of a new mediation effort by the United Nations and the Red Cross, diplomatic officials said today.


Rangers Tie the Islanders On Horava's First Goal
LEAD: Miloslav Horava had difficulty finding the proper words to describe his game-tying goal.
Roger Neilson, a man with a gift for a turn of phrase, hit a dead end when asked simply to supply an adjective.
Horava and Neilson had company, because the goal also left the opposition and the 16,485 fans at Madison Square


Bindley Western Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bindley Western Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
377,671,000
301,497,000
Net inc
b669,000
755,000
Share earns
.10
.12
9mo rev
1,117,113,000
917,805,000
Net inc
b2,606,000
2,967,000
Share earns
.41
.48


Reviews/Music; A Night of Tchaikovsky by Bernstein
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein seemed in an uncharacteristically muted mood Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall, but given the overwrought emotionality of his New York Philharmonic program, perhaps that was just as well.


Jones Intercable reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Intercable (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,441,000
14,495,000
Net loss
b9,799,000
5,211,000
b-Included a charge of about $2 million on the redemption of $35 million of debentures.


Ambase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ambase Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
906,000,000
786,000,000
Net inc
b20,000,000
27,000,000
Share earns
.57
.80
9mo rev
2,665,000,000
2,163,000,000
Net inc
b76,000,000
74,000,000
Share earns
2.22
2.17


For Many, Tours Go Beyond Sightseeing
LEAD: The time to plan this winter's vacation is now.
And if a package tour is suitable, there are more to choose from than ever before.


Dofasco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dofasco Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
958,400,000
769,100,000
Net inc
67,500,000
56,800,000
Share earns
.94
.88
9mo rev
3,035,400,000
2,032,300,000
Net inc
b167,400,000
148,000,000
Share earns
2.28
2.21


General Automation reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Automation (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
10,254,000
13,901,000
Net inc
b126,000
cd8,854,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
41,448,000
50,929,000
Net loss
b1,639,000
d11,044,000
b-After extraordinary credits of $69,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $348,000, or 6 cents a share, for the year.


Uni-Marts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uni-Marts Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
60,397,735
36,613,410
Net inc
1,122,102
831,379
Share earns
.17
.13
Yr sales
217,624,553
136,811,095
Net inc
1,851,225
2,852,779
Share earns
.44
.46
Shares outst
6,521,308
6,262,261


George Webby, 59, Maronite Church Leader
LEAD: Msgr.
George J. Webby, Vicar General of the Maronite Church in the United States, died of a heart attack Thursday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 59 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Culbro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
232,462,000
234,142,000
Net loss
3,490,000
b1,515,000
9mo rev
712,458,000
707,368,000
Net inc
567,000
b5,508,000
Share earns
.13
1.28
b-After income spun off from discontinued operations of $1,039,000, or 24 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,750,000, or 87 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aetna Life &amp; Casualty (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,887,600,000
4,402,300,000
Net inc
b182,600,000
c235,500,000
Share earns
1.63
2.07
9mo rev
14,457,800,000
13,469,800,000
Net inc
b525,800,000
c504,200,000
Share earns
4.67
4.41


New Date for Bout
LEAD: Mike Tyson will fight Donovan (Razor) Ruddock on Jan. 5 in Edmonton, Alberta, unless Tyson's promoter, Don King, says no, according to Ed Bean, the Edmonton businessman paying $3.5 million to stage the fight.
The fight had been scheduled for Nov. 18, but was postponed this week because Tyson is ill with a virus causing pain in his chest.


Review/Film; A Mix of Gore and Freud
LEAD: Horace Pinker (Mitch Pileggi), the raging mass murderer who cuts a splattery swath in Wes Craven's ''Shocker,'' is a television repairman with an unusual relationship to the world of video.
Toward the end of a movie that begins as a conventional horror film and grows steadily weirder, he dives in and out of television screens that transport him to and from various otherworldly realms.


John T. Burnell Dies; Ex-Labor Negotiator In New York Was 79
LEAD: John T. Burnell, a former union official who held posts in labor-management relations under Mayor Abraham D. Beame, died Thursday at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Queens.
He was 79 years old and lived in Flushing.


Weirton Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weirton Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
318,200,000
341,200,000
Net inc
b1,634,000
c2,311,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo sales
1,023,900,000
1,054,100,000
Net inc
b8,131,000
d1,076,000
Share earns
.39
.05


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Octoberfest, 42d Street between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas will be closed tomorrow from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.


'Hispanic' Is No More Racist Than 'Asian'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rioters Destroy Nearly Half the Buildings in a Pennsylvania Prison
LEAD: After two riots in two days, state troopers stormed a prison here this morning, rescuing five hostages and regaining control of the complex.


Charter Proposal for New York: Little Debate Despite the Stakes
LEAD: With Election Day little more than a week away, the proposed new charter for New York City, which would represent the most significant overhaul of municipal government in nearly a century, has failed to generate a broad public debate.


Chemdesign Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemdesign Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,018,021
7,443,994
Net inc
1,217,476
537,857
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
8,968,796
6,575,292
9mo sales
28,964,567
21,696,855
Net inc
4,513,430
b2,724,137
Share earns
.56
.41
Shares outst
8,120,937
6,716,754


Green Tells Reds He's Bowing Out
LEAD: Two months ago, Dallas Green was dismissed as manager of the Yankees by George Steinbrenner, the owner.
Last week, he announced that he had been offered the job of managing the Cincinnati Reds by Marge Schott, the owner.
Yesterday, he withdrew his name from consideration for the job for what the Reds called personal and business considerations.


Prime Motors Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Motors Inns Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
103,903,000
99,258,000
Net inc
20,782,000
19,349,000
Share earns
.63
.59


Williams Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Williams Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
325,500,000
293,600,000
Net inc
5,000,000
bc15,200,000
Share earns
.06
-
9mo rev
1,178,600,000
1,227,900,000
Net inc
29,100,000
b119,200,000
Share earns
.64
3.13


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
71,700,000
98,500,000
Net inc
b2,500,000
d15,700,000
Share earns
.05
.30
9mo rev
269,300,000
241,000,000
Net inc
c33,800,000
d25,600,000
Share earns
.65
.49


Russ Togs Stake
LEAD: A Hong Kong investment concern controlled by the New Zealand financier Sir Ronald Brierley has acquired an 8.06 percent stake in Russ Togs Inc. and says it is seeking clearance from Federal antitrust regulators to acquire up to 25 percent of the New York apparel manufacturer.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Industrial Equity Pacific Ltd.


Jerusalem, Despite Strife, Works as a City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Orkem Agrees to Buy Bostik
LEAD: The French state-owned chemicals group Orkem S.A. said today that it would pay $345 million to buy the Bostik adhesives business from the Black &amp; Decker Corporation.


Quixote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quixote Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
16,649,000
16,437,000
Net inc
1,059,000
1,136,000
Share earns
.14
.14


Sun Energy Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Energy Partners L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
290,000,000
272,000,000
Net inc
10,000,000
c33,000,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
371,600,000
345,100,000
9mo rev
894,000,000
890,000,000
Net loss
b134,000,000
356,000,000
Shares outst
363,200,000
333,600,000


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Pets That Don't Travel
LEAD: As the holidays approach, pet owners who will be leaving home for any length of time are confronted with the problem of what to do with the animals they cannot take with them.


National Gypsum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Gypsum Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
348,278,000
318,094,000
Net loss
2,461,000
90,972,000
9mo sales
1,016,939,000
877,052,000
Net loss
27,558,000
77,402,000
The latest third quarter included a gain of $10.6 million from the repurchase of debentures, while the year- ago period included a $76.9 million provision for loss on the sale of American Olean Tile Co.


CAMPAIGN STOP: Harlem; Dinkins Bid Rekindles Community Hope
LEAD: Harlem has been both dream and nightmare.


News Summary
LEAD:  International 3-6  Nicaragua will break a cease-fire with Nicaraguan rebels and resume offensive military operations next week, President Ortega said.
Reports indicate that the offensive has already begun.
Page 1  Fighting broke out in Nicaragua as Government troops began what appeared to be a coordinated combat operation against several hundred contras in a mountain region.


CFS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFS Group Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
10,486,000
10,437,000
Net inc
b225,000
c68,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo sales
33,440,000
32,945,000
Net inc
b981,000
c711,000
Share earns
.15
.11
b-Included extraordinary credits of $59,000 for the quarter and $139,000, or 2 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Midtown Masters Series
LEAD: A recital by the pianist Ursula Oppens will open the Midtown Masters series on Nov. 20 at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
On the program is the world premiere of ''Two Canons for Ursula,'' a piece by Conlon Nancarrow that was commissioned by Composers Forum; there will also be works by Rachmaninoff, Stravinsky and Schubert.


Hills Urges Japanese To Act to Lift Imports
LEAD: Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, called on Japan today to take a series of sweeping domestic actions, including the slapping down of companies that fix prices and the restructuring of retail distribution, to avoid new trade sanctions from Washington.


Metropolitan Fedl S &amp; L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Fedl S &amp; L (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
101,000
2,003,000
Per share
.03
.54


Budget Deficit Drops Slightly
LEAD: The Federal budget deficit declined slightly, to $152.1 billion, in the fiscal year 1989, mostly because the Government spent only half as much as expected in August and September on the savings and loan bailouts, the Government announced today.


Vertex Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vertex Communications Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,519,000
5,539,000
Net inc
404,000
528,000
Share earns
.12
.16
Yr rev
23,778,000
18,607,000
Net inc
1,552,000
1,098,000
Share earns
.47
.34


Koch's New Admirer: Giuliani on the Stump
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican mayoral candidate, spent the summer vilifying Mayor Edward I. Koch, saying that he had responded to corruption in his administration with ''his eyes closed, his ears clogged and his mouth open.''


Hako Minuteman reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hako Minuteman (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,003,000
7,299,000
Net inc
727,000
671,000
Share earns
.20
.18
9mo sales
24,754,000
21,754,000
Net inc
2,331,000
1,978,000
Share earns
.64
.54


Loophole for an Earthquake
LEAD: Where did Congress suddenly find $3.5 billion for earthquake disaster relief?
In a loophole.
If the quake had hit last month, as Hurricane Hugo did, money to aid its victims would have had to come from cutting other programs.
But, as luck would have it, the deadline for trimming this year's budget deficit has passed now, and with it this year's spending ceiling.


POSTINGS: At Home, Off Course; 20 Condos
LEAD: Howard Loewentheil, head of LFM Development Corporation of New Rochelle, N.Y., was so pleased with Fairway Greens - the Mamaroneck condominium project overlooking a golf course that he completed last year, with 50 of 54 units sold - that he decided to do a similar one in his home base.


Off the Record
LEAD: THE STATEMENT was never made on the record, off the record, in any way,'' insisted Speaker of the House Thomas S. Foley.
He had been reported by The Washington Times to have told a group of foreign journalists that ''the President is like a mad dog after a bone on this capital gains cut.''


Exchange Program of Jobs Worldwide
LEAD: WHEN 23-year-old Debra Commey of Accra, Ghana, was an accounting student at the University of Ghana, she never dreamed that she would work for the International Business Machines Corporation.
But now she is in the accounting section of I.B.M.'s Latin American division in North Tarrytown.


Numbers, Too, Were Against the Giants
LEAD: If the World Series was supposed to become part of the healing process after the earthquake here, it didn't offer much healing to the San Francisco Giants in the third game.
They knew the numbers all too well: 16 teams in the previous 85 years of the Series had lost the first three games, and none recovered.


Northeast Forests, Too, Get Congress's Interest
LEAD: CONGRESSIONAL debate over the future of American forests has almost always concentrated on the vast timber-growing areas of the Pacific Northwest and Alaska.
But slowly, the future of another heavily forested region, the Northeast, has begun to stir concern on Capitol Hill.


Amy Edelmann Plans a Wedding
LEAD: Amy Maureen Edelmann and William Paul Donohue Jr. plan to marry in December.
The future bride's parents, Maureen Edelmann of Montville, N.J., and West Tisbury, Mass., and Dr.
Robert B. Edelmann of Mendham, N.J., have made known her engagement to Mr.
Donohue, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donohue of Manhasset, L.I.


Teamwork
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Heyday of the Three-Martini Lunch
LEAD: WE CALLED THEM SILVER BULLETS - they were six-ounce martinis made up of six ounces of gin, a drop of vermouth and a thin strip of lemon peel floating on the top, surrounded by a handful of silvery slivers of ice. ''Straight up'' was the way most people drank in the 1960's; ordering ''on the rocks'' was seen as a sign of weakness, as was the substitution of vodka.


Laurinda Payson Middleton Is Married
LEAD: Laurinda Payson Middleton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Bentivoglio Middleton of New York and Greve, Italy, was married yesterday to Frank Graf Oswald 3d, a son of Mr.
Oswald of New York and Audrey C. Oswald of Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
Cal Larson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the Middleton Place Gardens in Charleston, S.C., public gardens that were once owned by the bride's family.


Up From Africa, Down From the Trees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Katherine Conkling, a Painter, Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Katherine Anne Conkling, the daughter of Rowena Conkling and Robert H. Conkling, both of Cambridge, Mass., to Dewey McDonald Thompson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
W.
Thompson of New Canaan, Conn., and Westport, Mass., took place yesterday.
The Rev.
Dean Thornburgh, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Marsh Chapel at Boston University.


Browsing Through Columbia's Jazz Reissue Bins
LEAD: When long-playing records came on the market 40 years ago and began supplanting the 78-rpm disks that had been dominant for much of the preceding half-century, a colorful byproduct of the record business disappeared along with the 10- and 12-inch shellac platters.


The Opium War
LEAD: The argument about legalizing drugs has become passionate, for good reason.
There is a certain intellectual appeal to the logic that suppression provokes the enormity of crime, corruption and irresistible riches that make enforcement so ineffective and so costly.


STREETSCAPES: The Grand Central Viaduct; An $8 Million Revival for a Midtown Masterpiece
LEAD: IT'S one of those things one doesn't really notice, fading as it does into the familiar background of midtown.
But the 1919 Park Avenue viaduct, running between 40th and 42d Streets, will begin to stand out again next year as an $8 million restoration by the Grand Central Partnership re-establishes the structure - including the roadway hugging the terminal - as a central focus for the Grand


LATE-NIGHT COOL
LEAD: Arsenio Hall should not be angered by Johnny Carson's attempt to control guest appearances (''Late-Night Cool,'' by Michael Norman, Oct. 1).
After Mr.
Hall has ruled the late-night talk circuit for nearly 30 years, he may use the power that comes with that territory to impede rising young competitors.


11th-Hour Syracuse Victory
LEAD: John Biskup, who missed his fourth extra-point attempt of the season, kicked a 24-yard field goal with four seconds left today to lift Syracuse to a comeback triumph over East Carolina, 18-16.


FASHION: On the Street; Bending Tradition Just a Bit
LEAD: After many years atop the illustrious domes of statesmen and politicians, the homburg is becoming a fashionable addition to the downtown look.
So, thanks to brisk business at thrift shops and antique-clothing markets, are vintage snap-brim fedoras and that flat-topped favorite of 50's hipsters, the porkpie.


Rising to the Occasion: Simple Souffles
LEAD: FOR DINING ROOM DRAMA, NOTHING compares with a souffle.
Its golden dome, towering tremulously above the edges of the dish, creates a stunning impression, suggesting that either daredevil or genius has been at work in the kitchen.


A HITTING PITCHER PERSONIFIES OAKLAND'S MASTERY
LEAD: Mike Moore epitomized the lopsided nature of the 1989 World Series tonight.
It was so lopsided that it could have been played on only one side of the San Francisco Bay as an intrasquad game and been at least as interesting.


One Struggle Over, Attention Turns to Guilt
LEAD: One afternoon two years ago, when Richard Wesley was feeling especially frustrated in his effort to write a play about what W. E. B. Du Bois had called ''the talented tenth'' of black America, he drove from his suburban New Jersey home to visit cousins in Harlem.
Heading across 145th Street, he noticed a car wash and decided to pull in.


More Boats Being Kept On Racks
LEAD: MORE Connecticut boats are being kept year round in warehouses instead of on the water, as rack storage buildings, or boat valet operations, are constructed along the coast.


LATE-NIGHT COOL
LEAD: So Paramount believes that Johnny Carson's audience is ''skewed to older men.'' Well, maybe yes, maybe no.
Frankly, this 61-year-old WASP finds Mr.
Carson and his fill-in buddy Jay Leno consummate bores. (Is it foreordained that they do a Dan Quayle or Exxon joke every night?) Arsenio Hall, on the other hand, is alive, upbeat.


An Out-of-the-Way Place in Darien
LEAD: BACKSTREET in Darien couldn't be more appropriately named.
In a modest clapboard shopping complex, facing a municipal parking lot on a short, inconspicuous street off Route 1, just a block from the railroad overpass, the tiny restaurant requires directions to find.
Backstreet has the easygoing atmosphere of a neighborhood drop-in place, with only about 50 seats.


Review/Music; Walter Hilse, on Organ, With Hockets
LEAD: Walter Hilse is one of our more venturesome organists, and his recital Wednesday night on the Holtkamp instrument at the Park Avenue Christian Church offered 7 of the 12 sections that make up Dave Soldier's ''Hockets and Inventions.'' The performance was billed as a world premiere, even though it was incomplete; Mr.


Japan Is Divided On Foreign Workers
LEAD: IN a country known for its wariness of outsiders, this bustling port has long been particularly welcoming to foreigners, with its English-language signs and the colorful Chinatown tucked into its narrow streets.
But as Japan slips deeper into its most severe labor shortage in 15 years, even Yokohama has become a front in the


Reviews/Music; Celia Cruz Takes Cuba to Harlem
LEAD: The Celia Cruz Celebrates Harlem show at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem on Oct. 21 caught fire during the second half and stayed lighted.
Backed by Mario Bauza's orchestra and egged on by the insistent choppy drumming of Tito Puente, Miss Cruz brought the packed house to its feet.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  ASPIRING QUARTET


Not Exactly A Campaign Swing
LEAD: Who would have thought that a tree-planting ceremony of the American Forestry Association at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington would make compelling television news?
Certainly not Senator John Glenn (below), the Ohio Democrat and former astronaut, who was being interviewed on other matters of the day at the ceremony by a television correspondent.


Alabama Still Undefeated After 7 Games
LEAD: Someone threw a rock through Coach Bill Curry's office window after Alabama's disappointing 22-12 homecoming loss to Mississippi last year.
This year someone might throw a parade for him.


Don't Waste Time Planning - Act
LEAD: American managers should reject the barrage of criticism they receive for focusing so much on short-term results.
Instead, they should concentrate on doing a much better job on those short-term results.
Traditionally, our greatest strength is the ''let's do it,'' ''let's try it'' attitude.
This American penchant for quick successes and quick rewards dovetails with the pressure for results that most American managers face.


Business Lunch: A Personal Approach
LEAD: IN WASHINGTON, GEORGETTE MOSBACHER IS known primarily as the wife of a Cabinet member and as a glamorous addition to the capital's party circuit.


Peace at Last, on Paper at Least, for Lebanon
LEAD: AFTER 14 years of civil war, Muslims and Christians in Lebanon have drawn up a new charter for sharing power that recognizes the dominant weight of the country's Muslim population and the country's Arab identity.
The deal struck last week holds a promise of an end to a murderous conflict, but it is still hard to say that peace in Lebanon is at hand.


Judith Schwartz Weds Tony Eprile
LEAD: Judith Dora Schwartz and Tony Eprile, who are writers, were married last evening at the French Culinary Institute in New York.
Rabbi Bruce Dollin officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, will keep her name.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin Schwartz of Schenectady, N.Y.
She is a graduate of Brown University and the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism.


Fashion; In New Sweaters, No Motif Goes Unknitted
LEAD: Autumn is sweater season.
Even mild October weather calls for something more than shirt sleeves.
Soft knits are a nice change from tailored jackets, and will slip comfortably under coats when winter's chilly blasts move in.


East German Catholic Bishop Adds to the Cry
LEAD: A pastoral letter demanding far-reaching democratization was read last Sunday to Roman Catholics in all churches of East Germany's leading diocese, Dresden-Meissen.


New York's Mayoral Rivals Support School Innovations
LEAD: The next mayor of New York City wants to be held accountable for the successes and failures of the school system and is committed to sweeping changes in how the schools operate.


Colleen Gunning Is Married
LEAD: Colleen Marie Gunning, a critical-care nurse at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J., and Dr.
Thomas Arthur Beckett, an obstetrician-gynecologist at the Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital and at St.
Barnabas, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Family in Florham Park, N.J.


A Case for Boys' Manners
LEAD: WE had heard there were more wolves in Russia than any other country, but one afternoon we wondered if they all had gathered in our backyard.
They arrived one by one and immediately canvased the yard for a new toy to attack.
They were not very gracious in delivering their presents to the birthday boy, nor did they remember to wish him a happy birthday.


Victories Sought
LEAD: Ulster County Community College in Pound Ridge, N.Y., is looking for a new basketball coach.


Battered Wife Freed in Killing of Husband
LEAD: A woman who ended 17 years of terror and abuse by hiring a gunman to kill her husband was freed from prison Friday after she was granted clemency by Gov.
Booth Gardner of Washington.


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas; Gambling Den Off Campus Shut, Austin Police Say
LEAD: When vice squad officers raided a suspected gambling den near the University of Texas, the ring was said to be handling $100,000 a weekend in sports bets.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-23


The Smugness Of Evil
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sometimes, a Negative Isn't Positive
LEAD: A QUICK scan of the political landscape last week suggested one lesson future candidates may draw from the campaigns of 1989: hit hard, hit fast, hit nasty.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch; An Old-Timer, a Newer Standby
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Gage &amp; Tollner


No Suits Filed By Sound Coalition
LEAD: As an organization committed to the protection of the Sound, the Long Island Sound Task Force welcomed the article ''Deep Splits Mar a Cause'' (Sept. 24).
We want to clarify a statement in the accompanying article, ''The Watch From the Shore: A Who's Who for Long Island Sound,'' that the Connecticut Coastal


In Bolivian Drug War, a Question of Will
LEAD: Bolivia has certain advantages over its neighbors when it comes to waging war against narcotics traffickers.
Unlike Peru and Colombia, there is no insurgency in Bolivia to interfere with antinarcotics operations.
Also, the drug lords in Bolivia have none of the organization, sophistication or equipment of the Colombian drug cartels that allow them to challenge the


A Lesson in Pain and Loss Comes at the Death of a Hamster
LEAD: IT was clear and cold, the kind of night that feels right for putting on a mask and going door-to-door to ask for Halloween treats.
Instead, the whole family processed solemnly outside.
I ran ahead to cut a late-blooming rose from the garden.
My daughter Liza came next, holding a tiny white box gingerly in front of her, with her brother shining a flashlight to show the way.


Pastimes; Bridge
LEAD: Tournament bridge players have a major problem that tournament chess players solved more than a century ago: slow play.
The chess clock, with its associated time limits and forfeitures for exceeding them, cannot conveniently be applied in bridge events although there have been attempts.


NEW INVESTIGATION URGED IN I.R.A. CASE
LEAD: After deciding to free four people who were apparently wrongly convicted of terrorist bombings in 1975, the British Government is under growing pressure to reopen the case of six men who were convicted of murdering 21 people in the bombings of two Birmingham pubs in 1974.


The Evolution of a Book
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stacy Aaron Engaged
LEAD: December wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Philip I. Aaron of Roslyn Estates, L.I., for their daughter Stacy Ann Aaron and Barry Richard Carus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Carus of Merrick, L.I.
Ms.
Aaron, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and is a promotion manager for Act III Publishing in New York.


OVERPAID AND GUILT-RIDDEN
LEAD:  LIAR'S POKER  Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street.
By Michael Lewis.  249 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.


William Warmus: Curator of Glass
LEAD: Both his father, a glass blower at the Corning Glass Works, and his wife's grandfather, a Norwegian glass blower, may have had something to do with William Warmus's interest in contemporary glass.


Lifestyle; No Idle Hands as Daylight Time Ends
LEAD: Hedy Bagatelle has fond memories of growing up in a two-clock family: an electric wall clock in the kitchen and a wind-up clock in the bedroom (moved into the living room whenever she was practicing piano).


Reviews/Music; Half of X Equals Cervenka
LEAD: X, the standard-bearers for Los Angeles punk-rock in the early 1980's, revolved around the songwriting partnership and marriage of John Doe and Exene Cervenka.
Both relationships have broken up, and with her current album, ''Old Wives' Tales,'' and the band she brought to the Lone Star Roadhouse on Tuesday night, Ms.


ECONOMICS: READING YOUR WAY OUT OF CHAOS
LEAD: Economics has long accommodated dozens of schools of thought.
But in the last decade or so, it has become more like physics or chemistry, disciplines so broad and so complicated that, within the field, one group of specialists barely speaks the same language as the Ph.D.'s across the hall.
And so much of what is published seems more to proselytize for an ideology than to make sense of the chaotic world inhabited by economists.


Check It Out
LEAD: First it was autographs for a fee - baseball greats, and some not-so-greats, charging up to $30 for signing wide-eyed youngsters' bubble-gum cards in shopping malls.


Tigre Rebels to Begin Talks With Ethiopia
LEAD: Rebels from a northern Ethiopian province said today that they would begin peace talks with the Ethiopian Government next week in Rome in an effort to end 14 years of civil war.


Soviet Union
LEAD: To the Editor: Driving in the Soviet Union is indeed the best way to experience the joys and frustrations of that country.
I was sorry to see, however, that there was no mention of the group trips run by Pioneer Travel Service of Cambridge, Mass.
Pioneer has operated camping and driving trips to the Soviet Union for 23 years.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: Yes, they are ''just'' baseball games.
Yes, death, destruction and despair have tragically gripped the Bay Area.
But invariably the process of life must continue.
The process of healing must begin.
The World Series should not be called off, assuming roads are commutable, sufficient police are available and the edifices holding 60,000 people are certifiably safe.


Q and A
LEAD:  France


Karen Barbanel Weds
LEAD: Karen S. Barbanel, a senior enforcement attorney at the New York Stock Exchange, was married last evening to Warren A. Estis, a partner in the New York law firm of Rosenberg &amp; Estis.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney W. Barbanel of Manhasset, L.I., and Mr.


A Place for Developing Artistry in Glass
LEAD: IN the brilliant light of their red-hot furnaces, silhouetted glassmakers take on a primeval aspect.
Ritual-like blowing and twisting of a long pipe turns the molten glass at the tip into a glowing sphere.
The blowpipe is passed from hand to hand and back to the ''glory hole,'' where the glass is reheated and reworked, again and again.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Octoberfest, 42d Street between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas will be closed today from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Traffic Jams
LEAD: To the Editor: If what you're looking for on your vacation is a massive, chronic traffic jam, I've just the place for you: State Highway 16 going through Conway and North Conway, New Hampshire both northbound and southbound.


Tagliabue Has Only Begun to Rebound
LEAD: At the National Football League's annual meeting in the spring of 1986, the 28 club owners were confronted with a decision that would determine their future as well as the future of pro football: to go to trial over the United States Football League's antitrust suit or to settle it out of court.
During the discussion, one of the owners turned to one of the N.F.L.


DAMAGE CONTROL DIDN'T WORK
LEAD:  THE FALL OF THE HOUSE OF HUTTON  By Donna Sammons Carpenter and John Feloni.  322 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.
SUDDEN DEATH  The Rise and Fall of E. F. Hutton.
By Mark Stevens.  298 pp.
New York:  NAL Books/New American Library. $19.95.


Groucho: The Curmudgeon on Stage
LEAD: A LEGEND creates problems for his or her subsequent biographers.
Recreating a personality who, while living, was larger and more dramatic than life can reduce biographical sketches into pale imitations of the original.


Margaret Enloe, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: Margaret Anne Enloe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Enloe of Ardsley, N.Y., was married yesterday in Fogelsville, Pa., to Steven Rand McIntyre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William McIntyre of La Porte, Tex.
Judge James T. Giles of Federal District Court in Philadelphia officiated at the home of the bride's uncle, Charles


Milwaukeeans Seek to Stem Rising Violence
LEAD: Earlier this month the city broke its record of 95 homicides in a year, set in 1987.
This year, one of drive-by shootings, drug-running and nightly gunfire, is being called the year of 100 murders.


Finding Strength In Compassion
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tracy L. Kelley Married
LEAD: Tracy Lynne Kelley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Kelley of Carneys Point, N.J., was married there yesterday at Trinity Lutheran Church to Edward Kelly Nalbandian, the son of Pat Kelly Nalbandian of Westport, Conn., and Edward J. Nalbandian of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Shenton performed the ceremony.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: THERE is a lesson for writers in search of subjects in ''Sabotage at Black Tom: Imperial Germany's Secret War in America, 1914-1917,'' by Jules Witcover.


U.S. Resolution on Armenians Angers Turks
LEAD: The Turkish editorial cartoon may not have been a model of subtlety, but it made its point clearly.


Mimi Nicolaides Weds Peter Mahoney
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Shrine of the Most Blessed Sacrament in Washington, Margaret Rose Nicolaides, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Homer Nicolaides of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Peter Edward Mahoney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Mahoney 3d of Baton Rouge, La.
Msgr.
J.
Joshua Mundell performed the ceremony.


What Lies Behind The Strange Smile On the 'Mona Lisa'
LEAD: As his two children run about his small apartment, dodging his easel and smearing their fingers across his palette, Song Bin paints ''Mona Lisas'' - more than 100 of them so far.


Medicaid Rules Revised Against Hospital Fraud
LEAD: The agency that administers the Medicaid program in New York City has issued stringent new guidelines to prevent what workers at several hospitals have said was pervasive fraud by the hospitals against the health insurance program for the poor.


DROPPING IN ON A DRAGON
LEAD:  THE FOUR LITTLE DRAGONS  By Brian Kelly and  Mark London.  432 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


A Honeymoon for One
LEAD: I SLATHER cold cream all over my face, and carry a bowl of mushy mocha-fudge ice cream to my night table.


Grovey Powers Arkansas Past Houston
LEAD: The Arkansas quarterback, Quinn Grovey, accounted for 335 yards in total offense, third-best in school history, and had five touchdowns tonight as the 13th-ranked Razorbacks remained in the Southwest Conference race with a 45-39 victory over 12th-ranked Houston.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: Yes, yes, yes.
Call the Series off.
Schedule the remaining games one week before the opening of the 1990 season.
JOSEPH A. KRYPEL  Wolcott, Vt.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: Would not the skills of those workers repairing damage done to Candlestick Park be put to better use helping the people of the Bay Area restore their shattered homes?
Could not the services of the scores of police officers assigned to the remaining Series games be better used in performing other, more critical duties?


Natasha Cowger Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Natasha Catiche Cowger, a daughter of Kathryn H. Cowger of London and Robert E. Cowger of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to John Richard Bergreen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris H. Bergreen of New York and Scarsdale, N.Y.
Justice Felice K. Shea of State Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the Lotos


Warhorses On The Campaign Trail
LEAD: A FEW weeks before the last election of the 1980's, John S. DaVanzo is campaigning as if it were still the 50's.


Bakker Will Serve Sentence As Worker at Medical Center
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the television evangelist who on Tuesday began a 45-year sentence for fraud and conspiracy, will be moved from a prison in Alabama to the Federal Medical Center here, the Bureau of Prisons announced Friday.
It gave no reason for the transfer.


Among War's Toll in Mozambique: Empty Stomachs
LEAD: The refugees - hungry, barefoot and nearly naked - straggle in daily from the bush, fleeing a guerrilla war that they do not comprehend and looking for relief from a Government that has little to give.


New York Mayoral Race Focuses On Voters' Sense of Party Loyalty
LEAD: Whether to resist or respond to party loyalty is emerging as a dominant question in the final 10 days of New York City's mayoral campaign, with David N. Dinkins wrapping himself in the mantle of prominent Democrats and Rudolph W. Giuliani, his Republican-Liberal rival, by necessity appealing for Democratic and independent votes by invoking John F.


Virginia Campaign Watched As Test on Abortion Rights
LEAD: L. Douglas Wilder has built his campaign for governor of Virginia around his support for abortion rights to an extent that no major candidate for high office has ever dared before.


Unclogging a Pop-Up Drain
LEAD: POP-UP drains, the kind operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet, are common on bathroom sinks.
Although convenient to use, these drains clog easily because the opening in the bottom of the sink cannot be screened.
Also, the plug mechanism frequently slips out of adjustment.


Thomas H. Yorke Wed To Jeannette V. Jardine
LEAD: The marriage of Jeannette Vreeland Jardine and Thomas Hosford Yorke took place yesterday at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
George A. Willis performed the ceremony.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.40
7.34
7.68
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.47
8.55
7.83
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.50
6.41
6.07
Bank Rate Monitor


On the Ancient Nile, a Modern Voyage
LEAD: PERHAPS, when you think of Egypt, you imagine yourself on a boat, gliding smoothly along the wide green Nile as people have done for thousands of years.
Beyond the bulrushes and palm trees that line the shore are small mud-brick villages, each with its own mosque and minaret, flanked by wide fields of black earth being plowed by bullocks.


No. 1 Irish Trounce Panthers
LEAD: Smarting over criticism of their manners and defending their top-ranked status, the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame thrashed Pittsburgh, 45-7, today to extend their winning streak to 20 games over two seasons.


Yanks Withou Two Nuisances
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Who Buys . . . Navy Times? Dirt Rider?
LEAD: UNDER the influence of bookstore chains and mass-circulation newspapers and magazines, the American reading public continues to blend into a single, more or less uniform market.
But a recent survey of magazine circulation by the advertising agency Young &amp; Rubicam's San Francisco office shows that beneath the layers of homogenization, American cities retain their distinctive flavors.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: J. Williams Burns; 'A Road in Good Condition Is a Safer Road'
LEAD: AS State Transportation Commissioner, J. Williams Burns oversees 5,500 miles of highway and 3,600 bridges.
He supervises 4,700 employees and is responsible for an operating budget of $400 million.
He also oversees the state's airports, harbors, piers, buses and trains.


Unclogging a Pop-Up Drain
LEAD: POP-UP drains, the kind operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet, are common on bathroom sinks.
Although convenient to use, these drains clog easily because the opening in the bottom of the sink cannot be screened.
Also, the plug mechanism frequently slips out of adjustment.


Nancy Porter and James Bokern Wed
LEAD: Nancy Chase Porter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick S. Porter of Virginia Beach, Va., was married there yesterday to James Scott Bokern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Bokern of Town and Country, Mo.
Dr.
J.
Scottie Griffin performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.


One Goal, Two Styles in New York City: Catered Party
LEAD: I USED TO STAY UP LATE AND DO A LOT OF the cooking myself - I love to cook,'' Mavis Taintor admitted before her guests arrived for a Wednesday night cocktail party she and her husband, Zebulon, gave in their Upper East Side brownstone.
But, she said, ''I work at a very demanding job, and I have three children, and that's where I put my energy.


CAMPUS LIFE: Harvard; Two Fraternities Set Up Operations Near a Campus
LEAD: The Dean of Students says Harvard University does not have a fraternity program.
Two such groups, however, exist off campus.


Study Sees More U.S. Plea Bargains
LEAD: The Federal prosecutor for the Southern District of New York brought more criminal cases per 100,000 people than United States Attorneys in 10 other districts, a study has found.


The N.F.L.'s Painful Profit Crunch
LEAD: It is a curious enterprise: an intercity alliance of 28 monopolies, blessed by Congress and invariably ruled by fabulously rich capitalists, bound up in its own form of socialism.
Yet the National Football League is as much a part of everyday American life as apple pie, Coca-Cola and Disney World.


'Forced March' Sees the Holocaust Through a Victim
LEAD: Amid the growing number of films dealing with the Holocaust, some of the most effective have been those that bracket the horrors of World War II with the flashbacks of a central character.
From ''The Pawnbroker'' to ''Sophie's Choice,'' there seems to be something more ''real'' about avowedly subjective recollections, as opposed to reconstructions that purport to show the past in an objective way.


Why Not an Aperitif
LEAD: AN APERITIF IS BOTH A DRINK and an occasion, a point in time when the day's labors are suspended and the fun part begins.
An aperitif smoothes the rumples, cleanses the palate and wakes up the stomach.
In Europe, its role in the ritual of hospitality is so central that over the years a whole class of specially concocted drinks has evolved based on secret, almost alchemical formulas.


Mediation Can Aid Children in Divorce
LEAD: The current divorce numbers do not change anything about the past - but the past is past.


Lions Losing Hope
LEAD: The season began with the optimism a new coach brings.
Injuries to the top two running backs soured the atmosphere, but after four losses in four games, the Columbia football program still had hope for a successful season.


A Cold War Over Coffee
LEAD: In the soothing confines of the Kerckhoff coffee house on the campus of the University of California at Los Angeles, where students like to while away hours prattling on about exams and fractures in their love life, the coffee industry feels it may be looking at its future.


When Disaster Is Predictable, A Failure to Communicate
LEAD: THE first days after a catastrophe bring shock, grief and anger, followed by finger-pointing at the technical experts.
Invariably, politicians ask scientists and engineers, ''Why didn't you tell us this could happen?'' To which the specialists usually answer, ''We did.''


Cooked Anchovies: A Different Taste
LEAD: ANCHOVIES taste quite different when they are cooked.
In the Piedmont region of Italy, raw vegetables are served with a classic hot dip made with anchovies, garlic and olive oil that is called bagna cauda.
It is usually cooked in an earthenware pot brought to the table and kept warm over a spirit lamp.


Actor's Inspiration Is Retarded Son
LEAD: DANA PARKER has been doing odd jobs at the Boston Post Road Stage Company - sorting nuts and bolts, cleaning up and ushering - since the theater started five years ago.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  A DROP OF HONEYAn Armenian Tale.
By Djemma Bider.
Illustrated by Armen Kojoyian.
Unpaged.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


TALKING: Inspections; Flawed Reports on Homes
LEAD: THE problem could be a roof that starts to leak within days of the buyer's moving in, or termite damage found to have pulverized a beam in a dark corner of the basement.


Playwrights Tread The Welcome Mat In Hollywood
LEAD: Like many other established playwrights, Marsha Norman is finding she is very welcome these days in Hollywood. ''There are lots of opportunities there now for playwrights, and people are usually willing to trust our judgment,'' she says.
The ubiquitous Ms.
Norman, author of ''Getting Out'' and '' 'Night, Mother,'' should know.


Susan L. Brinkley Wed in Baltimore
LEAD: Susan Lynn Brinkley and John Francis Means, both 1988 graduates of the College of William and Mary, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Baltimore.
The Rev.
William N. McKeachie officiated.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
James Wellons Brinkley of Baltimore and Mr. and Mrs.


Soviets Lack More Than Market Savvy
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Time to Shop
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAN ELENI'S HUSBAND BE FORGIVEN?
LEAD: A PLACE FOR US  By Nicholas Gage.
Illustrated. 419 pp.
Boston:  A Marc Jaffe Book/  Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


One Coach Had to Lose; Bellport Won
LEAD: Joe Cipp and Sal Ciampi are high school football coaches who spend an average of 40 hours a week preparing for game days.
They push themselves as hard as their players, and while Ciampi has attempted to retire, Cipp has just been contemplating it.
Being so similar in nature, it's no coincidence they are considered two of the best coaches on Long


POSTINGS: On Donated Land; Affordable Homes in South Norwalk
LEAD: With a 1.6-acre site donated by the City of Norwalk, below-market-rate mortgages from the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority and the sponsorship of a nonprofit housing agency, construction has begun on Ben Franklin Gardens, a 39-unit condominium project in the South Norwalk neighborhood.
Completion is scheduled for


Cable TV: 40 Channels, Nothing to Watch
LEAD: WHEN the cable television installers first appeared in our neighborhood, we greeted the army of line workers and sales representatives with open arms and open checkbooks.


BRAWLING OVER HARRODS
LEAD: Harrods is my corner shop.
Nearly daily dashes there to get everything from milk to air tickets have given me a ground-floor view of the changes resulting from the dramas reported in your article.
When I moved to Knightsbridge five years ago, Harrods was a musty old dowager.
Nothing lured me to shop past the items on my list.


Medicare Fee for Doctor Bills Rising to $29 a Month in '90
LEAD: The insurance premium that the nation's 33 million Medicare beneficiaries pay to cover doctor bills will rise to $29 a month in 1990, the Department of Health and Human Services said this weekend.
The 1989 rate is $27.90 a month.
Congress has decreed that 25 percent of the cost of Medicare's program that pays physician fees be covered by premiums paid by beneficiaries.


HIS ALTER EGO IS A KILLER
LEAD:  THE DARK HALF  By Stephen King.  431 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


Musical Misers and Big Spenders
LEAD: What ineluctable force impels one type of musician to work as tirelessly and prolifically as Schubert, while other, differently driven, artists jealously hoard their talents like Alberich guarding the Rheingold?
Listening to Carlos Kleiber conduct ''La Traviata'' at the Metropolitan Opera the other evening, all the while trying not to blame him for being involved in the overdressed and underthought Franco Zeffirelli production,


Talking With Palestinians Doesn't Call Destruction Upon Israel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Michele Pincus Weds James Frederick Eller
LEAD: Michele Amy Pincus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Pincus of New York, was married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., to James Frederick Eller, a son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Eller of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold Marans officiated.


College Football; FIRST LOSS FOR MIAMI
LEAD: Miami, rated No. 2 in the news service polls and No. 4 in The New York Times computer ranking, suffered its first loss of the season last night when it fell to Florida State, 24-10, at Tallahassee, Fla.


13 Are Wounded in Gunfight At Flatbush Birthday Party
LEAD: Thirteen people were wounded in a gunfight at dawn yesterday at an all-night birthday party in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, the police said.


HOW TO SUCCED IN BUSINESS? HERE'S THE SECRET....
LEAD: I've just read - that is, tried to read - more than a dozen books about how to succeed in business.
I now know what's wrong with most businesses: the businessmen are all home writing books about how to succeed.


Jim Bakker's Startling Sentence
LEAD: ''Those of us who do have a religion are sick of being saps for money-grubbing preachers and priests.'' That's how U.S.
District Judge Robert Potter prefaced his startling 45-year prison sentence for Jim Bakker, the TV preacher who turned out to be a confidence man.


Outdoors; Help for the Atlantic Salmon
LEAD: One of the world's most highly regarded game and food fishes, the beleaguered Atlantic salmon is also a symbol of pure, free-flowing rivers.


Best vs. Best, Not East vs. West
LEAD: In the next few days, newspaper and magazine stories will herald the anticipated clash of thoroughbred racing's titans -Easy Goer and Sunday Silence - in the sixth edition of the Breeders' Cup Saturday at Gulfstream Park near Miami.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: After the quake, the bars and the liquor stores reopened so people could drink.
The movie theaters played on so people could laugh and cry in front of the screens.
People went to work.


Slaloming Through European Ski Brochures
LEAD: THIS is the season when skiers read color brochures the way gardeners read seed catalogues in January.
And for those Americans who want to ski in Europe, comparing ski packages there is just as arcane an art as deciding which tulip bulb will fare the best.


Sandra B. Wilson Weds
LEAD: Sandra B. Wilson and Theodore R. Walser were married in New York yesterday at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
Charles Amstein.
Mrs.
Walser, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilbur Benjamin of Remsenburg, L.I., graduated from the State University of New York at Cortland.
She is the accessories fashion director in New York for the Neiman-Marcus stores.


That Old Question for a Candidate
LEAD: AS I was listening to a syndicated news show, a male correspondent was concluding an interview with a candidate for state senator.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Nassau
LEAD: The Bahamian capital, Nassau, spared the destruction that Hurricane Hugo wreaked on the neighboring Caribbean, is in the midst of its biggest construction boom ever.
Casinos are being renovated and expanded and new development is evident all over the island.
A flourishing economy is apparent in a multitude of new city buses, shopping malls and services.


Mocking the Utopian Dream
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leila Penniman, Designer, Weds
LEAD: Leila Thompson Penniman and Glenn Ridgely Hardy were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Chestnut Hill, Pa., by the Rev.
Charles Carter.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE PLACE IN FLOWERS WHERE POLLEN RESTS, by Paul West. (Collier/Macmillan, $9.95.) After a descent into some of the worst white America has to offer - the Los Angeles pornography industry and the war in Vietnam - a young Hopi Indian returns to the center of his earth in the Arizona mesas.
Last year our reviewer, Thomas R.


Xavier Rousseau: Jewelry Designer
LEAD: Xavier Rousseau might be described as an updater.
For 12 years, he was involved in Les Must de Cartier, including the development of the Santos watch (which he still wears), leathers, crystal, silver, china and scarves.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Love may strike in the middle of a crowded room, but inspiration not too often.
Or at least inspiration in its dictionary definition, as ''stimulus to creative thought.'' (Forget the alternative and more esoteric definition of ''divine influence''; that's a whole other thing.) Then again, inspiration doesn't strike that often anywhere.


Review/Music; Chico Freeman
LEAD: Chico Freeman, the hard-toned tenor saxophonist, brought a brawling quintet to Carlos 1 on Tuesday night.
And though the group was unrehearsed and played too long, it still put on a rocking show, driven by the percussion of the drummer Steve Berrios and the conga playing of Jerry Gonzales.
The idea was to merge Afro-Latin rhythms with Afro


Some Colleges Still Go All Out on Halloween
LEAD: Halloween on most college campuses on Tuesday will be filled with revelry and high-camp costumes.
Students also plan other activities like trick or treating for disadvantaged children.


U.S. Medical Workers Seized in Mozambique
LEAD: Government soldiers seized six members of an American medical team and two South African colleagues and held them at a military compound in northern Mozambique, United States officials said today.


'Upheaval in the Quiet Zone'
LEAD: To the Editor:


7 Guards Accused of Assault On Patrons at Meadowlands
LEAD: Seven security guards at the Meadowlands sports complex in East Rutherford, N.J., have been arrested on charges of assaulting rock concert patrons there, the Bergen County Prosecutor's office said yesterday.


Lifestyle; Matchbooks With X-Rated Message Are Adding to Some Smokers' Woes
LEAD: In what is fast becoming a smokeless society, the classier accoutrements of cigarette consumption have lost their allure.
Ashtrays of crystal and marble, however handsome, have been banished from the coffee tables of reformed smokers who equate them with spittoons.
Monogrammed silver cases and lighters, like the one Fred used to ignite


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  A Hotel Closes, But B.V.I.'s Say They're Ready


Sony Discussing Contribution to Reagan's Library
LEAD: Representatives of Ronald Reagan were discussing a possible contribution to Mr.
Reagan's presidential library with the Sony Corporation at the same time that the former President was defending the giant electronics company's proposed takeover of Columbia Pictures, a Reagan spokesman said today.


Cooked Anchovies: A Different Taste
LEAD: ANCHOVIES taste quite different when they are cooked.
In the Piedmont region of Italy, raw vegetables are served with a classic hot dip made with anchovies, garlic and olive oil that is called bagna cauda.
It is usually cooked in an earthenware pot brought to the table and kept warm over a spirit lamp.


Pastimes; Around the Garden Joan Lee Faust
LEAD: For This Week: Leaves are falling; keep after them with rakes or power blowers; add them to compost.
Mow the lawn one more time and set the blade to cut low, about one-inch; this short cut will endure until spring and spur rapid start up of the grass.
Finish bulb and shrub planting; tree planting continues well into early winter.


Trading Places
LEAD:  The new players for each team, and how they were acquired (r-rookie; t-trade; fa-free agent; e-expansion draft):  Atlanta Hawks: Roy Marble (r), Aleksandr Volkov (r), Haywoode Workman (r)  Boston Celtics: Michael Smith (r), John Bagley (t)  Charlotte Hornets: Stuart Gray (t), J.R.


On Not Going Up in Smoke
LEAD: WHAT are hard-core tobacco addicts going to do now that a Congressional committee has agreed to ban smoking on domestic airline flights?


Bavaro Likely To Miss Game
LEAD: Mark Bavaro did some running on his sprained left knee today, but the Giants' tight end remained doubtful for Monday night's game against the Minnesota Vikings in Giants Stadium.


Terry Duke Wed To John Marsh 3d
LEAD: Terry Trippe Duke and John Bigelow Marsh 3d were married yesterday by the Rev.
John Thursby at the First Congregational Church of Old Lyme, Conn.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Robert P. DeVecchi of New York and the late William H. Duke of Southport, Conn.
Her husband is a son of Helen H. Marsh of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Mr.


Selling a House Becomes a Family's Passion Through the Seasons
LEAD: HOW did our predicament begin?
Simply enough.
The two children were now teen-agers.
The small vacation cottage we owned was four-and-a-half traffic-filled hours away, and the resistance to making the weekend and summer trips was monumental.
What should we do?


A Tyson Setback
LEAD: By the time he gets around to fighting Razor Ruddock, the Canadian heavyweight, Mike Tyson, the youngest man to win the world heavyweight title, may be the world's oldest heavyweight champion.
The bout, which has already been postponed once, from Nov. 18, because of a Tyson illness, has had to be postponed again.


Rangers Trounce Unhappy Islanders
LEAD: The Rangers preserved their grasp on first place in the National Hockey League with a vengeance tonight at Nassau Coliseum as they crushed the Islanders, 4-1.


Review/Music; Gary Thomas's Rhythms
LEAD: Jazz is, as usual, translating aspects of popular music for its own purposes.
The process could be heard full blown in a set the tenor saxophonist Gary Thomas played at the Knitting Factory on Wednesday night.
Using funk and go-go beats, Mr.
Thomas and his rhythm section, aided and abetted by a drum machine, a computer or two and a rack of other electronic tools, turned in a show that had all the furor of a funk band and all the polish of a space-age pop show.


Tempting Offer in Irvington, but How Should Village Respond?
LEAD: THE village made famous by such l9th-century residents as John Jacob Astor 3d, Louis Comfort Tiffany and its namesake, Washington Irving, has gained a new claim to fame.
In the last 10 years, this sleepy Hudson River community has become the fastest-growing village in the county, increasing an average 12.1 percent each year in population.


Human Race, 2; Computer, 0 (for Now)
LEAD: To hear Gary Kasparov tell it, he could have beaten the vaunted computer chess program, Deep Thought, with one lobe tied behind him.
Mr.
Kasparov (above, right), the world chess champion, took on Deep Thought in a $10,000 grudge match last week in New York City and handily whipped the computer two straight games.


Teachers Chief Urges End to Standard Tests
LEAD: A teachers union leader called for an immediate end to multiple-choice standardized achievement testing yesterday, saying the results are misleading and may even be hindering school reform.


A Big Change Looms in 'Cafeteria Plans'
LEAD: As the end of the year approaches, some employees must decide how much, if anything, they will set aside for 1990 in their ''flexible spending accounts'' for health care - an employee benefit that lets them pay for uninsured medical expenses with pre-tax dollars.


The Details: Tips From Seasoned Hosts
LEAD: MOST SUCCESSFUL HOSTS ARE KNOWN BY A PARTICULAR approach that makes their parties work - for themselves as well as for their guests.
Whether it is the design of a kitchen enabling guests to join in the cooking or a flair for creating quirky centerpieces, there are certain details that set these hosts apart and make their gatherings memorable.


Now, the People's Army Has Fewer Friends, More Power
LEAD: CHINA'S favorite hat used to be the army cap.
As recently as this spring, young boys wore them everywhere and doting parents beamed their approval.


Sylvia Helm, Editor, Weds D. D. Armstrong
LEAD: Sylvia Marie Helm, the executive editor of Computers in Banking magazine, and Daniel Dobyns Armstrong, a director of the Globecon Group, a bank consulting concern, both in New York, were married in New York yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University by the Rev.
John Backe, a Lutheran minister.


POLICE IN PRAGUE MOVE TO BREAK UP BIG PROTEST MARCH
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's hard-line Government used heavily armed policemen today in an effort to crush protests by thousands of Czechoslovaks who marched in the capital calling for freedom and an end to Communism.


The Computer Buff's Bookshelf
LEAD: Those executives who pay attention to computers (and of course all executives should) are more likely to worry about grand issues like productivity and small ones like how to make their personal printers handle envelopes than whether the K.G.B. has penetrated their companies.
In a fresh crop of books, they will find lessons on all these matters.


Japan's Emperor Of Film
LEAD: WE THAT IS TO SAY, A GROUP OF Japanese journalists and I - were waiting for Akira Kurosawa.
It was February, the week of Emperor Hirohito's funeral, and the director was to hold a press conference about his new film, ''Akira Kurosawa's Dreams,'' shot in various locations around Japan.
It is to be released next spring.


Baseball Comes Back With a Flop in the Dirt
LEAD: Some people will say baseball came back with the cathartic ceremony on Friday night, 12 saviors from the earthquake throwing out 12 first pitches: ''Real heroes,'' as Dave Stewart would call them.


Once a Wunderkind, Now Robert 'Long Ago'?
LEAD: It is fitting that the survey of Robert Longo's career at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art is starting its three-city tour in the capital of American popular culture, the home town of movies and television.


Neither Seats Nor Turbo Nor Sun Roof Nor Warranty
LEAD: ALPHONSE SAGNELLI of Stamford has a tougher time moving inventory than most used-car salesmen.
His obstacle in achieving a healthy bottom line is that his Jeeps and vans, although modestly priced, have several peculiar features.


BRAWLING OVER HARRODS
LEAD: When my brothers and I bought Europe's biggest department-store company, House of Fraser, including Harrods, we paid cash (''Brawling Over Harrods,'' by Steve Lohr, Oct. 8).
We paid $:4 ($4.28) a share.
It was a good price, and the shareholders were happy to accept our money.
They went their way rejoicing.


A Hamlet That Can't Get Rid of Its Ghosts
LEAD: WHEN in Cornwall, tread softly around the subject of Dudleytown.
The bygone hamlet southwest of Cornwall Village has long been a favorite of folklorists and phantom seekers.
For decades, books on New England legends have labeled it everything from ''Connecticut's favorite ghost town'' to ''the village of the damned.


Review/Music; Laussade, Pianist, In Recital
LEAD: Elyane Laussade, a pianist with a powerful, polished technique and many an original interpretive notion, made her New York recital debut on Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Her program covered ample ground, all of it well within the standard repertory, and she addressed each work with an impeccable sense of style.


Turnovers, 2 More Teams And Questions
LEAD: Larry Bird is back.
David Robinson is finally here.
For the first time, players from the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia will be competing in the National Basketball Association.
In the biggest player turnover in league history, 128 players, more than one-third of the league, will be wearing new uniforms after an off season of stocking the two expansion teams, free agency, trades and the influx of rookies.


Susan Kohnken Is Married
LEAD: Susan J. Kohnken, an assistant Suffolk County district attorney in Riverhead, L.I., and Joseph R. Onorato, an assistant Nassau County district attorney in Mineola, L.I., were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I., by the Rev.
Francis B. Creamer Jr.
Mrs.
Onorato, 35 years old, is a daughter of George J.


Changing Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nancy J. Lavin Wed in Boston
LEAD: The marriage of Nancy Jane Lavin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Carson Lavin of Needham, Mass., to Daniel Austin Scheerer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Durand Scheerer Jr. of Essex Fells, N.J., took place yesterday at Trinity Church in Boston.
The Rev.
Margaret Gunness, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


Where Are the Innovators Of Today?
LEAD: ''For young artists to follow in the footsteps of titans is not a particularly happy lot,'' Walter Terry wrote in 1971 in his history ''The Dance in America.'' ''Thus it is with a new generation of modern dancers, with those who came after Graham, Humphrey and their fellow pioneers and who were forced not only to follow but also to attempt to rival the continuing creativeness and, in some instances, the performing magnitude of the master.


It Can Happen There
LEAD: Suppose the people of some small American town decided to protest Federal Government policy by withholding their taxes.
The Government responded by sending in the Army.


Drug Evictions
LEAD: To the Editor:


LATE-NIGHT COOL
LEAD: Michael Norman does well to praise Arsenio Hall for his deserved success on late-night television.
But to portray him as a maverick slights the fresh format of ''Late Night With David Letterman,'' a show that preceded Mr.
Hall's by roughly six years.


Gun-Related Slayings In Young Are Studied
LEAD: About 1 in 10 people who die before the age of 20 is killed with a gun, the Government's National Center for Health Statistics says.


Q and A
LEAD:  Rules on Stabilization


New York
LEAD: LIKE MOST AMERICAN DESIGNERS, DONNA KARAN HAS BEEN WORK-ing round the clock on her spring collection.
Late one recent night came a moment of truth.
The gorgeous fabric spun of sheer linen and glossed with golden metal threads had been months in the making in Italy.
Now it had finally arrived.
It draped like a dream, but when it met the sewing machine - screeeeech!


An Absurdist Drama in a Drawing Room
LEAD: WHAT are our best friends for?
Suppose they arrive at our door, frightened - no, terrified - in the middle of the night.
Of course, we must take them in; mustn't we?
But what if they then say they're staying - and take over the room of a family member?


Paper Says Lockerbie Bomb Possibly Originated in Malta
LEAD: The police have found evidence that the bomb on Pan American Flight 103 that killed 270 people was planted in Malta, The Sunday Times of London reported.


Community Control Goes Awry in a City School Board
LEAD: LAST week a panel investigating corruption in New York City public schools heard startling tapes made by a Queens school superintendent talking with members of his local board.
But just as important as what was said was what was not said.


Beatrice Daniels, I.B.M. Manager, Marries Banker
LEAD: Beatrice Jean Daniels, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Daniels of White Plains, was married yesterday at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y., to Michael Louis Zion, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benson Zion of Havertown, Pa.
Justice Thomas A. Facelle of State Supreme Court in White Plains officiated.


First Things First
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:  CLASSICAL  Gershwin: 'Porgy and Bess'  Cynthia Haymon, Harolyn Blackwell, Cynthia Clarey, sopranos; Damon Evans, tenor; Willard White, Gregg Baker, baritones; Glyndebourne Opera Chorus, London Symphony conducted by Simon Rattle.
Angel 49568; three CD's and cassettes.
Those who have long and justly championed ''Porgy'' as a great opera may find its recent accession to the mainstream a mixed vindication.


Halloween: Big Business and Big Trouble
LEAD: AS certainly as suburban doorbells chime when the sun goes down each Oct. 31, cash registers everywhere will relentlessly ring in the weeks preceding Halloween.
Candy corn is steady at 99 cents a pound.
A decent Batman costume will go as high as $20.
Child-sized candy bars are piled up at the entrances and exits and checkout counters of grocery stores.


CRACK AND RACIAL TENSIONS
LEAD: At a time when racial tensions in New York City are at a peak, with violent racial attacks occurring in the streets and a racially charged mayoral campaign occupying the press, Michael Massing's article ''Crack's Destructive Sprint Across America'' (Oct. 1) has, regrettably, added to racial misunderstanding.


A Late Kick Pulls Yale Ahead
LEAD: A 27-yard field goal with 10 seconds to play gave Yale a 23-22 victory over Penn today.
Ed Perks booted the line-drive kick that just cleared the crossbar as the Elis captured the Ivy League contest.


THE CASE OF THE HOPELESS CASE
LEAD:  A STRANGER IN THE KINGDOM  By Howard Frank Mosher.  421 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $18.95.


Army Defeats Rutgers
LEAD: Army, which has thrived on adversity this season, rallied in the second half today to beat Rutgers, 35-14, as Mike Mayweather scored three touchdowns for the third game in a row.


IN SHORT: BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS
LEAD:  WHEN GIANTS LEARN TO DANCE: Mastering the Challenges of Strategy, Management, and Careers in the 1990s.
By Rosabeth Moss Kanter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) This could have been a deadly academic treatment, full of charts and graphs, footnotes and tables.
Instead, Rosabeth Moss Kanter, a professor of business administration at the Harvard Business School, has written a relaxed, readable account of the hows and whys of change in American corporations.


For Some Free Agents, Not Filing Becomes New Strategy
LEAD: In 1981, a negotiating battle over professional compensation for lost free agents (the owners wanted it, the players didn't) produced a 50-day players' strike.
Four years later, the issue had become so unimportant or the owners had so soured on the idea that professional compensation was quietly dropped from the collective-bargaining agreement.


CONFRONTING THE SOVIET UNION'S ECONOMICE MORASS
LEAD: In a speech in New York on Oct. 16, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said that perestroika's success in the Soviet Union is in the long-term interest of the United States.
Mr.
Baker offered to send American technical and economic experts to the Soviet Union to help with the reforms.


Trekking In Thailand's Hill Country
LEAD: THE open-air truck noisly careered around the mountain, up steep, rocky hills and down the bumpy tree-lined roads.
The 12 of us, sandwiched elbow-to-elbow in the back, alternately smiled, winced and strained our necks trying to catch a glipmse of a waterfall that graced the northern Thai landscape.


Tanker, After Being Barred, Docks in Alaska
LEAD: A tanker that has been anchored in Cook Inlet for lack of a state-approved contingency plan for cleaning up any oil spill received permission today to unload after the ship's owner agreed temporarily to adopt the cleanup plan of another company.


Inside the Intifada


Ukrainian Catholics Move Into the Open
LEAD: For more than 40 years, Ukrainian Catholics have worshiped in secret gatherings held in the dense forests of the western Ukraine or behind drawn shades in the homes of believers.


Tending the Greenbelt Trail
LEAD: I CALLED my friend Joan the other day. ''I think it's time we hit the trail again,'' I said.
She agreed.
We're not planing to pack our bags annd skip town.
Instead, we'll pack a lunch, grab our pruning shears and a supply of garbage bags and head for Massapequa State Park.


Long Island Sound: Problems and Solutions
LEAD: I am writing in regard to your article ''L.I.
Sound: Deep Splits Mar a Cause'' (Sept. 24) and your accompanying description of Long Island Sound advocacy organizations.


ON THE TRAIL OF THE PARANORMAL
LEAD: WHAT does someone do when he hears footsteps or muffled conversation and no one is there?
Perhaps he has been touched by an unseen hand or knows of a room where an icy chill exists the year round.
Many people have called in A. J. Rauber of North Brunswick, a self-described investigator of paranormal activity.


Pamela Flood to Marry Dr. Glauco Radoslovich
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Flood of New York and Chappaqua, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Pamela Dru Flood to Dr.
Glauco Radoslovich, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anton Radoslovich of Cliffside Park, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.


School Costs: The Real Villain Is Property Taxes
LEAD: ANOTHER school year has now begun, but this one will be different from recent years.
Tax revolt hysteria swept Long Island last spring, leaving in its wake defeated school budgets, divided communities and disillusioned students and teachers.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. A citronella candle dripped melted wax onto the pressure-treated pine on our outside deck.
We have tried removing this stain, but so far nothing has worked.
Any suggestions?


What's Keeping Us From Building New Cities; Princeton and Irvine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Massachusetts; Week of Civility Tries to Confront Campus Prejudice
LEAD: Civility Week, which ended here Friday, marked the third anniversary of a racially motivated riot at the University of Massachusetts in 1986.
The university-sponsored observance, intended to promote racial and cultural harmony, was heralded by posters and the distribution of ribbons of different colors, symbolizing various races.


Does One's Color Really Matter?
LEAD: To The Sports Editor:


WARMING UP TO NEW ENGLAND WINTERS
LEAD: CALAIS, VT., IS A PLACE WHERE the general store closes at 7 P.M., and the night life goes downhill from there.
This quiet country town of 1,500 is precisely what Cornelia Capwell Denker, a textile and graphic-arts designer, and her husband, Goeffrey Poister, a musician, writer and film maker, were looking for when they moved there nine years ago.


Cooked Anchovies: A Different Taste
LEAD: ANCHOVIES taste quite different when they are cooked.
In the Piedmont region of Italy, raw vegetables are served with a classic hot dip made with anchovies, garlic and olive oil that is called bagna cauda.
It is usually cooked in an earthenware pot brought to the table and kept warm over a spirit lamp.


Bentsen Exhorts Democrats To Embrace Family Values
LEAD: Senator Lloyd Bentsen said today that the Democrats lost the Presidential election ''because too many young people aren't sure they can trust us to govern this nation.''


How a Artist's Vision Became Ours
LEAD: Most of us see Italian landscapes for the first time over somebody else's shoulders - the valley of the Arno, for example, behind Pollaiuolo's martyred St.
Sebastian, or the lakes of Mantua through the back windows in Mantegna's strange ''Death of the Virgin.'' After a time it seems natural to want to move the all-important central figures for a while and to walk into the picture, in particular the part that they necessarily hide from you.


Exxon Faults Wildlife Group's Criticism of Oil Spill
LEAD: Exxon has resigned from the National Wildlife Federation's corporate advisory board and has called the federation unfair in its criticism of the Alaska oil spill last March.


Five Killed and One Missing as Bridge Falls Into an Arkansas River
LEAD: A pedestrian bridge with as many as 50 people on it collapsed today, killing at least five people and injuring 18, after the crowd rocked the span back and forth, the authorities said.


Separate Officals For TV Replays
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


In Chicago, A New Romanticism
LEAD: This city's celebrated passion for skyscrapers has been as evident as ever recently.
First there was the announcement last June by Lee Miglin and J. Paul Beitler, a pair of local developers, that they planned to put up a 125-story, 1,914-foot tower on a tight corner site downtown, a building that would be the tallest skyscraper in the world, eclipsing its neighbor, the Sears Tower, by more than 400 feet.


Oil vs. Fish? No, a Way To Have Both
LEAD: RECENT efforts by Congress to restrict oil and gas exploration within 50 miles of New Jersey's coast have produced some of the typical posturing by environmentalists, regulators and developers that weighs more towards guerrilla theater than constructive debate.


Where to Get More Details
LEAD: Abercrombie &amp; Kent/Continental Waterways, 1420 Kensington Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521 (312-954-2944; 800-323-7308 outside Illinois).


Evening Hours; Benefits for the Arts, Children and AIDS
LEAD: Cartier's resembled the Mad Hatter's tea party Thursday night when nearly 100 young dancers age 8 to 14, all looking like Alice in Wonderland, gathered for a celebration.
The young dancers, all members of the School of American Ballet, are to perform in this year's ''Nutcracker'' at Lincoln Center.


Hemond Rewarded
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles yesterday extended the contract of Roland Hemond, the team's general manager, and gave him the added title of executive vice president.
In 1988, Hemond's first season as general manager, the Orioles had a 54-107 record.
Fortunately for Hemond, he had a two-year contract, and this year the team finished at 87-75, coming within a hair of the American League East pennant.


Trenton State Rally Produces 31-31 Tie
LEAD: Darin Roberts, a quarterback, scored on a 7-yard run as time ran out, and Scott Osborne kicked the extra point, enabling Trenton State to gain a 31-31 tie with Montclair State yesterday.


THE FREEWAY DEAD: Portraits From Oakland - A special report.; 11 WHOSE LIVES ENDED AS QUAKE CRUSHED I-880
LEAD: They were brought together by chance, by fate, by an act of God, some might say: 23 men, 15 women and a little boy.
Strangers caught together in a terrifying moment as the earth's mantle shrugged, blithely shattering a fragile man-made structure, the Nimitz Freeway in Oakland.


Another Quarter Of Economic Growth
LEAD: The economy grew at a 2.5 percent rate in the quarter that ended in September as a surge in consumer spending offset weakness in exports and the industrial sector, the Commerce Department reported.
The overall advance matched that of the April-June period.
Economists found reason to cheer in the report's indication of lower third-quarter inflation, even though that was mostly a reflection of falling energy prices.


THE PLAYERS' MAIN MAN
LEAD: ONE DAY IN THE middle of the baseball season, nine Houston Astros, in New York for a series against the Mets, spent an afternoon in midtown Manhattan.
For 90 minutes they sat around a conference table on the 26th floor of a Third Avenue office tower, listening to Don Fehr, a man more important to their careers than any manager, umpire or opposing pitcher.


Rita M. Jakeway Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Rita Mary Jakeway, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Jakeway Jr. of Eastchester, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Skinner Bigelow 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bigelow 3d of Landgrove, Vt.
The Rev.
Patrick Walsh performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Tuckahoe, N


DR. KING'S BEST FRIEND
LEAD:  AND THE WALLS CAME TUMBLING DOWN  An Autobiography.
By Ralph David Abernathy.
Illustrated. 638 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row.


James Freney to Wed Caroline Neville
LEAD: Mrs.
William Frederick Thayer of Palm Beach, Fla., and Newport, R.I., and Warwick Fay Neville of Pinehurst, N.C., and Palm Beach have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Livingston Neville to James Raymond Freney.
He is the son of Susann Ferguson Freney of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
A January wedding is planned.


Anne D. Campion Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of Our Savior in Brookline, Mass., Anne D. Campion, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander T. Daignault of Boston, was married yesterday to Curtis Hartman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Hartman of Aurora, Ohio.
The Rev.
William A. Spurrier 3d performed the ceremony.


THE PEST CAN'T THEM DOWN
LEAD:  GARMENTS THE LIVING WEAR  By James Purdy.  152 pp.
San Francisco:  City Lights Books.
Cloth, $16.95.
Paper, $6.95.


Exxon Valdez Trial to Be Held in Anchorage
LEAD: The trial of Capt.
Joseph J. Hazelwood, skipper of the Exxon Valdez, will be held in Anchorage despite claims by the defense that it will be hard to field an impartial jury here.


Tearing at the Deep Roots of Protectionism
LEAD: AS the Bush Administration sought in Geneva last week to push the world toward a freer agricultural economy, it was facing opposition not only from Europe but from some important farm interests at home.
The problem is that the United


STREET FIGHTING FEMINIST
LEAD:  LETTERS FROM A WAR ZONE  Writings 1976-1989.
By Andrea Dworkin.  337 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


ROLL OVER, WAGNER
LEAD: I am a composer whose background includes rock, jazz and conservatory training (''Roll Over, Wagner,'' by Anthony Tommasini, Sept. 24).
For the last few years, I have been scoring films using computers and synthesizers.
So I read your article on Stewart Copeland with great interest.
Copeland is a first-rate drummer.


Miss Gallagher To Wed in May
LEAD: Jayne H. Gallagher of New York and Washington has made known the engagement of her daughter, Elizabeth Jayne Gallagher, to William Michael McManus Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McManus of Rockville Centre, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.


Economic Miracle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; Death-Life Celebration By Muteki-Sha Troupe
LEAD: Natsu Nakajima has an indisputable sense of theater.
Her eye for visual effect extends to the smallest details of costuming and lighting.
But though her latest work, presented on Friday night at the La Mama Annex by Miss Nakajima's Muteki-Sha Dance Company, obviously thrilled much of the audience, to this observer it looked surprisingly shallow.


Pastimes; Chess
LEAD: Gary Kasparov was annoyed by remarks from commentators about a terrible blunder that his opponent Anatoly Karpov made in the 11th game of their second title match, the one that won him the world championship.


Clashes With Police at Gay Conference at Yale
LEAD: A man was arrested Friday night after putting up sexually explicit posters at Yale University, leading to a confrontation between the police and hundreds of people attending a conference on homosexual issues.


A Limit on Soliciting a Day's Work
LEAD: Just 30 miles south of Los Angeles, which has just begun a program helping day laborers find jobs, Costa Mesa is taking the opposite approach to the growing number of illegal aliens who gather on street corners seeking work.


When the Party's Over
LEAD: BREATHES THERE A SOUL WHO doesn't hate cleaning up after a party?


POSTINGS: 51 Low-Cost Houses; 2-Families
LEAD: More than two years after New York City began the nation's largest low- and moderate-income housing program, construction is moving at full throttle.
In one recent initiative, work is nearing completion on El Rosario, a complex of 51 two-family homes in a blighted industrial section of the East Williamsburg neighborhood in


Unclogging a Pop-Up Drain
LEAD: POP-UP drains, the kind operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet, are common on bathroom sinks.
Although convenient to use, these drains clog easily because the opening in the bottom of the sink cannot be screened.
Also, the plug mechanism frequently slips out of adjustment.


Teen-Age Dateland: Risky Country
LEAD: TEEN-AGERS, since time began, have always been ''cooler'' than their parents.
They know, on an experiential level, tons more about drugs, danger, depression, music, fashion and what's playing in the movies.
They take risks, accept challenges, try out new behavior.


Terreri's Play Lifts Devils Past Chicago
LEAD: The coach's harsh words about their lackadaisical play at home must have finally reached the Devils' ears, because they finally played a solid game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.


Long Talks Bring Child Rights Charter to U.N.
LEAD: After 10 years of negotiations, the first comprehensive Convention on the Rights of the Child is expected before the General Assembly for approval next month.


Art Meets Life for a Vietnamese Actress
LEAD: It's probably fair to say that just about nothing in Kieu Chinh's life has turned out as she expected.
Ms.
Chinh did not anticipate leaving her native Hanoi when she was 14.
Certainly she could not have imagined that she would become, in the late 1960's, South Vietnam's most famous female movie star and television talk show hostess, voted, in 1972, the most popular actress of Asia at the Asian Film Festival.


Levi Leads by 1 As Kite Staggers
LEAD: Wayne Levi, the golfer from upstate New York who plays the stock market almost as much as he does golf courses, had a blue chip day on the Harbour Town Golf Links today.
Levi ran five consecutive birdies on his way to tying the course record of eight-under-par 63.
This included a record-tying front nine of six-under 30.


Offsetting a Loss of Federal Support
LEAD: The conservative agenda of the Reagan era has forced many nonprofit groups to become much more sophisticated in the way they do business.


Is East Europe Too Amazing for the West?
LEAD: AS one astounding development succeeds another in what used to be known as the Soviet bloc, it is no longer visionary to think of the possibility of a new Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals by the end of the century.
The extent of change in the East became even clearer last week, but so did the implication that the


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  HALLOWEEN CONCERT


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: When you get knocked down, you have two choices: you get up or you stay down.
Play ball.
MATT JACKSON  Brooklyn


The Rite-of-Passage Cruise
LEAD: UNTIL last summer, no one had ever trapped me into an all-you-can-eat, nightly-entertainment-provided, package-deal vacation.
Then my daughter Elizabeth, who was 18 in May, said she wanted to go on a cruise after high school graduation.
To her, a cruise seemed romantic, adult and a good way to get a suntan.


Abused Children: Do Judges Know Best?
LEAD: The article ''Grandparents Raising Children of Crack'' (Sept. 17) focused attention on the recurrent problem of what to do with children of abusive parents.


Blood Donations And Cholesterol Tests
LEAD: The article ''A Night for Singles at a Blood Center'' (Sept. 24) was an excellent illustration of how far a little imagination can go in attracting new blood donors.


In Bach, Enlightenment Without Illumination
LEAD: The Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment is the latest of London's recombinant early-instrument groups, peopled with musicians familiar to anyone who has scanned the rosters of the English Concert, the Academy of Ancient Music and other ensembles.
As with most such groups, the roster expands and contracts as the music requires.


Sludge Sites For Nassau
LEAD: The article ''Towns Resist Selection as Sites for Sewage'' (Oct. 1) failed to mention that Nassau County's preferred resolution of this matter would be the processing of sludge off Long Island in a joint venture currently under consideration with Westchester County.


In Purchase, a Movable Musical Feast
LEAD: A VALUABLE but at times neglected possession of the State University of New York will take center stage at the Performing Arts Center of the campus here in the coming weeks.


Miss McPhillips Weds M. H. Allen
LEAD: Maureen McPhillips and Dr.
Michael Hall Allen were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
John F. McDermott performed the ceremony.


How Safe Are Cruise Ships?
LEAD: THE National Transportation Safety Board has conducted a broad investigation into the cruise business, and it is not happy.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  A Real Senior


MR. LONELYHEARTS
LEAD: I FIRST MET EPPIE LEDERER (alias Ann Landers) in July 1981.
She had just given a speech at a real estate convention and, as a reporter for The Orlando Sentinel, I approached her for an interview.
I was star-struck and somewhat fawning.
She was 63 years old and a legend; I was 22 and not yet jaded about celebrityhood.


NO CHANGE IS SEEN AT SPANISH HELM
LEAD: In the fifth general election since democracy returned here in 1975, Spaniards go to the polls on Sunday fully expecting that Felipe Gonzalez will be returned as Prime Minister but less happy with that prospect than they have been in the past.


A Shotgun Season for Deer is Proposed
LEAD: WITH the opening of the county's bow-hunting season for deer this week, state officials are considering a plan to allow a limited shotgun season in January on private land of 10 acres or more.


As Ideology Dies, Analogies Rise
LEAD: While much is utterly unpredictable - Mikhail Gorbachev's staying power, the limits of Soviet tolerance in the Baltic and Eastern Europe, China after Deng Xiaoping, the consequences of the European Community's move toward complete economic integration in 1992 - two international developments seem to have achieved a degree of probability approaching certainty.


Some Links to the Past in East Norwich
LEAD: IT was 1907 and Oyster Bay's Teddy Roosevelt was President.
Nearby in East Norwich, a restaurant called Rothmann's opened its doors.
After 63 years of ownership by the Rothmann family, followed by 19 years when it was known as Burt Bachrach's, the restaurant has been lovingly restored to its early 20th-century mellow elegance.


Nicaraguans Bracing for a Return To a War They Hoped Was Over
LEAD: Pessimism and apprehension descended here today as Nicaraguans and foreign officials learned that Sandinista leaders might end their 19-month cease-fire with contra rebel forces.


Effort to Repair an Old Project Lifts Tenants' Spirits (and Paintbrushes)
LEAD: Parishioners from middle-class churches in the Chicago area have been spending their weekends since July fixing abandoned apartments in a rundown public housing project where even the police are reluctant to venture after dark.


CRACK AND RACIAL TENSIONS
LEAD: ''Taking advantage of lax gun laws in Texas, Florida and Virginia,'' writes Michael Massing in his article, the dealers ''have stockpiled Uzis and AR-15 assault rifles.'' If this is true, it gives the lie to those who piously maintain that people, not guns, kill, and that, therefore, gun-control laws do not work.


THE OTHER SIDE OF ORIGINALITY
LEAD:  STOLEN WORDS  Forays Into the Origins and Ravages of Plagiarism.
By Thomas Mallon.  300 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $18.95.


Julia Horn to Wed James L. Bosland
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Horn of Minneapolis have made known the engagement of their daughter Julia Laramee Horn to James Lockwood Bosland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul C. Bosland of Short Hills, N.J.
An April wedding is planned.


Of Wigs And Wigmakers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Oct. 14  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $345,000  303 East 57th Street  (Excelsior)  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining area; maintenance $1,314, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: R. Bedell Ltd.)


In Paris Shows, Couture Meets Its Marketers
LEAD: LIKE glittering nymphs of the post-industrial age, the models sauntered down runways last week, showing the first styles of the 1990's.
But on their backs hung more than clothes.
Dangling from their coat-hanger shoulders were the fortunes of a luxury-goods industry that is France's second largest exporter after defense.


N.F.L. Picks, In Overtime
LEAD: If the teams of the National Football League took as long to select a play as their team owners took to pick a commissioner, sportscasters would be talking about the seven-month instead of the two-minute drill.
Last week, after three meetings in three cities and 11 ballots, the owners chose Paul J.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayville  $230,000  22 Highland View Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 23-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, h/w floors, deck, patio; taxes $2,500.
Glen Cove  $200,000  16 Tulane Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.


Supersecrecy of a Capital Drug Trial Is Extended to the Jurors
LEAD: The courtroom where Rayful Edmond 3d and 10 others are on trial has become a testing ground for new and troubling legal issues that arise in the prosecution of suspected drug lords who are feared in the communities from which juries are drawn.


NOBODY'S PERFECT
LEAD:  THE SUN ALSO SETS  The Limits to Japan's Economic Power.
By Bill Emmott.  292 pp.
New York:  Times Books. $19.95.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Making Nuclear Site Safe


GENDER AND THE G.N.P.
LEAD:  IF WOMEN COUNTED  A New Feminist Economics.
By Marilyn Waring.
Introduction by Gloria Steinem.  386 pp.
San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


A Soprano Who Feels She Can Say No
LEAD: ''I really consider myself in semi-retirement now,'' says the soprano June Anderson.
It is an odd comment for a 36-year-old singer who is about to make her debut as Gilda on Friday at the Metropolitan Opera in a new production of ''Rigoletto,'' with Leo Nucci and Luciano Pavarotti and designed by Zack Brown and staged by Otto Schenk.


Making a Big Name in the Recording Studio
LEAD: Eliahu Inbal is one of the most-recorded conductors of the last few years, with cycles of orchestral works by Mahler, Bruckner, Schumann, Scriabin, Sibelius and Ravel behind him, and Beethoven, Berlioz, Tchaikovsky, Dvorak and Stravinsky cycles on the way.
Yet he is little more than a name in the United


Cooked Anchovies: A Different Taste
LEAD: ANCHOVIES taste quite different when they are cooked.
In the Piedmont region of Italy, raw vegetables are served with a classic hot dip made with anchovies, garlic and olive oil that is called bagna cauda.
It is usually cooked in an earthenware pot brought to the table and kept warm over a spirit lamp.


3 Congressional Seats Could Open Next Year
LEAD: AS the gubernatorial race for next year begins to take shape, two, and possibly three, of the six Congressional seats in the state could be open next year.


Preparing to Celebrate the High Holiday of Candy
LEAD: THOUGH I admit that little trick-or-treaters are adorable in their witches' hats, trailing sheets and monstrous faces, I think the holiday should be outlawed.
The reason is candy.


Joanne Waller Is Married
LEAD: Joanne Karen Waller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Waller of New York, was married at the Stanhope Hotel in New York yesterday to Robert Thomas Maddox, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl W. Maddox of Sayville, L.I.
The Rev.
Bernard Poppe, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
The bride, 30 years old, as is her husband, graduated from the Spence School and Brown University.


Was English At Shortstop?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


French Designer-Decorators in the Style of Luxe
LEAD: The Paris School of Art Deco design was even more varied than shows of the last 25 years have shown.
While some designers found inspiration in ancient Egypt or in early-20th-century European modern, others, such as Ernest Boiceau and Andre Arbus, devised furnishings firmly rooted in the French classics of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.


Conference on Black Theology Unites Scholars and Pastors
LEAD: Black theology, a distinctive understanding of Christianity based on the religious experience of African Americans, was forged in the days of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and the Vietnam War, but its proponents believe it is no less relevant in the days of President Bush, televangelism, Spike


Boeing and Strikers to Talk
LEAD: The Boeing Company and the machinists' union have agreed to hold contract talks for only the second time since 58,000 workers struck the aircraft manufacturer Oct. 4 over wages and work schedules.
The announcement was made Friday by a Federal mediator, Doug Hammond, who said the two sides would meet separately with mediators Sunday and direct talks would be held Monday.


Six Candidates Seek Ears, Not Votes
LEAD: The Libertarian Party candidate for mayor of New York City runs his one-man campaign organization out of his midtown Manhattan stockbroker's office, where he writes his own literature - ''I'm anti-big government'' - photocopies it and mails it out.


Diver Battles Illinois Over 2 Lake Michigan Wrecks
LEAD: A salvage expert who discovered two 19th century steamers at the bottom of Lake Michigan is battling the state for control of the wrecks.


Koch's Stand on China Enrages Ambassador
LEAD: In the battle over Tiananmen Square - the one at 42d Street and 12th Avenue - the exchanges between the People's Republic of China and the City of New York are turning increasingly hostile.


Robert Halsband, 75, English Scholar, Dies
LEAD: Robert Halsband, an authority on 18th-century English literature and a teacher and writer, died of pneumonia Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 75 years old.
Professor Halsband wrote a dozen books on the literary figures of the 1700's and their works.
Among his books are ''The Life of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,'' ''The Complete Letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu'' and ''The Rape of the Lock and Its Illustrations, 1714-1896.


Jan C. Grossman Engaged to Marry
LEAD: The engagement of Jan Carol Grossman to Joshua Morton Rubins, a son of Eve Rubins of Baldwin, L.I., and the late Dr.
Irving Rubins, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Grossman of New York.
A December wedding is planned.


Murder Trial Offers DNA Test
LEAD: THE use of DNA as evidence in identifying crime suspects will come under scrutiny tomorrow, when a hearing begins in Nassau County Court in Mineola to determine its admissibility in a murder trial.


Ms. Seretean Wed To Glenn I. Levin
LEAD: Tracy Lynn Seretean, the daughter of Farol Seretean of Washington and Martin B. Seretean of Boca Raton, Fla., was married in New York last evening to Glenn I. Levin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Levin of Ardsley, N.Y.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel officiated at the Pierre.


THE NOUVEAU TYCOONS
LEAD:  THE NEW CROWD  The Changing of the Jewish Guard on Wall Street.
By Judith Ramsey Ehrlich and Barry J. Rehfeld.
Illustrated. 444 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Miss Lee Weds Kraighton Stack
LEAD: Alexandra Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Lee of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Kraighton Stack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Stack of Albany and Glass Lake, N.Y.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


Bird Is Back, but Celtics Have Age-Old Problem
LEAD: The Eastern Conference preview was prepared and written by Sam Goldaper.
Atlantic Division


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The new play-by-play announcer for Yankee games on the Madison Square Garden network is DeWayne Staats, who has been announcing Cubs games for five seasons. . . .
Mark Breland, the World Boxing Association welterweight champion, will defend his title for the third time, against Fujio Ozaki of Japan in Tokyo on Dec.


9 Remain in Hospitals After Rioting at Prison
LEAD: Nine of the 133 people injured in rioting at the state prison here this week remained in hospitals today.
Two guards and three inmates were released.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu; Homemade Corn Bread Ready-Mix
LEAD: The nostalgia food faction has not only returned regional American foods to their rightful place in the regions from which they come, it has also introduced the rest of the country to some of these wonderful old dishes that have been loved for generations for good reason.


Pastimes; Coins
LEAD: The 19th century brought curious items to numismatics, coins called struck copies.
They filled a need for reproductions of some American Colonial coins and different die makers created pieces that were faithful copies of the originals.
These copies were openly advertised and sold to collectors and museums.


Review/Dance; West German Company Makes American Debut
LEAD: By importing attractions from West Germany in recent seasons, the Next Wave Festival of the Brooklyn Academy of Music has revealed that contemporary German dance is not only esthetically stimulating and controversial but also remarkably varied.
This autumn, New Yorkers have been able to admire the extravagant fantasies of Reinhild Hoffmann and the emotional eloquence of Susanne Linke.


No Suits Filed By Sound Coalition
LEAD: As an organization committed to the protection of the Sound, the Long Island Sound Task Force welcomed the article ''The Sea That Unites Also Divides'' (Sept. 24).
We want to clarify a statement in the accompanying article, ''The Watch From the Shore: A Who's Who for Long Island Sound,'' that the Connecticut Coastal Coalition, of which the task force is a member, has taken legal action against municipalities.


Review/Music; Composers' Diverse Appropriations
LEAD: The only artist-member of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center to participate in Friday's program at Alice Tully Hall was Fred Sherry, the cellist and new artistic director.
This might lead some to assume that Mr.
Sherry's purge of the old membership is now complete.
In fact, he has some old and new fellow members, even if none were engaged for this program, the last repeat of which takes place this afternoon at 5.


A'S OTHER HENDERSON IS SPOTLIGHT
LEAD: When the World Series picked itself up and began again Friday, it almost seemed as if the Oakland Athletics had been standing there impatiently, tapping their feet and folding their arms and waiting to play again.


Death and Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


A's Win Series In Four Straight
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics completed a four-game sweep of the San Francisco Giants tonight and brought a resounding end to the first Battle of the Bay Area and to the first World Series ever interrupted for 11 days by an earthquake.


5 More Dead in Texas Blast
LEAD: Rescue workwers recovered five bodies overnight from what is left of the Phillips Petroleum plastics plant, destroyed by explosions Monday.
Twelve bodies have now been found, said a Phillips spokesman, Jere Smith.


Soviets Report Economic Decline Since July
LEAD: The Soviet economy has worsened since July as strikes and ethnic conflicts cut into production, the Government reported today.


Campus Life: Boston U.; Police Investigate False ID's Issued By Student Ring
LEAD: A student ring that produced illegal driver's licenses for use by underage students to obtain alcohol and enter adult clubs has been uncovered by officials at Boston University and Boston College.


The Ivy League Isn't 'Half-Baked'
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. A citronella candle dripped melted wax onto the pressure-treated pine on our outside deck.
We have tried removing this stain, but so far nothing has worked.
Any suggestions?


What's Keeping Us From Building New Cities; Part of the Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Terrace Solarium
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes; Camera
LEAD: Thirteen years ago Norman Snyder, a New York photographer, decided that what the world needed was a compendium of all things photographic.
The result was ''The Photography Catalog,'' a book modeled none too subtly on ''The Whole Earth Catalog.'' Like ''The Whole Earth Catalog,'' which was a combination of counter-culture wisdom and consumer titillation, ''The Photography


The New Business Lunch: Offbeat Restaurants
LEAD: DICK BYRNE, AN EXECUTIVE vice president of a New York advertising agency, is a veteran of more long, bibulous business lunches than he cares to recall.
Only 10 years ago, these affairs were routinely held at such Establishment bastions as La Cote Basque, The Four Seasons and Christ Cella.
On a recent occasion, however, when clients came in from out of town, Mr.


Say 'Ah'
LEAD: THE ELASMOSAUR WAS A GIANT sea reptile with fierce-looking jaws, flippers and an athletic neck that accounted for more than half its length.
Dating from the Cretaceous Period, some 66 million to 144 million years ago, it belonged to a family of creatures known as plesiosaurs, of which paleontologists say they are often reminded when they hear descriptions from those who claim to have sighted the Loch Ness monster, the possibly apocryphal


Dr. Patricia A. White Weds
LEAD: At St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Ossining, N.Y., Dr.
Patricia Anne White, an assistant professor of medicine at the New York Medical College in Valhalla, N.Y., and Daniel Kevin Flatley, a vice president of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Michael Connolly officiated.


Doing More With Less: Companies Donate Volunteers
LEAD: After a surge early in the decade, the growth of corporate philanthropy has stalled.
Corporate contributions, adjusted for inflation, have fallen by 7 percent since 1985, to $4.8 billion in 1988.
By comparison, individuals donated $86.7 billion, up 15 percent for the same period.
The most recent culprits for the decline in corporate giving: the rise of cash-draining mergers, the stock market crash in 1987, increased foreign competition and a reduced tax incentive.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''If the Congress of the United States stops financing the counterrevolutionaries, then we will unilaterally declare a truce.''
- President
Daniel Ortega Saavedra
of Nicaragua.  [ 1:5. ]


Baseball Adds To Quake Aid
LEAD: Baseball's $1.4 million contribution to the Northern California Earthquake Relief Fund breaks down this way: $50,000 from each of 24 clubs and $100,000 each from the two Bay Area teams, the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland Athletics.


IN SHORT: BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS
LEAD:  THE DECISION MAKERS: The Men and the Million-Dollar Moves Behind Today's Great Corporate Success Stories.
By Robert Heller. (Truman Talley/Dutton, $22.50.) One day in 1957, Akio Morita, the co-founder and chairman of the Sony Corporation, turned down a purchase order for 100,000 new transistor radios from the Bulova Corporation because Bulova would sell them only if the radios carried the Bulova brand name.


Allison Day Married to John B. Lanni
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., Allison Balken Day, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney D. Day 3d of New York and Bryn Mawr, was married yesterday to John Bryenton Lanni, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Lanni of York, Me.
The Rev.
Mark H. Andrus officiated.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing; A Peaceful Training Ground for Army Officers
LEAD: Seen from across the river in the waning color of mid-autumn, the forbidding institution carved into the rising banks of the Hudson unquestionably has a serious purpose.
Form probably never clung closer to function.


In Brooklyn, a Demonstration for Low-Income Housing


Vivian Makram, An Auditor, Weds
LEAD: Vivian Makram, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel Makram of Cairo, was married yesterday in New York to Michael Ward, a son of John J. Ward Jr. of Chicago and the late Mrs.
Ward.
The Rev.
Gilbert J. Gentile performed the ceremony at St.
Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church, where the bridegroom is the music director.


Susan Ann Belfiglio Weds George Grimbilas Jr.
LEAD: The Brick Presbyterian Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Susan Ann Belfiglio, the daughter of Ronald Belfiglio of New York and Susan Belfiglio of White Plains, to George Grimbilas Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grimbilas of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert Anderson performed the ceremony.


Paul Dwyer WedsMary Sue Howley
LEAD: Mary Sue Howley, a Daughter of Mrs.
Peter D. Howley of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Howley, was married there yesterday to Paul Gerard Dwyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Dwyer of New York.
The Rev.
Edward F. Maloney officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.


When the Sun Set on the Nixon Presidency
LEAD: In a pivotal scene in ABC's ''Final Days,'' Richard M. Nixon becomes a character out of Samuel Beckett.
It is early May 1974.
The Watergate scandal has reached a boiling point, and Special Prosecutor Leon Jaworski has taken legal action to wrest more White House tapes from the President.
Retreating to his home in San Clemente, Calif., Mr.


MARKET MADNESS
LEAD:  MANIAS, PANICS, AND CRASHES  A History of Financial Crises.
Revised Edition.
By Charles P. Kindleberger.  302 pp.
New York:  Basic Books.
Cloth, $21.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Unclogging a Pop-Up Drain
LEAD: POP-UP drains, the kind operated by raising a vertical rod in the center of the faucet, are common on bathroom sinks.
Although convenient to use, these drains clog easily because the opening in the bottom of the sink cannot be screened.
Also, the plug mechanism frequently slips out of adjustment.


Spotlight On Artists From Asia
LEAD: FOR several years Asia has been providing an astounding number of remarkable young musicians.
The opening of cultural doors and a strong sense of discipline are often credited, and the number of musicians of Asian heritage in the United States is increasing.


Votes in Congress; Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:  SENATE


Governor Kean Campaigns for Courter in New Jersey Meeting them were Kim Apollo and her children, Elizabeth, 9 months old, in Mr. Courter's arms, and Allyson, 4 years old. (NYT/John Sotomayor)


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Real Swan Lake


THE RISKS WEE TOO GOOD TO PASS UP
LEAD:  OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY  The Inside Story of the S&amp;L Mess.
By Paul Zane Pilzer with Robert Deitz.  269 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.
INSIDE JOB  The Looting of America's Savings and Loans.
By Stephen Pizzo, Mary Fricker and Paul Muolo.  443 pp.
New York:  McGraw-Hill. $19.95.


Carolyn Murray, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Carolyn Anne Murray and David Christopher Scalera were married yesterday at St.
Thomas the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Bloomfield, N.J., by the Rev.
Michael J. Kreder.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Norbert Paul Murray of Bloomfield and the late Mr.
Murray.
Mr.
Scalera's parents are Judge and Mrs.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Chappaqua, N.Y.  $500,000  22 West Orchard Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 34-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, screened porch, den, family room, rec room, 1.04 acres; taxes $7,481.
North Tarrytown, N.Y.  $328,000  Hunter Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, screened porch, 1-car garage; taxes $5,656.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''They are so determined to win the capital gains cut that they are resorting to extraordinary financing.
This is unprecedented, and it will cost the Treasury an extra $20 million to do it.''
Senator Lloyd Bentsen,
Democrat of Texas,
on the Administration's borrowing plan.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The Capone Connection; Transforming a Onetime Chicago Mob Headquarters
LEAD: A $2.6 million Federal urban development action grant awarded to this city last month has provided the last link in the financing of a $28.6 million project to transform the historic Lexington Hotel, where Al Capone had his headquarters, and a neighboring building into a 258-suite hotel with 32,000 square feet of retail space.


ELECTION PLANNED BY AFGHAN REBELS
LEAD: A visiting delegation of the Afghan rebels' government in exile in Pakistan has announced plans to hold some form of election in Afghanistan before Feb. 15.


Individualism That Promises Fun
LEAD: THE Jersey City Museum's ''Two Arks, a Palace, Some Robots and Mr.
Freedom's Fabulous Fifty Acres'' will be fun for most of its viewers.
Dominating the show is a wolf-sized dog made entirely out of automobile engine parts, by William Clark.
Titled ''Junkyard Dog,'' but looking infinitely meaner than the real thing, the creature stands with its jaws ajar to reveal huge white-painted fangs.


SO MUCH MORE THAN VIRGINIA'S HUSBAND
LEAD:  LETTERS OF LEONARD WOOLF  Edited by Frederic Spotts.
Illustrated. 616 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $29.95.


Special Today: Entertaining/Section 6


Soviet Union
LEAD: To the Editor: ''Relatively new?'' My wife and I did a month's auto tour of the Soviet Union, camping in our own car, 20 years ago.
Judging from your story of Aug. 27, the only thing that has changed since then is that the gasoline hoses have nozzles.
In 1969, the hoses just ended, and sometimes the fuel was supplied in jerry cans, not pumped.


The Influential and Joyous Legacy of Zaire's Franco
LEAD: The nation of Zaire went into mourning, by presidential decree, for four days after the death on Oct. 12 of L'Okanga La Ndju Pene Luambo Makiadi, the Zairian bandleader and guitarist more simply known as Franco, who died at the age of 51.
During the mourning period, Franco's music was heard continuously on the radio - probably without much repetition, since he had recorded at least 100 albums since 1956, when he helped to start O.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: Of course the Series should have been called off.
Could it be that the money involved in the games is too large to forfeit even in the face of a major disaster?
ALFRED W. MUNSON  Stroudsburg, Pa.


The Social Cost Of Low Wages
LEAD: The article dealing with the homeless problem in New Jersey was very timely (''State Grapples With Homelessness,'' Sept. 17).
The reference made to the low wages and high cost of rent facing the poor in our state has been confirmed by many private agencies involved in aiding the homeless.


Burger King's Big Comeback Bid
LEAD: The Burger King Corporation is at a point of reckoning.


Tomorrow, Sleeping Late
LEAD: IF Jane Pauley was miffed, as some reports had it, when Deborah Norville showed up on the ''Today'' show last August, it was all hugs Friday morning when they passed the baton.
NBC said that Ms.
Pauley (at right) would be leaving the show after 13 years to begin work on a weekly prime-time news program and on a special in which she will be interviewing people ''who have undergone significant personal and professional change and examining how they have faced these crossroads.


In an Impatient Pocket of Rural India, Gandhi Fights for His Political Future
LEAD: For the next few weeks, Kamal Bahadur Singh and thousands of people like him in farming villages and towns in a rural pocket of India called Amethi will number among the most important people in Indian politics.


FEELING THE HOT BREATH OF CIVILIZATION
LEAD:  THE STORYTELLER  By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane.  246 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


INSIDE THE INTIFADA
LEAD: AT MIDDAY THE WORD spreads among the young men of Husan: Gather at the usual place just after dark.
And a little before 8 P.M., about 15 youths assemble at the prearranged spot.
Their faces are covered by ski masks or checkered kaffiyehs, and each in turn utters the password, an Arabic letter difficult for Hebrew-speakers to pronounce.


Couple Die in Fall From Train
LEAD: An elderly California couple were killed in a fall from a moving Amtrak train today, the authorities said.
Investigators were trying to determine the events that led to the deaths of Arthur Kohfeld, 87 years old, and his wife, Dorthea, 76, of Reedley, Calif., near Middle Point in northwest Ohio, the Van Wert County Sheriff's Department said.


Dinner in the 80's
LEAD: For five years i was a hostess in remission.
It began when I moved into a typical New York City apartment and came into full bloom while I was a restaurant critic.
First I had no room to entertain at home; then I had an excuse not to.


About Men; Goodbye Thoreau, Hello Astaire
LEAD: THAT'S GOOD CLOTH,''


The Land of the Lemurs
LEAD: ''WHEN will we see lemurs?'' we asked on our arrival after dark at Berenty, a reserve in the south of Madagascar.
We had come to the capital of Madagascar, Antananarivo, only the night before and that morning had taken a plane to Fort Dauphin, then drove all afternoon through a variety of ecological niches including the spiny desert, where the cactuslike plants of a unique-to


When the Villain is Colonialism: Two Shows Explore Oppression
LEAD: ''Evil Empires'' at the Longwood Arts Gallery, and ''Consciousness Raising Art'' at the Bronx River Arts Center and Gallery, are separate but equal.
Both shows are about oppression but the first treats the subject generally while the second addresses one of its aspects, apartheid.


Off-Track Behind the Iron Curtain
LEAD: THE danger may not rival murder on the Orient Express, but an overnight train in Europe still can have its perils - at least if you're behind the Iron Curtain and as unwary a traveler as I am.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a producer's change, an article on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the play ''The Talented Tenth'' at the Manhattan Theater Club gives an outdated schedule.
The opening has been delayed, and a new date has not been set.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. A citronella candle dripped melted wax onto the pressure-treated pine on our outside deck.
We have tried removing this stain, but so far nothing has worked.
Any suggestions?


The Growing Legal Battle Over Employee Waivers
LEAD: Robert C. Patterson was 55 years old when the Xerox Corporation offered him a tough choice.
He could volunteer for the company's early retirement program and be eligible for 15 months' pay with benefits.
Or he could take his chances and possibly be discharged in an upcoming staff reduction.
If that happened,


POSTINGS: Near Booth Memorial; Medical Offices
LEAD: A few years ago, administrators at Booth Memorial Medical Center, on Booth Memorial Avenue at 141st Street in Flushing, Queens, were searching for a way to take better advantage of properties the center owned on the other side of the avenue and was using for offices and staff housing.
They turned for assistance to W.


Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Rueful Ruminations on Love in 'Bus Stop'
LEAD: IF ''Bus Stop'' is to work with an all-black cast - and why can't it? - the American Stage Company is offering no clue as to just how it can.


Beijing Welcomes 'Old Friend' Nixon, Hoping for Thaw With U.S.
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon arrived today for a visit of about six days in which he will meet with top Chinese leaders, and although it is billed as an unofficial fact-finding trip, both the United States and China seem to hope that it will help smooth relations.


THE SELLING OF DNA
LEAD:  GENE DREAMS  Wall Street, Academia, and the Rise of Biotechnology.
By Robert Teitelman.  237 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $19.95.


Appointments Worry Environmentalists
LEAD: President Bush won applause when he chose William K. Reilly, a career conservationist, as Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
But since then the President's choices for top environmental jobs have raised questions among some preservation groups and lawmakers about Mr.
Bush's commitment to protecting the environment.


Under Full Sail From Monte Carlo To Italy's Coast
LEAD: IT was a cool, windy night when we pulled away from the pier in Monte Carlo and headed out to an almost frighteningly black vacuum of sea and sky.
The blizzard of lights from the resort's densely packed apartment buildings was growing dimmer and dimmer when we noticed, off in the darkness, an odd, towerlike object lighted up like a


Pastimes; Stamps
LEAD: A delivery experiment that failed yielded stamps and postal stationery that are inexpensive but hard to find, a combination that attracts hobbyists.
The experiment - several experiments, actually - involved the delivery of mail by pneumatic tubes, which used vacuums to pull mail from one city station to another.


DATA UPDATE: October 29, 1989
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Aug. 89
Aug. 88
Change
Starts
1,332
1,459
-9.0%
Completions
1,434
1,539
-6.8%
Sales
755
712
+6.8%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Marion Bartle, Investment Manager, Weds John N. Packs in Massachusetts
LEAD: The marriage of Marion Stuart Bartle, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart H. Bartle of Lee, Mass., and New York, to John Nicholas Packs, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Packs of Endicott, N.Y., took place yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Stockbridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Theodore H. Evans, the rector of St.


NEW ORLEANS KITCHEN SESSION
LEAD: When Leonard Salvato, an architect based in New Orleans, began to think about building a house, he turned for inspiration to memories of his childhood home.
Mr.
Salvato grew up in the San Francisco Bay area where, he said, his large and gregarious Spanish and Italian family treated cooking as a team sport and meals as spontaneous, guess-who's-coming-to-dinner sorts of affairs.


Wright Bridge for Bay Would Have Held Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


M. S. Farkas Wed To Miss Goldberg
LEAD: Jessica Ann Goldberg, a daughter of Richard Goldberg of Palm Springs, Calif., and the late Marcia Goldberg of Chicago and New York, was married in New York last evening to Matthew Scott Farkas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Farkas of New York.
Rabbi Thomas Weiner and Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan


Verdict Upheld In Assault Case Over Mercury
LEAD: A New York State appeals court has reinstated the convictions of the owners of a Brooklyn thermometer factory who were found guilty by a jury of ''assault by a dangerous instrument'' for exposing workers to unsafe levels of mercury fumes.


A's Trounce Giants To Win Series Title In a 4-Game Sweep
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics won the World Series last night with a 9-6 victory over the San Francisco Giants, to complete a four-game sweep that had been interrupted for 11 days by the earthquake of Oct. 17.


Patricia Collins Weds
LEAD: Patricia Jean Collins, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William Kelly Collins of Lee, Mass., was married yesterday to Kevin Gerard Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bradley Taylor Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Revs.
Francis X. Murphy, Eugene O'Brien and Phillip O'Shea performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church in Lenox, Mass.


For Mayor: David Dinkins
LEAD: What a disappointing campaign: voters have heard almost as much about Jackie Mason and Jesse Jackson as about David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani.
So far, the two candidates haven't even managed to debate each other.


Lauren B. Abrams Marries
LEAD: Lauren B. Abrams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Abrams of Ridgewood, N.J., was married last evening to Daniel L. Krieger, a son of Laura Poster of White Plains and the late Jesse Krieger.
Rabbi Martin Freedman officiated at the Preakness Hills Country Club in Wayne, N.J.
Mrs.
Krieger, 28 years old, is the director of sales and marketing at Morgans Hotel in New York.


Panamanian's Tale: '87 Plan for a Coup
LEAD: Eduardo Herrera Hassan, a former colonel in the Panamanian Army, learned firsthand about the problems of plotting a coup that complies with the Presidential rules restricting covert operations by the Central Intelligence Agency.


Financing Repairs in Co-ops and Condos
LEAD: THE boiler groans and expires.
The windows were leaky last winter and now another cold season is on the way.
The elevator won't pass inspection and the broken and buckled sidewalk outside, which everyone thought belonged to the city, turns out to be the building owners' responsibility.


Villanova Wins in Italy
LEAD: Kirk Schulz passed for two touchdowns and led two third-quarter drives that helped Villanova to a 28-25 victory over Rhode Island today as the Yankee Conference opponents played in the first college football game in Italy.


Nancy B. Meyers Weds
LEAD: Nancy B. Meyers and Scott L. Gottlieb, who both graduated from Woodmere (L.I.) Academy in 1982 and cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania in 1986, were married last evening at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal officiated.
The bride, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Meyers of Belle Harbor, Queens, is the senior account executive at Omni Development and Marketing Ltd.


Auto Insurance: Wide Changes Are Sought
LEAD: AS automobile insurance rates rise and the Joint Underwriting Association sinks deeper into debt, New Jersey officials and insurance industry experts agree that the current system is ripe for sweeping changes.


New Deans At Adelphi
LEAD: I would like to correct a misconception in the article ''Colleges Strive to Keep Students on L.I.'' (Sept. 23).


Hatsy Brown and Scott Vallar Marry
LEAD: The marriage of Harriette Anne Brown, a daughter of Lieut.
Gen. and Mrs.
Frederic J. Brown 3d of McLean, Va., to Scott William Vallar, the son of Meryl Vallar and William H. Vallar Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., took place yesterday at the Chapel of the Centurion at the Fort Monroe Army post in Hampton, Va.


L.I. Streets Inspire a Novelist
LEAD: WHEN Alice McDermott was in college, she took writing courses so she could ''coast.'' But her teacher said: ''I've got bad news for you.
You're a writer.'' In Elmont, L.I., where she had grown up, writing was not ''something people did or even thought about,'' said Ms.
McDermott, now 35 years old.


Basic Education At Nassau Community
LEAD: ''In the article ''Colleges Increase Remedial Efforts for Marginal Students'' (Oct. 1), you did not mentioning the Basic Education Program at Nassau Community College.


Dan Wickenden, Author and Editor, Dies at 76
LEAD: Dan Wickenden, an author and retired senior editor at Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, the book publisher, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 76 years old.


Ultimatum for Eason
LEAD: The New England Patriots have won only two of their first seven games, and Pat Sullivan, the general manager, thinks he may have hit on a formula to improve things, if not on the playing field, then at least on the balance sheet.


Prospects; Mr. Blumenthal's Troubles
LEAD: Last year W. Michael Blumenthal, chairman of Unisys Inc., announced a strategy for the $10 billion company that he said would double its size by the mid-1990's.
But the strategy is not working.
The company's substantial debt has been downgraded, its inventories have increased and it has been reducing staff.


Ortega Now Says End to Rebel Aid Can Save Truce
LEAD: Modifying a position he stated on Friday, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua said today that he would adhere to a cease-fire with the contras if the United States halted its assistance to the rebels as a fighting force.


Review/Theater; Brains vs. Beaut In Family Melodrama
LEAD: ''Everyone needs a place to dance and sing,'' observes a character at the end of Kim Merrill's play ''Beauty Marks.'' The pronouncement is one of many mawkishly sentimental observations that punctuate a drama so aswirl in tearful memories, accusations and reconciliations that it has the feel of a high-pitched soap opera.


Bacon's the One
LEAD: To the Editor:


The 'Subway to Nowhere' Now Goes Somewhere
LEAD: Twenty years after its conception, a new subway-line extension - dubbed the subway to nowhere by its critics -made a ceremonial maiden run yesterday, rumbling under the East River from Manhattan to Roosevelt Island and into Queens.
Regular service was to start today on the $868 million line, the first subway to the island.


Corrections
LEAD: A television review of ABC's ''The Final Days'' in the Arts and Leisure section today misattributes a remark quoted in the second paragraph.


For-Profit Tactics Take Hold Despite Deep Resistance
LEAD: Despite considerable resistance to the concept, a growing number of nonprofit groups are thriving by using marketing research principles to refine their services and target their message.
Those nonprofits that can afford it have begun to rely on M.B.A.'s, consulting firms, advertising agencies, lobbyists and media specialists to guide their leaders, who traditionally have had little business experience.


Reviews/Music; A Concert In Honor Of Ascap
LEAD: The first Meet the Moderns concert of the season, on Tuesday evening at Cooper Union, had a full agenda.
It was the start of the 10th season of the series, but the anniversary took a back seat this time.
Instead, Lukas Foss and the Brooklyn Philharmonic celebrated the 75th annivesary of the American Society of Composers, Authors and


In Peekskill, Fodor Resumes His Concerts
LEAD: ''I HAVEN'T had a drink or drug since this thing happened,'' said Eugene Fodor, the celebrated violinist, who was recently placed on three years' probation after his arrest last July for possession of cocaine and other charges. ''I'm thinking with a clearer mind and I've never felt better in my life.


What Poison Politics Has Done to America
LEAD: FROM the tavern on the corner to the Capitol on the hill, there is a feeling that something has gone badly wrong in political discourse.
People have complained for years that campaigns do not grapple with issues of government.
But more and more, it seems that government has become enmeshed in the issues created for campaigns.


Point Guard Takes Over N.B.A.'s Show
LEAD: As a youngster growing up in Lansing, Mich., Magic Johnson often dribbled the night away at the local basketball court, pretending to be one of his idols.
One night he would pretend to be Dave Bing.
The next night, he might be Oscar Robertson or Walt Frazier.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner; Southwestern, French and Indian
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in the Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Arizona 206


Ladle Label
LEAD: What's in a nickname?
For Vinnie (Microwave) Johnson, the No. 3 guard on the champion Detroit Pistons of the National Basketball Association, apparently a lucrative endorsement contract.
Johnson scored so many points so fast after coming off the bench and entering a game three years ago that an awed opponent, Danny Ainge of the Boston Celtics, gave him the ''microwave'' label.


U.S. Legislators Press Beirut General on Pact
LEAD: Two American lawmakers tried today to persuade the Lebanese Christian leader, Gen.
Michel Aoun, to accept an Arab League-sponsored peace plan.
They also urged kidnappers holding Western hostages to free the men.


IN SHORT: BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS
LEAD:  FUNNY BUSINESS: An Outsider's Year in Japan.
By Gary J. Katzenstein. (Soho Press, $17.95.) Gary J. Katzenstein went to Japan with his eyes and heart open.
His innocence did not last.
A computer specialist, Mr.
Katzenstein went to work for Sony as part of a yearlong fellowship.
Expecting to bear witness to the dazzling efficiency of a leading Japanese corporation, he instead found an office filled with grim workers whose greatest virtue was endurance.


What's Keeping Us From Building New Cities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Heidi Schallenberg, a Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Heidi Elisabeth Schallenberg, a lawyer in New York, and Philip Sweeney, an official of the Environmental Protection Agency, were married yesterday at the First Reformed Church in Fishkill, N.Y., by the Rev.
Richard N. Ryley, a United Methodist minister.


Pastimes: Gardening; Tree Planting at Home Helps a National Effort
LEAD: Home gardeners who have learned of the environmental threats posed by the greenhouse effect may not realize they can play a role in combating it.


G.E. to Test Alternative Method of PCB Disposal
LEAD: A small model of the Hudson River will be constructed in Ann Arbor, Mich., in the next few months to test laboratory findings that naturally occurring bacteria can be accelerated to destroy PCB's on the river bottom, the General Electric Company announced this week.


A New Mayor, Just in Time For the Hard Time After the Boom
LEAD: A FEW months ago Felix G. Rohatyn caused a stir when he told the City Club that he believed New York may be heading for a period even more painful than the fiscal crisis of the 1970's.


LONELY AT THE TOP
LEAD:  ARMAND HAMMER  The Untold Story.
By Steve Weinberg.
Illustrated. 501 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


STUCK IN REVERSE
LEAD:  RUDE AWAKENING  The Rise, Fall, and Struggle for Recovery of General Motors.
By Maryann Keller.  275 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company.


Jets Just Lack What It Takes
LEAD: The bare-bones statistics give a bleak picture of the Jets, and hint at perhaps an even worse future.


Correction
LEAD: A list last Sunday of people prosecuted in theWedtech case misstated the job of a Postal Service employee.
The employee, Jerrydoe E. Smith, was a contract specialist in the Postal Operations Procurement Division, not a postal inspector.


Jessye Norman's Mediterranean Specialty
LEAD: WHEN JESSYE NORMAN speaks of food, the conversation may turn to Gustav Mahler - not as surprising as it may seem, given her renown as an interpreter of his music.
In fact, the Austrian composer led her, in a manner of speaking, to discover one of her favorite dishes, a Corsican specialty, her variation of which is given here.


DELIGHTFUL CROCODILES
LEAD:  THE MEDICI AESOP  Spencer Ms. 50.
Translated by Bernard McTigue.
Introduction by Everett Fahy.
Illustrated. 175 pp.
New York:  Harry N. Abrams. $45.


Miss Goldstein Weds A. R. Edelstein
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Ellen Goldstein and Anthony Robert Edelstein, both graduates of the University of Pennsylvania, took place last evening at the Columbia University Faculty House in New York.
Cantor Lisa Hest performed the ceremony.
The bride, who received an M.B.A. degree from New York University, is a direct-mail manager at Citicorp in New York.


A Love Affair With Jazz
LEAD: To the Editor:


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  FROM RUSSIA, WITH ART


In Nuclear Cleanup, Costs Grow and Promise Fades
LEAD: Engineers arrived here in 1982 to begin cleaning up a factory that once processed nuclear waste.
Their task was to employ a pioneering technology: remove hundreds of thousands of gallons of radioactive liquids and sludge from an aging storage tank and make the radioactive materials safe from spills or leaks by mixing them with cement or glass.


Feasting on Leftovers
LEAD: LEFTOVERS, I HAVE found, can often be a headstart on the way to a new adventure.
I welcome them as dividends, and the microwave oven is particularly good at transforming them into savory new dishes.


CONDUCT UNBECOMING?
LEAD: WHEN THE TRUSTEES OF ROCKEFELLER University in New York City appointed Nobel Laureate David Baltimore as president earlier this month, it plunged the school's distinguished scientific faculty into turmoil.
More than a third of Rockefeller's full professors took the extraordinary step of coming out against the appointment in the press.


Touch Tones
LEAD: IN THE 18TH CENTURY, VELVET was velvet, silk was silk, lace was lace and men were men - no matter how elaborately they adorned themselves in luxurious trimmings.
A hundred years later, the finery of French court dressing had given way to the simplicity of the English squire, whose coarse tweeds and woolens set the tone for a new definition of masculine attire.


An April Bridal For Jennifer Ash
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Clarke B. Ash of Palm Beach, Fla., have made known the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Ash, to Dr.
Albert Joseph Rudick Jr., a son of Eleanore Rudick of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Rudick.
An April wedding is planned.


A Large Helping Of Gunter Wand In Four Big Sets
LEAD: Like an errant delivery truck that mistakenly dumps a ton of coal on your lawn, the good people at BMG/RCA Records have seen fit to release 24 compact disks of Germanic music conducted in a Germanic fashion by Gunter Wand.
The disks, assembled in four boxed sets, consist of the complete symphonies of Beethoven (60090-2-RC, 6 disks), Schubert (60096-2-RG, 5 disks), Brahms (60085-2-RG, 3 disks) and Bruckner (60075-2-


Japan Moves Toward Modest Aid for Poland
LEAD: Prodded by the United States and other Western democracies, Japan is moving cautiously toward approving a modest program of aid for Poland.
It would be the first time that Tokyo has provided economic assistance to a nation in the Eastern bloc.


Homeless Projects At the Crossroads
LEAD: Two years ago, Andrew M. Cuomo arrived in the county determined to build transitional housing for the homeless in Mount Vernon, White Plains and Greenburgh.


Miami Undone By Turnovers
LEAD: Undone by six turnovers, two of them coming 1 yard from a touchdown, the University of Miami hopes for a perfect season came apart tonight with a 24-10 loss to Florida State.


For a Bit of a Gamble, Meet Them in St. Louis
LEAD: In South Africa in 1959 one would hardly have expected to find the American musical thriving, much less splashing in the rain that Louis Burke and Joan Brickhill concocted for their revival of Gershwin's ''Lady Be Good'' that year.
Yet musicals and dramas with such special effects as Borzois, chariots, 45-foot sequined cloaks, shipwrecks and flying Ariels became the trademarks of this married couple who eventually mounted more than 80 productions in their native country.


Rhones, California Style
LEAD: YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE A WINE EXPERT to recognize such names as cabernet, chardonnay and pinot noir.
Of course, they're the names of the grapes that go into California's most famous wines.
But don't get too comfortable; things are changing out on the West Coast.
Are you ready for syrah, mourvedre, grenache, cinsault and viognier?


Magazine to Print Lost Stevenson Story
LEAD: An unpublished and nearly forgotten story by Robert Louis Stevenson will appear in the fall issue of the Georgia Review, the University of Georgia's literary magazine announced today.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. A citronella candle dripped melted wax onto the pressure-treated pine on our outside deck.
We have tried removing this stain, but so far nothing has worked.
Any suggestions?


Leading a Path to Nature and Its Restful Ways
LEAD: JEAN VERTEFEUILLE introduces people to the sight of blue herons, the feel of canoe paddles and the sound of silence.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:  Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Hello, Central. Get Me Stereo
LEAD: A well-appointed home once had its music room, usually containing one or two grand pianos. (A second piano was handy for playing duo-piano arrangements of symphonic scores, which used to be a popular pastime in musical households.) Later, as domestic space got tight, the music room contained a hi-fi system and maybe no piano at all.


23 Yachts Set Sail In Race's 2d Leg
LEAD: Twenty-three sleek monohull yachts from 13 countries set sail today on the rugged second leg of the 33,000-mile Whitbread Round the World Race.


Sound Coalition Filed No Suits
LEAD: As an organization committed to the protection of the Sound, the Long Island Sound Task Force welcomed the article ''The Sea That Unites Also Divides'' (Sept. 24).
We want to clarify a statement in the accompanying article, ''The Watch From the Shore: A Who's Who for Long Island Sound,'' that the Connecticut Coastal Coalition, of which the task force is a member, has taken legal action against municipalities.


DIFFERENT FROM YOU AND ME: EIGHT INVESTORS
LEAD:  THE NEW MONEY MASTERS  Winning Investment Strategies of Soros, Lynch, Steinhardt, Rogers, Neff, Wanger, Michaelis, Carret.
By John Train.  385 pp.
New York: An Edward Burlingame Book/  Harper &amp; Row. $22.50.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Oct. 15 about Cumberland, Md., misstated the phone number for the C.&amp;O.
Canal Visitors Center.
It is (301) 722-8226.


Fashion; For Dancing Downtown, Buckets and Bags
LEAD: What evening bag goes with combat boots?


Social Events
LEAD:  For the Homeless  Oct. 29 - George Plimpton will be the host.
Ashford and Simpson will provide the music, Fran Lebowitz the humor and Calvin Trillin some enlightenment on the world in general at a party at Christ Church United Methodist, 60th Street at Park Avenue.
The festivities, starting at 5:30 P.M.


Condemned to Poverty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dancing to a Revolutionary Beat
LEAD: Maguy Marin, considered one of France's most audacious young choreographers, has always gone her own way, and never the same way twice.
In her latest work, ''Hey, What's All This to Me!?'' (''Eh, Qu'est Ce Que Ca M'Fait a Moi!?''), an abrasive rock musical about the French Revolution, Miss Marin shows that the glut of bicentennial reverence has not slowed her down.


Mediation Can Aid Children in Divorce
LEAD: Janice Cohn and Gary Skoloff are certainly on the right track (''Children Can Survive a Divorce,'' Opinion Page, Sept. 24) when they say that non-adversarial settings afford parents an opportunity to constructively consider the needs of their children instead of fighting over them in a courtroom.


The Road From Pulpit to Prison
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the television evangelist, apparently had no intention of waiting for the afterlife to get his taste of the good life.
With his PTL ministry bringing in $100 million a year at its peak, the boyish Mr.
Bakker indulged in expensive homes, cars and companionship, mostly with his ministry's money.


One Goal, Two Styles in New York City: Family Lunch
LEAD: TO INCLUDE THEIR YOUNG SON AS MUCH as possible in their lives, Martine and Jean-Michel Bergougnoux entertain en famille -for lunch usually, and in ways that allow Edouard, now 4, to take a small but active role.
In New York just three years, they like to share the personal, low-key pleasures of French home cooking with new American friends.


CAMPUS LIFE: Michigan; Marshmallows Are Added To List of Missiles
LEAD: The University of Michigan athletics department is taking action against marshmallows and students in wolverine costumes.
After receiving complaints from fans, the school has added marshmallows to the list of items prohibited in the 101,701-seat Michigan Stadium.


Woody as Rabbi
LEAD: To the Editor:


Faulty Metal in a Part Is Blamed for Iowa Jet Crash
LEAD: Government investigators have concluded that a manufacturing flaw caused the crack in an engine fan assembly that brought about the crash of the United Airlines jet over Iowa last July.


Question Of the Week; Should The Series Have Been Called Off?
LEAD: Only if a portion of revenues from the gate, the concessions, the salaries and the media is donated to relief, should the Series go on.
STEPHEN R. TOBER  Portsmouth, N.H.


Animal Films? The Secret Is a Bankable 'Dog'
LEAD: It's been said, by Woody Allen, I think, that if you do comedy, you don't sit at the grown-ups' table.
If you do animals, you may not even get into the house - and with reason.


RUTHLESS OPTIMISM
LEAD:  CIRCUS OF AMBITION  The Culture of Wealth and Power in the Eighties.
By John Taylor.  240 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $19.95.


Fond Memories Of Secretariat
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


CRACK AND RACIAL TENSIONS
LEAD: Thank you for showing me just how easy it is to produce and smoke crack.
Your simple, step-by-step instructions make an excellent primer for any first-time crack user.
The ''recipe'' and how-to-smoke instructions were great.
The only thing missing was a map of the neighborhoods where crack is bought most easily.


Ms. Chowenhill Plans to Marry
LEAD: Rona Anne Chowenhill's engagement to Clarke Edward Thrasher 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thrasher Jr. of East Aurora, N.Y., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Frampton Chowenhill of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.


Colorado Pounds Oklahoma by 20-3
LEAD: The tailback J. J. Flannigan and the quarterback Darian Hagan each rushed for more than 100 yards and Colorado's defense stifled Oklahoma today to give the Buffaloes a 20-3 victory, their first over the Sooners in 12 years.


DATABANK: Oct. 29, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'89
II Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,158.0
$4,134.0
$4,073.1
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
2.5
2.2
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7


Jazz and Mavericks Set To Challenge Lakers
LEAD: The following Western Conference preview was prepared and written by Cliff Brown.
Midwest Division


Angolan Resists U.S. Effort on Peace Talks
LEAD: Angola will not soften its attitude to rebels because of pressure from Washington, the Angolan President, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, said today.


The Muted Beauty of November
LEAD: NOVEMBER is a beautiful month.
October gets all the attention because every hill and valley and suburban street is ablaze with autumn color, but November has its own charm.


Reaction Is Mixed On Court Security
LEAD: TOUGH new security measures in use at the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City are drawing mixed reactions from county employees, lawyers and visitors to the busy nine-story structure that contains the courtrooms and offices of 21 State Superior Court judges.


Abortion Debate Dominates Prosecutor Race
LEAD: THE last two times out, Denis Dillon, the Nassau County District Attorney, ran for re-election unopposed.
This time, he is being challenged more by his own record as a staunch antiabortionist than anything else.


Further Delay Urged for New Mexico Nuclear Waste Dump
LEAD: An already delayed underground nuclear-waste dump in New Mexico, which the Energy Department now hopes to open by 1992 to end a crisis in plutonium disposal, should be delayed two or three more years to insure proper safety testing, a panel of advisers has told the department.


'Upheaval in the Quiet Zone'
LEAD: To the Editor:


DIGGING THEIR OWN CORPORATE GRAVESP
LEAD:  CORPORATE MAKEOVER  The Reshaping of the American Economy.
By Harvey H. Segal.  269 pp.
New York: Viking. $19.95.


Watch for Labels On Wooden Bats
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Whalers 1, Bruins 0: Mike Liut posted his second successive shutout and the 22d of his National Hockey League career last night in Boston as Hartford edged the Bruins on Scott Young's third-period goal.
Liut, first among active goaltenders in shutouts, made 28 saves to win a goaltending duel with Boston's Reggie Lemelin, who had to make only 17.


Liberal Causes Cash In On a Rash of Conservatism
LEAD: While most nonprofit groups struggle to maintain their services, several liberal advocacy groups have had to deal with a different problem: how to manage phenomenal growth.


Police Abuse Is Down, But Concern Has Risen
LEAD: THE police and citizens here have had many violent clashes over the years, but the city had never held hearings on police brutality until last month, when a group of black politicians asserted that brutality was increasing.


Court Rejects Plea for Abortion Before Jail
LEAD: A county judge has refused a woman's request to postpone her 60-day jail sentence so she can have an abortion first.


Japan's Leader Peeks Out of Scandal's Shadow
LEAD: In less than three months in office, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has performed calisthenics on National Fitness Day, given speeches endorsing the cause of consumers and generally tried to project an image of renewal and stability in the Government.


Review/Music; Jolly Boys' Caribbean Stylings
LEAD: Thursday night at the Knitting Factory, the only palm trees in sight were printed on the singers' shirts.
But the four Jolly Boys, who are graying, brought with them the casual atmosphere of the Jamaican resort beach at Port Antonio, where they serenade tourists and residents under the Caribbean sun.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Jackson  $130,500  3 Dina Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old contemporary; c/a, 1-car garage, den, pool; taxes $2,198.
Lakewood  $105,000  75 Columbus Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; patio, dining room, w/w carpeting; taxes $1,381.


Star Search
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wolverines Roll Past the Hoosiers
LEAD: Tony Boles scored three touchdowns, including a 91-yard scoring run, overshadowing Anthony Thompson's record-tying 59th regular-season touchdown for Indiana, as Michigan routed the Hoosiers, 38-10, today.


Bonnie Margolin, Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: At the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue, Bonnie Lee Margolin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Margolin of Great Neck, was married yesterday to Dr.
Simon Cheirif, a son of Rachel Cheirif-Kuriansky of Mexico City, and the late Benito Cheirif.
Rabbis Dale Polakoff and Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony.


Listings Try to Help Save Old Buildings
LEAD: SOMEBODY somewhere must want to buy a dismantled 18th-century tavern, move an early 19th-century Greek Revival house or help solve the problems of a 1933 International Style prefabricated home.
That is the idea that led the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation to start its Historic Properties Exchange.


New Scoring For Track
LEAD: A major point-scoring change will be made in next year's International Amateur Athletic Federation Mobil Grand Prix outdoor track and field circuit.


Seeing 'Intolerance' Is Hard Work
LEAD: ''I don't think I ever want to see 'Potemkin' again.''


Frank F. Blaisdell, Mayor, 76
LEAD: Frank F. Blaisdell, a former mayor of Middletown Township in New Jersey and longtime business and community leader in Red Bank, N.J., died at his home Thursday after a long illness.
He was 76 years old.


A CORRECTION
LEAD: A Northeast Notebook item on Oct. 15 about redevelopment in Winthrop, Me., misidentified the former variety store that was moved.
It was Wilson's, not Grant's.


Walker Happy as A Viking
LEAD: Herschel Walker is coming home.


A Footnote On Sketching Trips
LEAD: The Society of Illustrators notes your recent article on the exhibition at the New Rochelle Arts Association  [ ''Graphic Art's Glory Days in New Rochelle,'' Oct. 1 ] .
Many of the society's members will be represented.


Margaret Graham Is Wed in Darien
LEAD: At St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., Margaret Eileen Graham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph Graham of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Arrix Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arrix of New Canaan.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley performed the ceremony.


Scrutinizing the World of Taxation
LEAD: WHEN it comes to international taxation, businessman and bankers here and abroad look to Walter H. and Dorothy B. Diamond.
From their office here, the husband-and-wife team provide a constant stream of data on the changing world of finance and trade.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Are There Too Many Injuries in The N.F.L.?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Nancy Demmon Wed To George Fowlkes Jr.
LEAD: At the Menlo Park (Calif.) Presbyterian Church, Nancy Bailey Demmon and George Allen Fowlkes Jr. were married yesterday in a ceremony performed by the Rev.
James Larkin.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Roy E. Demmon of Atherton, Calif., and Mr. and Mrs.
Fowlkes of New York.


Old and New Guard Aim to Narrow Gap
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue stood at a lectern at a hotel in Cleveland three days ago and was scrutinized from his first answer to his last.
He had just been voted commissioner of the National Football League after a seven-month search.
The league's 28 owners had named a man from within, one they considered their own.


Question Box
LEAD:  Series Surprises  Q. No team has ever reached the World Series with a losing record during the regular season, but has there ever been a Series in which both teams had losing records the year before they won their pennants?
A.
Never before baseball's first expansion in 1961, only once before the league championship series format was set up in 1969 and only once more since then.


Don't Play Games With Water Quality
LEAD: After this year's spring rains, New Yorkers put aside worries about the quantity of their water supply and started debating its quality.
For 150 years, the city's supply has been coming from what was sparsely settled countryside.


Sailing the Mythical Seas With Columbus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Foothill Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,823,000
b4,117,000
Share earns
.18
.41
Shares outst
10,129,000
9,989,000
9mo net inc
8,474,000
b10,142,000
Share earns
.84
1.02
Shares outst
10,119,000
9,895,000


Adtec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adtec Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,072,000
3,269,000
Net inc
89,000
b178,000
Share earns
.04
.09
b-Included a gain of $98,000, or 5 cents a share, from an accounting adjustment.


LEARNING TO SAY NO: SCHOOLS AND THE DRUG WAR - A SPECIAL REPORT: Judgment Replaces Fear in Drug Lessons
LEAD: Once confined to a class session or two reciting horror stories and statistics, drug education in America is undergoing radical changes as the crack epidemic touches the lives of younger children across the country.


Kenneth Handelman Weds Lisa Loeb
LEAD: Lisa Renee Loeb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter F. Loeb of Rye, N.Y., and Stockbridge, Mass., was married in Rye yesterday at the Community Synagogue to Kenneth Benjamin Handelman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Handelman of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Rothman performed the ceremony, assisted by Rabbi Gary Mazo and Cantor Meredith


In Oakland After the Series, Joy With an Edge of Sadness
LEAD: Oaklanders had waited years for this moment, to beat San Francisco in the World Series, to show the world they had something better than their snooty neighbor across the bay.


Reporter's Notebook; Florio Promises a Prime-Time Victory
LEAD: Casting off the caution with which he usually discusses his chance of victory, Representative James J. Florio today predicted that he would be declared the next governor of New Jersey by 8:22 on election night.


Defendants to Argue Hawkins Killing Was Not Racial
LEAD: Two months after the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager, Yusuf K. Hawkins, in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, the seven white defendants are preparing to argue in court that the crime was not racially motivated.
Most defendants also plan to assert that they were not at the scene of the shooting or were unaware that the man accused of pulling the trigger, Joseph


Premier Canadian Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Canadian Ltd
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
10,301,989
10,665,456
Net loss
580,122
396,769
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Jeff Diamond Is Wed To Tracey L. Hoffman
LEAD: Tracey L. Hoffman, a telecommunications analyst for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York, and Jeff D. Diamond, an investment manager with the Prudential Capital Corporation in Newark were married yesterday at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Gary Creditor officiated.


From Pipes to Pennant
LEAD: To hear some of his colleagues tell it, Paul Tagliabue, the new commissioner of the National Football League, is an oxymoronic sort, a brilliant plodder who combines a devotion to hard work with an imaginative flair.


Dash Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dash Industries
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,162,389
4,831,157
Net inc
37,478
61,570
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
13,213,090
13,642,559
Net inc
71,268
83,914
Share earns
.01
.01


Irish 'Peace Trains' Halted by Bomb Threat
LEAD: Two ''peace trains'' that were formed to protest Irish Republican Army bomb attacks on the Dublin-Belfast rail link have been halted by a bomb threat.


Review/Television; 'Barging Through Europe,' a 3-Part Series
LEAD: As a series, WNET's ''Travels'' is based on a promising idea: take trips to places, familiar or a bit exotic, with travelers who will put their own personal spin on the experience.
Travelogues in living color have long been one of television's stronger suits.
But ''Travels'' is not content to let the cameras do most of the work.


Brush Fire Near Los Angeles Blackens Thousands of Acres
LEAD: A wind-whipped blaze roared through brush and canyon country overlooking the Pacific Ocean today, charring 4,000 acres, destroying one home and forcing more than 2,000 campers to flee, officials said.


Trade View Of U.S. Dim
LEAD: In a pessimistic assessment of trade prospects, the Bush Administration said Friday that it was unclear that the trade deficit could be shrunk further and warned that it might grow next year.


A Big Jump to Jersey Suburbs
LEAD: THE relocation of the tradition-steeped National Horse Show from Madison Square Garden to the Meadowlands sports complex after more than a century as an Off Broadway attraction on social and equestrian calendars is a fait accompli.


CPAC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPAC Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,800,000
6,500,000
Net inc
395,000
326,000
Share earns
.17
.15
6mo sales
15,800,000
13,300,000
Net inc
761,000
579,000
Share earns
.33
.26


Violent Crime and Theft On Rise For the Second Year, U.S. Reports
LEAD: Violent crime and personal theft rose 3.1 percent in 1988, the second straight year of increases for these offenses, the Justice Department reported today.


Reviews/Music; Time Traveling and Agoraphobia in Tippett Opera
LEAD: Despite the honored place that Sir Michael Tippett holds in English musical culture and the ceaseless exertions on his behalf by admiring critics, his operas have not traveled well.
The first and best of them, the 37-year-old ''Midsummer Marriage,'' has had San Francisco Opera exposure and still arouses some interest among opera enthusiasts in this country.


Review/Cabaret; Songs by Laurie Beechman
LEAD: In the comic centerpiece of her new cabaret act, the Broadway singer Laurie Beechman offers a witty twist on the preening ''Little Me'' genre of show-business autobiography.


Bills Put Brake on Marino To Win
LEAD: This was supposed to be an afternoon where the tougher and vengeful Miami Dolphins staked their claim in the American Conference East race while proving they were a playoff-caliber team.
The matchup against the Buffalo Bills would give Miami's defense a chance to show that its recent successes were not a fluke.


Stratus Computer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratus Computer Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
83,693,000
68,863,000
Net inc
8,435,000
7,552,000
Share earns
.40
.37
Shares outst
20,932,000
20,235,000
9mo rev
243,188,000
185,916,000
Net inc
25,192,000
20,146,000
Share earns
1.21
1.00
Shares outst
20,786,000
20,235,000


Crossland Reports a Loss
LEAD: Crossland Savings F.S.B., the nation's 11th-largest savings and loan institution, reported a big third-quarter loss Friday and said it does not expect to meet new capital guidelines governing the savings industry.


For Ukrainians, Connecticut Farm Tour Wasn't All It Seemed


Bears Restrain Rams, 20-10
LEAD: Chicago's quarterback, Jim Harbaugh, came to the rescue of the offense, and the Bears' defense came back to life today in a 20-10 victory over the Los Angeles Rams.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Monday about plans by the Department of Housing and Urban Development to remove Puerto Rico from the jurisdiction of the department's New York regional office described the 1987 management of the agency's moderate-rehabilitation program incompletely.
The program was managed then by three officials, including Deborah Gore Dean, not by her alone.


Health Images Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Images Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,254,763
6,034,215
Net inc
492,497
559,387
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
6,306,112
5,260,426
9mo rev
22,672,528
16,762,339
Net inc
1,527,630
1,570,641
Share earns
.23
.23
Shares outst
5,657,915
5,186,265


Kaufman (H.W.) Financial Group Inc(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufman (H.W.) Financial Group Inc(O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,887,000
16,663,000
Net inc
1,142,000
962,000
Share earns
.61
.53
9mo rev
70,614,000
52,511,000
Net inc
1,358,000
1,156,000
Share earns
.73
.64


Campaign Matters; Trying to Fool All of the People All of the Time
LEAD: ''Candidates see success as the ability to be all things to all people,'' said Frank J. Macchiarola, who has the unusual perspective of an academic, a former New York City Schools Chancellor and a losing candidate for city comptroller. ''They promise $2 worth of services for the $1 we have.''


No More Room For Amateurs In Town Halls
LEAD: Small-town government, once the province of public-spirited part-time amateurs and sleepy local issues, has been surrounded in the last decade by lawyers, consultants, planners, environmental regulators and real-estate developers who have closed in on town halls and changed them forever.


Koss Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Koss Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,739,035
7,550,312
Net inc
b705,621
b662,978
Share earns
.19
.17
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $59,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $53,000, or 1 cent a share, for the year- ago period.


Review/Art; Poetry and Showmanship of Frederic Church


Astec Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astec Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
37,921,000
44,839,000
Net loss
2,359,000
b1,029,000
Share earns
-
.27
9mo sales
150,678,000
141,454,000
Net inc
1,853,000
7,050,000
Share earns
.49
1.86


Results Plus
LEAD: Tennis


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
64,149,000
69,818,000
Net loss
3,143,000
b8,666,000
Share earns
-
.45
Shares outst
18,200,227
19,112,657
b-Net income and included an extraordinary credit of $6,395,000, or 33 cents a share.


Washington at Work; Making a President's Planes, Trains (and Diplomatic Matters) Run on Time
LEAD: There are plenty of ways to get a job from a new President.
One way is to grow up with him and play cheerleader for him in the souks of Morocco.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The leading role of the party will remain.
This is not open to discussion.
This dialogue will take place within these confines.
The leading role of the Communist Party is the only alternative to decaying capitalist society.
But the leading role must be a genuine consensus between the party and the broad masses.


Frank Paxton Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frank Paxton Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
31,801,000
31,047,566
Net inc
1,376,415
1,273,867
Share earns
.47
.44
6mo sales
57,873,540
56,065,978
Net inc
1,885,145
1,927,506
Share earns
.64
.66


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Michelle Maggal Is Wed
LEAD: Michelle Judith Maggal, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Moshe M. Maggal of Las Vegas, Nev., and Arnold Steven Weinstein, a son of Bella Weinstein of White Plains and the late Milton Weinstein, were married yesterday at the Ballroom at 24 Fifth Avenue in New York.
The bride's father officiated.
Mrs.
Weinstein, 32 years old, attended Hebrew University in Jerusalem and graduated from San Diego State University.


4 Are Wounded in Shooting at a Bronx Party
LEAD: Shooting broke out at a Bronx Halloween party early Sunday, leaving four people seriously wounded, including a pregnant teen-ager who lost her baby, the police said.


Almost Close to Home
LEAD: There's no reason to expect a basketball team founded in Chicago and headquartered in Hollywood to have any players from New York, except for one thing.
The team is the Harlem Globetrotters.


Robert Van Fossan, 63, Chairman Of Mutual Benefit Life Insurance
LEAD: Robert V. Van Fossan, board chairman and chief executive officer of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company and a longtime New Jersey civic leader, died of cancer yesterday at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 63 years old and lived in Mendham, N.J.


'Final Days' for the First Amendment?
LEAD: Last week, I had the strange experience of seeing myself on television when I previewed ABC-TV's docudrama version of ''The Final Days,'' Bob Woodward's and Carl Bernstein's book about the Watergate scandal.
I was portrayed by an actor named Ed Flanders.
My wife fell out of her chair laughing.
I did not think it was particularly funny.


Freeport-McMoran Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
53,597,000
54,605,000
Net inc
9,615,000
4,897,000
Share earns
.09
.05
9mo rev
197,515,000
165,870,000
Net inc
40,569,000
17,414,000
Share earns
.39
.20


Sports of The Times; A's Outrun a Bad Memory
LEAD: THIS World Series, which will always be remembered for the big bang smack in the middle of it, ended with a bang-bang play, as they say in baseball.


Accuracy in Short Supply In Flood of U.S. Statistics


Review/Music; New Cast in Met 'Boheme'
LEAD: Saturday's matinee of ''La Boheme'' at the Metropolitan Opera was an exercise in free enterprise.
A number of new singers entered the cast, and most of them - evidently hoping to make the best impression - sought out their own little islands of distinctiveness on stage.


Gateway Federal S&amp;L Assocition reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Federal S&amp;L Assocition
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
561,000
782,000
Share earns
.29
.40
9mo net inc
2,934,000
b3,922,000
Share earns
1.50
2.01
b-Included a gain from an accounting adjustment of $274,000, or 14 cents a share.


Nixon Meets With Chinese on Student Policy
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon met with Education Minister Li Tieying today for what the Chinese described as ''frank and sincere'' talks on China's policy toward its students in the aftermath of the crushing of the student-led democracy movement.


Ford Increases Jaguar Holding
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has raised its stake in Jaguar P.L.C., the British luxury car maker, to 13.2 percent, Jaguar said Friday.
Ford, which had held 12.4 percent of Jaguar, now owns 24.2 million ordinary Jaguar shares.
In a filing last week with the


Investigators Look for Clues In Fatal Collapse of Bridge
LEAD: An investigation began today to determine what caused a popular historic footbridge to collapse Saturday afternoon, spilling up to 40 people into the Little Red River, killing 5 and injuring 18.


3 European Airlines in Deal
LEAD: Three European airlines announced Friday that they had reached an agreement to strengthen their positions in the 1990's and open the way for increased travel to Eastern Europe.


Riesenberg Rises To Giant Occasion
LEAD: In Super Bowl XXI, the Giants' offensive tackles were Brad Benson and Karl Nelson.
They also had William Roberts, a former No. 1 draft choice, at tackle.
In 1987, the first two players they drafted were Eric Moore and Jumbo Elliott, both tackles.


Life Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
32,129,000
31,572,000
Net inc
3,218,000
2,471,000
Share earns
.24
.18
Shares outst
13,586,000
13,541,000
9mo sales
101,254,000
95,758,000
Net inc
9,916,000
9,234,000
Share earns
.73
.68
Shares outst
13,611,000
13,542,000


Archive Exhibit Reveals That Civic Strife Is Nothing New
LEAD: A startling documentary portrait of little old New York - with its brutal race relations, resentful taxpayers, dreadful prisons, filthy streets and miserable workers - has gone on view along the marble-lined corridors of the Municipal Archives.


Corrections Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corrections Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,854,224
6,234,604
Net inc
556,722
101,057
Share earns
.06
.01
Shares outst
9,421,288
8,596,265
9mo rev
25,087,991
16,496,691
Net inc
1,072,136
b510,579
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
9,214,631
8,651,142


Houston Candidates Court Business
LEAD: Although business leaders can no longer anoint mayors as they did decades ago, the campaign now under way shows that good business is still good politics in Houston.


Macy Has Loss Of $43.1 Million
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company said in a financial filing on Friday that it had a net loss of $43.1 million in its fourth quarter ended July 29, compared with a loss of $106 million in the period a year earlier.


Dataflex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,203,682
10,326,998
Net inc
593,512
346,747
Share earns
.24
.15
6mo rev
36,805,702
19,028,696
Net inc
1,127,205
642,023
Share earns
.46
.28


Software Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Services of America
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
785,814
710,866
Net loss
216,659
5,110


Books of The Times; Judge (Not Justice) Bork on His Defeat
LEAD:  The Tempting of America  The Political Seduction of the Law  By Robert H. Bork  432 pages.
The Free Press/Macmillan. $22.50.


CNW Revises 'Junk' Issue
LEAD: A skittish ''junk bond'' market forced buyers of the CNW Corporation to make significant last-minute changes in the financing of their $1.6 billion buyout of the railroad company, officials involved in the plan said.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Thursday referred incorrectly to a sale of three subsidiaries by the Parker Hannifin Corporation.
The company is selling its three automotive aftermarket units; it will retain its automotive connectors and cliff impact metal-forming divisions.


How Percy Helped the Elderly of Wilmette, Ill.
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Spanish Prime Minister Wins a Third Term  The Socialist party of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez claimed a majority of one seat in Spain's general elections, winning 176 seats in the 350-seat Parliament and assuring Mr.
Gonzalez of a third term.
Page A3.
Ortega's Miscalculation  The Nicaraguan President brought a political bombshell to a meeting of Western Hemisphere leaders.


Miss Mayer Weds David Freedman
LEAD: Nancy Bertha Mayer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Mayer of Huntington, L.I., was married there yesterday to David Freedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Freedman of Fall River, Mass.
Rabbi Barton Shallat officiated at Temple Beth El, assisted by Cantor Leon Perlman.


Jet Crash Killing 112 Is Laid to Faulty Metal
LEAD: Government investigators have concluded that a manufacturing flaw caused the crack in an engine fan assembly that brought about the crash of the United Airlines jet in Iowa in July.


Debate in London on Excavating Where the Globe May Have Been
LEAD: To the unschooled eye, the newly excavated site near the Southwark Bridge here looks like an ordinary dirt field with crumbling chalk-and-brick foundations.
But after two months of digging, archeologists say they are almost certain this is the site of the Globe Theater, where William Shakespeare was an actor and shareholder and where most of his plays were first performed.


RIVALS FOR MAYOR AIM FINAL DRIVES AT CRUCIAL BLOCS
LEAD: David N. Dinkins began the final full week of his New York City mayoral campaign yesterday by playing to his weakness, while Rudolph W. Giuliani, his rival, sought to capitalize on it.


4 Rising Stars Behind Magazine Success Stories
LEAD: While graying and grayed executives still dominated the American Magazine Conference here in late October, the thirtysomething generation is increasingly taking over the magazines.


U.S. Foundations Urged To Assist Third World
LEAD: The president of the Rockefeller Foundation has called for a new American philanthropic strategy to help alleviate poverty in the third world and protect the imperiled global environment.


70,000 HAIL REBELS IN SOUTH AFRICA
LEAD: The largest political rally in the history of the African National Congress was held today with the acquiescence of the white minority Government, which declared the organization illegal 29 years ago.


Nose to Nose, Down to a Final Race
LEAD: HORSE races are games of necks and noses, with seven-digit purses and ancient trophies won or lost on the bob of a head.
But when it comes to year-end titles and lasting reputations, the sport usually is far more forgiving than its photo-finish cameras.


Don't Let F.B.I. Raid World for Fugitives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Would Unions' Backing Cost Dinkins as Mayor?
LEAD: If David N. Dinkins is elected mayor of New York City next week, his pledge to share the goals of the many municipal unions that were instrumental in his nomination and his longstanding commitment to help uplift the poor will be tested almost immediately.


One Europe, but Many Airlines
LEAD: Eager to increase competition in the airline industry, European Community officials have decided that change is not coming fast enough and that it is time for tougher deregulation measures.
But they face a huge fight from many governments and airlines.


G&amp;K Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* G&amp;K Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,358,000
25,957,000
Net inc
2,569,000
2,076,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Share earnings reflect a 2-for-1 stock split earlier this month.


Freeport-McMoran Gold Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Gold Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,745,000
27,298,000
Net inc
531,000
6,589,000
Share earns
.01
.16
9mo rev
59,926,000
81,711,000
Net inc
4,301,000
24,534,000
Share earns
.10
.59


2 Beaten and Robbed In Village Bias Incident
LEAD: Several members of a group shouting anti-homosexual remarks assaulted and robbed two men walking through a Greenwich Village square Saturday night, the police said yesterday.
They called it a bias incident.


Continue Contra Aid Until the Elections, Senate Chiefs Agree
LEAD: Spurning a call by President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua to redirect American aid to dismantling the contras, Congressional leaders vowed today to continue assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels until the elections scheduled there next February.


Ultimate in Whirling
LEAD: Running, diving, catching and striving constantly to move downfield toward an opponent's end zone.
The game is not football, but Ultimate Frisbee.


Unifi Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifi Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 24
1989
1988
Sales
94,145,956
79,574,404
Net inc
b6,501,963
5,343,696
Share earns
.32
.25
b-Included a credit of $1,852,844 from an accounting adjustment.


I Have No Secret Agenda
LEAD: During the past several weeks the leadership of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or Unita, has visited the U.S., Britain, France and several African nations with the purpose of reviving the Angolan peace process that began last June in Gbadolite, Zaire.


Air India Tries a New Look For International Travelers
LEAD: Falling behind its regional competitors in Asia's burgeoning air travel market, Air India is shedding its ethnic image for a sleeker, made-in-America look.


33 Are Headed For Re-Election To City Council
LEAD: Thirty-three members of the New York City Council are expected to win re-election on Nov. 7 in a display of the power of incumbency in a city largely dominated by Democrats.


Carol K. Demitz Is Married
LEAD: Carol Keyes Demitz, a financial executive and lawyer in New York, and Dr.
Curtis Fred Brewer, a professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Yeshiva University, were married yesterday at their home in New York by Justice Myriam J. Altman of State Supreme Court.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a vice president and the assistant general counsel at Fiduciary Trust Company International, an investment management company.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Bank Ltd. named William J. Russo senior vice president of public affairs and advertising.


Bird Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bird Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
35,928,000
38,299,000
Net inc
b2,507,000
c2,870,000
Share earns
.58
.59
Shares outst
3,669,000
4,246,763
9mo sales
96,177,000
100,698,000
Net inc
bd11,728,000
cd5,410,000
Share earns
2.41
1.01
Shares outst
4,121,064
4,221,140


Bowl Picture Starts to Clarify
LEAD: As the college football season moved within a month of the Saturday evening when deals are made and invitations to bowl games are officially extended, the possibilities involving a game for an unofficial national championship became clearer this weekend.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on the Business Technology page on Oct. 18 about new computer chips referred incorrectly to products of the MIPS Company.
The company's R4000 chip has not yet been announced; MIPS executives said the company had not backed away from a design strategy known as ''superscalar execution,'' which lets a computer execute more than one instruction in a tick of the quartz crystal clock that governs the chip's speed.


Capital Ties Murder Record
LEAD: The District of Columbia matched its year-old record for homicides today with five killings in a seven-hour period that pushed this year's total to 369 killings.
Three of the weekend killings were linked to drugs, as are most of the slayings in the nation's capital.
The police said at the end of 1988 that homicides took 372 lives that year, but three victims of police shootings were subtracted from the total Sunday.


Key Production reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Production
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,180,000
7,219,000
Net inc
560,000
b1,651,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
23,945,000
26,852,000
Net inc
1,863,000
b1,873,000
Share earns
.16
-
b-Net loss


Nuclear Plant Remains Shut
LEAD: A problem with a cooling system at the Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear-power plant will keep the plant from reopening on schedule, plant officials said today.
The plant was shut down almost two weeks ago when a malfunction was discovered in its electronic system.
It was being brought back on line late last week when a problem with the cooling system was discovered, said Robert Burtch, a spokesman for Niagara Mohawk, a co-owner of the plant.


Belvedere Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belvedere Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,511,000
11,612,000
Net loss
b702,000
c1,156,000
Share earns
-
.20
9mo rev
45,971,000
40,492,000
Net inc
667,000
2,781,000
Share earns
.11
.48


RS Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RS Financial Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
852,000
1,370,000
Per share
.25
.40
9mo net inc
2,890,000
3,578,000
Per share
.84
1.04


Isomedix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Isomedix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,201,779
4,356,747
Net inc
848,884
513,310
Share earns
.16
.10
Shares outst
5,394,221
5,114,736
9mo sales
15,213,738
13,235,353
Net inc
2,482,568
b2,565,410
Share earns
.47
.52
Shares outst
5,270,905
4,973,795


Turbulent Weather in Britain
LEAD: Winds gusting to hurricane force swept parts of Britain over the weekend, killing six people, sinking a Pakistani freighter and driving a Nigerian fishing trawler onto the rocks.
The London Weather Center said gusts up to 100 miles an hour were recorded at the Portland Bill lighthouse on the south coast.


Sterling Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
103,100,000
169,200,000
Net inc
7,600,000
50,000,000
Share earns
.14
.83
Shares outst
56,300,000
60,000,000
Yr rev
580,800,000
699,000,000
Net inc
103,900,000
b213,100,000
Share earns
1.77
3.55


Ex-Officer Sees Gains If He Wins Sharon Steel
LEAD: Walter Sieckman, who has twice left executive positions with the Sharon Steel Corporation, says he cannot seem to stay away from the company, the nation's 17th-largest steel producer.


To End the Race Well, Start Well
LEAD: IF you are among the 23,000 runners entered in the 20th New York City marathon Sunday, the most important factor in how well you run and how much you enjoy it will be your pace during the first few miles.


BULGARIAN LEADER TALKS OF CHANGE
LEAD: Bulgaria's hard-line Communist leadership said today that it would increase efforts to carry out political and economic change.


Wicat Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicat Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
13,251,000
12,415,000
Net inc
1,381,000
1,099,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Shares outst
21,228,000
21,152,000
6mo rev
22,691,000
21,648,000
Net inc
1,402,000
713,000
Share earns
.07
.03
Shares outst
21,205,000
21,138,000


Franklin Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
68,500,000
57,800,000
Net inc
22,000,000
17,600,000
Share earns
.84
.68
Yr rev
253,600,000
213,200,000
Net inc
78,600,000
66,300,000
Share earns
3.00
2.51


In Many Town Halls, Professionals Rule
LEAD: Town halls around the New York metropolitan region, once the province of public-spirited amateurs, have been inundated in the last decade by lawyers and consultants.
Article, page B3.


Trion Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trion Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,183,000
12,023,000
Net inc
101,000
844,000
Share earns
.02
.13
9mo sales
31,158,000
32,840,000
Net inc
1,345,000
b2,302,000
Share earns
.22
.37
b-Increased from first-quarter 1988 net by a one-time $366,000, or 6 cents a share, reduction in accumulated deferred income taxes.


Guilford Mills Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guilford Mills Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
132,449,000
135,034,000
Net inc
4,065,000
5,107,000
Share earns
.41
.52


Review/Ballet; The Joffrey Revives 'Les Noces'
LEAD: ''Les Noces,'' a danced cantata by Igor Stravinsky and Bronislava Nijinska, was first performed by Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes in Paris in 1923.


Sidney Dobish, TV Cameraman, 68
LEAD: Sidney Dobish, a retired cameraman for ABC News and special projects, died Friday of cancer at the Nathan Adelson Hospice in Las Vegas, where he lived.
He was 68 years old.


Brenda W. Kunofsky,An Executive, Marries
LEAD: At Congregation B'nai Jacob in Waterbury, Conn., Brenda Wynne Kunofsky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Kunofksy of Waterbury, was married yesterday to Keith Ronald Herrmann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Herrmann of San Leandro, Calif., by Rabbi Michael Menitoff.


Hastings Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hastings Manufacturing (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,021,135
17,419,738
Net inc
392,721
234,650
Share earns
.94
.56
9mo sales
51,485,399
51,273,794
Net inc
995,738
900,524
Share earns
2.37
2.15


Girl, 13, Collapses and Dies At Connecticut School Dance
LEAD: The state medical examiner's office was conducting an autopsy today on the body of a 13-year-old Branford girl who collapsed and died during a school dance.


Vencor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vencor Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,103,000
6,854,000
Net inc
274,000
449,000
Share earns
.06
.10
9mo rev
39,382,000
17,817,000
Net inc
573,000
1,131,000
Share earns
.13
.25


Focus Is on Raising the Debt Limit
LEAD: For much of the 1980's, official Washington has chosen a dubious milestone - a necessary increase in the nation's debt ceiling - as the appropriate moment to call a political scrimmage.


Student Shot on L.I. Campus
LEAD: A 21-year-old student at the SUNY campus in Old Westbury, L.I., was shot and seriously wounded early yesterday during a melee between students following a campus Halloween party, Nassau County police said.
The student, Joseph Thompson, of 202 West 138th Street, Manhattan, was struck by three bullets fired from a 9-millimeter pistol by an unknown person, the police said.


Series May Hold A Hint of Future
LEAD: It took 15 days to finish because it was interupted by an earthquake, and nobody poured champagne or ran wild when it was finished.
But the 86th World Series went into the record books today as the second-most one-sided Series in history, and it left the Oakland Athletics with a growing image as the team most likely to continue to succeed in the 1990's.


Four New Trophies For a Top Headhunter
LEAD: Gerard R. Roche, who is regarded as a top executive headhunter, has four new trophies to display.


Advance Ross Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advance Ross Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
579,000
471,000
Net inc
76,000
b51,000
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
1,415,000
1,774,000
Net inc
15,000
b197,000
b-Net loss  The latest 9-month share earnings was less than one cent a share.


Beirut Distrusts the Promise of Peace
LEAD: Disillusioned by the failure of numerous cease-fires and peace agreements during Lebanon's long civil conflict, many Beirut residents are skeptical that the accord reached in Saudi Arabia last week can bring calm.


Manitowoc Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manitowoc Co (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
58,055,270
40,577,152
Net inc
2,788,723
3,695,370
Share earns
.27
.36


A's Look Gingerly To '90 and Beyond
LEAD: When there was nothing left but an empty clubhouse and the memory of players hugging joyously on the infield grass, one question still hung in the air like a pop fly in the afternoon sun.


Cash America Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cash America Investments (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,811,000
16,668,000
Net inc
1,843,000
1,413,000
Share earns
.23
.17
Shares outst
7,848,769
8,497,138
9mo rev
60,922,000
46,601,000
Net inc
4,765,000
3,446,000
Share earns
.59
.47
Shares outst
8,098,359
7,406,394


Universal Health Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Realty (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,726,000
3,911,000
Net inc
1,958,000
2,057,000
Share earns
.28
.29
Shares outst
7,047,000
7,193,000
9mo rev
13,432,000
11,333,000
Net inc
6,257,000
6,271,000
Share earns
.89
.87
Shares outst
7,048,000
7,246,000


Trick Plays Give Browns the Edge
LEAD: Stopped cold by Houston's defense in the first half, the Cleveland Browns resorted to trickery in the second half today, using gadget plays on three of their four touchdown drives and beating the Oilers, 28-17.


Compression Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compression Labs (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,255,000
5,428,000
Net inc
174,000
b337,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
9,079,000
7,669,000
9mo rev
20,223,000
15,480,000
Net inc
432,000
20,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
8,648,000
7,965,000


Heartland Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartland Express Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,922,731
8,943,589
Net inc
1,554,858
1,306,617
Share earns
.31
.26
9mo rev
36,209,177
25,425,228
Net inc
4,563,399
3,810,596
Share earns
.91
.76


Outdoors: It's Time For Deer Hunters To Be Zeroing In
LEAD: THIS is the time to make sure that your deer rifle shoots where you aim it, a process called zeroing in.


B. Altman Has Losses Of $4 Million a Month
LEAD: B. Altman &amp; Company's seven department stores have together lost $4 million a month since September and expect the drain to continue through the end of the year, the chain's parent company, the L. J. Hooker Corporation, has said.


Marquest Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marquest Medical Products (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,741,000
15,166,000
Net inc
697,000
607,000
Share earns
.17
.15
6mo rev
34,681,000
29,567,000
Net inc
1,434,000
2,548,000
Share earns
.35
.64


Kite Wins Playoff And Record Purse
LEAD: Just four months after he lost the United States Open title in what he said was his biggest personal disappointment in golf, Tom Kite won the richest purse in golf history today when he beat Payne Stewart on the second playoff hole for a total of $625,000 and some other important rewards.


Net Off 15.5% At Kellogg
LEAD: The Kellogg Company said Friday that its net income for the third quarter fell 15.5 percent.


A Sudden Torrent of Grievances Hits East German Party Leaders
LEAD: For almost five hours, the local Communist Party chief, the Mayor, the police chief and a host of other prominent East Berlin officials stood on the steps of City Hall today listening to things that a scant three weeks earlier would have been tantamount to treason.


Review/Theater; Jules Feiffer Presents the Playwright as Father
LEAD: Anthony Rose, the playwright and title character in Jules Feiffer's dark comedy at the Philadelphia Festival Theater for New Plays, is a refugee from the treacherous domestic battles fought in such former Feiffer works as ''Grown-Ups'' and ''Little Murders.'' In ''Anthony Rose,'' Mr.
Feiffer has shifted the battleground on which his characters fight for their identities from the Upper West Side of Manhattan to a rehearsal hall in Kansas City.


James Florio for New Jersey
LEAD: For the most part, Tom Kean's eight years as Governor have been good ones for New Jersey.
The economy has been robust, job growth strong and the state has shucked its image as a backwater to New York City and Philadelphia.


Flexsteel Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexsteel Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,490,706
40,153,692
Net inc
b935,000
1,125,000
Share earns
.31
.26
b-Included $551,581, or 8 cents a share, in nontaxable life insurance proceeds.


Philadelphia Journal; Patrolling Mean Streets To Bestow a Blessing
LEAD: Sgt.
Gerald F. Weigand is driving his cruiser up one block and down another, crisscrossing Police District 3 on a foggy Friday night in South Philadelphia.
He is drinking soda, chain-smoking Marlboros, scanning the streets.


Wynn's International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wynn's International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
72,780,000
75,029,000
Net inc
1,221,000
1,185,000
Share earns
.32
.31
9mo sales
216,407,000
225,828,000
Net inc
6,084,000
2,175,000
Share earns
1.59
.57


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 30, 1989:  MONDAY  Armstrong World Inds  Boeing Co  Consldtd Freightways  Foster Wheeler  Foxboro Co  Union Camp Corp  Wackenhut Corp  TUESDAY  Airborne Freight  American Brands  Borden Inc  Duke Power Co  Inspiration Res  Koger Pptys  Standex Intl  UGI Corp  USX Co  Warner Lambert


Early Signs Appear In Maine's Upset
LEAD: A pass thrown by the Maine quarterback, Mike Buck, was intercepted early in the game Saturday in Newark, Del.
Right then it may have occurred to some of the Black Bears that this game could be different.


Dekalb Genetics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dekalb Genetics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,400,000
20,800,000
Net inc
900,000
2,300,000
Share earns
.16
.41
Yr rev
255,300,000
230,300,000
Net inc
12,100,000
8,300,000
Share earns
2.14
1.48


Linear Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Sales
17,811,000
14,856,000
Net inc
2,459,000
2,200,000
Share earns
.15
.13


Ortega's Foray: A Stunning Misstep
LEAD: When President Daniel Ortega Saavedra set out Friday morning for a presidential summit meeting in Costa Rica, he carried with him a carefully constructed political bombshell: a decision to renew combat operations against American-backed rebels.


Jets Stumble Again But It's Predictable
LEAD: It was predictable, if not disastrous.


Government by Litmus Test
LEAD: Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, said yesterday that the abortion litmus test will no longer be applied to top scientific positions like the directorship of the National Institutes of Health.
Dr.
Sullivan says the White House now shares his views.
That would be a welcome step away from the


Small Town Is Shaken By a Child's Abduction
LEAD: Frightened and puzzled, the children of this small town have been asking their parents, again and again, ''Why?'' There are no good answers.
One week ago, an 11-year-old boy, Jacob Wetterling, was abducted by a man with a gun.
Searchers here have been unable to find any trace of the boy.


Consoltex Canada Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consoltex Canada Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
37,552,000
34,253,000
Net inc
2,260,000
1,552,000
Share earns
.78
.54
9mo sales
124,523,000
118,806,000
Net inc
6,995,000
b5,763,000
Share earns
2.41
1.99


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
PLEDGING CONFERENCE FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES - 10 A.M.


Audrey Feinberg, A Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: Audrey Sue Feinberg and David Andrew Kaplan, 1981 graduates of the New York University School of Law, were married yesterday in Bozman, Md., at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Alan William Kaplan.
Rabbi Joy Levitt officiated.


United Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Asset Management (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,122,000
30,946,000
Net inc
3,996,000
3,109,000
Share earns
.24
.21
9mo rev
107,328,000
91,218,000
Net inc
10,975,000
8,828,000
Share earns
.69
.61


Rangers' Victory Clouded
LEAD: The fear of an injury that has hovered over the Rangers like a dark cloud because of their lack of depth became reality Saturday night.


Machine Tool Orders Rise To '89 High
LEAD: Bolstered by higher capital spending in a number of industries, machine tool orders climbed 33.4 percent in September from the previous month, reaching the highest monthly total this year.


Abortion Consent Law Creates Support System; Biology and Maturity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Abortion Consent Law Creates Support System; Who Is a Minor?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Index Arbitrage Debate Renewed
LEAD: RARELY do Wall Street firms rush to be the first to curb a business that makes a lot of money.
But last week, reacting to huge swings in the stock market and increasing pressure from customers, a number of firms announced that they would curtail or eliminate their business in index arbitrage, the best-known form of program trading.


Termiflex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Termiflex Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,082,861
1,778,331
Net inc
13,303
63,821
Share earns
.01
.05
Shares outst
1,318,217
1,313,324
The company, which reduced its staff by 20 percent on Aug. 11, said the full effect of that reduction will be reflected in expenses for the second quarter ending Dec.


Florida's Still There After Galileo Launch
LEAD: To the Editor:


Publishers Worry After Fiction Sales Weaken
LEAD: Summer is usually the slowest season for hardcover books, but last summer's stagnant market has publishers wondering what happened.


Leslie Iris Brown Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Leslie Iris Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Brown of South Orange, N.J., to Samuel Bernard Goldberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
G.
Marshal Goldberg of Palm Beach, Fla., and Marblehead, Mass., took place yesterday at the Grand Summit Hotel in Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Alexander Shapiro officiated.


Commuter Plane Crashes in Hawaii Valley, Killing All 20 Aboard
LEAD: A commuter plane with 20 people aboard, including members of a high school volleyball team, crashed into a remote vally on Molokai late Saturday.
There were no survivors.


2 Stars on Fast but Separate Tracks
LEAD: FOR nearly a decade, they have traveled the globe as Norway's foremost distance runners.
Between them, Ingrid Kristiansen and Grete Waitz have won scores of races, running several world records on the track and world bests on the roads.


A Knee Strengthener Doubles as Fitness Aid
LEAD: A sports medicine device designed to rehabilitate athletes with knee injuries is also being targeted for use in fitness training.
It is being recommended for runners, skiers, swimmers, cyclists, as well as tennis, baseball and football players.


Air Travel Sets Record in 1988
LEAD: Airlines carried a record number of passengers last year, increasing worldwide profits to $1.6 billion, the International Air Transport Association said in a report made available today.


Review/Dance; Tulsa Ballet's 'Coppelia'
LEAD: The Tulsa Ballet Theater has a good many fans among New York dancegoers.
And the Tulsa production of ''Coppelia,'' performed on Saturday night at Colden Center at Queens College, promised to be of special interest.
The fact that Roman Jasinski and Moscelyne Larkin, founders of the Tulsa company, could draw on their years with the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo for their staging of ''Coppelia,'' suggests a link to the Ballet Russe version danced so notably by Alexandra


The Day After, Prague Is Under Police Guard
LEAD: Tension remained high in Prague today as hundreds of armed policemen patrolled the city streets, with many more massed at important intersections, ready to crush any resumption of the rallies that filled the center of the city on Saturday.


Dole Suggests Increase In Federal Gasoline Tax
LEAD: In a move that could generate bipartisan momentum for a Federal tax increase, Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, said today that he would support an increase in the gasoline tax.


Circon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,728,000
10,412,000
Net inc
11,000
b288,000
9mo sales
36,596,000
30,705,000
Net inc
157,000
b2,164,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Ipco CorpN) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipco CorpN)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
29,906,000
30,213,000
Net loss
b223,000
b1,102,000
b-After losses on disposal of discontinued operations of $659,000 for the latest first quarter and $1,147,000 for year-ago period.


On Moscow: The President Is Missing
LEAD: There is an iron law of bureaucratic politics in Washington: Until a President takes a firm public position on an issue, even his closest aides will push and pull in different directions.
And there's an obvious corollary: Without a united administration, coherent action is impossible.


93-Day and 184-Day Bills to Be Auctioned
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues this week is confined to today's amended bill auction.
Instead of the regular three-month and six-month maturities, the Treasury will auction 93-day and 184-day bills.





CGC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CGC Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
60,400,000
68,700,000
Net inc
9,200,000
11,100,000
Share earns
.36
.44
9mo rev
189,900,000
210,700,000
Net inc
29,400,000
38,000,000
Share earns
1.16
1.50


Socialists Win Majority in Spanish Vote
LEAD: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain secured a third term in office early today after a cliffhanger general election Sunday in which his Socialist Workers Party came within one seat of losing its majority in Parliament.


Gentleman Farmers Baffle Ukrainians
LEAD: The tour was billed as an opportunity for a group of Ukrainian diplomats to inspect a few American family farms.
But it did not take long today for Victor A. Krizhanovsky to realize that this beautiful town tucked away in the northwest corner of Connecticut is not a typical farming community.


The Suisse Romande's Evolution Since Ansermet
LEAD: The Orchestre de la Suisse Romande will never, and perhaps should never, escape its long identification with Ernest Ansermet, who founded the ensemble in 1918 and conducted it for 50 years.


Honfleur Journal; Storybook Sea Village Plots to Keep British at Bay
LEAD: With its narrow, tightly clustered houses, its weather-beaten 15th-century belfry and its ancient dock lined with fishing boats, Honfleur is the type of place for which the phrase ''picture postcard town'' might have been invented.


American Film Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Film Technologies Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,508,000
1,903,000
Net inc
560,000
b602,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
19,490,000
16,475,000
b-Net loss  The company is listed on the Philadelphia Stock Exchange.


Burton Craige Gray, Executive, 48
LEAD: Burton Craige Gray, a businessman active in the Libertarian Party and conservative research organizations, died on Friday, apparently of a heart attack, at the home of a brother, Bernard, in Atlanta.
He was 48 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


VMX Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VMX Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,855,000
9,243,000
Net inc
b619,000
c995,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $335,000, or 2 cents a share representing utilization of net operating loss carryforward.


Bridge
LEAD: The House of Representatives administered a severe defeat to the Senate Thursday night, but it was not in conference.
It was at the card tables in the Capitol Hill Club in Washington, where they met in their first annual bridge match, which was organized by the American Contract Bridge League.


Vying for Uncle Sam's Phone Dollars
LEAD: With the first part of the Federal Government's new telephone system officially on line, the three big long-distance carriers and smaller companies are scrambling to sell the Government additional services that could increase their revenues by billions of dollars.


Jonathan G. Sherman, 82, Dies; A Former Episcopal Bishop of L.I.
LEAD: Jonathan Goodhue Sherman, the retired Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Long Island, died of heart failure on Friday at St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
He was 82 years old and lived in Simsbury, Conn.


Seira Greenwald Weds Elihu Davison
LEAD: Cheryl Joy Greenwald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Leonard Greenwald of Pittsburgh and Delray Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Elihu David Davison, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Davison of Washington.
Rabbi Eli Leiter performed the ceremony at the Women's Club of Glen Ridge, N.J.


Harleysville Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harleysville Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,229,000
5,744,000
Share earns
.84
.79
9mo net inc
16,353,000
13,994,000
Share earns
2.22
1.94
Included in the latest quarter and 9 months were investment losses of $59,000 and $24,000, respectively.


At Troubled Bridgeport U., Fear Is Growing
LEAD: Catalogs for the University of Bridgeport carry on their cover a collage of college life: students playing saxophones, peering into microscopes, tapping computer keyboards.


Grubb &amp; Ellis reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grubb &amp; Ellis (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
95,142,000
98,812,000
Net inc
1,569,000
1,929,000
Share earns
.09
.12
9mo rev
263,857,000
264,295,000
Net inc
163,000
b2,907,000
Share earns
.01
-


Charter Plan Is Angrily Debated
LEAD: Often interrupting and trying to outshout each other, six Democrats yesterday strongly disagreed on the proposed New York City Charter that residents will vote on next week.


Walwyn Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walwyn Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,907,057
15,303,615
Net inc
112,613
b3,817,016
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
58,048,891
57,141,984
Net loss
2,139,426
4,097,860
b-Net loss  Figures are in Canadian funds.


Freeport-McMoran Copper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Copper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
90,909,000
75,588,000
Net inc
25,311,000
19,225,000
Share earns
.59
.45
9mo rev
270,422,000
206,553,000
Net inc
74,479,000
51,449,000
Share earns
1.74
1.21


Turbo Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Turbo Resources
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
163,259,000
145,281,000
Net inc
b646,00
c7,452,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
454,227,000
419,616,000
Net loss
b4,218,000
cd12,614,000
Share earns
-
.08


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; It's Sweep Month Again, But the Networks Are Quiet
LEAD: THE first ratings sweep month of the 1989-90 television season will begin on Wednesday without a miniseries in sight.


Meems Coffey Is Wed To Sholom Ellenberg
LEAD: Meems Coffey and Sholom Ellenberg were married yesterday at Congregation Emunath Israel in New York by Rabbi Meyer Leifer.


2 Earthquakes Strike Algeria; 19 Are Dead and 100 Hurt
LEAD: Two earthquakes about 15 minutes apart struck northern Algeria on Sunday night, killing at least 19 people and injuring about 100, the Interior Ministry reported today.
Most of the deaths were in the Tipasa region west of Algiers and in Churchell, on the Mediterranean coast west of the capital.


Some of New York's Jewish Voters Reconsider Their Support of Dinkins
LEAD: New York City's Jewish voters are the most sharply divided of the city's major ethnic and racial groups, so divided that many campaign strategists say they could swing this year's mayoral election.


2 Hard Years For the Contras
LEAD:  Aug. 7, 1987The Presidents of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica agree to prohibit the use of their territories for insurgencies and commit themselves to greater democracy and dialogue with guerrilla forces.


Legal Services Program For AIDS Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Aid Sought for Electronics
LEAD: In a report that will be delivered to the President this week, a national advisory committee on semiconductors will recommend that the Government establish a multibillion-dollar venture capital operation intended to resurrect the American consumer electronics industry.


Khmer Rouge Report Gains On Highway to a Major City
LEAD: The Khmer Rouge said today that their guerrillas were advancing in an attempt to capture a main route from a western Cambodian outpost at Pailin to the city of Battambang.


MEDELLIN SUSPECT EXTRADITED TO U.S.
LEAD: A high-level operative of the Medellin cocaine-smuggling ring was turned over to United States agents before dawn today at a Bogota airport and flown to the United States, Colombian and American officials said.


Computer &amp; Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer &amp; Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,979,000
30,925,000
Net loss
3,930,000
b202,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
43,738,000
88,467,000
Net loss
4,012,000
2,003,000
b-Net income


Finnigan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Finnigan Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
29,323,000
32,488,000
Net inc
13,000
2,290,000
Share earns
-
.40
Shares outst
5,405,000
5,797,000
9mo rev
86,230,000
98,395,000
Net loss
3,082,000
b6,786,000
Share earns
-
1.25
Shares outst
5,389,000
5,412,000


Franklin Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Computer (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
21,515,000
17,503,000
Net inc
1,355,000
2,648,000
Share earns
.20
.41
6mo sales
32,289,000
30,429,000
Net inc
134,000
4,028,000
Share earns
.02
.62


Abortion Consent Law Creates Support System
LEAD: To the Editor:


Would-Be Robber Loses Gun And Is Shot By Storekeeper
LEAD: A Queens shopkeeper turned a would-be robber's shotgun on him yesterday but injured four passers-by in the process, the police said.


Miss Zimmerman Is Wed in Florida
LEAD: Caryn Lisa Zimmerman and William Michael Zoffer, both lawyers in Washington, were married yesterday at Congregation Beth Shalom in Clearwater, Fla., by Rabbi Kenneth Bromberg.


Raid Across the Mexican Border
LEAD: In his office at the headquarters of Vitro S.A. here, Ernesto Martens keeps a supply of customized baseball caps emblazoned with labels like ''creative'' or ''optimistic'' or ''emotional.'' At the moment, his choice would probably be a cap marked ''bold.''


TRAINING JET CRASH KILLS 5 ON CARRIER
LEAD: Five people were killed and at least two were critically injured yesterday afternoon when a Navy jet trainer crash-landed on the deck of the aircraft carrier Lexington in the Gulf of Mexico.


Thatcher Skeptical on Europe Money Ties
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher expressed skepticism today about whether other European Community countries would fulfill Britain's conditions for tying the pound more closely to their currencies, an essential prerequisite for full European economic union.


Review/Music; Mysticism And Fervor: Nusrat Khan And Group
LEAD: Sitting Buddha-like on stage, pouring out thrusting and intricate vocal lines, the Pakistani singer and star Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan rattled the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday night.
And though the music Mr.
Khan sings usually requires an audience that understands his religious fervor, Mr.
Khan still managed to communicate a real intensity.


A Desk Reference From the Public Library
LEAD: The weight of authority, in the case of The New York Public Library Desk Reference, is 4 pounds 8 ounces, and since its 836 pages are not likely to be adapted to portable pocket-size service, the consumer may well have to buy a desk to put it on.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.  Monday
None  Tuesday
Leading Indicators ... Sept.
New-Home Sales ... Sept.
Farm Prices ... Oct.  Wednesday
Factory Orders ... Sept.
Construction Spending ... Sept.  Thursday
Productivity ...


Government Spreading Net To Break Market Free Falls
LEAD: Prodded by the likelihood of periodic plunges in stock market prices, the Federal Government, like it or not, is becoming committed to emergency measures to limit the damage from these frightening episodes.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-9  Top East Germans heard complaints for almost five hours on the steps of City Hall East Berlin. ''You are finished,'' one man told the East Berlin Communist Party chief. ''Give us free elections.'' Page A1


Lawson Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lawson Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
44,773,534
42,694,835
Net inc
6,013,492
5,457,780
Share earns
.44
.38
Shares outst
13,545,111
14,323,694
9mo sales
132,196,516
122,597,931
Net inc
15,806,840
15,955,234
Share earns
1.16
1.10
Shares outst
13,594,457
14,490,902


Wall Street Futures
LEAD: Wall Street has lost the confidence of the small investor for good reason: the marketplace that should be the self-policed source of capital from every investor has become a high-tech casino for the tax-favored institutional gamblers.


Ideological Tests Ruled Out In Filling U.S. Science Jobs
LEAD: Candidates for top scientific jobs in the Department of Health and Human Services will not have to pass an ideological ''litmus test'' test on abortion or other political questions, Secretary Louis W. Sullivan said today.


New TV Ad's Pitch: It's 'Cool' to Be a Boy Scout
LEAD: Standing in a shadowy, littered alley, the young spokesman in a new commercial is clad in a black leather jacket and tight Levis.
It is the look usually used to sell jeans or MTV.
But what he is pushing is the Boy Scouts.


Softsel Computer Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softsel Computer Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
151,616,000
111,657,000
Net inc
2,170,000
1,506,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
12,740,000
10,681,000
9mo sales
441,332,000
324,904,000
Net inc
6,871,000
4,950,000
Share earns
.54
.46
Shares outst
12,679,000
10,681,000


David Savage, 60, a Specialist in Mail Ads
LEAD: David Savage, an expert in direct-response advertising and a managing director of Krupp/Taylor USA, a subsidiary of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, died of a heart attack on Friday in his Manhattan office.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Change in Accounting Rules Backed
LEAD: In a decision that is likely to upset some state and local government officials, the Financial Accounting Foundation voted 12 to 2 yesterday to require government-owned utilities, hospitals, colleges and universities to base their accounting decisions on standards set by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, not its sister organization, the Governmental Accounting Standards Board.


Justice Dept. Approves Timing of Vote on New York Charter
LEAD: The Justice Department yesterday gave its approval to the timing of the referendum next week on the revised New York City Charter.
But the department also said it was unlikely that the agency would complete its review of the substance of the proposal by Election Day.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-17  Soviet price increases were called for on cigarettes, beer and food delicacies.
Officials said prices will be set by the market on some other products next year.
Page A1


Secret Heart of 'The Wizard of Oz' Unlocked
LEAD: To the Editor:


Glum Over Polls? Not I, Courter Says
LEAD: The streets tell a story different from the polls, Representative Jim Courter says, and that is what keeps him campaigning at a hectic pace, still optimistic that he can be New Jersey's next governor.


Report on Davis Lifts UAL Stock
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation rose $4 a share, to $175, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, after a newspaper reported that Marvin Davis, a California financier, might make a new offer for the parent of United Airlines.
The stock also was supported by market rumors that Coniston Partners, a New York investor group, had bought U


Israel Spira, 99, Leader of Bluzhov Hasidim
LEAD: Rabbi Israel Spira, who as the Grand Rabbi of Bluzhov was the spiritual leader of a Hasidic branch in Brooklyn and Israel, died yesterday at Maimonides Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 99 years old and lived in Brooklyn's Borough Park section, where his synagogue was situated.


A's Earn Record $117,580.29 Shares
LEAD: None of the eligible members of the champion Oakland Athletics were among the 18 first-day filers for free agency yesterday, but they became wealthier anyway, gaining a record winning share from the World Series.


Sotheby's to Break Up a Robert Sketchbook
LEAD: A decision by Sotheby's in London to break up one of two surviving sketchbooks by Hubert Robert, a leading French artist of the 18th century, has provoked criticism among some historians of French art and has prompted the resignation of a consultant to the auction house.


Creditors and Eastern Seen Near Accord
LEAD: The unsecured creditors of Eastern Airlines are close to backing management's ambitious plan to rebuild the bankrupt carrier, two people involved in the creditors' meetings said yesterday.


John Beckman Is Dead; Designer of Sets Was 91
LEAD: John Beckman, who designed the sets for ''Casablanca'' and other films and for the television series ''Designing Women,'' died in his sleep on Wednesday.
He was 91 years old and lived in Sherman Oaks, Calif.


Tracking a New Drug From the Soil in Japan To Organ Transplants
LEAD: IN the unending quest for new pharmaceuticals, many companies have sent employees to the remotest areas of the globe to collect samples of soil and other natural products.
From these forays have come many drugs now used to treat infections, heart disease, arthritis, cancer and other ailments.


U.S. Birth Level Nears 4 Million Mark
LEAD: The number of babies born in the United States every year is edging toward four million, a level not reached since the baby boom in the 1950's.
Until recently, demographers thought that level would be out of reach until well into the 21st century.


Drexel Head Limited On S.E.C. Dealings
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has subjected John S.R.
Shad, its former chairman and now the head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Group, to tight limits on his dealings with the agency.


Toy Cars Are Getting A Big Push
LEAD: THERE'S a commotion down in Al Carosi's basement.
It's coming from Derek, who is 13 years old, and Brendan, 9.
As their father, Mr.
Carosi wants them to pipe down.
But as the senior vice president for marketing at Hasbro Inc., the nation's largest toymaker, Mr.
Carosi is glad to hear it.


Our Towns; A Cancer Scare Adds to Sparkle Of Bottled Water
LEAD: The A.&amp;P. on Lincoln Avenue in Glen Rock is just across the highway from the town of Hawthorne, and it is where most of the people in Hawthorne do their grocery shopping.
Bill Halliwell has worked at the A.&amp;P. for eight years, and he has seen the demand for bottled water skyrocket.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Dropping a Penny  Q. What would happen if you dropped a penny from the top of the Empire State Building?
Would it make a difference if the penny fell flat or on edge?
A.If the coin fell straight down on edge, it could build up its velocity to 150 miles an hour, said Anatol Roshko, who is Theodore van Karman Professor of Aeronautics at the California Institute of Technology,


The Mayoral Candidates' Basic Speeches: Laments Followed by Proposals; Giuliani: Problems of Crime Pervade Life in the City
LEAD: The New York City mayoral candidates give dozens of speeches.
Sometimes they address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
More often they use a ''basic speech'' that varies little from one occasion to the next.
These are the basic speeches of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, and David N.


Stake Is Acquired In Durham Corp.
LEAD: An investment group led by Financial Securities Fund, a Nashville investment partnership, and Bailey Financial Group, a Rocky Mount, N.C., investment concern, has acquired a 5.6 percent stake in the Durham Corporation.
The group also said it might seek control of the Raleigh, N.C., holding company, which has interests in insurance and broadcasting.


Death Toll Rises to 30 in Algerian Earthquake


Boeing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boeing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,356,000,000
3,722,000,000
Net inc
242,000,000
144,000,000
Share earns
1.05
.63
9mo sales
15,429,000,000
12,090,000,000
Net inc
598,000,000
440,000,000
Share earns
2.60
1.92


Amstrong World Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amstrong World Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
723,900,000
672,800,000
Net inc
b47,000,000
42,900,000
Share earns
.92
.93
Shares outst
46,000,000
46,200,000
9mo sales
2,178,200,000
1,973,400,000
Net inc
b132,300,000
128,100,000
Share earns
2.75
2.77


Y.&amp;R. Ordered To Pay Midler
LEAD: A Federal court jury today ordered Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. to pay $400,000 to Bette Midler for using an imitation of the singer's voice in a commercial for the Ford Motor Company.


Itel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Itel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
543,000,000
419,900,000
Net inc
10,600,000
12,800,000
Share earns
.18
.39
Shares outst
51,184,000
28,845,000
9mo rev
1,571,000,000
1,184,100,000
Net inc
23,500,000
24,600,000
Share earns
.37
.58
Shares outst
50,465,000
27,394,000


Mitsubishi Estate a Force In Japanese Real Estate
LEAD: When the brokers and investment bankers representing the Rockefeller Group went looking for a buyer with the cachet to match that of their prestigious client, they did not have to look far.


BUSH SENDING TEAM TO ADVISE POLAND
LEAD: President Bush announced today that he would send a delegation led by three Cabinet officers to Poland next month to help decide how to spend a package of American aid that is now stalled in Congress.


Jerusalem Sentences A Palestinian to Life In Deaths of 16 Jews
LEAD: An Israeli court sentenced a Palestinian today to 16 consecutive life terms plus 480 years in jail for killing 16 Jews when he wrenched the steering wheel of a bus away from its driver last July and sent the vehicle plunging over a cliff.


Johnson Controls Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Controls Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,048,900,000
828,500,000
Net inc
23,800,000
30,400,000
Share earns
.57
.83
Shares outst
38,100,000
36,600,000
Yr sales
3,683,600,000
3,099,600,000
Net inc
97,500,000
103,500,000
Share earns
2.55
2.83
Shares outst
37,100,000
36,600,000


On Front Line of Drug War, U.S.-Built Base Lags in Peru
LEAD: The sandbagged bunkers and lookout towers of this American-built base rise in the heart of a broad valley with the greatest concentration of coca plants in the world, roamed by heavily armed drug traffickers and leftist guerrillas.


2 More Concert Guards Held
LEAD: Two Burns International Security guards at the Meadowlands Sports Complex were arrested today, bringing to nine the number of guards charged with assaulting patrons at a series of Grateful Dead rock concerts Oct. 11, 14 and 15.
Seven guards were arrested Friday night on charges of aggravated assault.


Genetic Links May Help Save Rhinos From Extinction
LEAD: IN a discovery that could be crucial to the survival of the black rhinoceros, scientists have found that different subspecies of the endangered animal are so genetically similar that they can interbreed.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Edberg Advances: Second-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden advanced easily in the first round of the Paris Open yesterday by beating Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union, 6-2, 6-3.
Also advancing easily was Aaron Krickstein of the United States, seeded sixth, who beat Mikael Pernfors of Sweden, 6-1, 6-3.


Topics of The Times; Public Service, New and Old
LEAD: Young lawyers and law graduates who choose careers in public service can expect to earn only a fraction of the wages of those who serve private clients.
Some law schools and law firms have begun to recognize the need to address the growing pay gap through such measures as student loan forgiveness programs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about the resignation of Nigel Lawson as Chancellor of the Exchequer in Britain misidentified the editor of the magazine American Economist.
He is Michael Szenberg.


Investor Group Makes Offer To Buy Detroit Free Press
LEAD: A group of Michigan investors yesterday proposed to buy The Detroit Free Press for $68 million, just as the owner of the money-losing daily newspaper, Knight-Ridder Inc., was asking the Supreme Court for permission to merge the newspaper's business operations with those of its rival, The Detroit News.


Reviews/Dance; On the Thread of Memory, A String of Fanciful Dances
LEAD: For the final premiere of their season, Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis have jointly choreographed a single work, ''Segue.''


Atoms Bound Together by Light
LEAD: RESEARCHERS at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute, a private research center in Cambridge, Mass., have discovered a way light can bind matter into molecules.
The scientists formed the ''optical molecules'' by using a previously unknown interaction detected accidentally while conducting other experiments.


Pilot of Crashed Jet Was Flying Too Low In Carrier Approach
LEAD: A Navy pilot attempting his first landing at sea was flying too low before his training jet crashed on the aircraft carrier Lexington, killing him and four others, the ship's captain said today.


Critic's Notebook; Thomas Jefferson, From Statesman to Tchotchke
LEAD: Monticello is one of the great works of American architecture, and one of the nation's most revered historical shrines.
Thomas Jefferson's home in Charlottesville is also a place in which you can buy earrings, glassware, key rings, jigsaw puzzles, T-shirts, plates, pillows, mugs, scarfs, bookends, neckties, cuff links, wastebaskets, candlesticks, silverware, place mats, cassette tapes, tote bags and cookie molds.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Gets TV Guide Account
LEAD: Wieden &amp; Kennedy, a small agency in Portland, Ore., with a lofty creative reputation, yesterday won the trade advertising account of TV Guide.
The account had been at N. W. Ayer for 26 years, but the magazine and agency parted company last week because, in the words of Joseph W. Cece, the president of TV Guide, ''We were not on the same wavelength.


Louise S. Hay, Professor, 54
LEAD: Louise Schmir Hay, chairman of the mathematics department at the University of Illinois at Chicago, died of cancer Saturday at West Suburban Hospital in Oak Park, Ill.
She was 54 years old and lived in Oak Park.


Quotron Is Set To Lay Off 400
LEAD: Quotron Systems Inc., the nation's leading provider or electronic stock quotes, said it would lay off 400 workers.
The company blamed the continued problems in the securities industry since the October 1987 stock market crash for the cutbacks.


Sonics Release Gaze
LEAD: Andrew Gaze, the 6-foot-7-inch forward from Australia who last spring helped Seton Hall reach the championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, where it lost to Michigan, has been released by the Seattle SuperSonics of the National Basketball Association.
Gaze was expected to become the 12th man on the Sonics' roster, but a 6-10 center-forward, Scott Meents, who played at Illinois in 1986, got the roster spot.(


Pastels at the Plaza, Cowgirls in the Park
LEAD: Starting the week on an upbeat note, Rebecca Moses presented a thoroughly professional and well-coordinated show that stressed monochromatic outfits in soft, romantic colors.
Her palette was pale, ranging from ivory to peach and sea greens.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Women Raise Voices For the Right to an Abortion
LEAD: While President Bush and his advisers reiterate their commitment to the anti-abortion movement, some of the most influential women in their party have publicly broken ranks and are arguing the case for abortion rights.


Human Rights Group Is Active in Israel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drillers Seek Rich Energy Source At Site of Ancient Volcanic Blast
LEAD: IN the hope of verifying the existence of a vast reservoir of useful, nonpolluting energy, scientists are drilling into a dome of California rock where one of the most violent volcanic explosions in earth's history occurred.


Review/Television; America's 'Great Adventure,' World War I
LEAD: ''The Great War: 1918,'' tonight's episode of the estimable history series ''The American Experience,'' at 9 o'clock on Channel 49 and at 10 on Channel 13, gets its power from the newsreels of trench fighting in the last grim year of World War I. The straightforward if undistinguished narration, written by the producer Tom Weidlinger and read by Eric Sevareid, tells how the ebullience of the ill-trained young Americans marching to join the Allies in 1917 was transformed by the shock of combat.


Secret Heart of 'The Wizard of Oz' Unlocked; Kansas, Be Proud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Shuns Dole Suggestion On Raising the Gasoline Tax
LEAD: The White House today rejected a suggestion by Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, that the Federal gasoline tax be increased to build roads and bridges.


Bally's Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bally's Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
530,439,000
523,652,000
Net loss
b3,714,000
c21,921,000
Share earns
-
.70
Shares outst
26,990,816
30,759,704
9mo rev
1,565,942,000
1,455,866,000
Net inc
b29,632,000
d45,149,000
Share earns
.88
1.43
Shares outst
26,816,453
30,806,555


Hungry Deer Called Threat To Fire Island's Ecosystem
LEAD: The Sunken Forest, a bramble of holly, pine and sassafras nestled behind the dunes of this Fire Island community, is an unusual ecosystem that some biologists believe is threatened with extinction.


Dow Posts Narrow Rise in Slow Trading
LEAD: Stocks ended narrowly mixed yesterday, settling down after a week in which the Dow Jones industrial average lost more than 90 points.


Talking Business with Horner of KPMG Peat Marwick; Merger Outlook For Accountants
LEAD: With merger activity in the accounting profession subsiding, KPMG Peat Marwick remains the world leader with roughly $4.3 billion in revenues for its 1989 fiscal year.
Larry D. Horner, KPMG's 55-year-old chairman, was the first to take the plunge almost three years ago when the firm he headed, Peat Marwick Mitchell, paired off with Dutch-based KMG Main Hurdman to expand its reach overseas.


Beneficial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beneficial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
31,000,000
29,200,000
Share earns
1.27
1.17
9mo net inc
89,300,000
83,600,000
Share earns
3.65
3.35


Cambodians Flee New Terror: Quake
LEAD: When the ground began to heave on Oct. 17, many Cambodian refugees here did not know it was an earthquake.


Gateway to Volumes
LEAD: THOUSANDS of software titles are available for Compact Disk Read Only Memory, or CD-ROM.
Most of them are notable primarily for cramming vast amounts of arcane material onto a single 4.7-inch platter.
Although most CD-ROM applications are specialized, there are an increasing number of general interest CD-ROM titles that, for the right users, might justify the purchase of CD-ROM paraphernalia..


Pedro Vargas, a Mexican Singer And Film Performer, Is Dead at 85
LEAD: Pedro Vargas, who was known as ''the tenor of the Americas'' during a career that lasted more than 60 years, died of heart failure today at his home here.
He was 85 years old.
His eldest son, Pedro Jr., said he died in his sleep, and that he had been suffering for several years from diabetes and heart problems.


Program Offers a Million Printing Possibilities
LEAD: BANNERMANIA may turn you into a banner maniac.
With it, you can create a huge number of banners, posters, or bumper stickers and print them out on your printer, color or monochrome, dot-matrix or laser.


MANY ARE LEAVING PRISON HIT BY RIOTS
LEAD: Federal prison officials have agreed to accept as many as 800 state prison inmates in Pennsylvania to relieve crowding caused by the destruction of cellblocks in rioting last week at the Camp Hill prison, state and Federal officials said today.


Printers Plan To Combine
LEAD: Quebecor Inc. of Montreal and the Maxwell Communication Corporation of Britain said today that they would merge their printing businesses in Canada and the United States to form North America's second-largest printer.


Washington Talk; Above the Dirt Arena, Bush Keeps the Score
LEAD: People close to the President know from the 1988 campaign, if not before, that when the occasion merits he has a taste for what he likes to call red-meat lines.
And at times in recent weeks, they have urged him to leave the cozy bipartisanship with which he has draped the Oval Office and indulge.


Palmy, Balmy Site for Breeders'
LEAD: The smell of suntan lotion sweetens the salt air in the ocean breezes.
Hot and blinding sunlight bounces from the blue water to the shell-pink stucco of the beachfront hotels.
The breaking waves muffle the rustle of swaying palm fronds.
Just like the travel brochures promise.


Mabel Hampton, Gay Rights Advocate, 87
LEAD: Mabel Hampton, an advocate in the gay rights movement, died of pneumonia Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Times Settles Legal Dispute With Independent Dealers
LEAD: After seven years of litigation, The New York Times and most independent dealers who deliver The Times to homes in the New York area announced a settlement yesterday of their dispute.


CS First Boston's Debt Downgraded
LEAD: Moody's Investor Service yesterday downgraded the long-term debt of CS First Boston from A2 to A3, citing the risks inherent in its merchant banking business.
The rating service also downgraded the debt of Financiere Credit Suisse First Boston, the company's Swiss subsidiary.
All told, the downgrading will affect about $550 million of the Wall


Greenpeace's Latest Cause: Junk in Antarctica


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE 10 A.M.
PLEDGING CONFERENCE FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES - 10 A.M.


Yugoslav Police Break Up Protest in Trial of Albanians
LEAD: Using tear gas and clubs, the police today dispersed 1,000 demonstrators of Albanian descent who were protesting the trial of the former Communist Party chief of Kosovo, a southern Yugoslav province troubled for years by ethnic violence.


Short of Cash, Kremlin Weighs A Soviet Version of the Sin Tax
LEAD: Venturing into the dangerous political terrain of consumer prices, the Soviet Finance Minister called today for an immediate increase in the prices of cigarettes, beer and delicacies.


Knicks Put Aside the Pressing Matter
LEAD: Watch for the press. Look out for the trap.


New Talks Are Held In City Opera Strike
LEAD: Negotiators for the New York City Opera and its striking orchestra met informally last night, with a formal bargaining session set for this morning, in an attempt to resolve their six-week labor dispute.


Careers; Panel Weighs Methods on Family Leave
LEAD: THE issue of parental leave, now more broadly described as family leave, is high on the agenda of women's groups, unions and some state legislators.


Uncertainty on Poll Results Clouds Strategy in Race for Mayor
LEAD: Both the Democratic and Republican candidates for mayor are less confident about the results of public-opinion polls than in previous New York City elections, an uncertainty that could affect their strategy and skew their vote-pulling operations on Election Day.


Reviews/Dance; Festive Vivaldi, With Room In the Spotlight for All
LEAD: Gerald Arpino's ''Viva Vivaldi'' sailed back into the Joffrey Ballet repertory over the weekend.
And the company's performance of the ballet on Sunday afternoon at City Center (131 West 55th Street) suggested why this has become a signature work for the Joffrey and for Mr.
Arpino.
Although ''Viva Vivaldi'' ends curiously, with a section led by two male soloists instead of the grand summary one might expect of a festive pure-dance piece of this sort, the ballet has moments in the spotlight for nearly everyone in the cast.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Polls Skew Strategies Of Mayoral Candidates  Although both the Democratic and Republican nominees in New York expect a 60 percent voter turnout on Election Day, neither is willing to predict who will turn out, because of uncertainties in several polls.
Page B1.
Broad DES Liability Stands


Jackson Sees a Daily 'Crucifixion' of Dinkins
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, whose relationship with David N. Dinkins has become an issue in New York City's mayoral race for some Jewish voters, said yesterday that the Democratic candidate was ''facing a kind of protracted crucifixion every day'' about the nature of his association with Mr.
Jackson.


Flag Burning Brings Out the Worst in Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Design; Larger-Than-Life Jewelry
LEAD: Clank, clank!
Clink, clink!
You can hear them even before you see them.
And then, of course, you cannot miss them, for the newest accessories are not only noisy, they are blockbuster in scale.


John M. Ketteringham, 49, Executive, Dies
LEAD: John M. Ketteringham, an executive with Arthur D. Little Inc., died of cancer Friday at his home in Lincoln, Mass.
He was 49 years old.


Treasury Securities Inch Higher
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities inched higher in very slow trading yesterday, as dealers awaited reports on economic activity in October.


Evert Opts Out
LEAD: Despite her five victories without a defeat in the recent Federation Cup in Japan, Chris Evert has decided not to compete in the $1 million Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden, Nov. 13-19.
She qualified for the season-ending tournament, as she has every year since the event's inception in 1983.


From Blass and Herrera, Wearable Styles
LEAD: Scarcely skipping a beat, the spring and summer fashion openings picked up yesterday in New York, just a few days after the Paris shows faded into memory.
Many audience members, as well as the trends, were the same on both sides of the Atlantic as the week opened: the jacket continues as key to spring dressing, fringe appears everywhere, bright colors are set off by neutral black, navy, white and beige, and hemlines frequently dip.


Chess
LEAD: On Oct. 22, the world champion, Gary Kasparov, showed his overpowering machine-eating style against the computer Deep Thought.
Thursday night the 26-year-old Soviet star showed his man-eating style against 15-year-old Gata Kamsky, who defected to the United States in March from the Soviet Union.


Environmentalists Favor Revised City Charter
LEAD: To the Editor:


Giants Toughen Up in 2d Half and Jolt Vikings
LEAD: For almost the first 34 minutes of the game tonight, the Minnesota Vikings outclassed the Giants in every department.
Then, in the third quarter, the Giants' defense and kickoff team exploded with three big plays, and the Giants rolled to a 24-14 victory.
It did not come cheaply.
Phil Simms, the Giants' starting quarterback, lasted only six plays before he was sacked by Al Noga and knocked out of the game with a sprained right ankle.


Times Are Tough For U.S. Runners
LEAD: Another marathon came and went over the weekend, this one in Chicago, and it has still been more than five years since an American has finished a race of that distance under 2 hours 10 minutes.


Weisfield's Is Sold
LEAD: Ratners Group P.L.C. agreed to acquire the American specialty jewelry retailer Weisfield's Inc. for $50 a share, or $55 million.
Weisfield's operates 87 stores in nine states.
Weisfield's stock jumped $14, to $53, in over-the-counter trading.
Its 35.9 percent increase was the best of the day.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Mitsubishi Estate bought 51 percent of the Rockefeller Group, which owns Rockefeller Center, the Radio City Music Hall and other mid-Manhattan office buildings, for $846 million in cash.  [ Page A1. ]  The Rockefeller Group quickly turned to Mitsubishi Estate when it sought a prestigious buyer.


Topics of The Times; Going Bats in Gotham
LEAD: We know of an 8-year-old girl who is turning herself into a medieval princess.
Her little brother, who likes bows and arrows, will be Robin Hood.
We know of a penguin, too, and expect the usual number of ghosts.
But the star of Gotham City's Halloween will be the guy with the pointed ears and the big cape who hangs upside down when he sleeps.


Gerald Sussman, 56, Humorist and Author
LEAD: Gerald Sussman, a humorist and advertising copywriter, died early Sunday in Alford, Mass., after a bronchial asthmatic attack while visiting friends.
He was 56 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Protesters March to K.G.B. Headquarters
LEAD: Hundreds of demonstrators encircled the notorious headquarters of the K.G.B. tonight in candle-lit protest, saying that new political freedoms have been too limited to guard against the revival of state terrorism.


British Pound Makes Gains; Some Traders Are Cautious
LEAD: The dollar was mixed against leading foreign currencies yesterday while the pound advanced for the first time since London was shaken last week by the departure of Nigel Lawson, the Chancellor of the Exchequer.


F.D.A. IS PREPARING NEW RULES TO CURB FOOD LABEL CLAIMS
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration is preparing new rules to help stop the unchecked growth of health claims that have begun to appear on cereals, juices, food supplements and other products, Administration officials said today.


Ancient Spider
LEAD: A fossil recently discovered near Gilboa, N.Y., indicates that spiders may have spun webs as long as 385 million years ago.


4 Are Held in Burning Of 3 Flags to Test Law
LEAD: Four people shouting ''Burn, baby, burn'' set fire today to three American flags on the steps of the Capitol in an attempt to test the constitutionality of a new Federal law banning flag desecration.


Europe Routes By American
LEAD: American Airlines said today that it would expand its European schedules by 30 percent and add destinations in Europe and the South Pacific.


Kemper Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kemper Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
698,009,000
593,698,000
Net inc
b55,998,000
d45,399,000
Share earns
1.14
.77
Shares outst
48,971,000
58,257,000
9mo rev
2,057,229,000
1,762,355,000
Net inc
c258,440,000
d151,427,000
Share earns
4.92
2.58
Shares outst
52,036,000
58,338,000


Houston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houston Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,141,698,000
1,082,250,000
Net inc
141,221,000
180,333,000
Share earns
1.12
1.52
Shares outst
125,933,000
118,327,000
9mo rev
2,897,995,000
2,700,804,000
Net inc
283,105,000
348,109,000
Share earns
2.28
2.95
Shares outst
124,052,000
118,075,000


Poll Finds Californians Support a Quake Tax
LEAD: A majority of Californians support a temporary increase in the sales tax to finance earthquake recovery efforts in the San Francisco Bay Area, according to a newspaper poll published today.


For a Schoolmaster-Spy, Strain of Heroism Shows
LEAD: In the glare of media scrutiny, Colman Genn has conveyed the confidence and toughness that might be expected from a former street gang member.
He gambled his reputation to save some New York City schools, and he appears to have won the bet.


Street Cleanup Would Boost New York Morale
LEAD: To the Editor:


Poland Devalues Zloty
LEAD: Poland devalued the zloty today by 12.6 percent, continuing its drive to narrow a huge gap between the free-market and official rates for the currency.
The central bank set the new rate at 2,400 zloties to the United States dollar, compared with 2,098 on Friday, according to figures published by the Government newspaper Rzeczpospolita.


Margaret L. Alsina
LEAD: Margaret Lowenthal Alsina, a retired language teacher at the Allendale Columbia School in Rochester, died of a heart attack on Oct. 21 at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
She was 66 years old and lived in Rochester.


Supreme Court Roundup; Product-Liability Ruling Left Standing by Justices
LEAD: The Supreme Court today let stand one of the most far-reaching product-liability rulings ever issued by an American court.


ANOTHER BIG RALLY IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: Chanting demands for everything from free elections to the ouster of the secret police, more than 300,000 East Germans marched around Leipzig's old center in what has become the major weekly ritual of the growing popular movement for change.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Wednesday about a piano recital by Norman Krieger at Alice Tully Hall misidentified a composer on the program.
He is Lowell Liebermann.


Ex-Head of MCA Unit Talks to Time Warner
LEAD: Irving Azoff, the former chairman of the MCA Music Entertainment Group, is expected to join Time Warner Inc. as head of his own record label in a joint venture arrangement, several industry executives said yesterday. which is the umbrella company for the record label, music publishing and amphi theatre operation.


TV Networks May Approve A Pool for Election Exit Polls
LEAD: The three major broadcast networks and the Cable News Network are expected to approve this week a plan to conduct joint exit polls and pool the information during national elections, beginning next year.
ABC News and CBS News, both of which want to control the pool, have offered competing plans, network news executives said yesterday.


The Spanish Victory: A Mandate for the Socialists
LEAD: After a tightly fought election in which business executives and bankers sided openly with the governing Socialist Party, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has won a mandate to continue modernizing Spain's economy in preparation for the creation of a single European market after 1992.


Father Thomas Oddo, Catholic Educator, 45
LEAD: The Rev.
Thomas Oddo, president of the University of Portland and a trustee at three other Roman Catholic institutions, was killed Sunday in an auto accident.
He was 45 years old.


One Top Soviet Editor Backs Another's Ouster
LEAD: The new editor of Pravda today defended President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's effort to oust the editor of Argumenty i Fakty, the country's most popular paper, saying that any editor who is a Communist must answer to the party even if his publication is ostensibly independent.


Suwalki Journal; In Poland's Hopeless Hog Picture, a Hopeful Spot
LEAD: In this land of limited meat and scarce though cherished kielbasa, few things would seem to offer a better growth opportunity than pigs.
And yet in the last three years stocks of hogs, Poland's principal livestock, fell from 22 million to fewer than 14 million.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is no business address in the world that has the same cachet as Rockefeller Center.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  The Tired Look


Rosario P. San Filippo, 90, Retired Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Rosario P. San Filippo, the retired director of surgery at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn, died of a heart attack Friday at the medical center.
He was 90 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Unocal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unocal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,818,000,000
2,604,000,000
Net inc
b79,000,000
97,000,000
Share earns
.67
.84
9mo rev
8,532,000,000
7,498,000,000
Net inc
b286,000,000
c339,000,000
Share earns
2.44
2.91


Friend Turned Foe of Gandhi Is Gaining in Self-Assurance
LEAD: Vishwanath Pratap Singh stood on the veranda of his home here and described the disenchantment that he felt for Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, whom he had served as Finance and Defense Minister and whom he hopes to unseat in national elections three weeks away.


Doctors Are Baffled By Rates For Cancer
LEAD: In the United States, the death rate from colon and rectal cancer is highest along an arc from Maine to Iowa, say Government researchers, who are puzzled by the finding.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. said its Erisco unit had bought data bases and other assets of Managed Health Care Services.
Terms were not disclosed.


Three for the City Council
LEAD: Only 3 of the New York City Council's 35 members face more than token opposition in the election next Tuesday.
That's what often happens in heavily Democratic New York; winning the primary is almost always tantamount to election.
The proposed revision of the City Charter, which would expand the Council and give it some real power, might change that.


Review/Opera; Handel's 'Caesar,' Updated Into Musical Comedy
LEAD: Because Handel's Italian operas were written in a Baroque form that was already outmoded in his lifetime, companies feel justified in bending them into shapes that the modern-day operagoer may easily recognize.
Typically, the scores are drastically cut and/or their numbers shifted around in hopes of sharpening dramatic points.


Himont Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Himont Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
354,886,000
435,496,000
Net inc
31,501,000
107,760,000
Share earns
.48
1.65
9mo sales
1,221,817,000
1,299,522,000
Net inc
170,912,000
282,826,000
Share earns
2.63
4.33


Dodge City Journal; Soviets Find Friendship In a Historic Cow Town
LEAD: When a Soviet delegation led by a top adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union expressed the desire to meet ''real Americans,'' Senator Bob Dole arranged to give them a taste of the Old West mixed with some Western-style democracy.


Foolish, and Thuggish, in Nicaragua
LEAD: The only positive thing to be said about the assault on peace by Nicaragua's President, Daniel Ortega, is the universal storm of outrage it instantly provoked.
That storm may, as soon as today, force him to back down from his re-declaration of war against the contras.
But even if he does, his bellicosity threatens the Nicaraguan election campaign just under way.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: Revco D.S.
Inc., the bankrupt pharmacy chain, received a $925 million buyout offer 10 days ago from the Robert M. Bass Group and Acadia Partners.


Two Plead Not Guilty In Shooting of Officers
LEAD: Two brothers pleaded not guilty today to the attempted murder of two Essex County police officers who wandered into what authorities said was a drug-related shootout.


Nalco Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nalco Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
269,983,000
248,795,000
Net inc
32,480,000
26,857,000
Share earns
.80
.69
9mo sales
787,554,000
732,199,000
Net inc
87,296,000
77,877,000
Share earns
2.19
1.98


Treasury Offers Proposals Aimed at Drug Laundering
LEAD: The Treasury Department yesterday disclosed the range of the new guidelines it is reviewing to regulate the electronic transfer of vast sums of money among banks around the world.


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
983,500,000
923,800,000
Net inc
145,700,000
148,500,000
Share earns
1.46
1.53
Shares outst
99,500,000
97,300,000
9mo rev
2,760,200,000
2,495,300,000
Net inc
290,300,000
347,800,000
Share earns
2.94
3.60
Shares outst
98,600,000
96,700,000


Dangerous Delusions: When Fans Are a Threat
LEAD: INTENSE public attention on the lives of the famous is leading an increasing number of mentally disordered people to place celebrities at the center of delusions that can lead to harassment and occasionally to violence, psychiatrists say.


Spinal Surgery
LEAD: A University of Mississippi player remained in critical condition in Memphis after five hours of spinal surgery yesterday, and doctors said it was unlikely he would regain the use of his arms and his legs.


Kean's Popularity Is Little Help to Courter
LEAD: The popularity of New Jersey's best-known Republican, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, has been of little help this fall to his own party and its candidate for governor, Representative Jim Courter.


Shuttle Crew Completes a Practice Launching
LEAD: A team of five astronauts successfully concluded a practice countdown today for a November launching of the space shuttle Discovery on a secret military mission.


DEALS
LEAD:  BASEBALL  MONTREAL (NL) - Exercised the option on the contract of Tom Foley, infielder, for 1990.
TORONTO (AL) - Exercised the option on the contract of George Bell, outfielder, for 1990.
ST.
LOUIS (NL) - Elected August A. Busch 3d chairman of the board, Fred L. Kuhlmann president and chief executive officer, and Mark Sauer executive vice-president and chief operating officer.


Joseph Beruh, 65, Dies; A Theatrical Producer
LEAD: Joseph Beruh, a theatrical producer whose shows included ''Godspell,'' ''The Magic Show'' and ''American Buffalo,'' died in his sleep on Monday, apparently of a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


U.N. Funds Sought by President Again Facing Cuts in Congress
LEAD: Against President Bush's wishes, Congress is planning to withhold money owed the United Nations this year for the fifth year running.


Rediscovering the Lost Crops of the Incas
LEAD: HALF a millennium ago in the Andes, on the eve of the Spanish conquest, the Incas created an agricultural wonderland.
On irrigated mountainside terraces along the spine of South America, they cultivated an estimated 70 species of crops, almost as many as the farmers of Europe and Asia combined.


53d St. Group Tries to Help Homeless Closest to Home
LEAD: Many civic associations take on projects that produce quick, visible results, like increased police protection, cleaner streets or new trees.


First Financial Management Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Management Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,254,000
7,533,000
Share earns
.61
.44
Shares outst
23,379,000
16,951,000
9mo net inc
32,851,000
19,235,000
Share earns
1.58
1.14
Shares outst
20,763,000
16,934,000


New York to Drop Ban On Private AIDS Tests
LEAD: New York, the only state to prohibit testing for the AIDS virus by commercial laboratories, said today that it would lift the ban.


Court Review Set in LTV Pension Case
LEAD: The Supreme Court today agreed to review a case that could affect the solvency of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the troubled Federal agency that Congress set up 15 years ago to guarantee the security of employee pensions.


Nynex's Debt Under Review
LEAD: The debt rating of the Nynex Corporation and related entities has been placed under review for possible downgrading, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday.
The review affects about $7.7 billion in outstanding debt.


Reports of Needle Attacks on West Side Rise to 23
LEAD: Sixteen additional women have reported that a group of teen-age girls struck them from behind with a needle or pin on walks last week on the Upper West Side, the police said yesterday.


Rangers Have Depth Misperception
LEAD: The notion had surfaced even before the season began: The Rangers, decent but not deep in talent, were a couple of critical injuries away from serious trouble.


Dollar Takes Its Cue From Stocks
LEAD: Something different is happening in the foreign exchange market.
In a reversal of the recent pattern, the dollar is being led around by the stock market.


Miller to Market Non-Alcohol Beer
LEAD: In another sign of sluggish sales for the beer industry, the Miller Brewing Company of Milwaukee said it plans to sell a beer-flavored alcohol-free beverage.
The nation's No. 2 brewer, after the Anheuser-Busch Companies, said it would begin selling the drink, Miller Sharp's, on Jan. 1.


Bridge
LEAD: The members of Congress who played last Thursday in the first match between the Senate and the House of Representatives are now looking forward to their next match.
They are to play Feb. 23 in London against the British Parliament, and will be seeking to avenge two previous defeats.
A match scheduled in Nashville, Tenn., last November had to be canceled because Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher summoned


Thomas Noyes, 67, Broadway Producer and Newspaperman
LEAD: Thomas Ewing Noyes, a Broadway producer who later became a reporter and an editorial writer and a radio commentator, died of heart disease on Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 67 years old.


Hercules Analyzes Unit
LEAD: Hercules Inc. said today that it was assessing the future of the Aircraft and Electronic Products part of its Hercules Aerospace Company as part of its shift in strategic direction.
Hercules said it engaged the First Boston Corporation to analyze the business and help determine the best course of action.


Bush's Acid Test
LEAD: President Bush's much-ballyhooed clean air proposals took a beating in a House committee but he still can push his innovative acid-rain program through Congress - if he throws the full weight of his Administration and his own prestige behind it.


Gag That Man!
LEAD: Some of those people in Washington really have their nerve.


Beathard Is the Man Jets Need
LEAD: If the Jets lose in New England next Sunday for a 1-8 record, they will have sunk to the depths of the worst start in their 30-year history.
But even if they somehow were to avert that embarrassment, it's time for the Jets' owner, Leon Hess, to acknowledge that three heads are not better than one.


Bush Asked to Oust Wall
LEAD: The chairman of the House Banking Committee has asked President Bush to dismiss M. Danny Wall, the nation's top Federal regulator of savings and loan associations, because of Mr.
Wall's handling of the failure of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif.


NL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NL Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
249,500,000
246,900,000
Net inc
65,800,000
c38,100,000
Share earns
.99
.57
9mo sales
761,500,000
771,600,000
Net inc
b152,500,000
c115,900,000
Share earns
2.30
1.74


Foster Wheeler Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foster Wheeler Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1989
1988
Revenue
310,996,523
254,078,623
Net inc
6,119,268
4,209,483
Share earns
.17
.12
9mo rev
941,848,588
782,077,774
Net inc
b23,974,024
b21,015,519
Share earns
.68
.60


NEW EVIDENCE SEEN IN PAN AM ATTACK
LEAD: Investigators in Europe have uncovered evidence and testimony linking a radical Palestinian faction to the December 1988 bombing of a Pan Am flight over Lockerbie, Scotland, United States Government officials said today.


Piniella and Quinn Meet About Reds Job
LEAD: Lou Piniella, the former Yankee outfielder and manager, said last night that he had met earlier in the day in Ohio with Bob Quinn, the Cincinnati general manager, about the Reds' managerial vacancy. ''The Reds have permission to talk to me, and I met with Quinn today,'' Piniella said after returing to his Allendale, N.J.


6 Detained Americans Freed by Mozambique
LEAD: Six American members of a missionary medical team seized by soldiers last week were released today, United States officials said.


Japanese Buy New York Cachet With Deal for Rockefeller Center
LEAD: The Rockefeller Group, the owner of Rockefeller Center, Radio City Music Hall and other mid-Manhattan office buildings, said yesterday that it had sold control of the company to the Mitsubishi Estate Company of Tokyo, one of the world's biggest real estate developers.


On TV, Fiction Blurs Fact
LEAD: The urge to dramatize news events is leading television down two dangerous paths.
One is the familiar docudrama, a blend of drama and documentary like ABC's ''The Final Days,'' shown Sunday.
The other is the re-enactment or simulation of news events on news programs.
The minimum remedy - a foghorn-blast warning to viewers that fact and fiction are being blended - may make docudramas palatable.


Kateb Yacine, Novelist And Poet, Is Dead at 60
LEAD: Kateb Yacine, a leading Algerian novelist, poet and playwright, died of leukemia on Saturday in Grenoble, France.
He was 60 years old.


Copper Prices Off Sharply On Fears of Larger Supply
LEAD: Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Commodity Exchange, extending the market's two-week-old slide amid new selling prompted by a continued easing of supply fears.


Whirlpool Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whirlpool Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,501,700,000
1,180,000,000
Net inc
46,700,000
b31,500,000
Share earns
.68
.45
Shares outst
69,300,000
69,300,000
9mo rev
4,716,600,000
3,397,200,000
Net inc
137,800,000
b106,100,000
Share earns
1.99
1.53
Shares outst
69,300,000
69,300,000


Bellevue Jury Rejects Plea Of Insanity
LEAD: A Manhattan jury, rejecting the insanity defense of Steven Smith, convicted the 24-year-old homeless man yesterday of robbing, raping and murdering Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant in her office in Bellevue Hospital on Jan. 7.


White House to Limit Job Screening
LEAD: The Bush Administration will not use anti-abortion views as a test for screening job candidates except for people being considered for the Government's top health policy jobs, the White House said today.


The Trident Boondoggle
LEAD: A common-sense pillar of U.S. strategic policy over the years has been that our nuclear weapons planning and arms control goals should be consistent.
In that respect, the Trident submarine program is a bafflement.
By pursuing it full bore, we are ignoring our goals for a strategic arms agreement and committing to buying billion-dollar submarines that we may be forced to dismantle in a few years.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Village Halloween Parade, Broadway between 14th and 23d Streets will be closed tonight from 6 to 11, as will Fifth Avenue between 14th and 23d Streets.
The Avenue of the Americas will be closed between Houston and 14th Streets from 5 P.M. to 11 P.M.


Hundreds of Demonstrators Encircle K.G.B. Headquarters in Moscow


Gilbert in Masters
LEAD: Brad Gilbert, ranked fifth in the world and the winner of five tournaments in 1989, is the fourth player to qualify for the eight-player Masters Championships, Nov. 28-Dec. 3 at the Garden.
Gilbert, who is in fourth place in the Nabisco Grand Prix standing, joins Ivan Lendl, Boris Becker, and Stefan Edberg.


Chinese Seeking to Avoid Reduction of Debt Rating
LEAD: Chinese state bankers said today that there was no reason for China's international credit rating to be diminished and expressed confidence over the country's ability to repay its mounting debts.
According to the latest official figures, China's debts totaled $40 billion at the end of 1988.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Oct. 14 about the nation's 10 largest guard companies misidentified the fifth-largest.
It is American Protective Services Inc.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.61
8.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.78
7.79
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.64
7.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.90
7.94
8.50
30-YR.


Neil H. G. Green, 66, An Executive of Nestle
LEAD: Neil Harold George Green, senior vice president of finance and treasurer of Nestle Holdings Inc., died on Sunday at his home in Jackson, Miss.
The cause of death was not released.
He was 66 years old.


Pactel's Damage Is Over $40 Million
LEAD: Pacific Telesis Group, one of the nation's seven regional telephone companies, said that the Oct. 17 earthquake in nothern California had caused $40 million to $50 million in damage to its buildings and network facilities.
Pactel, based in San Francisco, said most of the damage would be covered by a $150 million earthquake insurance policy that it carries.


Communication Center Names New Chairman
LEAD: Burton B. Staniar, chairman and chief executive officer of the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company (Group W), has been named chairman of the Center for Communication.


Fire Kills 60-Year-Old Woman
LEAD: A 60-year-old woman who apparently had been smoking in bed was killed today when her bedroom became engulfed in flames, the authorities said.
The woman, Nancy Sterback, was dead when firefighters arrived to put out the 4:30 A.M. fire.
About 20 years ago, another person died in a fire in the same room, Chief David Russell said.


Shun 'Backwater of Oppression,' Nixon Tells China
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon urged China today not to sink into a ''backwater of oppression and stagnation'' and called on both the United States and China to strive for cooperation to overcome the present bitterness in their relationship.


Merrill Ends Index Arbitrage
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest retail brokerage, said yesterday that it would abandon its business in index arbitrage, the best-known form of program trading.


As Oratory Fades, Obstacles to Chemical Arms Pact Multiply
LEAD: One month after President Bush proposed from a United Nations podium that the United States and Soviet Union begin to slash their stockpiles of poison gas, his initiative has run into political and technological obstacles.


Give Us Biomedical Research, Not Bombs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Individuals Stay Unafraid of Stocks
LEAD: SMALL investors, far from being scared by market volatility, seem to see it as an opportunity this year.
Some mutual fund managers said yesterday that there was a net flow of cash into funds in October, when the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 190 points in a single day.


Books of The Times; Pleasures and Hazards of Familial Love
LEAD:  Ordinary Love &amp; Good Will  By Jane Smiley  197 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


Peru Plans Silver Stockpile
LEAD: In a move that could restrict world silver supplies, Peru said Sunday that it would stockpile silver to help local mining companies through economic doldrums.
The Government's Central


Murray Levy, Manufacturer, 77
LEAD: Murray Levy, a clothing manufacturer and philanthropist, died of cancer Sunday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 77 years old.


Drugs and Debt: Shackles of Migrant Worker
LEAD: The long history of migrant labor in America's orchards and fields has been a chronicle of debt, dependency and fear.
Now the discovery of a written record of degradation and servitude among sweet potato pickers at a farm near here has demonstrated anew how little the lives of migrant workers have changed.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Federal Savings Bank, Jacksonville, Fla., named Norman J. Harrison chief executive.


Move Gives Trusts More Flexibility
LEAD: The history of the Rockefeller family is the history of the word ''trust.''


Sales Dip Deflates Hyundai Bubble
LEAD: Just three years after engineering one of the most successful imported-car introductions in the United States, the Hyundai Group has hit a rough patch.


Nora Levin, Historian, 73
LEAD: Nora Levin, founder of the Holocaust Oral History Archive at Gratz College and author of ''The Holocaust: The Destruction of European Jewry, 1933-1945,'' died of cancer on Thursday at American Oncological Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was 73 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


Black Town Suffers for Its Fidelity to South Africa
LEAD: A harsh retribution has been visited upon the people of Nkqokqweni.
They have been beaten, detained, deported and have seen their homes bulldozed to rubble, all because they believe that they belong to South Africa.


El Paso Natural Gas Appoints a New Chief
LEAD: The El Paso Natural Gas Company, a leading natural gas transmission concern, has named William A. Wise as chief executive.


East German's Art Gets a Brooklyn Home
LEAD: When Gerd Sonntag, an artist from East Berlin, came here to show his work at the new Castillo Cultural Center in Greenwich Village, he didn't expect to wind up with an exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum.
But when his paintings go on view there tomorrow, he will be the first East German artist to have a one-person show in a major


Fatal Car Accident Shuts Bridge in Queens
LEAD: The North Channel Bridge, which connects the Rockaways peninsula with the mainland of Queens, was closed for five hours yesterday morning after a fatal car accident left oil contaminated with a toxic chemical on the road, the police said.


U.S.-Soviet Citizen Forum: Fewer Rifts Now
LEAD: Soviet and American citizens celebrated the improvement in relations between their two nations today as they met here for their fifth annual exercise in people-to-people diplomacy.
But the occasion was marred by American concern about a Soviet editor who was not allowed to attend.


Nearly Complete Tyrannosaur Skeleton Found
LEAD: THE most complete skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus rex ever found has been uncovered in the badlands of eastern Montana.
Paleontologists expect the fossilized bones to give them a much clearer picture of the anatomy of the fierce-looking carnivore that, in the popular imagination at least, epitomizes the great dinosaurs.


The Mayoral Candidates' Basic Speeches: Laments Followed by Proposals; Dinkins: I Intend to be Toughest Mayor on Crime This City Has Ever Seen
LEAD: The New York City mayoral candidates give dozens of speeches.
Sometimes they address a particular issue or audience in a particular way.
More often they use a ''basic speech'' that varies little from one occasion to the next.
These are the basic speeches of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, and David N.


Enron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,205,400,000
1,193,000,000
Net inc
b13,400,000
cd16,800,000
Share earns
.14
-
Shares outst
50,300,000
47,600,000
9mo rev
4,373,100,000
4,247,100,000
Net inc
b112,600,000
d83,800,000
Share earns
1.88
1.20
Shares outst
49,700,000
47,300,000


New Whooping Cough Vaccine Under Study
LEAD: An Italian scientist says he has discovered a new vaccine for whooping cough that does not have the side effects of the vaccine now used.


Passing Game Is Giving Packers High Hopes
LEAD: At the midpoint of the scramble for Super Bowl XXIV, 20 of the National Football League's 28 teams have records at or above .500, television ratings are steady and attendance is at near record levels: 913,996 people were at games this week, the second highest total in history.


American Family Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Family Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
599,256,000
574,386,000
Net inc
24,070,000
28,320,000
Share earns
.30
.35
9mo rev
1,801,203,000
1,726,221,000
Net inc
55,048,000
82,407,000
Share earns
.68
1.02


Sea Containers Plans Statement
LEAD: Sea Containers Ltd. said it planned to make an announcement today after a meeting of its board in London.
A spokesman in New York for the Bermuda-based ferry and cargo concern would not give further details.
The company previously said it would make public this month a ''recommended alternative'' to a hostile offer by Temple Holdings


Ortega Seems to Retreat Further From War Threat
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra is apparently stepping back still further from his announcement that his Government will break its cease-fire with rebels.


Cross &amp; Trecker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross &amp; Trecker Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
105,584,000
111,261,000
Net loss
b1,027,000
c12,353,000
Yr rev
456,689,000
430,944,000
Net loss
46,538,000
c23,590,000
b-Included a non-recurring charge of $25 million taken in the third quarter and related essentially to a major restructuring program.


Chrysler Is Said To Plan Cuts
LEAD: Lee Iacocca, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, was quoted as saying the company expects to close at least one assembly plant, to delay products and to lay off some white-collar workers because of the slumping domestic auto industry.
The report in the trade paper


Despite Scorn, Team in Utah Still Seeks Cold-Fusion Clues
LEAD: THE euphoria and wild claims about a ''cold fusion'' power source are long gone.
So is the gold-rush fever over the hope of turning a table-top apparatus into a font of nearly limitless energy and profit.
It's even hard to find the T-shirts and bumper stickers that entrepreneurs once peddled around town to celebrate the finding.


All Quiet in the Jets' Offense and Their Locker Room
LEAD: Isn't anyone on the Jets upset with a 1-7 record?


