At The Movies
LEAD:  Romero Films Poe


7 AGENCIES JOINING IN CLIMATE WATCH
LEAD: The Bush Administration set priorities today for all Federal research on global warming, ozone depletion and other potential environmental disasters.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums ''SEW WHAT,'' a workshop that teaches children ages 5 to 11 and their families how to make belt pouches, bean bags or pillows, 1 to 2:30 P.M. tomorrow in Central Park, at Belvedere Castle by Turtle Pond and the Delacorte Theater, south of the Great Lawn at 79th Street.
Free.


Search Intensifies for Missing Radioactive Gas
LEAD: The Energy Department said yesterday that it had formed a team to track down tritium that remains missing after a two-month search.
Officials said the search had failed to resolve all discrepancies over how much of the radioactive gas was sent to commercial customers.


Prices Paid To Farmers Drop 1.4%
LEAD: Prices that farmers were paid for raw products dropped 1.4 percent from July to August, putting the monthly average just where it was a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.


No Headline
LEAD: With legislative elections six days away, the South African Government's confrontation with anti-apartheid forces sharpened today.
Hundreds of demonstrators were repelled with tear gas and rubber bullets, and the police searched the offices of the country's largest predominantly black trade union federation.


Large Retailers Report Mixed Sales for August
LEAD: The nation's largest retailers issued mixed sales reports for August yesterday, with apparel retailers and department stores faring better than mass merchandisers during the back-to-school season.


Seymour Krim, Author And Critic, Dies at 67
LEAD: Seymour Krim, an author and critic, was found dead, apparently of a drug overdose, in his Manhattan apartment Wednesday night, the police said.
He was 67 years old.


Bleeding Cambodia
LEAD: The bitter breakdown of the Paris peace conference on Cambodia opens a horrifying possibility.
If Vietnamese forces withdraw as scheduled this month, Pol Pot's genocidal Khmer Rouge army could once again shoot its way into power.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Blythe in the Village


5-1 Victory Puts Jays At the Top With Orioles
LEAD: George Bell drove in three runs, two with a home run that extended his hitting streak to a club-record 22 games, as the Toronto Blue Jays defeated the Chicago White Sox this afternoon, 5-1, to complete a sweep of a three-game series.


Sanchez and Mayotte Outdo Debris and Din
LEAD: Out in the breeze and sunshine on Court 16, the man who had suffered the worst Grand Slam defeat in his storied career just the night before within the gloom of the cavernous Stadium Court contemplated a shot and doubled up in a convulsion of laughter.


Excess Alarms Feared From Bomb Detector
LEAD: A new bomb detector that the Government has ordered airlines to install at large airports cannot reliably spot the type of bomb that caused the crash of a jetliner over Scotland in December, critics say.


Irish Begin Season in Classic Style
LEAD: The coach had wondered aloud if this Notre Dame team would win more than two games this season.
Lou Holtz had spoken of the greatness of the 1989 Fighting Irish, but the problem was that he had used his superlatives in the past tense.


China to Tighten Controls
LEAD: Vice Premier Yao Yilin said today that the Government would take even tougher retrenchment measures in the next three years to reduce inflation and restore market order.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
BancOklahoma Corp., Tulsa, Okla., a bank holding company, named Stanley A. Lybarger president and chief operating officer of the parent company and its principal subsidiary, Bank of Oklahoma.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The President was big on lobsters today.
I was big on pork.''  - Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada.  [ A18:5. ]


A New York During the 'World of Tomorrow'
LEAD: When you and I were young, Maggie, there were El trains over Third and Sixth Avenues, cafeterias that were social centers for the otherwise unoccupied, demonstrations in Union Square, burlesque on 42d Street and such Mayors as Jimmy Walker and Fiorello H. La Guardia, who were nothing if not colorful, although not in the same way.


Abboud Partners Raise Bank Stake
LEAD: A/C Limited Partnership, which is controlled by A. Robert Abboud, chairman and chief executive of the First City Bancorporation of Texas Inc., and Frank C. Cimak, First City's vice chairman and secretary, has raised its stake in the Houston-based bank holding company to the equivalent of 8.8 percent, from 6.5 percent, based on its holdings of both stock and stock options.


U.S. to Train Colombians
LEAD: The Pentagon said it would dispatch 50 to 100 military personnel to train Colombians to operate and maintain the $65 million worth of arms and equipment promised by President Bush.
Page A6.


Labor Board Workers to Get New Training
LEAD: The National Labor Relations Board has ordered its regional offices to provide new training to employees who handle inquiries about workers' rights, a move stemming from a study by an anti-union group that said the board often provided inaccurate information.


3d Generation Ascends At Marks Bros. Jewelers
LEAD: Marks Brothers Jewelers, which estimates that it is the nation's fifth-largest retail jewelry chain, will soon be getting a new president and chief executive, Hugh Marks Patinkin.


A Pritzker 'Hobby' Is Expanding Abroad
LEAD: ''I love going through factories,'' said Robert A. Pritzker. ''Everybody has his own hobbies.
That's mine.''


Mayoral Rivals Differ on Race Relations, Patronage and Charter Revision
LEAD: The challengers to Mayor Edward I. Koch assert that he has contributed to racial tensions in New York City.
Beyond the criticism, however, they offer few specific proposals to promote racial unity.


Labor Day Celebration in Three-State Region; Westchester
LEAD: The Labor Day weekend in Westchester County will be celebrated with a good measure of leisure, both outdoors and in.
There will be a song-filled salute to the work ethic in America, nature walks in search of butterflies - even a horse show and a chess tournament open to novices and experts alike.
CONCERT IN SOMERS.In a tribute to laborers everywhere, Muscoot Farm Park in Somers will present a musical revue on Monday called ''Songs of the Working Class,'' led by Jeffrey Main, a guitarist.


Corrections
LEAD: A table in Business Day on Monday listing the previous week's active stocks misstated the earnings of C. R. Bard Inc.
In the previous 12 months the company earned $1.49 a share, for a five-year annual growth rate of 20 percent.


Books of The Times; How Shakespeare Became a Man for All Centuries
LEAD:  Reinventing Shakespeare  A Cultural History From the Restoration to the Present  By Gary Taylor  Illustrated. 461 pages.
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $29.95.


Israeli Reservist Denies Links to Drug Dealers
LEAD: Yair Klein, an Israeli mercenary, is at the center of an international clamor.


Envoys' Spouses Learn What a Man's Place Is
LEAD: Practicing the etiquette of a diplomatic spouse, a Washington real estate lawyer stepped up to President Bush at a recent White House reception and introduced himself as ''Mr.
Julia Chang Bloch.''


Market Place; Looking for Value In Airline Assets
LEAD: AMERICAN AIRLINES, considered by Wall Street to be a prime takeover target, has substantial assets that could generate huge amounts of cash to finance a bid.
But the airline is also headed by an executive who could mount a strong defense.


U.S. Is Sending Military Specialists to Train the Colombians
LEAD: Detailing a more ambitious role for United States servicemen being sent to Colombia, the Pentagon said today that it would dispatch 50 to 100 military personnel to train Colombians to operate and maintain the $65 million worth of arms and equipment promised by President Bush.


China Rejects Charges
LEAD: The Chinese Government responded angrily today to accusations from Amnesty International that it had ordered secret executions of dissidents and imprisoned more than 10,000 people involved in the crushed democracy movement.


Review/Art; 2 Distinct Visions of 19th-Century America
LEAD: The National Academy of Design has the best exhibition twin bill in town.
It is not that they are the two best exhibitions, although they are solid enough.
What makes them so valuable is the way they complement each other and underline essential aspects of 19th-century American art.
Each retrospective is devoted to an important academy member.


Qaddafi's Rule Is Celebrated; Libya and Chad in Peace Pact
LEAD: Clad in flowing white robes, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi opened celebrations tonight to observe his 20th anniversary as Libya's leader while his Government signed an agreement with Chad to end 16 years of hostility.


Suspect Surrenders


Bensonhurst: A Tough Code In Defense of a Closed World
LEAD: Banners and lights of red, white and green - the colors of the Italian flag -hang along 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst for the Feast of Santa Rosalia.
Normally the neighborhood's biggest event of the year, the feast is overshadowed now by the murder of Yusuf K. Hawkins, a black youth who had ventured into the neighborhood to look at a used car and was surrounded by a crowd of white youths and gunned down.


Red Ransom Is Running Like Top 2-Year-Old
LEAD: The paddock scene before the sixth race at Belmont Park yesterday had the look of major stake.
Fans crowded eight deep for a look at the runners, and owners such as Paul Mellon and Ogden Phipps watched intently as their horses were saddled.


Rose Implicated
LEAD: Thomas P. Gioiosa bragged he was sheltering Pete Rose's track winnings from taxes, the mother of Gioiosa's former girlfriend testified in Federal court in Cincinnati yesterday.


Auctions
LEAD: If America's fascination with automobiles can be termed a love affair, then what started last night in Auburn, Ind., is an orgy of national proportion.
Something like 150,000 people are expected to drop in.


TV Weekend; The Passion and the Pain Of the Painter Frida Kahlo
LEAD: During Frida Kahlo's life, she and her paintings existed in the formidable shadow of her husband, the great Mexican muralist Diego Rivera.
Since her death in 1954, however, the passion and pain that this remarkable woman poured onto her canvases has brought recognition to her work and fascination with her courageous life, which is admiringly treated in ''Frida Kahlo: Portrait of an Artist,'' on Channel 13 at 10 P.M.


John H. Williams, Executive, 76
LEAD: John H. Williams, retired president and chief executive officer of Buck Consultants Inc., an actuarial concern with headquarters in Secaucus, N.J., died Monday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla., after a short illness.
He was 76 years old.


Club Owners Ordered to Pay $10.5 Million to Players in Collusion Case
LEAD: Including a strong reminder that major league baseball clubs engaged in ''conspiratorial conduct,'' an arbitrator awarded $10.5 million yesterday to players he said were financially damaged for the 1986 season as a result of the owners' collusion.


Brazil Is Offering a 6% Bond
LEAD: The Brazilian Government issued exit bonds today to reduce interest payments on its foreign debt by $40 million a year.
Marcelo Ceylao, a director at the nation's central bank, said $1.5 billion worth of the bonds were delivered to financial markets in New York and London for distribution on Friday.


Alcott &amp; Andrews Seeking Protection From Creditors
LEAD: Alcott &amp; Andrews, a chain of clothing stores that caters to working women, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday.


Ruiz's Ballot Removal Upheld
LEAD: The State Court of Appeals yesterday released a decision that removed former State Senator Israel Ruiz Jr. of the Bronx from the ballot because of Mr.
Ruiz's felony conviction in February.


Measure Protecting S.R.O. Housing Is Lifted
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court yesterday lifted a temporary legal measure blocking the demolition or conversion of single-room-occupancy housing in New York City.


Suspect in Brooklyn Slaying Surrenders
LEAD: An 18-year-old white youth who investigators say was the gunman in the racial killing of a black teen-ager in Brooklyn walked into a police station in Oneonta, N.Y., early yesterday and surrendered, the police said.


Hilton on Red Sea
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation will take over management of the luxury hotel at Taba, the Red Sea resort once disputed by Egypt and Israel, a spokeswoman for the hotel chain said.
Nazima Raffa, public relations manager for Hilton in Egypt, said the company would take over the hotel Friday from Sonesta International Hotels.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Improvising by 12


U.S. Can Promote Central American Peace; Dying for Nothing
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Day of Outrage' March Ends in Violence
LEAD: The vanguard of a mile-long protest march against racism and the recent killing of a black youth clashed with the police last night as it tried to force its way through lines of helmeted, riot-equipped officers on the Brooklyn approach to the Brooklyn Bridge.


Bryan Smith, 93; Headed Liberty Mutual
LEAD: Bryan E. Smith, a former chairman and president of the Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, died of pneumonia Wednesday at the Fairport Baptist Home, where he had lived for the last year.
He was 93 years old.


Strong Showing by Dollar; Gold Is Down Worldwide
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply against most major currencies yesterday, reaching a two-month high against the yen.


Basses in Filing On Sensormatic
LEAD: An investment group led by Sid R. Bass and Lee M. Bass, two members of the wealthy Fort Worth family, has filed for permission from Federal antitrust regulators to raise its stake in the Sensormatic Electronics Corporation to 14.9 percent from 7.8 percent.


Idaho Shuts Border to Nuclear Waste From Colorado Weapons Plant
LEAD: Fulfilling a vow he made in February, Gov.
Cecil D. Andrus has closed Idaho's borders to shipments of radioactive waste from the Government's only plutonium processing plant, a move that could force the plant to halt production early next year.


Labor Day Celebration in Three-State Region; New Jersey
LEAD: Although vacationers will be packing their bags and signaling the unofficial end of summer this weekend along the New Jersey shore, the Labor Day holiday still promises a variety of activities in all parts of the state.
FLEMINGTON FAIR.The Flemington Fair, the state's oldest agricultural fair (133 years) and one of the East's largest, is again offering its mixture of music, midway rides, auto racing and 4-H animal judging.


On Stage
LEAD:  'Willy Sings the Blues'


14 Hurt as Capital Highway Bridge Collapses
LEAD: A bridge being built over a major roadway collapsed in the morning rush hour today in this suburb of Washington, injuring 14 people, the state police said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Promoting Connecticut's Home-Grown TV
LEAD: Deep in the heart of Connecticut, television broadcasters here believe, there is a Texas-sized sense of state identity just waiting to kick off its Topsiders and come out fighting.
The best means of expressing it, they suggest, is the remote-control channel switcher.


U.S. ADOPTS LIMITS ON USE OF BENZENE
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency today imposed tough restrictions on the industrial use of benzene, a major chemical that has been linked to leukemia in adults.


Arab and Israeli Die Of Wounds Suffered In Uprising Violence
LEAD: An Israeli tax collector died today, 17 days after he and three other Jews were wounded in a firebomb attack as they drove through the West Bank town of Ramallah, and Palestinians said a Gaza youth died this morning after being beaten by soldiers.


Film Maker Is on Board of Arab Group
LEAD: The maker of a pro-Palestinian documentary about the uprisings in the Israeli-occupied territories said yesterday that she has served for more than two years on the board of an organization supported by Arabs.
The organization, the Arab American Cultural Foundation, has promoted itself as a sponsor of the film.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  THE LAST LAUGH


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the guilty plea entered by Salim B. Lewis and his investment firm, S. B. Lewis &amp; Company, on criminal charges of securities violations reversed the roles played by two lawyers in the case.
Gandolfo V. DiBlazi represents S. B. Lewis &amp; Company; Stanley Arkin represents Mr.


Princess Anne and Husband Agree to Separate
LEAD: Princess Anne and her husband, Mark Phillips, have agreed to separate after nearly 16 years of marriage, Buckingham Palace said today.


Bakker Committed for Psychiatric Tests
LEAD: Jim Bakker was committed to a mental institution in handcuffs and leg shackles today after a psychiatrist and his defense lawyer reported that he was hallucinating and cowering in a fetal position under a couch in the lawyer's office.


Pavarotti Vows Not to Sing At Lyric Opera of Chicago
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti said yesterday that he would not sing again at the Lyric Opera of Chicago and suggested that he and the Chicago company were bad luck for each other.


A Killing That May Alter an Election
LEAD: The death of a 16-year-old black youth at the hands of a white gang in Brooklyn last week has indelibly marked the 1989 mayoral primary and is likely to intensify the racial polarization of the electorate in the days to come, many political consultants and politicians say.


Cadbury to Acquire P.&amp;G.'s Crush Drinks
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company agreed today to sell its Crush International beverage operations to Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., the British candy and beverage company, for $220 million in cash.


Airlines to Install System by Plessey
LEAD: The Plessey Company, the British electronics concern, said six airlines were about to install its new in-flight entertainment system enabling passengers to play games, call home, shop or telex the office.
The company did not identify the airlines.
Plessey will pay for the installation costs of the system while profits will be shared with the airlines.


Browns' Mack Gets Four-Game Suspension
LEAD: Kevin Mack, the Cleveland Browns' running back, was suspended for four games by the National Football League yesterday for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.


Factory Orders Post 1.7% Decline for July
LEAD: Orders to American factories slumped 1.7 percent in July to the lowest level in eight months, the Government said today, in a report indicating that growth remains subdued.


What Do Museums Owe Donors?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Labor Day Celebration in Three-State Region; Hudson Valley
LEAD: The major events in the Hudson Valley this weekend are the opening today of a new visitors' center at the United States Military Academy at West Point and the reopening of a newly refurbished West Point Museum, depicting the history of warfare, weapons and the Academy itself.


Black Gains Right to Shed White Label
LEAD: A light-skinned black woman has won her battle to stop the illusion that she was white, even though her parents listed her as white on her birth certificate in an attempt to help her overcome racial bias.


Let's Not Trivialize The Woodstock Era
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; Rolling Stones Open in Philadelphia
LEAD: Strutting, preening, pointing his toes and spitting out lyrics, Mick Jagger led a lean, efficient Rolling Stones in the opening stadium show of the band's first tour since 1981.
If the 46-year-old Mr.
Jagger feels his age, he wasn't showing it Thursday night at Veterans Stadium here; even between songs, he stalked the stage and jittered with energy, with gestures that were both balletic and funky.


Correction
LEAD: Yesterday's editorial on World War II was illustrated with a cartoon by Bill Mauldin.
The line crediting Mr.
Mauldin was omitted in error.


Badillo, Former Koch Rival, Backs Mayor for Re-election
LEAD: Herman Badillo, a prominent figure in New York City's Hispanic community who once described Mayor Edward I. Koch as a ''petty racialist who fans the flames of racism,'' yesterday endorsed the Mayor's re-election bid.


El Diario Sold by Gannett To Group Led by Publisher
LEAD: A partnership led by the publisher of El Diario/La Prensa acquired the newspaper yesterday from the Gannett Company, the parties said yesterday.


U.N. Panel Puts China on List Of Human Rights Defendants
LEAD: A United Nations panel today placed China on a list of countries accused of seriously violating their citizens' human rights.


What Divides U.S. and Canada? Hint: It's Red and Has Big Claws
LEAD: They voiced support for Colombia's efforts to deal with drug traffickers.
They agreed that further assistance to Poland was crucial.
And they concurred that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega must yield power as Panama's military leader.


White House
LEAD: It may be a variation of the ''good-cop, bad-cop'' routine.
It may be a subtle political ploy.
Or it may be only symbolic of the way George Bush conducts business.


Dow Gains 9.12, but Airline Stocks Retreat
LEAD: Stock prices chalked up modest gains yesterday, except in the closely watched transportation sector, where they slumped.


U.S. Renews Attack on Noriega, Offering Evidence of Ties to Drugs
LEAD: In a new effort to turn world opinion against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the United States asserted today that the Panamanian strongman continued to play a major role in the laundering of drug money and the shipment of narcotics through his country.


Housing Index At 4-Year Low
LEAD: An index measuring the ability of the typical American family to buy a house fell in July to the lowest level in nearly four years.
The National Association of


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Here are Labor Day holiday schedules.
Because of the Labor Day Parade in Manhattan, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 72d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Because of the West Indian Day Parade in Brooklyn, Eastern Parkway between Utica and Washington Avenues will be closed from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Black Leaders Travel To Brooklyn Meeting
LEAD: Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan and several other black political and religious leaders traveled to the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn yesterday to meet with white community leaders in an effort to repair the damage done to racial relations by the murder of Yusuf K. Hawkins.


Burlington Journal; Homeless Cite '27 Will In Demanding a Haven
LEAD: The school that Elihu B. Taft's money built is an impressive structure, red brick with white columns facing west toward Lake Champlain from its perch in Burlington's affluent hill section.


Bryant May Miss Year
LEAD: Kelvin Bryant, the Washington Redskin running back who has been sidelined all summer because of injuries suffered in a car accident, has been advised by doctors to sit out the entire 1989 season, the team announced last night.


Review/Art; Words and Symbols From Matt Mullican
LEAD: Matt Mullican's installation at the Museum of Modern Art is a disappointment.
Over the last decade, Mr.
Mullican has developed a considerable reputation as a performance artist and a maker of posters, banners, oilstick rubbings and stained-glass pieces on which he has emblazoned obscure pictographs.


Leaping Slowly From Theater to Cabaret
LEAD: ''Doing a cabaret act is a very heavy exposure of who you are, both as a person and an artist,'' Christine Andreas said the other day. ''Before putting together an act that I knew would have to be quite autobiographical, I figured I'd better collect some more information about my life.
In the last few years, having a baby and the experience of 'Legs Diamond' made me feel I was finally ready to call the shots myself.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Wishner-Cody Corporate Communications has formed an associate relationship with First Financial Advertising Ltd., a British financial communications firm.


Italian Party Chief Quits
LEAD: Former Prime Minsiter Ciriaco De Mita said today that he had resigned as president of the Christian Democrats, thus ending seven years in the leadership of Italy's dominant political party.
Mr.
De Mita said he was concerned the party ''gives the impression of being in a different frequency from mine.


Study Doubts Depression Raises Cancer Risk
LEAD: Although psychological depression is suspected of reducing the body's immunological defenses, researchers now say it does not appear to increase the risk of cancer.


Prices for Notes and Bonds Ease
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds eased in very thin trading yesterday, as traders shrugged off two developments that could have produced a rally.


Koreans Get Libya Job
LEAD: A South Korean company has won a Libyan contract to build a water pipeline, the largest construction contract ever awarded in the Middle East, a company spokesman said today.
The spokesman for the Dong Ah Construction Industrial Company said the value of the 90-month contract for the 683-mile pipeline totals $5.3 billion.


Walesa Rejects Soviet-Style Communism
LEAD: As Solidarity celebrated its ninth anniversary, Lech Walesa told a Soviet interviewer today that Poland should pull away from Soviet-style Communism and create its own model of society drawing from both socialism and capitalism.


Economic Scene; The Difficult Task Facing the Fed
LEAD: THE really exciting thing about the American economy at this point is that there is no excitement.
Despite everything - the near-record seven-year longevity of the expansion, the anxieties about recession and inflation, the mounting national debt, which has been exacerbated by the bailout of savings and loans, the relatively high level of interest rates and the high cost of the dollar in international markets - the United


Out of Towner's Series Returns With Dance
LEAD: Dance Theater Workshop's Out of Towners series is devoted to the proposition that New York City is not the cultural capital of the world.
Canceled last summer in the face of increasing financial problems, the series is back this year with dance, music and theater from as close as Providence, R.I., and as far away as San Francisco, Seattle, Africa and New Zealand.


For Giants' Cooks, It's Time to Fret
LEAD: The week leading up to the final squad reductions is always an anxious one in the National Football League.
And 13 of the 60 players sharing the locker room here at Giants Stadium will be gone by next Tuesday, when the teams set their rosters at 47.


Pilots Said To Plan Bid For United
LEAD: The pilots union at United Airlines plans to make an offer to buy the carrier that could be worth $6.5 billion, a Wall Street executive and an investor with major holdings in the airline said yesterday.


Hawks Re-sign Wilkins
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins, the Atlanta Hawks' All-Star forward, became one of the highest-paid players in professional basketball when he signed a five-year, $14.5 million contract yesterday.
Under his former contract, Wilkins, 29 years old, earned $1.4 million per season.


Restaurants
LEAD: Auntie Yuan, the midnight-cool, elegantly modern Chinese restaurant on First Avenue, is the most enduring and consistent member of the David Keh clan (Pig Heaven, David K's, David K's Cafe).
Chinatown aficionados may inveigh against the uptown prices here, which are largely a function of neighborhood rents.


When Mom Gets Sick, We Don't Cut Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trial Suspended as Bakker Is Committed for Tests


U.S. Is Blamed for Fatty Lunches in Schools
LEAD: School lunchroom cooks are hampered in efforts to provide nutritious meals because the Government donates mainly ''fat-laden foods'' like ground beef, pork and luncheon meats, a consumer health group said Wednesday.


The New Times Square Design: Merely Token Changes
LEAD: Wednesday's announcement of a new design for the four towers planned for Times Square was a stunning public reversal, less an architectural event than a marketing one, a sort of architectural equivalent of the Coca-Cola Company's abrupt replacement of New Coke.
The Times Square towers, too, bombed in the marketplace; though construction had not even begun, critical and public reactions to Philip Johnson and John Burgee's original design were so negative that the New York State Urban Development Corporation and the New York City Public Development


Results Plus
LEAD:  GOLF  Norman Takes One-Shot Lead: Greg Norman shot an eight-under-par 64 yesterday and took a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Greater Milwaukee Open in Franklin, Wis.
Wayne Grady, Phil Blackmar, Curt Byrum and Steve Pate were one shot behind on a windy, overcast day at the 7,030-yard Tuckaway Country


Pavilion Buys Stake in RKO
LEAD: Pavilion Communications Inc., a company founded by two former actors, has acquired a majority interest in RKO Pictures, which in Hollywood's heyday produced classic films like ''Citizen Kane,''


Our Towns; A Prep School That Teaches Drug-Free Life
LEAD: Fall is coming and the autumn sense of expectancy is in the air on the 140-acre campus of Phoenix Academy here.
Bryant Norman is looking forward to computer classes.


John Steptoe, 38, Illustrator, Dies; He Also Wrote Children's Books
LEAD: John Steptoe, a writer and illustrator of children's books who won several awards for his work, died of AIDS on Monday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 38 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Joe Collins, Former Yankee, 66
LEAD: Joe Collins, a first baseman for 10 years with the New York Yankees, died today at his home here.
He was 66 years old.


Sol Greitzer, 63, Longtime Violist in Philharmonic
LEAD: Sol Greitzer, a prominent violist and the New York Philharmonic's longtime principal player until he resigned in 1985, died of a stroke yesterday in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Trio at Bradley's
LEAD: The trio of Kenny Barron on piano, David Williams on bass and Ben Riley on drums is performing tonight through Saturday at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
There is a $10 cover and an $8 minimum.


I.O.C. Moves to Keep South Africa Out of Competition
LEAD: The International Olympic Committee passed three resolutions today restricting the eligibility of athletes in Olympic Games.
Two of the measures further isolate South Africa from international competition; the third places limits on the soccer tournament.


Copper Prices Up Sharply As Strike Worries Grow
LEAD: Copper futures prices surged in late trading yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York on renewed supply worries prompted by plans for a strike at a mine in Chile, the world's largest copper producer.


Promotional Agency Gets A Crossover
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the vogue in advertising is to speak of integrated communications, practitioners of public relations, direct marketing and advertising tend to remain apart, even antagonistic.


Allstate Discounts Offered for Brakes
LEAD: The Allstate Insurance Company announced that it would offer a 10 percent discount on three leading auto-policy coverages for drivers of cars equipped with anti-lock brakes.
The only other United States insurance company offering an anti-lock brake discount is U.S.A.A. of San Antonio, which insures military personnel and their dependents.


Review/Film; Shared Virtue vs. Great Evil In 'Weapons of the Spirit'
LEAD: Faced with the unfathomable evil of the Holocaust, the French town of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon responded with deep and mysterious goodness.
From 1940 to 1944, the 5,000 people of Le Chambon - a community of profoundly religious Protestants - sheltered 5,000 Jews.
Individual farmers and pension owners took in refugees; a Swiss-run school received Jewish children from French internment camps; a safe house sheltered Jews heading for the Swiss border.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


Accounts
LEAD: * Architectural Record to HDM New York, with a budget of $500,000.


Jets Looking Good But Aren't Up to Par
LEAD: Feeling healthier and looking better, the Jets end their exhibition play Friday night against the Chiefs, a club that could probably use another month of camp.


China Hails Mazowiecki
LEAD: China has congratulated Poland's new non-Communist Prime Minister and wants to continue friendly relations with that country, a Foreign Ministry official said today.


DEAL IS REPORTED ON EAST GERMANS
LEAD: Hungarian and West German officials have worked out a plan that will let up to 20,000 East Germans leave for the West over the next few days, West German Government and opposition officials disclosed today.


Review/Theater; When Grandmother Is a Hungry Monster
LEAD: Roberto Cossa's comedy ''La Nonna'' is sometimes dark, and often its humor may be too robust for delicate sensibilities.
But in the production by Repertorio Espanol, the Argentinian writer's play at the Gramercy Arts Theater is very funny; the laughter it brings from the audience is gleeful and utterly unashamed.


Topics of The Times; New York's Taxing Question
LEAD: Faced with a queasy economy and the burdens of drugs and AIDS, Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York has begun to ask out loud whether the state can afford next year's scheduled tax cut.
It's the right question.


Argentina and Britain Move To Restore Diplomatic Ties
LEAD: Argentina and Britain formally recognized the obvious today - that each country has continued to maintain a diplomatic presence in the other's capital despite the rupture in diplomatic relations during the war over the Falkland Islands seven years ago.


Review/Operetta; Romberg's 'Desert Song' In City Opera Revival
LEAD: ''The Desert Song'' has an infallible plot, a perfunctory but assured book and a score that is sturdy and sufficient but (''One Alone'' apart) scarcely more.
It is not a masterpiece of operetta, but it is a sure bet in the theater, and holds up well even under the hard-boiled, lackluster treatment accorded it in the current revival of the New York City


Topics of The Times; Joe Alsop's Kith
LEAD: To his critics, Joseph Alsop was a rabid cold warrior and a snob who cultivated only the high and the mighty.
To others, his death this week at 78 recalled the years when Washington's swaggering columnists enjoyed a spotlight not yet dominated by TV news celebrities.
Yet Joe Alsop was more interesting than his caricature.


At the Bar; The Ronan case: a giant legal battle over a tiny company.
LEAD: It began simply enough as a power struggle between two co-owners over control of a tiny paint company in the South Bronx.


F.B.I. Profits on Seat Sales
LEAD: Federal agents apparently reaped at least $52,000 in profits when they sold seats on Chicago's big futures exchanges.
The seats had been bought to help the agents pose as floor traders during an undercover investigation of the markets.


As Drug Violence Increases, Foreigners Leave Colombia
LEAD: Colombia's drug traffickers continued their war against the country's establishment today with a powerful bomb in Medellin, their main base of operations, that caused extensive damage.


500 Garbage Workers Vote to Strike on L.I.
LEAD: Members of a Teamsters local representing about 500 garbage workers on Long Island voted to strike when their contract expired at midnight, a union official said last night.


Music Danceable And Brash
LEAD: In the early 1970's, the name ''salsa'' began to be applied to the brash and bright urban music of Cuban and Puerto Rican New York City.
While the music drew on all sorts of sources, Hispanic and other, it often tried to retain what was called tipico - traditional - flavor while experimenting within the forms.


Heavy Bombardments Continue in Lebanon
LEAD: Heavy clashes continued in Lebanon today, and Gen.
Michel Aoun, who commands Christian forces battling Syrian troops and their Lebanese Muslim allies, said he would carry the fight ''until the end.''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-11  Latvian nationalists will demand that Moscow grant their region ''special status'' within the Soviet Union, said leaders of Latvia's largest political movement.
Page A1


Washington Mayor Assails U.S. Officials on Reports of Drug Use
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., stung by new allegations that he has used drugs, denied tonight that he had ever done so and charged that the allegations resulted from ''blatant'' disclosures to reporters by Federal officials who wanted ''to get headlines and to assassinate my character.''


People
LEAD: *
Patricia Doyle has been promoted to managing director of LGFE, formerly Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein.


Koch Asserts Con Ed Misled City on Blast
LEAD: Consolidated Edison ''misled the city and residents of Gramercy Park'' about the danger of asbestos contamination from a powerful steam-pipe explosion and criminal charges may be warranted, Mayor Edward I. Koch said last night.


Morris Dalitz, 89, Ex-Bootlegger And Owner of Las Vegas Casinos
LEAD: Morris Barney Dalitz, a Prohibition Era bootlegger and prominent figure in the casino industry in Las Vegas, Nev., in the 1950's and 1960's, died yesterday at his home there.
He was 89 years old and had been ill for some time.


Inflation Spurt in Brazil
LEAD: Brazil's consumer prices rose by 29 percent in August, the second-largest monthly rise ever, the Government said today.
The increase was exceeded only by the January inflation rate of 70 percent, which covered 45 days rather than one month.


Merger Law Is Challenged
LEAD: The High Voltage Engineering Corporation asked the Supreme Court today to decide whether Wisconsin's takeover law is constitutional.
If the case is accepted, it would be the Court's first hearing on the latest generation of state takeover legislation.


Fordham Prepares To Take Major Steps
LEAD: Fordham will play a game against a major college opponent for the first time in 35 years tomorrow as the Rams begin their association with the Colonial League and Division I-AA.


Labor Day Celebration in Three-State Region; Connecticut
LEAD: Connecticut will celebrate Labor Day looking back through its long history and up into the sky over Long Island Sound at two dozen hot-air balloons.
From farm animals at a fair to a fish fry by the shore, other end-of-summer traditions in this tradition-minded state will endure as well.
WOODSTOCK FAIR.About 150,000 people are expected to converge on Connecticut's rural northeast corner over the three days of the 129th annual Woodstock Fair, making it the largest single event of the weekend.


RABBI TO BOYCOTT WARSAW SERVICE
LEAD: Citing a dispute over the presence of a Roman Catholic convent at Auschwitz, Poland's only rabbi said today that he would not join in a prayer service commemorating the start of World War II.


U.S. Can Promote Central American Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


More Children Are Living With Stepparents
LEAD: The number of American children living with stepparents has risen sharply as women have children before marriage and parents change spouses, the Census Bureau reported today.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The National Multiple Sclerosis Society has introduced a television public service campaign emphasizing the achievements of people with multiple sclerosis.
The ads are part of a campaign by Wells, Rich, Greene.


Saab Is Silent On Ford Report
LEAD: The Swedish auto maker Saab-Scania A.B., facing mounting losses, today refused to confirm or deny a news report that the Ford Motor Company was negotiating to buy an interest in its ailing passenger car division.
After a board meeting today, Jan-Erik Larsson, head of Saab's auto division, declined to respond to a report in the Stockholm newspaper Expressen that a takeover deal with


Summer's Farewell Party: Everyone Is Invited
LEAD: LABOR DAY first marched onto the calendar more than a century ago as a celebration of working-class solidarity, yet today the holiday has become summer's bittersweet finale.
While other seasons may fade in and out, governed more by climate than calendar, summer comes to an all-too-abrupt end with the arrival of the first Monday in


Fuess Moves West
LEAD: For Billings S. Fuess, the copywriter who created the line, ''Hershey's, the great American chocolate bar,'' Ogilvy &amp; Mather's Fifth Avenue office was home for 23 years.
But last month, Mr.
Fuess left the agency to start his own advertising shop in Summit, N.J.
Mr.
Fuess is currently working on the second edition of a best-selling book, ''How to Advertise,'' with his co-authors, Kenneth Roman, chairman of the Ogilvy Group, and Jane Maas, president of Earle Palmer Brown/New York.


LATVIANS TO SEEK A 'SPECIAL STATUS' WITHIN THE U.S.S.R.
LEAD: Defying a warning from the Kremlin to curb separatist and nationalist calls in the Baltic republics, the leadership of the largest political movement in Latvia said today that it would demand that Moscow grant the republic ''special status'' within the Soviet Union.


Loitering in New York, With Intent to Observe
LEAD: Summer weekends, and especially holiday weekends, are particularly good times to explore New York City.
With many of the city's residents out of town or holed up in their apartments, the streets can seem eerily empty - all the better to venture out on one of a number of guided walking tours.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 464 money market mutual funds increased by $53.7 million, to $343.4 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 142 institutional funds decreased by $380.9 million, to $85.33 billion.
The assets of the 227 general-purpose funds were up by $124.3 million, to $109.91 billion.


Frustrated Strawberry Admits He's Struggling
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry has finally broken his silence after refusing to speak to reporters for the last month.
He admitted today that he was ''very disappointed the way I've been playing all season'' and promised a new effort to help spark the Mets.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  The pilots' union at United Airlines plans to offer $6.5 billion for the carrier, a Wall Street executive and an investor with major holdings in the airline said.
The offer, worth close to $300 a share, will be presented to UAL's board today, and approval is expected.
British Airways would be a major investor.


Juror's Illness Delays Longest Criminal Trial
LEAD: What is probably the longest criminal trial in United States history was delayed again today because a juror was ill.


Chicago Merc Suspends 4
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange today suspended and fined four traders in its Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index futures pit, accusing them of prearranging trades on the day of the October 1987 stock market crash.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Akzo N.V., Sassenheim, the Netherlands, a chemical company, completed the acquisition of Reliance Universal Inc., Louisville, Ky., a coatings concern, from Tyler Corp., Dallas, for $275 million.


Photl Advances, Deftly Defeating Fitzgerald
LEAD: In his decade of competition at the United States Open, Ivan Lendl has acquired much more than his three singles titles.
Over the 10 years and through the countless interviews, he has gained a sense of both perspective and humor, honed a sharp wit and crafted an altogether engaging smile.


Boeing Jet Order
LEAD: Aloha Airlines, a subsidiary of privately held Aloha Airgroup, said it had ordered four Boeing 737-300 aircraft, with options on an additional four.
The transaction has a potential value of about $250 million, the airline said.
Aloha said it would begin receiving deliveries of the aircraft in November 1992.


Review/Art; The Many Ways of Turning Wood Into Bowls
LEAD: It is always refreshing to come across a category of art objects that is new and unknown, that reaches one's field of vision relatively unencumbered by big reputations, advance publicity, critical theory or plain old word of mouth.
The silence of such experiences can be truly golden.
It accentuates, by default, the extenuating noise that accompanies most visual encounters in the New


Even in Absence, Koch Draws Most Debate Fire
LEAD: Even in his absence, Mayor Edward I. Koch was the target of most of the spirited exchanges among his three Democratic opponents at a debate conducted yesterday by Spanish-language radio and television stations.


Shifting Sands, Instant Forecasts
LEAD: Just one month ago, most economic forecasters employed by banks and brokerage houses were warning of an imminent recession; now they are celebrating continued growth.
Economic miracle?
Hardly.
Such sudden shifts have more to do with the nature of a forecaster's job than with what is actually happening to the economy.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Bistro d'Adrienne


Rate Freeze By Niagara
LEAD: The financially troubled Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation agreed today to freeze its rates, to cut the salaries of its top executives and to not pay a dividend to stockholders under an agreement announced by state officials.


Bankruptcy Plan Revised By Eastern
LEAD: Eastern Airlines proposed to its unsecured creditors yesterday that it emerge from bankruptcy with more flights and less cash than it had previously planned.


Wall St. Is Playing The Jobs Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Another Soviet Area Rejects Russian
LEAD: Soviet Moldavia established Moldavian as its official language today despite the complaints of tens of thousands of Russian speakers on strike within the republic that the law would increase tension.


French Sign LeMond
LEAD: Greg LeMond, the new world professional road racing champion and the two-time Tour de France winner, has agreed to a three-year, $5.7 million contract with a combined French team.


Regulators in Quandary Over Part of Bailout Bill
LEAD: Some regulators in the Treasury and the Office of Thrift Supervision are warning that they have found a provision in the savings and loan bailout law that could force institutions to build up large cash reserves faster than it was believed the law required.


New York's Roads and Bridges Falling Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Comparing Their Answers: Setting a Tone for the City
LEAD: In separate interviews last month, The New York Times asked the six New York City mayoral candidates to discuss some of the major problems facing the city in 1989 and how they would deal with them.
This is the fifth of six articles comparing their responses.
Excerpts from the interviews appear  [ below ] .


VW Quits Albany Port
LEAD: Volkswagen of America has moved its Northeast distribution center from the Port of Albany to Rhode Island, the second major shipper the Albany port has lost in two months, officials said.
Volkswagen said Wednesday that it was transferring its shipping center to Davisville, R.I., effective immediately.


Goldsmith Says Bid For B.A.T. in Snag
LEAD: Sir James Goldsmith, who is leading the hostile takeover bid for B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., said a British regulatory panel must extend its deadline or his takeover attempt will fail.
Britain's Panel on Takeovers and Mergers requires that all conditions of a bid, including United States regulatory approvals, must be completed within 81 days after the bidder's offer document is delivered.


McCall's Gets Editor In Chief
LEAD: Anne Mollegen Smith, who has been editor in chief of Working Woman magazine since 1984 and has held top editorial positions at Redbook and Glamour, was named yesterday as editor in chief of McCall's magazine.


College News Service
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. and the Gannett Company, which publishes USA Today, said Wednesday that they were starting a daily electronic news service for college newspapers.
The companies said the USA Today-Apple College Information Network would offer graphics and news stories drawn from USA Today and other dailies in the Gannett newspaper chain.


Washington Farewell to Joseph Alsop


The City Council, Old and New: II
LEAD: Unusual weight attaches to the choice of City Council members in Manhattan, as in the other borough races discussed yesterday.
The proposed City Charter would make the Council larger and stronger, and members elected this fall would become its nucleus.
These are our choices for Manhattan contests (one partially in the Bronx) in the Sept.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Pilots May Buy United Air  The union plans to make a $6.5 billion bid for the airline, Wall Street sources said.
In the deal, worth close to $300 a share, British Airways would be a leading investor.
Page D1.
Deal on East Germans  Bonn and Budapest have worked out a plan to allow up to 20,000 East Germans now in Hungary to leave for West Germany, according to West German officials.


Racial Pattern Is Found in Boston Mortgages
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston criticized mortgage lenders in this city today, saying that the percentage of loans for properties in predominantly black neighborhoods was substantially lower than that in white neighborhoods.


Helen Johnson Dies; Ex-Union Lawyer, 68
LEAD: Helen Johnson, a lawyer and former trustee of the Experiment for International Living, a student exchange group, died of colon cancer Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 68 years old.


Robert Schakne, 63, a CBS News Reporter
LEAD: Robert Schakne, a writer and correspondent for CBS News for 33 years before he retired in 1988, died of cancer yesterday at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
He was 63 years old and lived in Washington.


Dent Is Positive Despite Poor Start
LEAD: The losses are never easily forgotten.
Bucky Dent still recalls 1985 as if it had taken place last week.
It was his first season as a manager, at Class A Fort Lauderdale, and he had a group of young, brash players tasting professional baseball for the first time.


Wine Makers Face Hard Truth
LEAD: With the sales decline that began in 1987 accelerating ominously, the worries of domestic wine makers are mounting, along with disagreements over how to respond.


Gdansk Journal; Shelling Began, and Nothing Was Ever the Same
LEAD: On Sept. 1, 1939, the German battleship Schleswig-Holstein bombarded the Polish garrison of what was then Danzig, a free city, setting off World War II.


Marathon For Proud Mother
LEAD: Next to running for United States President, playing the United States Open is one of the cruelest tests of character and endurance ever devised.
Just to get through the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary of the first two rounds is a triumph of body and soul.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about a steel process using nitrogen as an alloy misidentified the parent company of Garrett Automotive.
It is Allied Signal Inc., not General Signal Inc.


Dining Out Guide: Bargains on the Upper East Side
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current.
Anatolia


Eileen W. Hesse Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Eileen Weinberg Hesse, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Weinberg of New York, was married yesterday to Larry Sherman Toulouse, a son of Mrs.
Thomas Toulouse of Topeka, Kan., and the late Mr.
Toulouse.
Judge Doris T. Friedman of Westchester County Family Court officiated at the ceremony, at La Reserve Hotel in White


Grumman at Work On China Project
LEAD: Work is continuing on a $250 million contract to modernize avionics on Chinese-made F-8 fighter jets despite the United States Government's suspension of military sales to China, said John O'Brien, the chairman and chief executive of the Grumman Corporation.


Newspaper Hearing Set
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court has scheduled arguments for Oct. 30 on whether The Detroit News and The Detroit Free Press may merge some operations to cut costs.


Topics of The Times; A Quiet Victory
LEAD: After months of noisy debate, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority voted last week to ban amplified and other loud music from subway platforms, while allowing it to continue in the mezzanine areas of stations.
The compromise isn't music to everyone's ears - but that's the beauty of it.


Spanish Leader Calls Elections for October
LEAD: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez today called elections for Oct. 29 and said he would seek a third consecutive parliamentary mandate.


Anne E. Shusted Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Anne Elizabeth Shusted, the daughter of Assemblyman and Mrs.
Thomas J. Shusted of Haddonfield, N.J., was married yesterday to William Joseph Barker Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barker of Wynnewood, Pa.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
William Graham at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in Haddonfield.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Keeping It Green
LEAD: Lawn maintenance is a nine-month chore, and now is the time to think about feeding and mowing.
Two pieces of equipment are essential: a mower and a spreader to insure accurate applications of lime and fertilizer.
There are many choices, and much depends on the size of the property and who is doing the tending.


ESOP Effect On UAL Deal
LEAD: Although Congress has proposed legislation to curb the use of employee stock ownership plans, the ESOP to be used in the UAL transaction is likely to be entitled to receive generous tax advantages because it provides that employees would own an estimated 70 percent of the stock.


Trash Haulers Begin a Strike on Long Island
LEAD: About 500 trash haulers on Long Island walked off their jobs today over wage and other issues, but the impact of the strike will probably be minimal unless it goes beyond Tuesday, since few garbage pickups are made over the Labor Day weekend, officials said.


Coping: With Fur and Leather Garments
LEAD: It will be easy to look chic this winter bundled up in sporty shearlings, silks and leathers.
But shoppers now heading for the stores in search of stylish outerwear should consider how well the latest coats, jackets and rain gear will hold up in bad weather.


I.B.M. Briefing
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation has scheduled a news briefing for Tuesday about midrange computer systems.
Analysts said they believe that I.B.M. will introduce enhancements to existing products or new products within its AS/400 family of midrange computers.


Dow Tradition To Be Broken
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that it was preparing to put an over-the-counter market stock into its transportation average because a wave of mergers and buyouts is making it difficult to find enough big transport companies on the New York Stock Exchange.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Angeles Corp., Los Angeles, a diversified investment management company, completed the sale of its Quinoco oil and gas businesses to SODP Inc., a subsidiary of Hallwood Energy Partners of Dallas.
The sale price was $26 million.


A Pattern Maker's Buyout Burden
LEAD: Simplicity Patterns was still racking up profits long after most American women had given up making their own clothes, but now it is struggling to stay out of bankruptcy court.


Alaska Miner, 95, Bests Wilds
LEAD: A 95-year-old miner who was lost in the Alaskan wilderness for more than three weeks has been found safe.


Football Prayer Ban Stirring Anger in South
LEAD: There are two central verities, religion and football, in this northwest Georgia town of 9,000 people and at least 40 churches.


Pentagon Picks On-Site Burning To Dispose of Chemical Weapons
LEAD: Tooele Army Depot's aging stockpile of nerve and mustard gas, 42 percent of the nation's chemical arsenal, will be destroyed in a $138 million incineration plant to be built at the site, the Pentagon says.


Marvin Gordon Dies; Choreographer Was 59
LEAD: Marvin Gordon, a choreographer, teacher and dancer, died Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York City.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his companion, William H. Hooks, said.
Mr.
Gordon was 59.


Jews Not Excluded From Holocaust Memorial
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Drug to Relieve Panic
LEAD: A chemist with Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., the pharmaceutical manufacturer based in Nutley, N.J., has patented a drug to relieve panic.
The compound is a variation of benzodiazepine and is a chemical cousin of Valium and Librium, which are used to relieve anxiety.
The anti-panic drug would relieve more severe psychoses and is undergoing clinical trials in Europe.Walter Merz, a chemist in Basel, Switzerland, received patent 4,861,772.


N.F.L. Bans Browner
LEAD: Keith Browner of the San Diego Chargers was suspended for 30 days by the National Football League yesterday for substance abuse.
A 30-day suspension is usually given to second-time offenders in drug or alcohol abuse cases.


Qaddafi, Marking 20 Years in Power, Pledges 'International Revolution'
LEAD: As he celebrated two decades in power, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi declared today that Israel ''must be removed'' and promised to pursue an ''international revolutionary program'' to rid the world of ''government and classes, parliaments and parties.''


About New York; Empty Places Beyond a Fence, And in the Heart
LEAD: There are curiously empty spaces in this cluttered city.


Steel Can Makers Try to Recoup
LEAD: Normally an industry can feel pretty good about a product that generates $2.6 billion in sales.
But in the case of tin-plated steel cans, it is painful for producers to ponder how the makers of aluminum cans and plastic bottles swept them out of the $6.25 billion market for beverage containers in the 1970's.


U.S. Tennis Open Closed to Average Fan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maturing Step by Step With Europe
LEAD: It is precisely because he is a European, Hans Magnus Enzensberger says, that the idea of the European Community so galls him.


For Civil Court in the Bronx
LEAD: It's called the Civil Court, and its judges are supposed to be elected by New York City voters.
But in reality, there's nothing civil or democratic about the selection process - a longstanding embarrassment that cries out for reform by the State Legislature.


Skills Needed, U.S. Study Says
LEAD: A shortage of skilled workers and a surplus of unskilled workers is threatening economic growth, according to a report presented to Labor Secretary Elizabeth H. Dole today.


Peter T. Jones, 59, Expert on Trade, Dies
LEAD: Peter T. Jones, a lawyer, businessman and educator who specialized in international trade, died in a horseback riding accident Tuesday in Aspen, Colo.
He was 59 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Starved Teen-Ager Charges Mother Imprisoned Her
LEAD: A starving teen-ager has told the authorities that her mother beat and imprisoned her in their mobile home.


Persian Gulf Trade Up
LEAD: United States businesses now have a better opportunity to sell in the Persian Gulf states than at any time since the Camp David peace accords were signed in 1979, the United States Ambassador to Bahrain said today. ''U.S. exports to the region are increasing at a very healthy rate,'' Sam H. Zakhem told a meeting of the Mid-America Arab Chamber of Commerce here.


Better Leaders for Yonkers
LEAD: Three primary races give voters a chance to shore up the leadership of Yonkers, N.Y.


Communists in Baltics Shying From Kremlin
LEAD: Faced with the threat of disastrous defeat in coming local elections, Communist Party leaders in the Baltic republics are maneuvering to distance themselves from the central party leadership in Moscow.


Nicaraguan Opposition Fails To Select Election Candidate
LEAD: The main opposition alliance, after meeting for seven hours, failed to agree on a single presidential candidate for the February elections.


Down, But Not Out on Broadway


Review/Pop; Creator of Blue-Collar Rock Takes It on a Nostalgia Trip
LEAD: Wearing his trademark floppy cap and sunglasses, an affable Dion strolled onto the stage of the Beacon Theater on Thursday evening for a concert that was awash with nostalgia.


Colombians Win New Drug Trials As Judge Is Accused of Prejudice
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has thrown out the convictions of four Colombian aliens on drug-trafficking charges, saying the trial judge's comments at the sentencings indicated an apparent prejudice against Colombians that tainted the entire trial.


Revamped, British Air Looks Abroad
LEAD: In a speech last year, Sir Colin Marshall, chief executive of British Airways P.L.C., said, ''There has never been a global airline in the truest sense.''


Mark IV Pact With Valeo
LEAD: Mark IV Industries Inc., based in Williamsville, N.Y., near Buffalo, announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement to sell its Blackstone Corporation subsidiary to Valeo S.A. for $310 million, including the assumption of about $65 million of Blackstone's debt.


Protests Worth Risk, Supporters Say
LEAD: The need to insure that no neighborhood in America is off limits to any citizen outweighs the risk of offending a community and even the risk of violence, veteran civil rights advocates and experts on civil disobedience contend.


Yanks Blast Out of Their Slump
LEAD: The Yankees needed a game like this in June or July or even August, not now, with their crowds getting smaller and their season essentially done.
They are playing just to finish, trying to keep others from winning and contending, even though there is little consolation in it.


Medicare to Pay for X-Rays
LEAD: Medicare will pay for routine mammography tests to detect breast cancer beginning Jan. 1, under a regulation the Government proposed today.
Congress voted last year to authorize the health insurance program for the elderly to cover mammography examinations.


Young vs. Old: Evert Plays On Other Side of Net Now
LEAD: No matter where Chris Evert turns these days, she is challenged by youth.
At 34 years old, she has grown accustomed to playing opponents of considerably fewer years.
But the next time she takes the court at the United States Open, she will be greeted by a young player who also has an unusual amount of promise, just as Evert did as a teen-ager.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1989
LEAD:  Companies


AN ACTIVE AND ELOQUENT COMMISSIONER
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti, who once said all he ever wanted to be was president of the American League, served in baseball's two other highest-ranking positions for almost three years before his death yesterday.
But he made his mark as an active commissioner and National League president.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.93
8.87
8.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.90
7.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.78
7.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.29
8.86
30-YR.


Polygram Expected to Buy A&amp;M Records
LEAD: In another sign of consolidation in the record industry, Polygram N.V. is expected to acquire A&amp;M Records, the record company that was founded and is owned by Herb Alpert and Jerry Moss.
Industry executives put the price of the acquisition between $400 million and $500 million.


Massachusetts Won't Bring Charge in Cadet Death
LEAD: A Massachusetts judge has recommended that criminal charges be brought against three people in the training death of a police cadet last year.
But the State Attorney General, James Shannon, said Thursday that he would not bring criminal charges in the case.


Aide to Noriega Is Sworn In; U.S. Won't Recognize Him
LEAD: President Bush said today that the United States would not have any diplomatic contact with the newly appointed Government of Panama, headed by a longtime associate of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
Mr.
Bush also said he planned to tighten economic sanctions against Panama.


American Colonists Took Arms, but Only With Reluctance; First Shot at Lexington
LEAD: To the Editor:


Somalia Warned on Human Rights Abuse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Microphone Advance For Video Cameras
LEAD: Home video cameras have always had zoom lenses, allowing the user either to focus on a particular object or a broad scene.
Now, the Eastman Kodak Company has patented a microphone that will allow the ''focusing'' of acoustics as well.


Cartons Found Leaching Dioxin to Milk
LEAD: The toxic chemical dioxin has been found leaching from paper cartons into milk, but in extremely low amounts, the Food and Drug Administration said today.


New Tensions Revive a Campus's Mounted Police


Bridge; A New York City teacher puts her experience to work in a game.
LEAD: A few bridge experts seem to have acquired a grip on the game by osmosis, perhaps by watching family members.
But for the vast majority, learning that way makes as much sense as a non-driver climbing into a car and hoping to find out how to take it on the highway.


TV News Provides Images Of Candidates, Hot or Cool
LEAD: For television viewers, the most compelling political image of the last week may have been the news pictures of Mayor Edward I. Koch's motorcade speeding in reverse to escape a hostile crowd.


Treasury Prices Rally in a Short Session
LEAD: A late rally lifted prices of Treasury securities yesterday in an abbreviated trading session.
Trading in government securities, which normally has no fixed hours, ended at 1 P.M.


West Germans Charge A Former G.I. as a Spy
LEAD: A retired United States Army sergeant was charged with treason today for allegedly selling NATO war-contingency plans to two Eastern bloc nations.


Construction Spending Virtually Flat
LEAD: Spending for new construction edged up two-hundredths of a percent, to $415.7 billion in July, from $415.6 billion in June, at a seasonally adjusted annual rate, the Commerce Department said today.


TRACK
LEAD: Aouita Takes Grand Prix Title: Said Aouita of Morocco capped a brilliant season by posting the world's second-fastest 5,000-meter time yesterday to win the grand prix overall men's title for the third time in four years.
Aouita, competing at the grand prix meet in Monte Carlo, Monaco, won the title with 69 points.


High Court Wise on Civil Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Con Ed Says Asbestos Tied To 17 Blasts
LEAD: Consolidated Edison disclosed yesterday that in addition to the powerful steam-pipe explosion in Gramercy Park two weeks ago, there have been at least 16 other blasts in New York City since 1973, all apparently involving asbestos-lined steam pipes.


Signs of Economic Strength Produce Gains for Dollar
LEAD: The dollar gained against all major foreign currencies yesterday after reports were issued with positive economic data, including statistics showing strength in the nation's job market in August.


Alexa Shabecoff, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Alexa Shabecoff, 29 years old, and Roger Joseph Bertling, 32, staff lawyers with Legal Services of Eastern Missouri in St.
Louis, were married there yesterday at the home of Dr.
Sondra Schlesinger and Dr.
Milton Schlesinger, family friends.
Judge Susan Block of the associate circuit division of the St.


Laurie A. Habiby Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., Laurie Ann Habiby, a daughter of Canon and Mrs.
Samir J. Habiby of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan William Detwiler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Detwiler of Norwell and Chatham, Mass.
The Most Rev.
John M. Allin, the retired 23rd Presiding Bishop and Primate of the Episcopal Church of the United States, officiated, assisted by the Rev.


C.I.A Removes Aide Who Managed Arms To Afghan Guerrillas
LEAD: An official of the Central Intelligence Agency who supervised the delivery of American weapons to Afghan guerrillas has been reassigned to another job following Congressional complaints about mismanagement of the program, Congressional aides said tonight.


Controllers and Forecasters Cleared in Crash of Delta Jet
LEAD: A Federal district judge absolved the National Weather Service and air traffic controllers today of negligence in the 1985 fatal crash of a Delta Air Lines jet during a severe thunderstorm.


Toon Hurt as Jets Win on Safety in Overtime
LEAD: Barely hours after the Jets ended a summerlong contract dispute with Wesley Walker, they lost their other acclaimed wide receiver, Al Toon, who suffered a slight shoulder separation tonight against the Chiefs in the team's last exhibition game.


EMPLOYEE BUYOUT OF UNITED AIRLINES SOUGHT BY PILOTS
LEAD: In a bid that would make United Airlines the largest American company owned by its employees, the pilots' union and the management of the airline's parent company proposed yesterday to buy the carrier for $6.75 billion.


Panda at National Zoo Bears Tiny Cub
LEAD: Ling-Ling, the giant panda at the National Zoo, gave birth today to a tiny female cub.


Sterling Motor Increases Rebates
LEAD: Sterling Motor Cars has increased rebates to $5,000 on three of the four 1989 car models it sells in the United States.
The new rebates apply to the Sterling 827SL, 827SLi and 827SL Limited Edition automobiles.
The rebate for the fourth car in the Sterling lineup, the 827S, will be $3,000.
Prices for Sterling's 1989 models were $23,550 for the SL; $29,975 for the SL and SLi, and $30,450 for the Limited Edition.


Cotton Prices Fall Sharply; Copper Cut by Strike View
LEAD: Prices of cotton futures fell sharply yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange in what appeared to be another leg of a technical correction that began a week ago after prices reached their highest levels in nearly two years.


More Children Living In Stepparents' Homes
LEAD: The number of American children living with stepparents has risen sharply as women have children before marriage and parents change spouses, the Census Bureau reported today.


Matsushita to Buy From Motorola
LEAD: The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, maker of Panasonic, Quasar and Technics products, says it will buy about five million transistors a month from Motorola Inc. starting in September.
It marks the first time a Japanese consumer electronics maker has made large purchases of custom-made semiconductor devices from a United States-based company.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Because of the Labor Day Parade in Manhattan, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 72d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Local Jobless Rates Edge Up
LEAD: The rate of unemployment in New York State and New Jersey edged up last month, the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


Leading Indicators Gain 0.2%
LEAD: The Government index intended to predict the course of the economy rose slightly in July, suggesting that growth will continue at a moderate pace during the next three to nine months.


Hawks Sign Koncak To $13.2 Million Pact
LEAD: The Atlanta Hawks still had some change left over for Jon Koncak yesterday after signing Dominique Wilkins to a reported $14.5 million contract 24 hours earlier.
It was big change, too.
Koncak, a free agent who had been offered $2.5 million for one year by the Detroit Pistons, signed a six-year contract with the Hawks for a reported $13.2 million.


Amax Plans to Halt Bid for Falconbridge
LEAD: Amax Inc., the New York-based metals company, said yesterday that it would not extend its takeover bid for Falconbridge Ltd., effectively walking away from what many expected to become a bidding war for some of Canada's richest mining assets.


A Director Is Named For National Museum
LEAD: Elizabeth Broun, an art scholar, has been named director of the National Museum of American Art, Robert McC.
Adams, secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the museum's parent body, has announced.
The appointment is effective immediately.


Is Life Evenhanded?
LEAD: Michelangelo was left-handed.
Holbein, too.
Leonardo da Vinci, maybe.
History tells us they were great artists.
What it doesn't tell us is whether they took the seat at the left end of the table, to spare their fellow diners their elbows.
Or if they cut themselves when they used the scissors, or hunched over their handwriting, or had to think twice before turning the handle.


Review/Dance; Statues That Pose and Move Into a Beckoning Landscape
LEAD: Dancescape at Wave Hill came to an end on Saturday night with a piece by Mark Taylor that fully lived up to the series' title. ''Font,'' performed by Mark Taylor and Friends to music by Mark Webster and Charles Morrow, had been scheduled to begin in the Aquatic Garden in this environmental center in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Comparing Their Answers: Managing the City's Economy
LEAD: In separate interviews last month, The New York Times asked the six New York City mayoral candidates to discuss some of the major problems facing the city in 1989 and how they would deal with them.
This is the last of six articles comparing their responses.
Excerpts from the interviews appear  [ below ] .


Bush Welcomes New Tokyo Leader
LEAD: In a get-acquainted session at the White House, President Bush urged Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu today to transform Japan into an ''import superpower'' to curb trade tensions and cement an ''enduring partnership'' with the United States.


Books of The Times; Tea Ceremonies, Haiku And, of Course, a Body
LEAD:  Inspector Imanishi Investigates  By Seicho Matsumoto  Translated by Beth Cary. 313 pages.
Soho Press. $18.95.


Helmsleys' Real Estate: Empire After the Verdict
LEAD: Long before the public came to associate the Helmsley name with luxury hotels and a palace queen, Harry B. Helmsley had assembled a real-estate empire the worth and boundaries of which few can measure.


U.S. Jobless Rate Drops to 5.1%, Reflecting Steady Economic Gain
LEAD: The economy continued to generate new jobs at a moderate clip in August as the unemployment rate edged down one-tenth of a point to 5.1 percent, the Labor Department reported today.


Protesters And Police Trade Blame For Violence
LEAD: As the suspected gunman in the racial killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins pleaded not guilty yesterday, police officials and organizers of a march to protest the killing blamed each other for the violence at the demonstration.


Syncor Bid Made By Van Kampen
LEAD: The investment banking firm Van Kampen Merritt, acting on behalf of an unidentified investment group, said it had made an offer to acquire the Syncor International Corporation for $7.57 a share, or about $81 million.
Syncor, based in Chatsworth, Calif., operates more than 80 pharmacies that prepare and deliver radioactive pharmaceuticals to hospitals and laboratories for use in chemotherapy, diagnostic imaging and antibiotic therapy.


Plessey Takeover Cleared
LEAD: A hostile bid of $3.1 billion for the Plessey Company P.L.C., the British electronics and military equipment maker, cleared its final regulatory obstacle today as the European Community announced that it would allow the deal to go through.


TUTU IS ARRESTED DURING A PROTEST
LEAD: Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu and his wife were among about 30 demonstrators arrested today in Cape Town when they tried to protest the reported beating of other demonstrators by the security police.


Trade Surplus Falls in Japan
LEAD: The continuing surge of overseas travel by Japanese tourists helped to reduce Japan's bulging trade surplus in July for the fifth straight month.


Jobs on Line as Giants Face Steelers
LEAD: Starting jobs and just plain jobs will be at stake Saturday night when the Giants play the Pittsburgh Steelers at Giants Stadium in their final preseason game.


After Tilting at Airplanes, Becker Dispatches Mecir
LEAD: Boris Becker stood at center stage on the Stadium Court and interrupted his third-round United States Open match to issue a challenge to the planes flying overhead.
As a matador does to a bull, Becker urged the jumbo jets to come and get him, and he took it as a sign of weakness when they did not.


Prague Blocks East Germans' Route West
LEAD: As West Germany prepares for a flood of East German refugees from Hungary, several hundred East Germans occupying the grounds of the West German Embassy here appear to have little hope of receiving permission to leave.


Stimulating The Growth Of Livestock
LEAD: Researchers at Genentech Inc., the biotechnology company in South San Francisco, Calif., have patented what officials describe as a biological skeleton key that unlocks the growth mechanisms in livestock without using hormones.


Guilty Plea In Pentagon Fraud Case
LEAD: Federal prosecutors logged their 20th conviction or guilty plea today in the continuing inquiry into military procurement fraud, as a former consultant admitted selling inside information on a $100 million Marine Corps contract to officials of the Unisys Corporation.


Rushdie Answers His Critics in a Poem
LEAD: Granta, Britain's leading literary magazine, published a poem today by Salman Rushdie in which the author responded to his critics angrily and vowed to continue writing despite the Iranian death threat against him.


Colombians to Protect U.S. Personnel
LEAD: The Defense Department said today that security for the 50 to 100 American military personnel being sent to Colombia to assist in an anti-drug campaign would be provided by the Colombian Government.
The Pentagon's chief spokesman, Pete Williams, told reporters that American military personnel ''will not participate in operations and will not accompany Colombian personnel on anti-narcotics operations.


SATRUDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 16.


EAST GERMANS PUT HUNGARY IN A BIND
LEAD: At least 3,000 East German tourists, and possibly many more, are waiting in Budapest for permission from Hungary to cross into Austria on the way to West Germany.


Daniel Burman, Surgeon, 79
LEAD: Daniel Burman, an eye surgeon for more than 50 years, died Wednesday at his home in Southfield, Mich., after a long illness.
He was 79 years old.


Vladimir S. Littauer, Riding Instructor, 96
LEAD: Vladimir S. Littauer, a horseback riding instructor and the author of several books on the subject, died Thursday at his home in Syosset, L.I.
He was 96 years old.


The Blood on the Brooklyn Bridge
LEAD: The bloody clash between the police and demonstrators on the Brooklyn Bridge Thursday evening was ugly, disturbing and, above all, avoidable.
The police, often accused of provoking confrontation, appeared to go out of their way to avoid this one.
It appears that trouble occurred anyway because a few demonstrators were determined to make trouble.


American Colonists Took Arms, but Only With Reluctance
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Hazard in a Bucket
LEAD: Unattended buckets of water or other liquids are hazardous to small children.
The five-gallon size is particularly dangerous.


Rangers Trade Beck
LEAD: The Rangers yesterday traded the rights of Barry Beck to the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for future considerations.
Beck, the 32-year-old defenseman, who played seven seasons with the Rangers before retiring in the fall of 1987, announced last month that he wanted to return to play in the National Hockey League.


High Court Wise on Civil Rights; Start Producing An Affordable AZT
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peers Reflect on the Loss of Giamatti
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti's greatest responsibility as commissioner of baseball was the future of the game, and he talked endlessly about his desire to protect and shape it, to preserve what was perfect about it and enhance what was less so.


Corrections
LEAD: A book review on Aug. 21 about ''Emerson in Italy'' referred incorrectly to Goethe.
He died on March 22, 1832, and was not alive when Ralph Waldo Emerson went abroad in 1833.


Tandy's Grid Unit Adds to Computer
LEAD: The Grid Systems Corporation of Fremont, Calif., a unit of the Tandy Corporation, said it had shipped the first CD-ROM drive specifically designed for battery-operated laptop computers.
CD-ROM stands for compact disk read only memory.
The drives store large amounts of data using the same technology that compact disk players use to store music.


Review/Music; Rolling Stones Still Kicking, Hard
LEAD: Strutting, preening, pointing his toes and spitting out lyrics, Mick Jagger led a lean, efficient Rolling Stones in the opening stadium show of the band's first tour since 1981.
If the 46-year-old Mr.
Jagger feels his age, he wasn't showing it Thursday night at Veterans Stadium here; even between songs, he stalked the stage and jittered with energy, with gestures that were both balletic and funky.


As the Schools Go, So Goes the City
LEAD: The failure of New York City's public schools and the implications of their disintegration for the city's future have at long last become too serious to ignore.
As voters assess this year's mayoral race, they should think carefully about the candidate who has the determination and vision to create a school system to meet the city's needs in coming decades.


Files Shredded, Ex-H.U.D Aide Has Told Court
LEAD: Deborah Gore Dean, who is at the center of investigations of political abuse in Federal housing programs, has said in a sworn statement that she had many of her office files shredded as she was leaving her post as executive assistant to Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. ''I gave them to the Inspector General and had them shredded by the Inspector General,'' Ms.


Psychiatric Evaluation Is Begun for Evangelist
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the television evangelist whose trial was interrupted Thursday when he was committed to a Federal prison hospital, began receiving a psychiatric evaluation today and was visited by his wife.


Babes In Car Land
LEAD: So we bought the MomAndPop.
A Detroiter.
Six cylinders.
Power everything.
Electronic top to bottom and more spotlights than a Broadway musical.
Stereo AM/FM, cassette-capable, compact-disc-friendly, muting.
Also equalizer potential and speakers cunningly sited to flood every nook and cranny of the MomAn


Dow Rises 14.82, to a Record 2,752.09
LEAD: Stock prices rose to another record yesterday, bolstered by lower interest rates in the credit markets, covering of short sales and a re-evaluation of several economic indicators.


Lifting a Pinkie for the Upper Crust
LEAD: The founders of the Distressed Gentlefolk's Aid Association would no doubt turn up their noses, although very discreetly, at some of the people who are passing themselves off as gentle these days.


Concert Programs In Braille Applauded
LEAD: Marcia Kogler had been a subscriber to the New York Philharmonic for nearly a decade, but had never been able to read a concert program.
That has changed, however, and Mrs.
Kogler is among thousands of blind and visually impaired music lovers who are benefiting from a service that provides Braille, large-type and audiotape programs for a growing number of performances at Lincoln Center.


Colombian Volcano Erupting
LEAD: The Nevado del Ruiz volcano, which killed 25,000 people in 1985, spouted steam and ash today, prompting the authorities to order the evacuation of some people living nearby.
The volcano, 80 miles west of Bogota, began erupting Thursday night.
The Government's disaster emergency office said people living along five nearby rivers could be endangered by flooding caused as glaciers clinging to the 16,000-foot volcano melt.


On 2 Slams, Jays Rise And Orioles Fall to 2d
LEAD: Baltimore fell out of first place in the American League East for the first time since May 26 as Daryl Boston's first-inning grand slam homer powered the Chicago White Sox to a 10-1 victory over the Orioles tonight.


The Green Fields of Bart's Mind
LEAD: ''It breaks your heart,'' Bart Giamatti wrote about baseball, in an essay titled ''The Green Fields of the Mind.'' ''It is designed to break your heart.


'HORRIFIC' FIGHTING GOES ON IN BEIRUT
LEAD: Thousands of Muslim and Christian militiamen and troops fought with heavy artillery, rocket launchers and tanks in and around Beirut today, and civilian areas were hard hit.


'Follow This Car! I'm Being Stolen!'
LEAD: Manufacturers are introducing radio-equipped car alarms that could allow stolen vehicles to be recovered quickly, perhaps in minutes.
Some can sense a theft in progress and give the car's location at all times.


Wellington Powell, 89, Executive for A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: Wellington Powell, a retired vice president of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, died of cancer Thursday at the Washington Hospice.
He was 89 years old and had moved to Washington from Manhattan three years ago.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Thursday about a fashion designer gave his first name incorrectly in some copies.
He was Giorgio Sant'Angelo.


Spill on Delaware Was Small
LEAD: The Coast Guard today lowered its estimate of the size of an oil spill Thursday in the Delaware River.
The 865-foot tanker Minerva, registered in Singapore, was first reported to have spilled thousands of gallons of crude oil as it was unloading its cargo at the British Petroleum refinery here.
But Coast Guard officials said today that the figure was ''at least 1,000 gallons'' and added that the oil company's estimate, 600 gallons, could be accurate.


Television; People Who Should Know Add Note of Hope on AIDS
LEAD: ''Positive Perspectives on AIDS'' - a program presented by ''Eye on Dance,'' the dance interview show, today at 5:30 P.M. on Channel 31 - fully lives up to its title.
It may be that we are moving into a more hopeful age, when a cure for AIDS seems a possibility and treatments to slow its progress are a reality.


4 Die in Fire at a Foster Home
LEAD: Gasoline was poured on the porch of a foster home here and set on fire, killing 4 children and injured 11 other people, 6 of them critically, the police say.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD:  Questions appear on page 12.


Bogota's Justice Aide Impresses Washington
LEAD: To enlist American help in its struggle against drug traffickers, Colombia this week dispatched a representative who is said to be at the top the list of assassination targets.


Chairman Will Not Top Offer by Suez for Victoire
LEAD: In the face of the largest takeover bid in French history, the chairman of Groupe Victoire, France's No. 2 insurance company, said today that he would not try to top the offer.


Russell Joffree Barrnett, 69, Cell Biologist
LEAD: Russell Joffree Barrnett, a cell biologist at the Yale University School of Medicine, died of a heart attack Aug. 21 at his home in Mashpee, Mass.
He was 69 years old.


Fujisawa to Buy Lyphomed, ACritical-Care Drug Maker
LEAD: Lyphomed Inc. said today that it had agreed to be bought by the Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Company, a Japanese concern that already owns 30 percent of Lyphomed, for about $670 million.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dioxin in Milk Cartons


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about executive changes at the Times Mirror Company truncated a quotation from Donald S. Kellermann, a company spokesman, in some editions.
Referring to the choice of David Laventhol as publisher of The Los Angeles Times, Mr.
Kellermann said, ''This is not succession-related.


For Colombian Judges, a Lesson in Self-Defense


After Verdict, Questions About the Value of the Helmsley Wealth


Council to Claim Duties
LEAD: With A. Bartlett Giamatti's death, baseball's executive council will take on the commissioner's power and duties.
The council can nominate a commissioner pro tem for a period of less than three years.


Koch Fund-Raising Surges Ahead And He Outstrips Dinkins By 2-1
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch, who only six weeks ago had to borrow $200,000 to keep his campaign commercials on the air, has moved far ahead of his Democratic rivals in fund raising, according to campaign financial reports filed yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5  Muslim and Christian troops fought with heavy artillery, rocket launchers and tanks in and around Beirut.
Civilian areas were hard hit.
Page 1  Qaddafi pledges an ''international revolution'' 3  Bonn marked the 50th anniversary of the outbreak of World War II with the cautious blend of penitence and politics.


Actor's Illness Helped Reagan To Grasp AIDS, Doctor Says
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan did not grasp the seriousness of the AIDS epidemic until he learned that the actor Rock Hudson had the disease in 1985, Mr.
Reagan's former physician says.


Jaruzelski and Solidarity Leaders Honor Poles Who Died in the War
LEAD: Poles commemorated the outbreak of World War II today with services and ceremonies reflecting the new diversity in Polish politics.


From the Germans 50 Years Later, Cautious Remorse and an Old Rift
LEAD: West German leaders marked the 50th anniversary of the outbreak of World War II today with the cautious blend of penitence and politics that has been a fixture in this period of Nazi-era anniversaries, and with a flare-up of the dispute over German-Polish relations.


Casino-Going for the Fun of It: It Helps to Know the Score
LEAD: The odds are always in favor of the house in the casinos here, and everywhere else, but that does not deter the millions of people who gamble for fun.


Mets Finally Score in Loss to Giants
LEAD: The Mets moved into September tonight and promptly lost a major gamble and a major game to the San Francisco Giants.


Mortgage Rates Rise
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.22 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
That rate was up from 10.21 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.74 percent this week, up from 8.69 percent the week before, Freddie Mac said.


Your Money; To Reduce Risk Try Mutual Funds
LEAD: With the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index up almost 29 percent so far in 1989, calculated for total return, many small investors would like to share in those gains, but they are afraid of the market's risk.
The answer, financial advisers say, is professional management, and for most that means mutual funds of both bonds and equities.


Baker to Meet Shevardnadze
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union are to meet on Sept. 22 and 23 in Wyoming, the State Department announced today.
A full range of issues are to be discussed, the department said.


Bailey Controls
LEAD: McDermott International Inc. agreed to sell the Bailey Controls operations of its Babcock &amp; Wilcox unit to Finmeccanica Societa Finanziaria per Aziona for $295 million.
Finmeccanica is a high technology holding company of IRI, Italy's largest industrial concern.
Bailey Controls employs about 2,700 people and has annual revenues of about $370 million.


Economic Views: Koch And Challengers Differ
LEAD: When Edward I. Koch first ran for mayor 12 years ago, the issue was how to revive a city on the verge of bankruptcy.
Now, after more than 10 years of an economic boom, growth is slowing - and the man who wins the mayoral election this year may have less money at his disposal to meet public demands to combat crime, drugs, homelessness and troubled schools.


Purchasers' Index Declines To Lowest Level Since '82
LEAD: The industrial side of the United States economy continued to weaken during August, the National Association of Purchasing Management said yesterday, and an index based on a monthly survey of 250 corporate purchasing managers fell to 45.2 percent, from 46 percent in July.


Eastern Airlines
LEAD: Anonymous pamphlets have been circulated among pilots and other airline personnel, calling for a nationwide work stoppage on Monday to commemorate the six-month anniversary of the beginning of the Eastern Airlines strike.
The pamphlets and small posters urge transportation workers to call in sick on Labor Day or to disrupt and delay the completion of their tasks if they do report to work.


Polish Leaders, Facing Domestic Challenges, Unite to Honor War Dead
LEAD: Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, left, joined President Wojciech Jaruzelski, center, and Lech Walesa of Solidarity to mark the 50th anniversary of the start of World War II.
The occasion, overshadowed by domestic conflicts, fell short of the celebration of unity that some had hoped for.
Page 5. (Associated


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We should beware of making hasty judgments from today's vantage point.
Who among us can say with a good conscience that confronted with such evil, he would have summoned the strength to be a martyr?'' - Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany.  [ 1:3. ]


Sleeping Man Killed by Truck
LEAD: A homeless man sleeping on a mattress on a sidewalk was run over and killed at 2:15 A.M. yesterday by a tow truck hauling an abandoned car from a Brooklyn school yard, the police said.
The police did not identify the victim but described him as in his 30's.


Giamatti, Scholar and Baseball Chief, Dies at 51
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti, the Renaissance scholar and former president of Yale University who gave up a brilliant academic career in 1986 to join the rough-and-tumble of big league baseball, died after apparently suffering a heart attack at his summer home on Martha's Vineyard yesterday.


Lester Blum, Surgeon, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Lester Blum, a surgeon with Mount Sinai Medical Center for 50 years, died of heart failure Wednesday at Mount Sinai.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Contract for Pat Burns
LEAD: Pat Burns, who coached the Montreal Canadiens to the Stanley Cup final in his rookie season, got some job security yesterday when he signed a four-year contract.


Papers' Hearing Delayed
LEAD: A hearing has been rescheduled for Tuesday on a dispute between The Dallas Times Herald and The Dallas Morning News over publishing features and comic strips that the Universal Press Syndicate intends to move from The Times Herald to The Morning News.
The hearing in United States District Court had been scheduled for today.


DC-10's Design Is Fatally Flawed
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Electronic Pickup For String Instruments
LEAD: Max V. Matthews, a professor at Stanford University who developed one of the first electronic musical synthesizers, has invented an unusual electronic pickup for the violin and other stringed instruments.
A pickup converts the sound of each string to electrical pulses that can then be amplified.


Kate O'Kelly Weds Richard A. Doyle
LEAD: Kathy Lynn O'Kelly, the daughter of Eleanor M. Shutt of Wayne, Pa., and Samuel G. O'Kelly Jr. of Deerfield, Ill., was married yesterday to Richard Anthony Doyle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Doyle of New York and Roxbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Gordon, a Presbyterian minister, and the Rev.
Daniel Morrissey, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the interfaith ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in


Four 'Jerry's Girls' in Darien Revue
LEAD: THE opening number of ''Jerry's Girls,'' the musical melange of Jerry Herman's songs at the Darien Dinner Theater, evokes the composer's flamboyant theatrical creations (Dolly, Mame and Mabel, among them) as well as the glittering originators of those roles (Carol Channing, Angela Lansbury and Bernadette


Recollections of Learning Japanese
LEAD: DECIDING to spend a few weeks of summer vacation at a Japanese language camp in Kanazawa instead of, say, lounging and reading in Hawaii or Bali is the sort of judgment that seemingly qualifies a person for membership in Masochists Anonymous.


How Prodigies Perceive Business
LEAD: Thanks to the likes of Steven P. Jobs, the founder of Apple Computer Inc., and William Gates of the Microsoft Corporation, young computer prodigies are now considered potent drivers of the economy.


If There's a Nostalgia Boom, The Charts Don't Show It
LEAD: With the announcement this summer of major concert tours by the Rolling Stones, the Who, Jefferson Airplane and Paul McCartney, along with the hoopla surrounding the 20th anniversary of the Woodstock Music and Arts Fair, 60's rock nostalgia may have reached a high tide.


Will Biotechnology Finally Deliver?
LEAD: INVESTING in biotechnology stocks is a little like picking up mercury with your fingers: just when you think you have it, it slips away.


Bills, Oilers and Seahawks Are Favorites
LEAD: The following American Conference preview was prepared and written by Gerald Eskenazi.
Teams are listed in the predicted order of finish.
Eastern Division  Buffalo Bills


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: History is the discovery of connections.
Two postal items sat in a collector's file with other offbeat stuff for a year until research on one lead the researcher to fish out the other and connect them.


Giving Special Workers a Chance
LEAD: THE work ethic that built our nation is dead.
So say the pessimists who mourn the passing of a ''hungry and hard-working'' America this Labor Day.
We have lost our competitive edge, they say.
We take the bounties of our labors for granted.
We are lazy.


TRAPPED IN THE CRIME NEXT DOOR
LEAD:  EDEN CLOSE  By Anita Shreve.  265 pp.
San Diego:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $17.95.


Ohio Fair Is Rocked by the Specter Of Bogus Winner in Steer Division
LEAD: It has come to this: Two fairs where generations of future farmers have stood with pride and joy beside their winning livestock fear that they have been duped into awarding a top prize to the same steer under different names.


Some Greet Fall With Sweaters; Some With Elbows; Watch Your Back: It's Autumn in New York
LEAD: The leaves haven't begun to change.
The Mets and some of the Yankees have yet to call it a season.
Some of those cool breezes are still being supplied by Friedrich.
So why does it seem like fall already?
Perhaps because it's New York, that hurry-up town.
Let the rest of the country wait until Sept.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing; Southeastern Connecticut: Old Melds With New
LEAD: Nearly 20 million people visit Connecticut each year, but tourism officials in the southeastern part of the state are quick to boast that the majority of them come to this area.


The Challenge Of Putting a Home On the Map
LEAD: In August I celebrated a special anniversary: 10 years as a county resident.


Visitors Stream Back to Yellowstone After the Fires of 1988
LEAD: A full year after the famous fires that devastated large parts of the nation's oldest national park, Yellowstone displays unmistakable signs of recovery, both on its natural and its human sides.


Ellen Clare Gillespie Is Wed in Capital
LEAD: The marriage of Ellen Clare Gillespie and Scott Eric Dreyer took place yesterday in the Navy Chapel at the Naval Security Station in Washington.
The Rev.
Kenneth Roeltgen, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Harold White officiated.


FIGHTING WOMEN
LEAD:  WEAK LINK  The Feminization of the American Military.
By Brian Mitchell.  232 pp.
Washington:  Regnery Gateway. $17.95.


Senate Star Rides a Wave of Great Expectations
LEAD: The questions were gentle and the atmosphere was downright warm the other day when Senator Bob Kerrey held forth at the Big Red Cafe in the small town of Chappell.


PUBLIC ENEMY No. 1; A War on Drugs Is a Necessary Risk for Bush
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH will deliver his first prime-time televised address this week, and the nation's state of mind has given him a politically irresistible topic: a strategy for battling drugs.


What the Island's Landfill Law Specifies
LEAD: The effort by the Long Island Weekly (Aug. 6) to summarize the status of the Long Island landfill ''deadline'' is commendable, but I believe the article left some gaps that should be filled.


Swimming With Dolphins Isn't a Carnival Ride; A Dream Came True
LEAD: To the Editor:


PUBLIC ENEMY No. 1; What the States Would Like to See
LEAD: WHAT do the states want from a national war on drugs?
Last week, Laura Mansnerus, an editor of The Week in Review, posed the question in telephone interviews with several officials from around the nation.
Here are excerpts from their responses.
New York


PASTIMES: Numismatics
LEAD: One of the most beautiful coins is the Japanese koban, an oblong striated gold piece, which looks more like an ingot than a coin.
It often appears painted with Japanese characters.


To Dress for Success, Try a Dress
LEAD: The power suit seems to be losing some of its muscle.


Let Handymen Move and the Cans of Paint Stay Put
LEAD: MOVING is not a pleasant experience no matter how well organized and prepared you are.
My family was more fortunate than most in our recent move because we were moving only about two miles from our current home and we were staying in the same community.
We also had a 10-day period from when we purchased the new home and actually had to move out of the old one.


Correction
LEAD: A listing of the Top 20 college football teams in last Sunday's sports section gave the incorrect team in the No. 8 spot.
It should have read Florida State.


PHYSICIAN, BEHAVE THYSELF
LEAD:  LORD BYRON'S DOCTOR  By Paul West.  277 pp. New York: Doubleday. $19.95.


Who Is Going to Pay For Airport Security?
LEAD: BY ordering the airlines to begin screening passenger luggage with a new type of bomb detector, the Government hopes to prevent terrorist attacks like the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people last December.
But the new procedures, which were announced last week, are also expected to intensify the debate over who should shoulder the growing cost of airport security: the


Waltrip Driving Toward Big Payoff
LEAD: If Darrell Waltrip wins the Southern 500 today in Darlington, S.C., he will earn a bonus of $1 million.


PRETORIA HARDENS TACTICS AT RALLIES
LEAD: The Government today intensified its crackdown on demonstrators protesting apartheid in advance of Parliamentary elections scheduled for Wednesday.


Food; Beyond the Burrito
LEAD: MY ONLY VISIT TO MEXICO WAS MORE THAN 10 years ago, but I can still taste the seviche I ate there.
The fish was firm and bright, the flavors of lime, spice and peppers were clean and sharp.
That flavor had just about nothing in common with the Mexican restaurants I've visited north of the border.
At most of them, the only fish on the menu is camarones - or shrimp.


As Schools Open, Kean's Impact Iss Assessed
LEAD: AS the 1989-90 school year begins this week for New Jersey's 1.08 million children in public schools, the barrage of educational reforms that have come from Trenton for almost eight years has finally abated.


OTB Plans Look to Race Track and Beyond
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Pete Rose should learn the three ''R's'': no remorse, no rehabilitation, no reinstatement.
CAROLE MARTIN  New York


Tonier Alleys With Day Care and Dining
LEAD: Bowling has not seen any significant growth since the boom that followed the introduction in 1946 of automatic pin-spotting technology, which sets pins in the familiar triangular configuration.
Between 1965 and 1975, the number of lanes in the United States doubled to an all-time high of more than 169,000.


CALM, COOL AND BELEAGUERED
LEAD: When I read your characterization of Faye Wattleton as a former nurse, my thought was, why ''former''?
If Ms.
Wattleton were a physician, as she believes she should have been, she would not have been characterized as a former physician.


NONFICTION
LEAD: THE MAN WHO MADE THE BEATLES: An Intimate Biography of Brian Epstein.
By Ray Coleman. (McGraw-Hill, $19.95.) At the height of the Beatles' popularity, their manager, Brian Epstein, was almost as much of a star as they were - and with good reason, as Ray Coleman's carefully researched biography documents.


China Rebuffs Pope
LEAD: China has denied permission for Pope John Paul II to fly in Chinese airspace on a visit to the Far East in October, an Alitalia Airline spokesman said Friday.
The Beijing Government did not give an official explanation for the decision, said the spokesman, Gianpiero Piva.
The Italian carrier is to fly the Pope to Seoul on Oct.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Feeling the Beat


The Fine Art of Delaying the Tax Cut
LEAD: TWO and a half years ago, when New York State leaders announced agreement on a four-year plan to cut taxes, state politicians described the idea as if it heralded a new era.
It was, they said, a tremendous step, sending a ''strong signal'' to the state's businesses, and, in the words of Gov.
Mario M.


POLITICAL TERRAIN SEEN AS CHANGING
LEAD: Political scientists are coming to agree that there is a durable, changed political landscape characterized by Republican Presidential dominance, Democratic mastery of the House of Representatives and a nearly even split between adherents of the two parties nationally.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the International Olympic Committee Congress gave incorrect soccer eligibility requirements for the 1984 and 1988 Games.
The only players, regardless of age, not eligible for the Olympics were those who had played for a European or South American World Cup team.


IN THE LAND OF THE BLIND CAUDILLO
LEAD: To characterize former Dominican President Juan Bosch as a ''symbol of Dominican political instability'' is simply farcical (''In the Land of the Blind Caudillo,'' by Mark Kurlansky, Aug. 6).
Bosch was the first democratically elected president of the Dominican Republic.
In the short period of his Government, the


Greed Is No Laughing Matter
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Record 14 Officers Killed in '88 In Drug Incidents, a Study Shows
LEAD: Fourteen police officers were killed last year in drug-related incidents, the largest annual number on record, a report made public today said.


Regretful Recruiter
LEAD: Bo Schembechler of Michigan, in his new book, ''Bo,'' says that recruiting is the worst part of being a college football coach and that he no longer looks forward to it. ''You would be appalled at the things I have to do to recruit,'' Schembechler said. ''A man my age.''


DATA BANK: Sept. 3, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.7
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'89
IV Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$171.6
$173.9
$146.4


Chinese With an Indonesian Accent
LEAD: THE name of one of New Canaan's newest restaurants, the Little Kitchen of New Canaan, could be a little misleading.
Instead of the homey image of pot roast and Mom's apple pie that such a name might evoke, this small restaurant is a study in the sophisticated use of minimum space and intelligent decorating.


Gwen Haverstock Weds
LEAD: Gwendolyn Foster Haverstock, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Alfred Haverstock of Oberlin, Ohio, was marrried yesterday to Kenneth Howard Freed, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Freed of White Plains.
William M. O'Riordan of Northampton, Mass., a justice of the peace, officiated at Greenwood, a music camp in Cummington, Mass.


Nanny-Teacher Days Are Important, Too
LEAD: AS younger children of two-career couples return to class this month or sign up for nursery or elementary school, their parents are likely to be asked to bring helpers like nannies, au pairs and live-in housekeepers to meet the teachers.
Such invitations are already being offered in New Canaan and Westport.


Paige Robbins Has Wedding
LEAD: Paige Robbins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Robbins of Kings Point, L.I., and New Milford, Conn., was married yesterday to Eric Nerenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lowell Nerenberg of Rockville, Md.
The ceremony, at the Windows on the World restaurant in New York, was performed by Rabbi David Benedict and the Rev.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart on page 10 of the Travel section today with an article about Ottawa mislabels the month for which weather statistics apply.
It is September.


Not a Stranger To World Series
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Love, Lies and Murder in 1944
LEAD: On march 8, 1945, Pvt.
Karl Gustav Hulten, a 22-year-old American G.I. from Cambridge, Mass., was taken from his prison cell here and hanged by the neck until he was dead.
The crime for which he was executed was the murder of a London taxi driver named George Heath, whose official police description gave the trial the tabloid tag of ''The Cleft Chin Case.


Calamitous Flier
LEAD: To the Editor:


Timothy Goodell, A Lawyer, Weds Karen A. Jackson
LEAD: Karen Ann Jackson and Timothy Bartlett Goodell were married yesterday in the Hall of Philosophy at the Chautauqua (N.Y.) Institution.
The Rev.
William H. Terry, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Office Brokerage Fees; Fuzzy Rules and High Stakes Make a Litigious Climate
LEAD: THE stakes are so high and the rules so fuzzy, it's no wonder that brokers of office space in Manhattan clash over who should collect the brokerage commissions.
And when a jilted broker decides to pursue a commission he believes was snatched away unfairly, the office tenant involved is often dragged into the fray.


Fight on Indian Reservation As Casinos Divide Mohawks
LEAD: Pro- and anti-gambling factions of Mohawk Indians fought today in a seven-hour confrontation on the St.
Regis Akwesasne Indian Reservation, but there were no arrests and only minor injuries, the state police said.


Lust, Suicide And Baby-Theft On Eaton Place
LEAD: After 50-odd episodes of ''Upstairs, Downstairs,'' plenty of them involving crisis in the drawing room and turmoil in the kitchen, it's hard to believe that the family closets at 165 Eaton Place have any more secrets to reveal.
But they do, they have.
And some pretty dark ones, too.
Did you know, for instance, that back in 1906 one of the Bellamys' scullery maids hanged herself in her tiny attic bedroom?


CALM, COOL AND BELEAGUERED
LEAD: I am a 74-year-old grandmother; I have eight wonderful grandchildren, and I say hurrah for Planned Parenthood's president, Faye Wattleton (''Calm, Cool and Beleaguered,'' by Marianne Szegedy-Maszak, Aug. 6).
I say, if you do not believe in abortion, do not have one.
But it is a woman's right to make this decision, not a state's right to make it for her.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington State; Arrive Early And Party Hard At Waterbust
LEAD: The first partygoers started arriving around 7 A.M., and by the time the first band went onstage about noon, the festivities were in full swing.
Jeffrey Spane, a junior business major at the University of Washington, said it was ''the biggest party I've ever been to.''


Claire Luce, 85, Comedy and Classical Star
LEAD: Claire Luce, a 1920's Ziegfeld star who left the musical stage for the classical theater, died Thursday at her Gramercy Park home in Manhattan after a lengthy illness.
She was 85 years old.


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Maybe.
It has been legal for years to bet on baseball in Las Vegas, and Oregon has recently passed legislation to allow an N.F.L. football lotto betting system.
So who are we kidding?


West Germans Prepare for East German Refugees


Rhode Island Offers Scholarship Plan for Poor
LEAD: Rhode Island will offer full state-college scholarships for low-income pupils under a sweeping plan that will also provide academic help to pupils from the third grade through high school, Gov.
Edward D. DiPrete says.


Lerzan Kizilay, Medical Student, Weds
LEAD: Lerzan Suzanne Kizilay, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dogan Kizilay of South Orange, N.J., and Christopher Patusky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Patusky of Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday at the Memorial Church at Harvard University.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
John MacInnis, a Roman


One if by Land, 2 if by Sea, and 3 if by Interstate 95
LEAD: LURED by the excitement of battle, the smell of gunpowder and the taste of beer from a pewter stein, hundreds of Connecticut history lovers pack up their families on weekends and head off to war.


Freddie Redd Sums It Up in Three Blue Notes
LEAD: There's a notion that if a jazz musician records for a decent record company and makes a reputation for himself, he'll receive, along with a contract, some health insurance, a retirement fund, keys to a new car and a happy prosperous life.
Not so, and it wasn't so in 1960 and 1961, when the pianist and composer Freddie Redd recorded three albums for Blue Note


In Miami, the Visual and Performing Arts Seek Their Place in the Sun
LEAD: On a weekday not too long ago, a total of more than 8,000 people attended two performances of Swan Lake by American Ballet Theater and a concert by the National Symphony Orchestra conducted by Mstislav Rostropovich.
It was a record, of sorts, for Miami.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Elmont  $153,000  727 Connie Lane  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Franklin Square  $200,000  1043 Wool Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 48-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.


Giamatti Fondly Recalled
LEAD: As president of Yale University, A. Bartlett Giamatti would sneak off to Boston occasionally and sit in the stands at Fenway Park, watching his beloved Red Sox ''incognito,'' Haywood Sullivan, one of the team's owners, recalled.


Ethiopia Releases Prisoners From Haile Selassie's Family
LEAD: The Ethiopian Government today released 87 political prisoners and 820 others convicted of common crimes, according to an announcement by the Government radio.


FICTION
LEAD: PELLE THE CONQUEROR. Volume One: Childhood.


One Hope for AIDS Patients Is Hostage to the Market
LEAD: WHERE AIDS is concerned, even good news often comes wrapped in bitterness.
The recently announced indications that AZT can postpone the onset of AIDS and slow the early stages of the disease have brought hope for hundreds of thousands of people infected with the virus.
But the developments have also fueled the debate over access to AZT, or azidothymidine, the only approved drug for treating the disease.


U.S. DRAFTS PLANS TO CURB ADMISSION OF SOVIET JEWS
LEAD: The State Department and other Federal agencies have drafted plans that would make large numbers of Soviet Jews ineligible for admission to the United States as refugees.
A likely effect of the plan would be to channel many of them to Israel, whose Government has long sought such a move.


Polish Cardinal Terms Agreement On Auschwitz Convent 'Offensive'
LEAD: Poland's Roman Catholic Primate, Jozef Cardinal Glemp, has described as ''offensive'' an agreement to move a convent away from the site of the Auschwitz death camp.


Alger Hiss's Supporters
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Queen's Court
LEAD: One bill, $21 for a membership in a crossword puzzle club, went on the books of the Park Lane Hotel.
And because of it, Leona Helmsley might be going to prison.
For years, Mrs.
Helmsley, 69 years old, has boasted in ads that for the ''queen'' of the Helmsley hotel chain, no detail was too small to escape her attention.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Works in Progress; Keeping Up the Pressure
LEAD: IF YOU LIVE IN A TALL BUILD-ing and you're not getting a good strong shower,'' Wally Rosenwach says, ''you're too close to the tank.'' Rosenwach, 67, is the chairman of one of New York City's two primary installers of those wooden water tanks that sprinkle, so to speak, the city skyline; up to 300 new and replacement tanks are erected annually by the Rosenwach Tank Company.


CAMPUS LIFE: Massachusetts; 3 Police Horses Are Put to Work As 'Ice Breakers'
LEAD: Two days in the saddle and already the new mounted police unit at the University of Massachusetts is a crowd pleaser.


Art Out of Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


In a Small Town, a Battle Over a Book
LEAD: If a group of local parents had let her speak to them before ''The Catcher in the Rye'' was banned from her high school, Shelley Keller-Gage says she would have told them she believes it is a highly moral book that deals with the kinds of difficulties their own children are facing.


No Violence as 300 March Into Bensonhurst Again
LEAD: In the fourth such protest since the killing of a black teen-ager 11 days ago, about 300 demonstrators bearing African liberation flags and chanting ''Yusuf, Yusuf,'' marched through the heart of the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn yesterday afternoon.


It's Off to College, in the Nick of Time
LEAD: DOES experience help one conquer obstacles the second time around?
Let's hope so.
It seems that only yesterday (it was exactly 360 yesterdays ago) we were preparing to take our son to embark on his first year of college.


Small Tribute to a Musical-Comedy Tradition
LEAD: THE opening number of ''Jerry's Girls,'' the musical melange of Jerry Herman songs at the Darien Dinner Theater, evokes the composer's flamboyant theatrical creations (Dolly, Mame and Mabel, among them) as well as the glittering originators of those roles (Carol Channing, Angela Lansbury and Bernadette


Stallone to be Questioned in Double Slaying
LEAD: Police officers investigating the slaying of an entertainment executive and his wife last week plan to interview the actor Sylvester Stallone, The Los Angeles Times reported today.


Keeping It Simple and Fresh
LEAD: MY mother once said that living with a small child was like having a permanently drunk houseguest.
Never did this ring more true than one weekend recently when I tried to cook dinner for eight adults in the company of six children confined indoors because of rain.
Just as I was trying to sort out last-minute details, one child wanted spaghetti with butter - and not in a bowl but on a plate like a grownup; another was turning over his carefully strained chicken and mashed potatoes on his head and a third needed a bottle of milk warmed immediately.


Constance Cummings, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Constance Cummings and Christopher Sean Lewis Kelly were married yesterday at the Manning Chapel at Brown University.
The Rev.
Richard Carson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Ms.
Cummings, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Cummings of Providence, R.I.
She is an alumna of Phillips Academy and a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University.


Keeping It Simple and Fresh
LEAD: MY mother once said that living with a small child was like having a permanently drunk houseguest.
Never did this ring more true than one weekend recently when I tried to cook dinner for eight adults in the company of six children confined indoors because of rain.
Just as I was trying to sort out last-minute details, one child wanted spaghetti with butter - and not in a bowl but on a plate like a grownup; another was turning over his carefully strained chicken and mashed potatoes on his head and a third needed a bottle of milk warmed immediately.


Despite the Gray, A Child of the 60's
LEAD: Even though you consider me middle aged, Mr.
Wolfsohn, I don't.
Middle age is always leaping another 10 years ahead of me.
Even as gray begins its relentless march across my head, I still consider myself a child of the 60's.
During those turbulent and exciting times, I examined and re-examined my values.


Getting a Garage Ready for Winter
LEAD: BY the end of summer, most garages desperately need cleaning and reorganizing to put them in shape for the winter.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: ''Yikes,'' said Alice the Aspiring Photographer over the phone, ''I've just noticed that my new lens has a big scratch on it.
What can I do?''


Maine's Secluded Island Inns
LEAD: AFTER a late afternoon rain shower the sky cleared just enough to make a radiant spectacle of sunset over the distant Camden Hills.
From the rock ledges at Robinson Point on Isle au Haut, we could see across Penobscot Bay to Vinalhaven and North Haven Islands in the foreground and the dark blue humps of Mount Megunticook and Ragged Mountain on the luminous horizon.


Don't Turn Old Glory Into a Portrait of Mao
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sarah Nichols Married to C. G. Duffy
LEAD: Sarah Kirkland Nichols, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Nichols of Syosset, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher George Duffy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Duffy of Hackensack, N.J., and Brewster, Mass.
The Rev.
Seymour Flinn performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New


Vietnam Refugees Riot in Hong Kong
LEAD: In the second major refugee riot here in a week, a Vietnamese man was killed today and 11 others were injured during a disturbance that began with a dispute over a gambling debt.
The riot reflected a growing tendency toward violence among the frustrated Vietnamese boat people crowded into Hong Kong's detention centers.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''There are lots of economists back at university jobs or driving trucks who did not have the guts to stick their necks out.'' - Scott Pardee, vice chairman, Yamaichi Securities.


Swimming With Dolphins Isn't a Carnival Ride; 'Elective Captivity'
LEAD: To the Editor:


They Also Serve Who May Only Wait
LEAD: EACH week, about 1,000 people in Nassau County are summoned to jury duty, the right and privilege of every American.
Most respond with a spirited, ''How can I get out of this?''


Amelia Zurcher Is Married
LEAD: Amelia Anne Zurcher and Mark Steven Sandy were married yesterday at Christ Church in Pelham, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Stewart Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony.


What's Doing In Ottawa
LEAD: It's not often that a 19th-century capital city gets two dramatic additions to its spirit and skyline in a single year.
But that's what has just happened to Ottawa.
A year ago, the granite and glass National Gallery of Canada, designed by Moshe Safdie, opened on a spectacular site overlooking the confluence of the Rideau Canal and the Ottawa River.


My Brother, My Teacher, My Pal
LEAD: MY brother got married this summer and he spent his honeymoon in our parents' summer home on the South Shore of Long Island.
It is the same home where we spent our childhood summers, the home by the sea where my brother taught me so many things.


Jan Lewis Weds Steven B. Elliott
LEAD: Jan Marie Lewis, a daughter of Lieut.
Col.
William J. Lewis, U.S.A., retired, and Mrs.
Lewis of Hudson, Fla., was married yesterday to Steven Burton Elliott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Elliott of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Converse P. Hunter, a Presbyterian minister, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Riverside Church in New


Carter the Peacemaker Now Turns to Ethiopia
LEAD: For the second time this year, former President Jimmy Carter, more active and visible than at any time since he left office, is about to play a central mediating role in the affairs of another country.


Wait! Don't Burn That Mortgage
LEAD: As an attorney involved in real-estate law, I'd like to tell your readers not to burn their paid mortgages (''The Mortgage Is Paid Up. Hurrah?,'' Opinion page, Aug. 6).


Assessing New York's Charter Change
LEAD: THE proposed overhaul of New York City's charter would bring sweeping changes in the way planning and land-use decisions are made, but experts say they do not expect the revision to quicken the pace of development or dramatically shift the balance of power among City Hall, neighborhood advocates and New


Arlene Rosenberg Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Arlene Michele Rosenberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Seligman Rosenberg of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
David Howard Henick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Henick of Albertson, L.I., took place last evening at the Park Avenue Synogogue in New York.
Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg, assisted by Rabbi David Lincoln and Rabbi Myron


Acceptance From John
LEAD: Tommy John, who has been throwing baseballs almost every summer since he was 10 years old in the Terre Haute Little Leagues, says he would rather still be pitching, but the former Yankee has accepted that his career as a hurler is over.


Seeking the Roots Of Italy's Lustrous Majolica
LEAD: So popular is the current exhibition of Italian majolica at the Metropolitan Museum of Art that when this large show closes on Oct. 1 it will be pared down somewhat (from 500 to 400 pieces) and then reopened on Nov. 2, to run well into the winter.


Unfair to Dogs
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Teaching Kids to Bowl On Lanes Without Gutters
LEAD: Bowling proprietors are counting on a host of new products and promotions to fill their alleys with recreational bowlers during the long winter ahead. ''It's much more work than it used to be,'' said Sandy Hansell, a bowling consultant. ''With an abundance of league players signed up for 35 weeks a year you could loaf while they played.


CALM, COOL AND BELEAGUERED
LEAD: Having worked for Planned Parenthood in the early 1980's as vice president of communications, I can attest to Faye Wattleton's dedication.
I want to laugh when I read that some people resent her $120,000 salary.


Choices and Limitations
LEAD: To the Editor:


SPORTS PEOPLE
LEAD:  LeMond Undecided Greg LeMOND has reportedly been offered a three-year, $5.7 million contract from a French cycling team.
But LeMond has not decided which team he will race with next season.
A French newspaper, L'Equipe, quoted LeMond as having confirmed that he and the French Z team had reached an agreement in principle.


Shanley's 'Volcano' Bubbles With Burning Angst
LEAD: On a hot, smoggy morning at the old M-G-M back lot (turned Lorimar-turned-Warner Brothers), it's easy to spot John Patrick Shanley inside Sound Stage 30.
All you have to do is listen for the laughter.
Sometimes gleeful, sometimes caustic, it lofts above the misty, cavernous sound stage where a raging typhoon is getting almost everyone wet, except Mr.


In Israel, a Way to Woo More Soviet Jews
LEAD: IN a meticulously appointed business complex here on the outskirts of the city, a large waiting room decorated in black, gray and shades of pink separates the Russians from the Westerners.


Writer's Anger Is Misdirected
LEAD: If the article by Karon Cooney was meant to be humorous, it was not.
Thousands of people who are overweight - and especially those overweight since before puberty - have or will have, an extremely hard time losing and keeping off weight, according to Dr.
Kenneth H. Cooper, the noted fitness guru and author.


Sandra Mossblad Is Wed in Omaha
LEAD: Sandra Ann Mossblad and Francois Marcel Luethi were married yesterday at the Augustana Lutheran Church in Omaha.
The Rev.
Victor Schoonover performed the ceremony.


CALM, COOL AND BELEADUERED
LEAD: As the president of National Right to Life, I hardly expected to receive equal treatment in your article on Faye Wattleton.
I did, however, expect factual accuracy.


Merriment Is In Short Supply
LEAD: To the Editor:


Technology Spreading Like Ivy in Academia
LEAD: To survive the rigors of higher education, college students are packing some high-tech gadgetry into their luggage this fall.
A survey of campuses nationwide indicates that most students are taking enough stereos, computers, refrigerators and television sets to make their rooms pass for appliance stores.


Christine Lahti Tries to Fashion A Spunky 'Heidi' Daniel Sullivan, the director, with Ms. Lahti and the actor David Pierce during rehearsals (Michael O'Neill): Christine Lahti in the film ''Running on Empty'' (pg. 9)
LEAD: To Christine Lahti fans, there is something incorrigibly winning about the actress's lopsided grin, with the upper lip tilting rightward and the longish nose angling left, those sharp dimples, the auburn curly hair bobbing over one eyebrow, the dark eyes switching from mischief to grief in a second.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE PLAYER, by Michael Tolkin. (Vintage, $7.95.) In the cutthroat world of Hollywood, a studio executive finds that random murder seems a logical extension of his job.
Last year our reviewer, Janet Maslin, called the book ''a shrewd, entertainingly dark Hollywood novel.''  MISSING BEAUTY, by Teresa Carpenter.


Washington Sets New Limits on the West's Water Tap
LEAD: THE South Platte River begins as a rivulet in the snow peaks of the Rockies in Colorado and tumbles down the mountains to Cheesman Canyon south of Denver, where it broadens and quickens between steep slopes.
Trout thrive in the icy waters.
Hawks and eagles ride the updrafts from sun-baked canyon walls.


West Point Gynecologist Denies Seducing Patient
LEAD: A gynecologist at the United States Military Academy has denied seducing a patient earlier this year, as she accused him of doing, but he admitted having an affair with a former patient at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, which would be a breach of the same regulations he is accused of breaking at West Point.


Boy Caged in Pen; Grandparents Are Charged
LEAD: The grandparents of a 4-year-old boy have been charged with keeping the child in a pen during the day outside the motor-home vehicle in which they lived.
He had no toilet and only a bottle of water in the pen, the authorities said.


THE CAMPAIGN, FOR PRINTHEADS
LEAD:  WHOSE BROAD STRIPES AND BRIGHT STARS?
The Trivial Pursuit of the Presidency 1988.
By Jack W. Germond and Jules Witcover.  478 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $22.95.


Once Again, Racism Proves to Be Fatal In New York City
LEAD: EARLY this summer, when Spike Lee's ''Do the Right Thing'' opened, some commentators, white ones, mostly, nervously predicted that the film's portrayal of racial divisions in Brooklyn might provoke riots by blacks.
It didn't.


Fordham Routed
LEAD: Fordham's introduction to Division I football was a rough one.
Colgate, the first major college opponent for the Rams in 35 years, achieved an easy victory today, 35-3, before a crowd of 3,600 at Andy Kerr Stadium.


CHINA WILL ALLOW FEWER STUDENTS TO STUDY IN U.S.
LEAD: In a significant shift in its strategy to modernize the country, China said today that it would restrict the number of graduate students it sends to the United States and other nations, and would begin producing far more members of its technological elite in Chinese universities.


Peachy Keen
LEAD: THERE ARE MANY WAYS TO REPORT ON wine, but only two count.
One is to gather lots of bottles, divide them into logical categories - for instance, red and white - then open them up and taste.


Menagerie Show Mixes the Bland And the Stunning
LEAD: A VISIT to the menagerie show at the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen Gallery is like a frolic at the zoo, minus the roars and peanuts.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about public television's handling of controversy examines the decision to broadcast ''Days of Rage: The Young Palestinians,'' a pro-Palestinian documentary that is scheduled for Wednesday night on PBS.


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Sure, and reward his incredible denials, his total lack of remorse and his shady life style.
Pete Rose's television huckstering of manufactured, overpriced ''memorabilia,'' on the very day of his suspension, should keep him out of baseball forever.
Baseball will survive without Charlie Huckster.


A Search for New Players as Leagues Shrink
LEAD: TODAY'S state-of-the-art bowling centers are trying to shake the image of smoke-filled haunts where pot-bellied characters like Ralph Cramden in ''The Honeymooners'' meet to drink some beer and bowl a few frames.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  DINOSAUR MAGIC


6 Mayoral Rivals Turn to TV Game Shows in Effort to Win Gracie Mansion
LEAD: Everybody loves a good game show.
That includes Ed, Dave, Jay, Dick, Ron and Rudy.
All six major-party mayoral rivals have spent tens of thousands of dollars to broadcast their campaign messages in between turns of the ''Wheel of Fortune,'' at roughly $3,600 a 30-second shot.


Total Immersion in France
LEAD: TRYING to learn French by taking one class a week is like trying to crawl to California from New York; it's possible, but chances are you'll probably give up midway.
At least that was the conclusion I came to last winter after struggling for months at the French Institute/Alliance Francaise in New York.


A Party to Aid Venice
LEAD: Prince Andrew and the Duchess of York danced into the early hours Friday at a gala organized by Save Venice Inc., an American organization that raises money for preserving the art treasures of this city.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; In a Season Of Garden Excess, Be Flexible
LEAD: Lucky recipients of someone else's garden surplus need to be flexible to appreciate the assortment of fresh vegetables and occasional fruits that come their way at odd times of the day and night.


Where Are the Worthy Opponents?
LEAD: THIS year both major political parties in the county have failed the public by not running candidates for office in all the 17 legislative districts.
Five of the candidates, two Democrats and three Republicans, are running without opposition in the November elections.


Tribute of Sorts For Steinbrenner
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Diving's New Image Is Keeping Classes Full
LEAD: A new breed of scuba diver, drawn by lighter, safer equipment and diving's new, less masculine image, is helping to increase the sport's popularity.
And diving is a skill that can be learned now and taken to tropical waters on winter vacations.


Executives' Toolbags
LEAD: Remember the jokes about the tuna sandwich in the attache case?
These days, the sandwich is chic - wholesome fuel for those with better things to do than indulge at lunchtime - and the attache case isn't.


Cash or Credit Card for Turnpike Aid
LEAD: MOTORISTS whose vehicles break down along the New Jersey Turnpike are being asked whether they have enough ready cash or credit cards to cover the cost of road service under a policy being more rigorously enforced by the state police.


Threat on Bush and Quayle
LEAD: A man the police said might be mentally disturbed was arrested today after he called the 911 emergency number from a telephone booth at Los Angeles International Airport and threatened to kill President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the authorities said.


Barbara Phelps Becomes a Bride
LEAD: St.
Christopher's Episcopal Church in Chatham, Mass., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Barbara Wilder Phelps, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Phelps of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Chatham, and Joseph Garside 4th, the son of Mr.
Garside 3d of Westwood, Mass., and the late Mrs.
Garside.
The Rev.


HOW TO MAKE LOVE LIKE A MARTIAN
LEAD:  NIGHTSHADE  By Jack Butler.  276 pp.
New York:  The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Sabatini Defeats Meskhi Handily
LEAD: Although the year has been somewhat disappointing for Gabriela Sabatini, she played a superb match at the United States Open yesterday.
She was upset at both the French Open and at Wimbledon, so yesterday's third-round match became a momentum builder in a tournament that could turn her season much brighter.


Me and Machiavelli
LEAD: ''BUENOS dias,'' I sang out one sunny morning in the suburbs of Washington.
My wife looked up in surprise at my sudden eruption in a foreign language.
I smiled innocently. ''Buenos dias,'' I sang again.
But my greeting was anything but nonchalant.
It was my opening move in a carefully constructed and covert strategy, and strategy was something I had come to appreciate during decades of diplomatic reporting and a couple of years at the State Department.


High-Speed Rail Can't Pay for Itself
LEAD: ANYONE who is a transportation expert has heard, time and again, from people who have ridden on the fast Japanese Shinkansen or the faster French Train a Grande Vitesse, called the T.G.V. ''Why can't we have that in America?'' they ask.
My answer is: Because it's an outrageous boondoggle.
With one possible exception, no high-speed rail system in this country could pay for itself, and the claimed external benefits - cleaner air, energy saved, eased pressure on airports - are nonexistent.


New Paths for Regional Theaters
LEAD: America's regional theaters, which established themselves as alternatives to New York's commercial theater a generation ago - and thus transformed the nation's cultural landscape - may once again be at a crossroads.
More than 25 years after the not-for-profit regional movement began, the way these theaters - 320 of them across the country - bring drama to their audiences is being altered by their own evolution.


George S. Kane Weds Ms. Doyle
LEAD: Anne Forbes Doyle, a sales representative for the Designtex textiles company in Boston, and George Stuart Kane, the book marketing manager for the Appalachian Mountain Club there, were married yesterday in Hingham, Mass.
The bride's father, Edward L. Doyle, a deacon of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston, performed the ceremony at a nuptial mass celebrated by the Rev.


Benefits
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHAT DO YOU THINK WILL HAPPEN TO SHIRLEY?
LEAD:  A NATURAL CURIOSITY  By Margaret Drabble.  309 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Giants Bewilder Viola and Mets
LEAD: Frank Viola, who threw a three-run home run to a .211 hitter, put it this way: ''It's there for the taking.
But right now we're not making an effort to take it.
And that's the sad part.
You can't say turn it on.
We'd better step out real quick, or it'll be gone.''


Catherine McGill, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Catherine Debo McGill, a daughter of Susan Claydon of Boulder, Colo., and Douglas F. I. McGill of Steamboat Springs, Colo., was married yesterday to David Malcolm Durning, a son of Ronald B. Durning of Alford, Mass., and the late Doris Charbonnet Durning of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Craig S. Milco performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in Amherst, N


'If The Deal Sounds Too Good, Beware!'
LEAD: NEIL H. COHEN is the president of MBA Associates, a jewelry appraisal concern in Hartford and 1 of just 85 appraisers in the country certified as a master gemologist appraiser.


Capital Mayoral Race Turns Murkier
LEAD: The race for mayor of Washington in 1990, a bettor's nightmare, is growing even more confused.


Confessions of a 'Fed Watcher'
LEAD: THE world of private financial institutions is permeated by people who got their professional start at the Federal Reserve - the Board of Governors in Washington or one of the 12 District Federal Reserve Banks.
Occasionally, these high-class technicians become top executives or entrepreneurs, but more typically they continue as professionals - chief economists and senior advisers to top management, or key participants in day-to-day securities trading and asset/liability management.


Do Numbers Lie About Audio Gear? Just Listen to What Your Ears Say
LEAD: Wisdom, as contrasted to common sense, has been linked by skeptical philosophers to a distrust of the obvious.
Accordingly, an early essay by Bertrand Russell argues against the persuasiveness of numbers and ferrets out the limitations of their meaning.


Millions for Muppets
LEAD: As corporate takeovers go, it was not just another Mickey Mouse deal.
Miss Piggy was also involved.
Last week, the Walt Disney Company said it would acquire Henson Associates Inc., the company that created and owns the Muppets, in a deal that analysts valued as high as $150 million.
It will combine Miss Piggy, Kermit the Frog and the other Muppets with Disney's roster of characters for use in Disney's theme parks, on television and in movies.


'Shenandoah': Musical Focuses on Civil War
LEAD: IT is extremely rare that a small local theater will manage to acquire the performance rights to a show that is simultaneously running on Broadway.


Dr. Nancy Ryan Has a Wedding
LEAD: Dr.
Nancy Lyn Ryan, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Ryan of New Canaan, Conn. and Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Harris Lowitt, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Saul Lowitt of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
J.
Peter Cullen, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Allan L. Press jointly performed the ceremony at the New


Turkic Republics Press Soviets to Loosen Reins
LEAD: While world attention is focused on the Baltic Republics' steady independence march, a strange thing is happening along President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's southern flank.


Hydroelectric Project Offers Benefits
LEAD: The Aug. 6 article ''Plan for Hydroelectric Project at Old Mine Upsets Residents'' discussed the Mount Hope Waterpower Project with respect to Rockaway Township, but it did not touch on its significance with respect to New Jersey's energy problems.


Blue Jays' Drive to Top Began When Wilson Crossed Border
LEAD: They talk in quotable sentences, such as the ones Broadway shows and movies lift from reviews and use in advertisements and commercials:


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.35
7.35
7.76
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.64
8.66
7.54
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.46
6.45
5.94
Bank Rate Monitor


N.F.L.'s Goal: Another Rozelle
LEAD: Paul Brown, the Cincinnati Bengals' vice president and general manager and a National Football League patriach, chuckled and leaned back in his chair.
Brown was recalling those long days that turned into longer nights in January 1960 in Miami when N.F.L. owners toiled for 10 days and 23 ballots while electing a new commissioner.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Mail Call


Susan J. White Weds in Darien
LEAD: Susan Jeannette White and John Paul Tedesco, both 25 years old, were married yesterday at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., by the Rev.
Christopher Muldoon.


When Its Time To Say a Good Goodbye
LEAD: IT seems that I am always saying goodbye to her.
When Frances was 18 months old, I went back to college and left her three days a week with a matronly woman with young children of her own.
Those were painful goodbyes.
She clung to my legs and cried huge tears.


A Grown-Up And Proud of It
LEAD: I have seldom been as annoyed as I was by the Opinion piece ''Why Can't Grown-Ups Act Their Age'' by Edward T. Wolfsohn (Aug. 6).
Clearly I am one of the grown-ups Mr.
Wolfsohn deplores: I am more than middle-aged, being in my 60's, and I wear a whole gamut of (according to Mr. Wolfsohn) unsuitable garments - the least offensive being several T-shirts with slogans of N


Getting a Garage Ready for Winter
LEAD: BY the end of summer, most garages desperately need cleaning and reorganizing to put them in shape for the winter.


A BRAHMS TO FIT THE HALLE'S HALL
LEAD: Solid, imposing and a little grim, the Halle Orchestra has for most of its 132 years reflected Manchester, England-the city that is its home.
Yet as with industrial Britain in general, things seem to have slipped, to have worn a bit at the edges and lost their outer shine.
The Halle which has veen led by such men as Hans Richter, Sir Thomas Beecham and Sir John Barbirolli, is no longer the international name it was before and just after World War II.


Q AND A
LEAD:  Island Weddings  Question: In which places in the Caribbean can one get married? - R.B., New York, N.Y.
Answer: Americans can marry on most Caribbean islands, though a minimum residency and certain documents are generally required.


Swimming With Dolphins Isn't a Carnival Ride
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sally Buckman, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Sally Ann Buckman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Buckman Jr. of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and Robert Stephen Shaw, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Shaw of Beltsville, Md., were married yesterday at the First Unitarian Church in Shaker Heights.
The Rev.
Bettye Doty performed the ceremony.


Flight Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor: After buying flight insurance (strictly life) for many years at various locations from Mutual of Omaha, on June 16, 1989, at the Pan American terminal at Kennedy International Airport I was confronted with a surprise.


Orioles' Olson Ties Record
LEAD: Gregg Olson tied an American League record for saves by a rookie as the Baltimore Orioles used five pitchers to beat the Chicago White Sox tonight, 2-1, and keep pace with front-running Toronto in the American League East.


Wider Exposure for Tasty Thai Dishes
LEAD: THERE'S a sizzling new Homer's Oriental in Centereach.
Homer Lee's ninth restaurant and first foray into Suffolk County caps a string of Nassau successes, including traditional Chinese restaurants, an international extravaganza complete with Mongolian barbecue and two other Homer's Orientals.


One-Design Fleet Sailing for Rye to Compete for '89 Trophy
LEAD: NEXT Sunday, nearly 53 years after the International One-Design sailboats made their debut on Long Island Sound, the fleet's 1989 world championships will be held in those waters, with the American Yacht Club in Rye as the host.


Old Dictator Looks Better To Guatemala
LEAD: When a civilian government took office here in 1986 after three decades of almost uninterrupted military rule, it appeared to close a bloody chapter in Guatemala's history.


Getting a Garage Ready for Winter
LEAD: BY the end of summer, most garages desperately need cleaning and reorganizing to put them in shape for the winter.


Hilary Bing Wed To Dean Butera
LEAD: Hilary Anne Bing, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sanford B. Bing of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married last evening to Dean McNeilie Butera, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Butera of Branchville, N.J.
Rabbi Morton Rosenthal performed the ceremony at the Hun School in Princeton, N.J.


S.M.U.'s Mustangs Gallop To Nowhere in Comeback
LEAD: Years before a succession of parties this weekend welcomed tonight's return of football to Southern Methodist University after a two-year void brought on by scandal and disgrace, Ownby Stadium, a storied piece of the southeast corner of the S.M.U. campus, stood as a symbol of a university's attitude toward the game.


Hanoi Now Says Ho Died on Different Day
LEAD: Vietnamese leaders have asserted that they falsified the date of Ho Chi Minh's death and changed portions of his will, putting the leader's body on display in a glass mausoleum when his initial wish was to be cremated.


THE ARTIST AS ART
LEAD: Those familiar with Gilbert and George as a team of contemporary British artists are apt to be nonplused by the laborious ideology applied to their quirky work by Wolf Jahn in his critical study, THE ART OF GILBERT &amp; GEORGE: Or, An Aesthetic of Existence (Thames and Hudson, Paper, $24.95).
First celebrated in 1968 for presenting themselves as ''living sculptures'' that proclaimed the artist as art, Gilbert Proesch and George Passmore - who have lived and worked together since graduating from a


The Selling of Steinbrenner's Yankees
LEAD: Yankee fans are mad at George Steinbrenner, again. Or still. Or more than ever.


Big Contributions Fueling Koch Race
LEAD: Big contributions played a major role in Mayor Edward I. Koch's fund-raising surge in the last two months, despite a new law in New York City that was intended to keep big money out of election campaigns.


Men's Style; The Mild Ones
LEAD: IN THE OLD DAYS, IT WAS EASY.
YOU stepped into a pair of beat-up blue jeans, snapped on some leather chaps, oiled up your tattoo and roared off toward the open road.


Omega to Hazing Sought
LEAD: The nation's largest organization of fraternities, represented on 900 college campuses throughout the United States and Canada, announced today that it will start a campaign to eliminate hazing, which over the last decade has led to 40 deaths of students and hundreds of serious injuries.


IN THE LAND OF THE BLIND CAUDILLO
LEAD: Pena Gomez is the son of Haitian parents.
This fact, not the color of his skin, is the real political albatross around his neck in a country with a historical distrust of anything Haitian.
M.
CARMEN  HERRERA-VON WRANGELL  Moorestown, N.J.


Wide Open Spaces
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Review/Music; John Zorn and 'Cobra'
LEAD: Watching John Zorn conduct a performance of his ''Cobra'' at P.S. 122 on Friday evening, one was put in mind of a precocious brat let loose in a room full of fancy sound equipment, with a gang of his friends willing to follow his whims.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Howell  $165,000  490 Windeler Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; deck, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $1,800.
Jackson  $225,000  571 Abbey Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, c/a; taxes $4,000.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa; Scholarship Winner in Iowa Finds That Homelessness Is No Barrier
LEAD: Gerald Winterlin does not mind studying 80 hours a week to maintain his nearly perfect grade point average.
The University of Iowa senior said he works hard because the three years he spent as a homeless person taught him never to quit.


Seniors Tourney Shifts Its Site
LEAD: The Senior Golf Classic will move to a new public golf course here next year, tournament officials announced today.


At Auschwitz, Decency Dies Again
LEAD: It appears that Auschwitz has lost none of its power to derange.
Nobody dies there anymore; but decency still does.


It's Aikman for Dallas
LEAD: Troy Aikman officially became the Dallas Cowboys' starting quarterback, beating out Steve Walsh in the duel of the high-priced rookies.
Aikman, the first player taken in last April's draft, was introduced with the starting offensive unit in the Cowboys' exhibition game with Houston last night.
That was the method that the new coach, Jimmy Johnson, had said he would use to make known his decision on which quarterback would start in Dallas's season-opener at New Orleans next


POSTINGS: Historic Properties; On the Block
LEAD: An auction of eight historic properties - including the only yacht listed in the National Register of Historic Places - will be held later this month at five sites across the country by Kennedy-Wilson Inc. of Santa Monica, Calif.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  RUBBER DUCK RACE


America's Head Count Sets Battle Lines for Congress's Seat Count
LEAD: THE Census Bureau's army of 400,000 census-takers has not yet taken to the country's streets and byways, but there is already talk of a markedly different political geography as a result of the southward and westward drift of the American people.


Lendl Coasts Again
LEAD: Ivan Lendl's holiday weekend started off just the way he had planned on Stadium Court at the National Tennis Center, a spot he finds just as comfortable as his backyard court in Greenwich, Conn.


Towns Seek Limits on Plastic Use
LEAD: AFTER the General Assembly failed to act this year to ban the use of plastic foam food packaging, more than a dozen communities have started to take the matter into their own hands.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


Bush's War on Drugs: Politics, Risks, Hopes
LEAD: On Tuesday, when President Bush uses his first major television address to announce his plan to fight drugs, his timing will seem perfect: opinion polls show that Americans are fed up with the epidemic.
But he is also taking a necessary political risk.
A look at the plan and at what some state officials would like to see.


CALM, COOL AND BELEAGUERED
LEAD: Labels pack a wallop, and when we comply with the ''right-to-life'' or ''pro-life'' labels, Faye Wattleton's adversaries are accorded a public-relations victory.
Despite their carefully selected moniker (suggesting other points of view are ''anti-life''), the ''lifers'' repeatedly demonstrate that their concern for living things begins and ends with embryos.


Muslim Fundamentalists Sentenced in Egypt
LEAD: An Egyptian court convicted 26 Muslim extremists today on charges stemming from attempts to kill two former Cabinet ministers and a journalist.
They were sentenced to prison terms ranging from a year to life.


THINKING MAN'S MINIMALIST: HONORING BARTHELME
LEAD: ''The proper work of the critic is praise, and that which cannot be praised should be surrounded with a tasteful, well-thought-out silence.''


Susan Rose and Joanna Ferrone - Entrepreneurs
LEAD: Since his humble birth on a cocktail napkin in a New York bar four years ago, Fido Dido has grown into an international superstar.
The deceptively simple cartoon character now appears on T-shirts in Manhattan, yo-yos in Australia, lunch boxes in Japan and even television commercials in Europe and Hong


Florida State Is Upset At Finish
LEAD: Brett Favre flipped a 2-yard touchdown pass to Anthony Harris with 23 seconds left in the game today to lead Southern Mississippi to a 30-26 upset victory over Florida State.


Mormons Oust First Indian in the Hierarchy
LEAD: The Mormon Church has excommunicated the only American Indian who ever achieved a leading position in its hierarchy.


Blending the Threads of Labor's Past
LEAD: THE Windham Textile and History Museum, a new museum in the Willimantic section of Windham that celebrates the accomplishments of the working class, re-creates an era when textile mills dotted the Connecticut landscape, before most of them moved South or out of the country.


Megan Walker, Banker, Is Wed
LEAD: Margaret Anne Walker, an assistant vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, and James Garland Rose Jr., a vice president in merchant banking at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, both in New York, were married yesterday in Richmond.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Lewis Sachs performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Wrestling  Gold Medal for Monday: The Olympic champion Ken Monday of the United States beat Arsen Fadzaev of the Soviet Union to win the gold medal in the 74-kilo (163 pounds) category at the world freestyle championships yesterday in Martigny, Switzerland.
Monday, a 27-year-old from Stillwater, Okla., scored a 6-1 points victory over Fadzaev, who moved up a weight category this season after winning world and Olympic titles at 68 kilos (149.5 pounds) in 1987 and 1988.


Ennosuke Rattles Kabuki's Venerable Bones
LEAD: A man is not what he seems.
At first he appears to be a hero's loyal comrade, but actually he is a fox in disguise.
The tension builds on stage as characters unfold their true identities, baring deep psychological truths.
One's friends could be one's enemies, yes, but they can become friends enlisted to fight still other enemies.


Connecticut's Condo Capital Deals With Boom Gone Bust
LEAD: In the long housing boom of the 70's and 80's, this bustling town on Long Island Sound became known as the condominium capital of Connecticut.
More than 3,200 town houses and apartments sprouted in fields and forests and along the rocky shore.


Retraining of New York Auto Workers Urged
LEAD: Workers who lack basic skills and companies that cannot keep up with changing times are hurting New York State's efforts to compete in the lucrative auto parts market, a state report released today concluded.


'No Author Is a Man of Genius to His Publisher'
LEAD: They're a triumvirate: the agent is the person who doesn't call you back; the editor is your friend but he keeps getting shot out from under you; the publisher is a great guy before the book comes out, a cheapskate and a scoundrel after that.
So go the familiar complaints of authors.


Cuban Ex-Official Sentenced in Drug Case
LEAD: A Cuban military court has convicted and sentenced a former Interior Minister to 20 years in prison for abuse of office and other charges related to a Government drug-trafficking scandal, the Cuban press agency reported Friday.


The Bargain in Angola Doesn't Look So Clear Now
LEAD: TWO months ago, before 17 other African leaders, President Eduardo dos Santos of Angola reluctantly extended a hand to the rebel leader Jonas Savimbi after the two arranged a cease-fire in an effort to end their 14-year civil war.
But today, those present differ widely over what the two men had actually agreed on.


4th-Generation Hotelier Faces Challenge of Filling Huge Casino
LEAD: WHEN the billion-dollar Taj Mahal casino hotel opens next year, Mark Grossinger Etess will be the man responsible for filling it with patrons.


A Little Compassion For the Overweight
LEAD: If Karon Cooney really did not appreciate fat jokes and had listened when former fat people told her how unhappy they were while being fat, then she could not advocate the prejudicial treatment of fat individuals she writes of in her essay ''Solutions to the Fat Problem'' (Opinion page, Aug. 6).


Baseball Over 30? Softball Up to 70's
LEAD: I was very much amused at the Aug. 20 article ''Game Remains Young in the Over-30 League.''


Building a Moat With Software
LEAD: GEOFFREY WIENER went to his accountant's office to discuss a tax return.
The accountant, who was scrupulous about the security and the confidentiality of his clients' financial data, kept all the papers in a locked file cabinet.
When he tried to get out Mr.
Wiener's return, the accountant could not get his key to open the lock, and the spare key was at lunch with his secretary.


The 49ers' Standard, With a New Twist
LEAD: Jerry Rice is the epitome of the National Football League player who emerges from a small town and a small school and wonders if he fits with his new team in his new city.
Rice was born in Starkville, Miss., and grew up in nearby Crawford.
He played football at a Division I-AA school, Mississippi Valley


Karin Greene Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Greene Jr., of Zionsville, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karin Goodwin Greene to Peter Gerard McCann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. McCann of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Greene, 28, years old, graduated from Carnegie-Mellon University and owns a graphics design company in New York.


A Shakeout For Software
LEAD: ASK Willard (Pete) Peterson, executive vice president of the Word Perfect Corporation, how and where his company's software is sold and he will probably laugh. ''We try to keep track, sure, but it seems every week we're adding 100 names to our dealer data base, and deleting another 100,'' he said.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Japanese List Hotels as Cheap As $26 a Night


Children at an Exhibition?


George Steiner's Distinctions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Large Sculptures of Pale Presence
LEAD: HAVING inaugurated the new Joseloff Gallery with a show by a Connecticut artist, Milton Avery, the director, Zina Davies, is now offering something more exotic.


Fan Defects
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Putting the Program Back in Program Music
LEAD: In Beethoven's time, the conductor Roger Norrington pointed out during his recent ''Beethoven Experience'' at the Pepsico Summerfare, it was altogether customary for a music critic to ''analyze'' a new piece with repeated reference to subjective content.
That even instrumental music should carry an extramusical meaning - a ''program'' of some sort - seemed perfectly natural.


How the Little Guy Is Playing the Market
LEAD: AS the Dow Jones Industrial Average broke through to record highs last month, Stephen A. Swets, a 38-year-old manager with a Chicago housing firm, switched some of his savings out of a Fidelity Investments bond fund and into one of the firm's stock mutual funds.
Mr.
Swets said he made the switch because he is ''optimistic'' about the current bullish stock market's long-term prospects, but he cautioned, ''This is not the time to be fully invested in stocks.


MODEST, DECENT AND ECCENTRIC
LEAD:  NO TRICKS IN MY POCKET  Paul Newman Directs.
By Stewart Stern.  231 pp.
New York:  Grove Press. $17.95.


New Medicaid Plan To Protect Aged's Assets
LEAD: ELDERLY people will be able to obtain Medicare coverage for health care while also protecting their assets under a new program that will begin in Connecticut.


Julie A. Steinberg Becomes a Bride In Philadelphia
LEAD: Julie Ann Steinberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin E. Steinberg of Merion Station, Pa., and Lieut.
John Batterson Stetson 5th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stetson 4th of Haverford, Pa., were married yesterday at the Hotel Atop the Bellevue in Philadelphia.
The civil ceremony was performed by Judge Judith J.


Announcer Wed To Betsy Knight
LEAD: Elizabeth Spalding Knight, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eliot Spalding Knight of Madison, N.J., and Robert Edgar Blanchard Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Blanchard, also of Madison, were married there yesterday at the Grace Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Robert W. Ihloff performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Coming to Grips With Gaelic
LEAD: THE Gaeltacht, or Irish-speaking district of Ireland, exists as a scattered fringe around the country's perimeter, with small concentrations of native Irish-speakers found only in the most remote areas - in the Dingle Peninsular of Kerry, on the Aran Islands off Galway, and in Donegal, that most northern and distant county of the Irish


Sailboat Tradition Emerges
LEAD: The competitive edge in traditional sailboat racing is surfacing on Long Island Sound next week with a world championship for one of yachting's oldest classes, the 33-foot International One-Design.


Fryar Finally Signs
LEAD: AFTER weeks of tumultuous negotiations, Irving Fryar has agreed to a new contract with the New England Patriots.
The five-year contract reportedly calls for Fryar to earn $4.2 million in base salary and a potential $2.5 million in incentives.
The wide receiver is expected to begin practice tomorrow.


Ms. Zimmerman Plans to Marry Geoffrey Chazen
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin David Zimmerman of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jamie Rachel Zimmerman, 29 years old, to Dr.
Geoffrey David Chazen, 31, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eric Chazen of Nashville.
A November wedding is planned.


CAMPUS LIFE: Kansas; Campus Cafeterias Won't Be Using Plastic Foam Cups
LEAD: After eight months of meetings and 2,600 signatures on petitions, the University of Kansas has decided to ban plastic-foam products on campus.


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Yes.
With conditions: if he apologizes publicly and if he performs public service to the youth of our nation for a specified period.
BERNARD FREEMAN  New York


All Nannies Want Is a Little Respect
LEAD: IT'S like the Rodney Dangerfield routine of not getting enough respect, but Merryl Woodard, a nanny, does not find the situation funny.
The lack of respect by employers for nannies is so prevalent, she says, that ''it's often a thrill to be considered an equal human being.'' As a result, Ms.
Woodard decided to write a guidebook on the subject, ''Handbook for Attracting and Holding the Right Nanny.


About Men; Growing Pains
LEAD: EVERY EVENING I visit the young groves of spruce, pine, cedar and fir I've planted on my land.
Occasionally I talk to them.
Four years ago, after a doctor erroneously diagnosed me as suffering from kidney disease, I told the trees, in maudlin panic, ''I want to live long enough to see you grow tall.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: Chess spectators want incompatible things, so it is no surprise that they are often disappointed.
They want to see the world's top players in action and they also want the games to be full of action.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: The advertisement usually includes lighting with a pink glow effect, fresh flowers and either the presence of an attractive male or some clue that he's nearby waiting.
But the focus is on the woman, a glamorous creature in a gossamer nightgown, with or without matching negligee.


Public TV Juggles A Hot Potato
LEAD: By its treatment this week of a much-disputed documentary, public broadcasting finds itself grappling once again with its basic obligations.
How can it serve as a forum for all manner of opinions, including those that are bound to irritate many viewers, yet retain its financial support?
How can it open its schedule to independent documentary makers, yet take care that controversial issues are treated fairly?


In Search of Values
LEAD: To the Editor:


Calamitous Flier
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: 71 Low-Income Units; Doing Rehabs
LEAD: A Brooklyn community group that has been renovating abandoned and dilapidated buildings in the Williamsburg section is to open three rehabilitated apartment houses near the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway at 10:30 A.M.
Friday in a ceremony at 344 Rodney Street.
The Rodney Street building and two nearby buildings, at 334 South Third Street and 778 Driggs Avenue, have been redeveloped into a total of 71 apartments: eight three-bedrooms, 44 two-bedrooms, 13 one-bedrooms and six studios.


Getting a Garage Ready for Winter
LEAD: BY the end of summer, most garages desperately need cleaning and reorganizing to put them in shape for the winter.


Spring Wedding For Nan Gaines
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Gaines of New York have made known the engagement of their daughter, Nan Gaines, and Robert D. Foster.
The future bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Foster of North Woodmere, L.I.
The couple plan a spring wedding.


Nigel Atkinson - Textile Designer
LEAD: Nigel Atkinson always liked fabric. ''When I was small I liked looking in my mother's wardrobe and seeing all the fabrics hanging down, particularly the paisleys,'' he recalled.


Making the Most Of Parkland In an Era of Limits
LEAD: A DECADE ago, Westchester's five public golf courses were losing $360,000 a year, not including another $100,000 in equipment costs.
Players who had to tee off from rubber mats and suffer rough fairways were hardly pushing past each other to get onto the greens.


An 'As You Like It' That's Full of Brio
LEAD: SO rarely does the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival come up with something snappy that when it does, a mere departure, under a new director, can be misconstrued as a real event.


How Fighting Global Warming Could Be Painless and Profitable
LEAD: UNWELCOME as it is, the prevailing view of energy and climate experts who fear a catastrophic warming of the globe is that Americans must make drastic sacrifices in their comfortable way of life.
Already, Angelenos are on the cutting edge of this brave new world without leaf blowers and drive-through burger stands, facing new controls on everyday life just to clean up the breathing air, never mind the stratosphere.


Innovative State Program Offers AIDS Treatment at Home
LEAD: A HOSPITAL intravenous feeding stand serves as a coat rack in the home of 40-year-old Richard, a former roofer who has been on living on disability insurance payments since a doctor told him two years ago that he had ARC, or AIDS-related complex.


Miss Fargiorgio Marries Lawyer
LEAD: Antonella Giovanna Fargiorgio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guido Fargiorgio of Cranston, R.I., was married there yesterday to John Michael Jemail, the son of Sybille von H.-F.
Jemail of Cincinnati and Emil Eugene Jemail of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Mario Ongaro performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic


Mrs. Helmsley's Defense
LEAD: After a trial for criminal tax fraud lasting two months, Leona Helmsley, whose hotel and real estate holdings are worth $5 billion, was convicted on 33 counts of tax evasion.
She was acquitted of the more serious charge of extorting kickbacks from contractors and suppliers.
Sentencing is expected Nov.


Bridal Planned By Miss Solano
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Solano of Eastchester, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Antoniette Solano to Jeffrey Paul Weiner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Weiner of Eastchester and Boca Raton, Fla.
The wedding is planned for later this month.


Mr. Nickerson Wins Boojum
LEAD: Mr.
Nickerson claimed temporary leadership of New York's sprinters by surviving an early speed duel and then drawing away through the stretch to post a 2 1/4-length victory over Sewickley in the $113,000 Boojum Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: I would understand all the fuss if Pete Rose had bet against his own team.
But he was betting on his team.
Is that so wrong?


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Armonk, N.Y.  $370,000  37 Evergreen Row  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old raised ranch; family room w/ fireplace, patio, 2-car garage, 1.4 acres; taxes $3,968.
Chappaqua, N.Y.  $535,000  70 Annandale Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; 3 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1.5 acres; taxes $9,684.


On Language; Haunted Words
LEAD: ETYMOLOGY - THE study of the origin and development of words, affixes and phrases - is populated by all manner of ghoulies and ghosties and long-leggety beasties.
Spook etymologists would rather invent a dramatic word origin than trace a word to its source, and it was such fanciful etymologizing that fired Mark Twain to pen his satirical derivation of Middletown from Moses: by ''dropping the -oses and adding the -iddletown.


Overcrowding at a Jail Leads To a Prison Without Bars
LEAD: A SLOPPY dirt track behind the Secaucus Prison Annex on County Road Extension here is the twisted path that leads to the newest correctional site in the state.
The encampment is called Tent City 161 by the Department of Corrections, although it has also been dubbed Camp Humphreys after the Superior


Keeping It Simple and Fresh
LEAD: MY mother once said that living with a small child was like having a permanently drunk houseguest.
Never did this ring more true than one weekend recently when I tried to cook dinner for eight adults in the company of six children confined indoors because of rain.
Just as I was trying to sort out last-minute details, one child wanted spaghetti with butter - and not in a bowl but on a plate like a grownup; another was turning over his carefully strained chicken and mashed potatoes on his head and a third needed a bottle of milk warmed immediately.


Lilco Cheered For Ending Hunt
LEAD: In response to your article on Lilco annulling the fox hunt (Aug. 13), I find it appalling that this kind of activity still goes on in this day and age.


Review/Jazz; New Orleans Sound: the Dirty Dozen Brass Band
LEAD: Brass-band music used to be a singular strain of New Orleans's cultural heritage.
It was defined by its free-wheeling polyphony, its repertory of dirges and stomps and its appearance primarily at parades and funerals.
The Dirty Dozen Brass Band, appearing through today at the Blue Note (131 West Third


CAMPUS LIFE: Skidmore; New Dorm Option: Floor That Shuns All 'Substances'
LEAD: Students of Skidmore College have a new dormitory option -living on a ''substance free'' floor -and the initial response indicates that the floor will be crowded for some time to come.


THE FOLLY AND THE SQUALOR
LEAD:  HOW WAR CAME  The Immediate Origins of the  Second World War, 1938-1939.
By Donald Cameron Watt.
Illustrated. 736 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books. $29.95.


Tiran Nersoyan, An Archbishop, Scholar and Author, Is Dead at 85
LEAD: Archbishop Tiran Nersoyan, a former Primate of the Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Church of America, died of cancer early Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in New York City.


SHAKING THINGS UP AT CHICAGO
LEAD:  UNSEASONABLE TRUTHS  The Life of Robert Maynard Hutchins.
By Harry S. Ashmore.
Illustrated. 616 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $27.50.


34 Incumbents on Council Running, Two-Thirds Unopposed in Primaries
LEAD: All but one of the 35 members of the New York City Council are running for re-election, and most are favored to win, although there are almost a dozen contests in the Democratic primary.


A French Presence in Lebanon, A Lebanese Presence in France
LEAD: FOR months, French television viewers have watched scenes of Lebanese cowering in basements, bleeding in hospitals or lying dead amid the ruins of East Beirut under the firepower of Syrian and Muslim militias.
Even though the victims are not French, the intensity of French news coverage of the civil war resembles the American obsession a decade ago with the Iranian takeover of the United States Embassy in


Triathlon Report Had Missteps
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Fair judges use precedent.
Commissioner Pete Rozelle of the National Football League suspended two players, Paul Hornung and Alex Karras, for one year for placing bets on their own teams and other N.F.L. games.
Not only did they return to the N.F.L., but Hornung has also been inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame and Karras remains a candidate.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Opening to the outside world does not necessarily mean seeking knowledge from only a few Western countries.''
- He Dongchang,
China's Vice Minister
of Education.  [ 1:3. ]


PUBLIC ENEMY No. 1 What the Plan Would Aim to Do
LEAD: HERE are the main elements in the drug package that President Bush is scheduled to present Tuesday night:  Enforcement


NEW SCHOOL TERM IN CHICAGO PUTS PARENTS IN SEAT OF POWER
LEAD: With the start of the new school year, Chicago will begin what education experts say is the most radical attempt in this country to revamp a big-city school system by shifting power almost overnight from downtown bureaucrats to parents and community people at each of the city's 600 schools.


Amey Flavin to Wed Charles Simonds
LEAD: Amey Flavin and Charles McMichael Kirkland Simonds, both 28 years old and both 1983 graduates of Ithaca College, are planning to marry later this month, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
David Edmund Flavin of New Canaan, Conn., have announced.
Mr.
Simonds is a son of Mrs.
Eric P. Swenson of Weston, Conn., and Peter K.


Fewer Hooks, Straighter Rolls And a Passel of Perfect Scores
LEAD: With little equipment needed and the cost of playing one game as low as 50 cents, bowling is certainly an inexpensive form of entertainment.


Miss Schlossman, Master's Candidate, To Wed Douglas Firtel, Law Student
LEAD: The engagement of Wendy Anne Schlossman and Douglas Nelson Firtel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton C. Firtel of Cheshire, Conn., and Boca Raton, Fla., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph Schlossman of Jamaica Estates, Queens, and Southampton, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


POSTINGS: Bulova Factory Conversion; Watch Out! New Rentals for Woodside
LEAD: A factory in Woodside, Queens, once used by the Bulova Watch Corporation, is being remodeled for commercial and residential uses.
The three-story structure at 61-20 Woodside Avenue near the Long Island Rail Road station, is being converted into 72 apartments plus 7,800 square feet of retail space and 8,200 square feet of medical office space on the ground floor.


Wrona's Homer Powers Cubs, 10-3
LEAD: Rick Wrona's three-run homer capped a six-run first inning and Greg Maddux posted his 16th victory as the Chicago Cubs defeated the Atlanta Braves, 10-3, tonight.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Aug. 19  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City  $237,100  200 Rector Place  (Liberty Court)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 633-sq.-ft. condo in a 2-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, marble bath, terrace, health club and pool; common charge $372, 100% tax-abated (Broker: D.


A Seismic Shock for Education
LEAD: The annual Gallup education poll sponsored by the professional educational fraternity Phi Delta Kappa often yields startling results.


The Commissioner Who Went One for One
LEAD: In the course of explaining his decision on Pete Rose, A. Bartlett Giamatti permitted himself a digression that showed what kind of commissioner he might have been in the long run.


Correction
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on Aug. 13 about Donald Trump and a proposed new baseball league gave an incorrect name for the stadium in which the Buffalo Bisons play.
It is Pilot Field, not Rich Stadium.


Outdoors; If You're Casting About for a Good Read
LEAD: Fly fishermen who focus on trout are prone to regard all other forms of angling with disdain, and those who favor the dry, or floating, fly believe that theirs is the purest endeavor of all.


George McGovern Elects Innkeeper
LEAD: IN the freshly renovated lobby of the Stratford Inn, the proprietor offered visitors coffee, pastries and a handshake. ''Hope you're enjoying your stay,'' he said in a familiar reedy voice to one couple who watched in awe as their host, the 1972 Democratic nominee for President, filled his cup with orange juice.


NIAGARA MOHAWK AND STATE IN PACT
LEAD: In an effort to bring about some political and financial stability, the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation has signed an agreement with New York State officials to freeze its electric rates, cut the salaries of its top management and suspend dividend payments to holders of common stock.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Refugee Riot in Hong Kong


Zoo Presses to Save Its Pandas' Fragile Cub
LEAD: The cub born to Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing, the National Zoo's giant pandas, is in critical condition with a bacterial infection believed passed on from its mother, a spokesman for the zoo said today.


Jewish Reaction to Glemp Comments Is Mixed
LEAD: American Jewish leaders had reactions ranging from shock to guarded optimism yesterday over the Polish Primate's call to renegotiate a 1987 agreement to move a Catholic convent from the site of the Auschwitz concentration camp.


POSTINGS: Preservation an Issue; Opponents Fight Hartford Plan
LEAD: A plan by a Canadian land development company for a $320 million project on the site of two historic buildings in Hartford faces an uncertain future as a result of opposition by preservation groups.


Early Music Is as Old As Today
LEAD: Periodically I have complained in this space of my inability to detect much expressive content in many of the ''original-instrument'' performances now being offered by early-music specialists.
In concentrating so heavily on trying to re-create the sounds and textures of the past, our 20th-century crusaders easily lose sight of the larger purposes music is supposed to serve.


Amusement Along the Way


The Infant-Formula Debate Strikes Home
LEAD: AFTER a seven-year boycott ending in 1984, Nestle S.A., the world's largest producer of infant formula, agreed to scale back an aggressive marketing campaign that many health professionals said was encouraging women in the third world to give up breast-feeding.
Now the issue is resurfacing, this time in the United


West Virginia Rolls, 35-10
LEAD: Garrett Ford, a sophomore running back who was redshirted last season, gained 127 yards on 16 carries and scored two touchdowns today as the West Virginia Mountaineers defeated Ball State, 35-10, in the opening game for both teams.


Ann Kelly Weds Bernard Brennan
LEAD: Ann Kelly of Kinderhook, N.Y., and Bernard T. Brennan of Kinderhook and Delray, Fla., were married yesterday at St.
John the Baptist Roman Catholic Church in Valatie, N.Y., by the Rev.
John Caldara.


Updating Futures
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nina Sanguily to Marry
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Manuel Sanguily of Scarborough, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Magdalen Sanguily, 28 years old, to Robert John Weireter, 30, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Weireter of Crestwood, N.Y.
Miss Sanguily, who is known as Nina, graduated from West Chester (Pa.) State University and is a representative for Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme Pharmaceuticals in Rahway, N.J.


The Pros and Cons of Keeping Up a Lawn
LEAD: ''In the Natural State'' (Aug. 6) is the second article I've read about lawns; the other asked, ''Why mow?'' Both of them were silly space-fillers.


Four More Ways to Say It
LEAD:  LEARNING to speak a foreign language abroad first requires a bit of patient comparison shopping in the United States.
The best places to start are national tourist offices and travel agencies.
Both usually have up-to-date brochures.
Most important, they can provide feedback from satisfied and dissatisfied customers.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Eastport, Me.; Waterfront Renovations
LEAD: A 102-YEAR-OLD three-story building that originally housed a candy store has found new life on this city's waterfront, where half the buildings have been or are being renovated.


MISUSE OF THE I.R.S.: THE ABUSE OF POWER
LEAD: PETER K. BROS - CHIEF OF THE RULINGS section No. 2, exempt organization technical branch of the Internal Revenue Service, in Washington - was responding to an application for tax-exempt status.
Some months earlier, the Minnesota Association for the Improvement of Science Education had applied for such status, including in its statement of purpose the desire to encourage the continued ''teaching of evolution in the public schools as the only recognized scientific theory of the origin of life on earth.


Professor Slain; Student Held
LEAD: A professor at the University of Florida's School of Medicine was shot to death Friday, and the police charged one of his students with the slaying.
The body of the victim, Arthur Kimura, a 41-year-old associate professor of pathology, was found in his home soon after deputies had received a call that a burglar alarm had gone off there.


Krutov Talks Gain
LEAD: Soviet hockey authorities have given the Vancouver Canucks permission to negotiate with Vladimir Krutov, a star Soviet forward.
The Canucks have already signed Igor Larionov, Krutov's former linemate.


A Week On the Beat Of the Dollar
LEAD: THE dealing room at Chase Manhattan Bank is open and noisy.
As I began my first day as a trader, I quickly discovered that when the dollar is moving rapidly, the rhythm in the room echoes the movement in the market.
But it took precious time to learn the beat.


Pamela A. Block Planning to Wed
LEAD: October wedding plans have been announced by Dorothy Block of Boca Raton, Fla., for her daughter, Pamela Anne Block, and John Bentley Works, a son of Edwin M. Works of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Barbara L. Works.


Ms. Spakevicius Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Danguole J. Spakevicius, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius Spakevicius of Westwood, Mass., and William Carl Altman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Altman of New Ulm, Tex., took place yesterday at St.
Paul Roman Catholic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
William Wolkovich officiated.


Cambodia Has Exhausted Every Step Short of War
LEAD: A MONTH of peace talks on Cambodia ended in failure last week with the warring factions seeming intent on going back to the battlefield to settle matters there.
Diplomats struggled to put the best face on the negotiations by saying they would reconvene the talks in a few months, but no one expects that to happen until the


NONFICTION
LEAD: SERENITY: A Boxing Memoir.
By Ralph Wiley. (Holt, $22.50.) To Ralph Wiley, prizefighters gain an inner peace by understanding ''the futilities of worry and strife.'' Maybe that is ''because they face down life and death or because the sense to worry has been knocked clean out of their heads.'' Mr.


Christmas Is Just a Few Choir Rehearsals Away
LEAD: IT may seem a bit premature to worry about Christmas music, but for those interested in taking part in singing the seasonal fare, now is the time to do something about it.
The county's avocational choirs are preparing for action and almost all of them are ready to welcome new members.


Istria
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with great interest ''Slavic with Italian Accent'' (Travel, July 2).
I was surprised that the article didn't mention the Croatian history of Istria and saddened that, by contrast, most of the references were about the similarities of Istria and Italy.


Giamatti Died From Heart Attack And Autopsy Shows Prior Attack
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti, the commissioner of baseball and a former Yale University president, died of a heart attack and suffered a previous heart attack ''in the remote past,'' the medical examiner who conducted an autopsy on Dr.
Giamatti said yesterday.


House Panel Warns Howard U. About Spending
LEAD: Howard University, whose reputation as one of the nation's premier black educational institutions is attributable in good part to heavy Federal financial support, has been warned by Congress to reduce its dependence on Government money and to spend more wisely.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  CELEBRITY LECTURE


British Soldiers Wounded By Gunman in West Germany
LEAD: Assailants in a car shot and seriously wounded two British soldiers at a military housing area, the police said today.
The Irish Republican Army asserted that it was responsible for the attack.


All Aglitter: Tennis's Top Stars And French Glass
LEAD: A trio of parties before this Labor Day weekend hinted at the explosion of social events that will follow.
Monday evening's Tennis Ball and awards ceremony honored leading players in the United States Open, now under way at the National Tennis Center in Flushing, Queens.
The evening in the ballroom of the Plaza was sponsored by the Women's International Tennis Association for the benefit of the March of Dimes Birth Defect


Reducing the Labor Shortage
LEAD: AMERICA'S economy and certainly New Jersey's economy are built on the foundation of a quality work force.
That's why a severe and growing shortage of qualified workers threatens New Jersey's continued economic growth.


Action by Chase Kills Plan for Hispanic Bank
LEAD: A two-year effort by former Congressman Herman Badillo and others to create a bank mainly for New York City's Hispanic community collapsed Friday when Chase Manhattan Bank pulled out of the deal in which it was to sell the enterprise seven of its branches.


Drug Ring Bombs Newspaper in Bogota
LEAD: Colombia's narcotics traffickers brought the drug war to the capital today with a bomb that heavily damaged the offices of a leading newspaper, shattering windows and ripping off roofs of buildings in a two-block radius.


Plusses and Minuses for Jets
LEAD: This weekend was good, mostly, for the Jets.
Last weekend wasn't so good.
And next week, when it really counts?
The Jets' exhibition season ended with a 2-2 record, a so-so mark indicating perfectly that sometimes they were good, sometimes they weren't, and that they could have troublesome times ahead.


All Nannies Want Is a Little Respect
LEAD: IT'S like the Rodney Dangerfield routine of not getting enough respect, but Merryl Woodard, a nanny, does not find the situation funny.
The lack of respect by employers for nannies is so prevalent, she says, that ''it's often a thrill to be considered an equal human being.'' As a result, Ms.
Woodard decided to write a guidebook on the subject, ''Handbook for Attracting and Holding the Right Nanny.


My Son Is Better Off Learning At Home
LEAD: MY 7-year-old son quit school last year.


Miss Foster Wed To Mark Brooks
LEAD: Susan Kent Foster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Foster of Bronxville, N.Y., and Mark William Brooks, a son of Phyllis A. Brooks of Brewster, N.Y., and the late Robert W. Brooks, were married yesterday at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The Rev.
Carter Via performed the ceremony.


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: When the 29th Bermuda Bowl begins next weekend in Perth, Australia, there will be 10 teams in contention.
Two of them, United States and Poland, as the number one teams in the two biggest zones, will be exempt until the semifinal stage.
The other eight, Canada, France, Egypt, Taiwan, Colombia, Brazil, Australia and New


DATA UPDATE: September 3, 1989
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
July 89
July 88
Change
New York
189.1
162.8
+16%
New Jersey
209.8
352.0
-40%
Connecticut
116.5
175.3
-34%
(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Masterpieces Caught Between Two Wars
LEAD: Anniversaries are a funny business.
Sacred to some, they mean nothing whatever to others.
Four weeks ago, I went around telling people that Aug. 4, 1989, was the 75th anniversary of the outbreak of World War I. They yawned.
Having learned my lesson, I should have hesitated to tell them that today, Sept.


How New Yorkers Wait
LEAD: To the Editor:


The World Has Never Been Quite The Same
LEAD: THE DAY ON WHICH Western Europe took the final step into the most disastrous war in history was a fine one in London.
The sun was bright and warm on Sept. 3, 1939, and the sky that Sunday morning was cloudless.
But the news from Poland was bad.
As I ate my eggs and bacon, I read that German panzers were knifing through the Polish defenses.


Little League Team That Could Fills a Town With Heroes
LEAD: BEFORE he managed a game this summer, before he ordered a player to bunt and long before his players celebrated their final victory by shaving off his hair, Tom Galla of the Trumbull National Little League All Stars was thinking about winning the Little League World Series.


TALKING: Sales Pitches; Looking Behind The Deals
LEAD: ANYONE in the market for a new house or condominium, or one that has been converted from a rental, is probably being showered with a panoply of incentives as a result of the weakened marketplace.


Profitable Year For the Pirates
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates say they will turn a modest profit this season even though the team is winning fewer games and drawing fewer fans.


'Spices' Burns With the Spirit of Rebellion
LEAD: ''Chili is a fascinating image in terms of Indian ideas,'' says Ketan Mehta, the director of ''Spices,'' which opens on Wednesday at Cinema Third Avenue. ''It signifies sexuality; it signifies violence; it signifies fertility; it signifies revolt.'' Chilies play a central role in the film, which takes place in an isolated village in colonial India, where Sonbai, a comely spice factory worker, becomes the object of a subedar's (or feudal overlord's) amorous attentions.


'Eureeka's Castle': New Niche for Preschoolers
LEAD: ''Eureeka's Castle,'' the first nationally distributed series designed for preschoolers since ''Sesame Street'' appeared on public television in 1969, makes its debut tomorrow, Labor Day, the workers' holiday.
As it happens, the target audience is those children who are in day care most weekdays precisely because their parents are at work.


Six Firefighters Are Injured In a House Fire in Brooklyn
LEAD: Six firefighters were injured yesterday in a blaze that gutted a home in the Kensington section of Brooklyn, the Fire Department said.


Martha Homma Is Married
LEAD: Martha Jean Homma, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Homma Jr. of Great Notch, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Edward Whiteley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilfred E. Whiteley Jr. of Wyckoff, N.J.
The Rev.
Edwin C. Bockstiegel performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Upper Montclair, N.J.


Nurses Pulled Off Shifts After Licenses Expire
LEAD: Hundreds of nurses employed by municipal hospitals in New York City were pulled off their shifts this weekend because they had failed to renew their professional licenses.


Deborah Ellen McAlister Is Engaged To Wed Christopher Jones in Autumn
LEAD: The engagement of Deborah Ellen McAlister to Christopher M. V. Jones, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Gareth Jones of Cambridge, England, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mrs.
Andrew C. Hilton of New York and Weston, Conn., and Dr.
Edward Hays McAlister of Rochester.
A November wedding is planned.


Festival's Fun Is a Test of Brawn
LEAD: FRASIER PEHMOELLER showed how to toss the 100-pound, 13-foot-long tree trunk. ''You cup your hands,'' he said. ''You don't need to run.
Just take a nice walk.
When you're ready, let it go.''


Stars, Slurp And Substance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Copy Editor Wed To Miss Hagerty
LEAD: Kathleen Marion Hagerty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Hagerty of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Lawrence Wilson, a son of Col.
William Lawrence Wilson, U.S.A., and Mrs.
Wilson of West Point, N.Y.
Msgr.
Harry J. Byrne performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of SS.


Giants Take a Step Backward
LEAD: The Giants, who had seemed to be making so much progress, regressed tonight in their final preseason game.


Dr. Eric Hochberg Weds Ms. Berman
LEAD: The wedding of Amy Beth Berman, an assistant vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York, and Dr.
Eric Mitchell Hochberg, a chief urology resident at Mount Sinai Medical Center, took place last evening at Terrace on the Park in Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Ezra Finckelstein officiated.


Why Certain Performers Are a Breed Apart
LEAD: Thom Fogarty walked across Lincoln Center Plaza one recent afternoon and took his place behind a battered clothes rack, playing portly dresser to other dancers.
The piece was ''The Angle of Ascent,'' created by Tamar Rogoff and Anthony Tsirantonakis.
Before it was finished, Mr.
Fogarty had served as neatener of the universe, straightener of costumes and comforter of the troubled.


Non-Superpowers Are Developing Their Own Spy Satellite Systems
LEAD: A growing number of nations are building spy satellites or advocating such action, threatening to end the East-West monopoly on espionage from outer space.


Labor as Management: The Airline Unions Adopt Bold Takeover Strategies
LEAD: After years of granting concessions to management, the labor movement in the airline industry is shedding its defensive posture and showing new resourcefulness in protecting its interests.


LIFE STYLE: Some Greet Fall With Sweaters; Some With Elbows; In Cambridge, Thoughts Turn to Woolens
LEAD: As summer heads toward fall and students exchange shorts and T-shirts for tweed jackets and sweat suits, the city of Cambridge is preparing for the annual onslaught of new students and back-to-schoolers.


Stephen Burrows: Sportswear Designer
LEAD: Stephen Burrows has leapt back into the fashion world after a seven-year sabbatical with new ideas and up-to-date versions of his signature sportswear.


Susan Kelty to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Kelty of Bronxville, N.Y., and Shelter Harbor, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Ellen Kelty, to Charles Blair Law Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Blair Law of Lyons Falls, N.Y.
Ms.
Kelty, an associate at the New York law firm of Brown &amp; Wood, graduated from the Bronxville School, the University of Virginia and St.


Redeveloping the Redevelopment of Times Square
LEAD: FOR more than 20 years, business and government officials have talked about ''doing something'' with Times Square.
Once a bright, clean entertainment district that attracted tourists and New Yorkers alike, the area is still bright and still attracts tourists and theater-going New Yorkers, but is overrun by pornography, drugs, sleaze and crime.


HE WALKS ALONE
LEAD:  THE AFTERNOON OF A WRITER  By Peter Handke.
Translated By Ralph Manheim.  86 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tennessee; New Course Offers 'Balanced' Debate On Abortion Issue
LEAD: While the subject of abortion has often been addressed in college courses, the University of Tennessee has made the controversial issue into a three-credit course of its own that is being offered this fall.
It is called ''Abortion: Moral Dilemma and Legal Debate.''


NO FAITH IN TRUST OR TREATIES
LEAD:  WARRIOR  The Autobiography of Ariel Sharon.
By Ariel Sharon with David Chanoff.
Illustrated. 571 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


Potential Milestones
LEAD:  Steve Largent, Seahawks, needs 2 touchdown receptions to tie Don Hutson's record of 99.
Eric Dickerson, Colts, could become the first player in N.F.L. history to gain 1,000 rushing yards in seven consecutive seasons.
He, Franco Harris and Walter Payton each had six consecutive 1,000-yard seasons.


Tax Tinkering Won't Help the Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Christian Commander in Beirut Assails U.S. Policy
LEAD: As his forces fought artillery battles with Muslim opponents, the Christian military commander accused the United States today of collusion with Syria to keep Lebanon divided.


Keeping It Simple and Fresh
LEAD: MY mother once said that living with a small child was like having a permanently drunk houseguest.
Never did this ring more true than one weekend recently when I tried to cook dinner for eight adults in the company of six children confined indoors because of rain.
Just as I was trying to sort out last-minute details, one child wanted spaghetti with butter - and not in a bowl but on a plate like a grownup; another was turning over his carefully strained chicken and mashed potatoes on his head and a third needed a bottle of milk warmed immediately.


Opera Orchestra Series To Be Carried on Radio
LEAD: The three 1988-89 performances of the Opera Orchestra of New York will be broadcast on WNYC-FM (94.7) on three consecutive Sundays, starting today, at 7 P.M.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Numismatics column on Aug. 6 misidentified the statue in Grand Army Plaza in Manhattan and misstated the plaza's location.
The statue is of Gen.
William Tecumseh Sherman, and the plaza is at Fifth Avenue and 59th Street.
The column also misstated the site of Augustus Saint-Gaudens's home in 1907.


3 Running to Succeed Leland
LEAD: Three men have announced their candidacies for the seat of the late Representative Mickey Leland, who was killed in a plane crash on a relief mission to Ethiopia last month.
They are Anthony Hall, a Houston City Councilman; State Senator Craig Washington, and State Representative Al Edwards.
A fourth candidate, City Councilman Rodney Ellis, has not announced his plans, but Mr.


Julie Weiss Is Married
LEAD: Julie Sara Weiss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Weiss of Waban, Mass., was married last evening to Michael William Levine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Levine of Roslyn, L.I.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Alvin I. Lieberman at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston.
Mrs.
Levine is a freelance legal interpreter in Spanish in Lawrence, Mass.


Huntington Weighing Future Role for Farm
LEAD: THE most-recent proposal for developing Froehlich Farm, one of the few large parcels of open space in Huntington, reaches the public hearing stage Wednesday evening at Town Hall.


Sunset on Another Season at the Beach, My Second Home
LEAD: AS the sun settles below the horizon, the sky over the ocean becomes rich with hues of purple and orange that are reflected in the slowly moving water.
Flocks of gulls and other marine birds skim the surface of the water, diving lazily into the waves in search of their evening meal.


What Am I Doing at Home?
LEAD: AS September rolls around, I realize that I will not be returning to school.
As a recent college graduate I must accept the responsibilities of the real world.
I will find a job, buy a car and live, once again, with my parents.


ISRAELI ARMY SAYS IT KILLED 2 GUNMEN
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and killed two Palestinians who fired on the soldiers with automatic weapons today in the West Bank city of Nablus, the army said.
It was one of the few such gun battles since the Palestinian uprising began.


Lesson in the Baltics: Gorbachev's Tolerance Only Goes So Far
LEAD: A NEW debate between Congress and the Bush Administration over whether to impose additional sanctions on the Chinese Government is ready to bubble to the surface.
When Congress reconvenes this week, the Senate and House are scheduled to try to work out a package of sanctions for presentation to the


Court Decides Who's on the Primary Ballot
LEAD: Less than two weeks before the Sept. 12 primary, the State Court of Appeals last week affirmed the removal of a Brooklyn City Councilman from the ballot, reinstated another Councilman, left a Liberal Party candidate for Civil Court judge unopposed in Manhattan and insured a three-way race for Brooklyn district attorney.


Boy Is Mauled to Death by Family Leopard
LEAD: A 16-month-old boy strapped into a car seat was mauled to death Friday by a 200-pound leopard that escaped from its cage at the family's farm, the authorities said.


Top New Designs Share an Old Trait - Simplicity
LEAD: In an earlier era, industrial designers would have been known as inventors, creating ingenious products that brought greater benefits to all.
It is no accident that Thomas Edison's sleekly curvaceous light bulb, with its filament aglow, became the universal symbol for a bright new idea.
An idea, or conception in the mind, is a kind of gift given to designers and inventors in any field, which is then followed up by laborious proofs to show that the thing can work.


Once-Feared, Albany Ethics Law Leaves Mainly Annoyance
LEAD: Eight months after New York State's sweeping new government ethics law took effect, both critics and supporters of the measure say it has had only a marginal impact on the way state government works.


Q and A
LEAD:  Party Wall


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:  CLASSICAL  Eisler: Lieder  Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, baritone; Aribert Reimann, piano.
Teldec 8.44092; CD only.
Unexpectedly good stuff here, at least for those of us who haven't previously taken Eisler for a subtle song composer.
The songs were composed between 1939 and 1956; the texts are from Pascal, Anacreon, Shakespeare and others but mostly from Brecht; the idiom varies (sometimes erratically) from something related to the cabaret to 12-tone density.


The Statistics Lean to the Positive
LEAD: The economy grew at a 2.7 percent annual rate in the second quarter, the Government said, revising an earlier estimate of 1.7 percent.
That and other positive reports last week helped further cool the early-summer speculation about an economic downturn.
For example, sales of new homes were up 14.4 percent in July, reaching their highest level since December 1986.


Paul Bowles's Ennui
LEAD: To the Editor:


STREETSCAPES: Variety Photo Plays Theater; Marquee's Lights Are Dark on 1914 'Nickelodeon'
LEAD: IT'S hard to put your finger on what was special about it.
Perhaps it was the aura of the early days of the movies, but the 1914 Variety Photo Plays Theater at 110 Third Avenue was unforgettable when it was in operation.


Flames From Ashes
LEAD: The ugly issue of the Carmelite convent at Auschwitz has flamed into an international disgrace, and just in the midst of the 50th anniversary of the Nazi invasion of Poland, starting World War II.


Movie Biography Mustn't Tamper With Pop Icons
LEAD: There is almost no excuse for ''Wired,'' a film so devastatingly dull that it seems longer than John Belushi's whole career.
But it does have imagination, of a very misguided sort.
Though ''Wired'' is based on Bob Woodward's blunt book - which includes a look at Belushi's rise to fame and much detail about his fall into the squalid drug addiction that killed him - the fancied-up film places Belushi's character in a ludicrous fantasy.


'America Is Still a Primative'
LEAD: SECRETARY of Transportation Samuel K. Skinner recently launched an ambitious program to develop a well-articulated national transportation policy.
His effort will be appraised in no small measure by his ability to find the right role for high-speed rail in some of the nation's saturated corridors.


Orange Juice, Not Cocaine
LEAD: In a good year, a Bolivian farmer may net about $1,500 from the coca leaves he can grow on a hectare of land.
Or, these days, he can tear out the coca plants and collect $2,000 per hectare from the Bolivian Government.
That sounds like a good deal - but not many farmers consider it good enough.
The reasons are worth pondering as the Bush


There's No Way to Outwit Geese
LEAD: A COMMON topic of conversation this summer - right up there with Lyme disease and the tax increase - has been the recent explosion in the population of Canada geese.
It seems that no matter where you go lately, you are going to come across geese or people talking about geese.


PERSPECTIVES: The MAC Rentals; Refocusing Assisted Housing Programs
LEAD: THE scene at the construction site for the Queenswood apartments in the Corona section of Queens these last few weeks could not have failed to mesmerize onlookers.
Huge cranes, bobbing and nodding like steel giraffes, raised and fitted whole walls and floors of two eight-story buildings into place.


WHAT A CHILD IS GIVEN
LEAD: ON THE AUGUST MORNING IN 1971 when Marietta Spencer first met the birth family of her adopted son, Paul, she was prepared to be nervous.
In the four years that she had worked as a social worker for the Children's Home Society of Minnesota, in St.
Paul, Spencer had arranged and guided many such meetings.


Whose Security?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rodeos
LEAD: To the Editor: In Sister Jane Patricia's letter (Travel, July 23), her lack of knowledge about rodeos was obvious.
She speaks of cruelty and cited a picture of the bull rider (Travel, June 18).
The flank strap, which she calls a ''tight belt'' that ''pains him so,'' is only a mild irritation that encourages the bull to buck and twist.


The Pros and Cons of Keeping a Lawn
LEAD: As a member of the American Forestry Association, I must commend Pete Dunne on his indisputable contrast of lawns versus trees (''In the Natural State'').


FASHION: On the Street; What the Well-Dressed Puddle-Jumper Wears
LEAD: Rain has been a way of life this summer and a strain on fashion, no matter the length or looseness of dresses and skirts.
New Yorkers and practiced visitors took it all calmly, breaking their stride only to make suprisingly graceful leaps at flooded Fifth Avenue corners.
Tight short skirts rode up a bit, while long, loose ones were more likely to sweep dangerously close to a puddle and turn into a mop.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Madeleine Pelner Cosman; A Broker in Medical Practices
LEAD: ARTIFACTS from the 15th and 16th centuries surround Dr.
Madeleine Pelner Cosman in her office.
Dr.
Cosman says that the items, like a stained glass window depicting St.
Luke, patron of physicians, and a carved wooden chair from Henry VIII's time, are a diversion and solace for her clients.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Because of the Labor Day Parade in Manhattan, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 72d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.


The Talk of Tripoli; The Innocents From Abroad Hail Qaddafi
LEAD: The man from Naples had come to Libya, he said, to debate the problems of the world - the environment and so forth.
And Peter Furek, from a Zurich assemblage of leftists and others who call themselves ''autonomous,'' thought he might meet the Libyan people.


Strategies for Exchanging Soft Currencies
LEAD: CONVERTING currency is an annoying aspect of travel.
After standing in line for eons, the traveler is tempted to convert a large amount of dollars into local money to avoid standing in line the next day.
But when you are dealing with a soft currency - one that is difficult to convert - and some not-so-soft ones too, this can create a worse problem:


CALM, COOL AND BELEAGUERED
LEAD: I was disappointed but not surprised to find Faye Wattleton as the subject of the cover story in your magazine.
The real story, however, is about those who have waged a 16-year battle against Roe. v.
Wade.
A more appropriate assignment would be to run an article on how an underfinanced, grass-roots movement has gotten the Supreme Court to reverse itself - despite Faye Wattleton.


Iranian President Quits as Chief of Armed Forces
LEAD: President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran has resigned as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, saying he is too busy with other matters, the Teheran radio reported today.


FOR HER PAINS, SHE WAS CALLED OLD SHAMEFUL
LEAD:  I MYSELF AM A WOMAN  Selected Writings of Ding Ling.
Edited by Tani E. Barlow with Gary J. Bjorge.  361 pp.
Boston:  Beacon Press. $24.95.


The Car-Seller, Too, Feels Racial Killing's Impact
LEAD: The used car that attracted Yusuf K. Hawkins and his friends to Bensonhurst is no longer for sale and its owner, 25-year-old Nick Hadzinas, still struggles with the knowledge that his innocuous newspaper ad played a role in the tragedy of a family, a community and a city.


Ms. Rodkin Wed To Rob Rotering
LEAD: Nancy Ann Rodkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Rodkin of Chicago, and Victor Robert Rotering, the son of Mrs.
William Laird of Edina, Minn., and the late Victor S. Rotering, were married yesterday at the Bond Chapel at the University of Chicago.
The interfaith ceremony was performed by Rabbi Allen Secher and the Rev.


Lesson in the Baltics: Gorbachev's Tolerance Only Goes So Far
LEAD: HE'S complaining darkly now, but Mikhail S. Gorbachev once found the Baltic republics' high-spirited yearning for something better to be so contagious that he could not help celebrating it during a tour of his Western realm two years ago.
The national leader saluted the ''revolution of expectations'' he found there.


UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT?
LEAD:  INTERFERENCE  How Organized Crime Influences Professional Football.
By Dan E. Moldea.  512 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Democracy on Display
LEAD: After Ileana Ros-Lehtinen was elected to the Florida Congressional seat of the late Claude Pepper last week, Republicans called it a Republican victory and anti-abortion organizations said their cause had prevailed.
Ms.
Ros-Lehtinen, a 37-year-old former State Senator, is indeed a Republican who opposes abortion, but neither her party affiliation nor her moral convictions played much part in the campaign that resulted in her becoming the first Cuban-American elected to Congress.


Scouting Report For Steinbrenner
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Paris Manners
LEAD: To the Editor: A few words in defense of Paris, with reference to the letter of Mary Frieman (July 23), not that the city isn't perfectly well able to defend itself.


Nureyev and Topol Help Bushnell Turn 60
LEAD: BUSHNELL MEMORIAL HALL in Hartford is celebrating its 60th anniversary with a schedule that includes new productions of ''The King and I,'' starring Rudolf Nureyev; seven children's shows, and performances by the Vienna Boys Choir, Warsaw Philharmonic and Orchestre National de France.


Streaking Yanks Win On Hall's Homer in 9th
LEAD: It is past the point in the season when the home run could have left an indelible mark.
After all, the life span of drama in the Bronx these days is painfully short.
With the pennant race all but offically over for the Yankees, climactic home runs can produce cheers, but not hope.


Argentine Court Moves to Extradite Ex-Nazi
LEAD: The Federal Appeals Court in the city of La Plata has agreed to extradite the accused Nazi war criminal Josef Schwammberger to West Germany for trial, but he still has resort to the Argentine Supreme Court.


Review/Dance; Trisha Brown vs. the Set
LEAD: The returns have been diminishing on the summer outdoor dance front this year.
On Wednesday, with a performance by the Trisha Brown Dance Company at the World Financial Center Plaza, they slowed to a dribble.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our toilet tank is 25 years old, and we have a terrible time with it ''sweating'' on the outside during hot weather.
This ''sweating'' is so bad that we have to replace the bathroom carpet under the tank.
Can anything be done to stop this?


Giants, Vikings and Rams Look Tough
LEAD: The following National Conference preview was prepared and written by Frank Litsky.
Teams are listed in the predicted order of finish.
EASTERN DIVISION  Giants


Criminal Personality Relates to Others by Attacking and Taking
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE FOLLY AND THE SQUALOR
LEAD:  WARTIME  Understanding and Behavior in the Second World War.
By Paul Fussell.
Illustrated. 330 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $19.95.


Dr. Demond Marries Dr. Kim Hayes
LEAD: Dr.
Avery Holliday Demond and Dr.
Kim Ford Hayes, assistant professors of environmental engineering at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, were married in Ann Arbor yesterday at the Leslie Science Center.
The Rev.
Kenneth Phifer, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.


New School Outfits, Plus Encouragement
LEAD: WHEN 12-year-old Tasha arrives for the first day of school this week, her new denim skirt, turtleneck, brand-name sneakers and bright pink backpack should help her fit right in.
But she thinks arriving by cab might undercut the effect, and so plans to ask the driver to stop a block away.


Question Of the Week; Should Rose Be Reinstated Next Year?
LEAD: Denial is a classic symptom of an addiction and Rose will not begin the long road back until he recognizes the need for professional help.
Three years would seem an appropriate amount of time to prove the success of any rehabilitation program.
STEVE BERGMAN  Brooklyn


Sarah Watson Engaged
LEAD: Sarah Ann Watson and Joseph M. Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harley T. Anderson of Binghamton, N.Y., plan to be married later this month.
The prospective bride is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Watson of Darien, Conn.
Ms.
Watson, 36 years old, was until recently a social worker with a community program of the Health and Hospitals Corporation in New York.


Gail K. Negbaur, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: At the Tower Suite of the Time &amp; Life Building in New York, Gail K. Negbaur, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hal K. Negbaur of New York, was married yesterday to Philippe A. Cavat, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pierre Cavat of Versailles and Grenoble, France.
Judge Millard Midonick, who retired from the Surrogate Court of the County of New


CAMPUS LIFE: Case Western; New Smoking Ban Gives Few Refuges For Lighting Up
LEAD: Smokers at Case Western Reserve University who want to light up will have to go outdoors; a new campus-wide policy bans smoking in virtually all university buildings.


In Search Of Values
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Year After Fires, Visitors Increase at Yellowstone


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Time off for the three-day weekend.  A Few Books


Seven Brides For Seven Berbers
LEAD: EVERY year in a remote valley deep in the Moroccan Atlas mountains, Berbers of the Ait Hadiddou tribe gather at a Moussem, the equivalent in Morocco of a country fair.
There, they sell their sheep, goats, mules or camels, and buy shovels, plastic buckets, tea, sugar and other supplies to support their lonely existence in the mountains for another year.


The Case for Ed Koch - and His Duty
LEAD: Our last words in endorsing Mayor Koch for re-election in 1985 were: ''When we cheer for Mr.
Koch, we cheer for his demonstrated willingness to make choices and take responsibility.
May he now show himself to be as skillful in advancing harmony as he has been in winning votes.''


Dr. Carol Langford Marries in Florida
LEAD: The wedding of Dr.
Carol Langford, a pediatrician at the Joseph Smith Community Health Center in Boston, and George B. Wolfenden, the retired founding headmaster of the Tampa (Fla.) Preparatory School, took place yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Winter Park, Fla.
The Rev.
Ronald Reese, a


Diana Dorfman, Physician, Weds
LEAD: Dr.
Diana Brooke Dorfman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Dorfman of Brooklyn, and Westhampton, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
James Alan Deutsch, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Deutsch of Brooklyn Heights, and Burrville, Conn.
Rabbi A. Stanley Dreyfus performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New


Sharon Patricia Cooney Has Wedding
LEAD: Sharon Patricia Cooney and Thorpe Shuttleworth, a son of the late Margaret W. Shuttleworth of West Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Jack Shuttleworth of Clearwater, Fla., were married yesterday at the Bronxville, N.Y., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George K. Cooney.
The Rev.
William M. Naughton, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Timothy Sullivan And Penny Rolfe Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Penny Rolfe to Timothy Paul Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Sullivan of Shrewsbury, Mass., has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, N. Anthony Rolfe of New York and Palm Beach, Fla., and Susan Sulzberger Rolfe of New York.
A December wedding is planned.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Brunch; All Over Manhattan, From Park Avenue to Ninth
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Barney Greengrass


Bennett Criticisms Cut From Anti-Drug Plan
LEAD: Criticisms of United States foreign policy made by William J. Bennett in the draft of his national drug strategy have been deleted from the final version, according to an Administration official.


American Telemedia Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telemedia Network
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,677,044
197,688
Net loss
60,087
481,439


Noah Vanquishes Mancini and Will Face Becker
LEAD: Yannick Noah has always entertained tennis fans with his flamboyant style of play.
His physical ability on sky-high overheads, diving volleys and thunderous serves has always made him stand out on the court.


Cimco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cimco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,330,360
13,172,009
Net loss
74,005
b911,502
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income  The company said the latest quarter results were significantly below expectations due to greatly reduced customer requirements and higher than anticipated expenses associated with the start-up of a number of new product lines.


AIDS Camp Frees Children of Awful Secret
LEAD: Under a canopy of pine trees and a flawless blue sky, nine children with AIDS and their families spent the last week fishing and berry-picking, molding clay pots and singing campfire songs, making friends and breaking the bonds of secrecy that surround their disease.


Review/Pop; Dance Bands Convene In Queens for Salsa Festival
LEAD: A handful of the world's best dance bands convened in the Forest Hills Tennis Stadium on Saturday night as part of the New York Salsa Festival '89.
Greeted by a wildly enthusiastic audience, the show overflowed with cultural pride.


Gwendolyn Levine Is Wed
LEAD: Gwendolyn Tracy Levine, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Levine of Old Westbury, L.I., and Michael Craig Levy, a son of Milton Levy of New York and Corinne Levy of New Rochelle, N.Y., were married yesterday at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Reuven Grodner performed the ceremony.


CPI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPI Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 22
1989
1988
Sales
68,955,000
62,308,000
Net inc
5,593,000
c5,032,000
Share earns
.35
.30
6mo sales
137,819,000
121,890,000
Net inc
b7,220,000
c8,853,000
Share earns
.45
.53


The Editorial Notebook; Still Shunning the Black Doll: What a TV Special Said About Self-Image
LEAD: ''Black in White America,'' the ABC News documentary shown Tuesday, opened with a segment that could have been shot 50 years ago.
Confronted with two images identical except for skin color, black children were asked which was prettier, cleaner, smarter.
Today, as in Dr.
Kenneth Clark's famous doll experiment two generations ago, most pointed to the white-skinned image.


Devils Opening Camp Today
LEAD: The Devils, who have added two Soviet players and a Finn to their Swedish contingent, will be the first of the New York area's three National Hockey League teams to open training camp.


Lisa Distelheim, a Reporter, Is Married
LEAD: Lisa Beth Distelheim, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving H. Distelheim of Highland Park, Ill., and William Francis Barron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Barron of Greenwich, Conn., were married last night at the Ritz-Carlton in Chicago.
Rabbi Harold Kudan officiated.


Bid for UAL Seen Passing U.S. Scrutiny
LEAD: Although the Government has indicated that it is prepared to take a harder line against leveraged buyouts of airlines, it is unlikely to reject outright a $6.75 billion bid for the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, analysts said over the weekend.


Yanks Win Again As Dent Wises Up
LEAD: Bucky Dent is growing smarter by the day.
He is clearly more talented and more effective now than he was a week ago.
Better prepared?
Without question.


Health Plan Tax Loophole
LEAD: A new Federal health-care plan for the elderly contains a loophole that encourages tax-exempt investments and could cost the Treasury significant revenue losses, a Government investigator said last week.


Local Business Weeklies Seek a New Direction
LEAD: Two years ago, Michael K. Russell, then the chairman of American City Business Journals Inc., told employees of The St.
Louis Business Journal that he would never sell his controlling interest in the company for less than $80 a share.


Myanmar's Unlost Cause
LEAD: With dictatorships collapsing elsewhere, there's no reason to give up on last year's aborted democracy movement in Myanmar, then called Burma.
But Myanmar's plight seems to have got lost in Washington.


OUTDOORS: TIME FOR BLUEFISH AND STRIPED BASS
LEAD: From Cape Cod to New Jersey, the prime surf casting months for big bluefish and striped bass are September and October.


For Hispanic Paper, a Rising Market
LEAD: El Diario/La Prensa, the Spanish-language daily newspaper in New York City, is the latest media organization to realign its ownership and management in an effort to capture the attention of a booming Hispanic market.


Two Sides in Warsaw Seem Near Cabinet Pact
LEAD: Solidarity and the Communist Party appear to be nearing agreement on a new Cabinet whose makeup would satisfy both Communist demands for additional power and Solidarity's requirement that the party come to terms with a reduced role.


Genesee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genesee Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
37,071,000
37,415,000
Net inc
1,690,000
1,647,000
Share earns
1.06
1.01


As School Begins, Educators Are Facing Tough Lessons
LEAD: As millions of summer-sated children in the New York metropolitan region get ready to tackle the 3 R's, school officials are tackling a tough course in demographics: how to cope with the baby-boom generation's own baby boom, which has led to overcrowded elementary schools, while high school classes have shrunk dramatically.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genovese Drug Stores Inc (AMEX)
12wks to Aug 18
1989
1988
Sales
91,121,000
79,300,000
Net inc
397,000
1,140,000
Share earns
.06
.17
26wk sales
204,471,000
178,483,000
Net inc
1,516,000
2,290,000
Share earns
.23
.34


Replacement for Ruiz Picked in Bronx Race
LEAD: A Democrat who pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge four years ago has been selected to replace former State Senator Israel Ruiz Jr. as a candidate in a special election in the 32d District, which lies in the South Bronx.


Must U.S. Free Trade Include Jobs Export?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sorg Inc reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sorg Inc (AMEX)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Sales
77,736,000
70,753,000
Net loss
10,431,000
b4,235,000
b-Included a loss of $658,000 from discontinued operations.
The latest fiscal year results included a write-off of the remaining balance of $2,591,000, of the goodwill relating to the company's acquisition of Kellow Brown in July 1987.


Nominee for S.E.C. Chairmanship Faces Heavy Sessions With Senators
LEAD: While it might seem logical that a major Government post be given to the most knowledgeable expert in the field, Presidents seldom feel bound by that reasoning.


Reviews/Music; Violating the Pop Structure
LEAD: Form dictated emotion at the drummer Bobby Previte's show at the Central Park Band Shell on Friday night.
Mr.
Previte, leading a band that included Marty Ehrlich on saxophone, Ray Anderson on trombone, Jerome Harris on bass and guitar, Stewart Cutler on guitar and Zeena Parkins on keyboards, has no fears about avoiding the grinding repetition of pop structure: a piece of his might open with a 15-second jolt of texture, then move into new territories, one after another, and never look back, leaving the air filled with surprise and question marks.


Claire Luce, 85, Dies; Was Versatile Actress
LEAD: Claire Luce, a 1920's Ziegfeld star who left the musical stage for the classical theater, died Thursday at her Gramercy Park home in Manhattan after a lengthy illness.
She was 85 years old.


Myth of Methanol
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carl Hovgard, Tax Adviser, 83; Founder of the Research Institute
LEAD: Carl Hovgard, who founded the Research Institute of America, an advisory service for tax professionals, in 1935, was its president until 1967 and then concentrated on oil exploration in Texas and Oklahoma, died Friday at his retirement home in Carmel, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
The institute sells analyses of legislation and regulatory activity that affects businesses.


Seven Oaks International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seven Oaks International (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,565,000
9,046,000
Net inc
61,000
401,000
Share earns
.01
.06


Aides See Koch and Dinkins Neck and Neck in the Stretch
LEAD: As they prepare to unleash a final avalanche of leaflets, letters, telephoned appeals and televised commercials, advisers to all four Democratic mayoral candidates agree that the primary appears to have evolved into a showdown between Mayor Edward I. Koch and Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan.


John Wiley &amp; Sons reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Wiley &amp; Sons (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
73,396,000
67,550,000
Net inc
1,839,000
3,032,000
Share earns
.41
.71
The company attributed the revenue increases in its latest first quarter largely to the Alan R.


Despite Imperfections, Central Park Works Well
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 in Bronx Accused of Impersonating Police
LEAD: Two auxiliary police officers were arrested yesterday in the Bronx and charged with impersonating New York City police officers by frisking people who jumped subway turnstiles, the police said.


Head of Lamonts Sees Compliment in Aris Bid
LEAD: Leonard Snyder, the chairman and chief executive who is rapidly expanding the retail stores of Lamonts Apparel Inc. in Western states, says he considers it a personal compliment that the Aris Corporation pointed to his strong management team as a principal reason for wanting to buy the chain, which is based in Bellevue,


Proposal on Hunt Tax Debt
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has proposed settling the bill for Nelson Bunker Hunt and Carolyn Hunt's back taxes for about $200 million - less than one-third of the $700 million the Government originally sought.


Sports World Specials: BASEBALL; The Latest in Bats
LEAD: As the pennant races heat up in the major leagues, the wooden-vs.-aluminum-bat controversy continues to simmer, stoked by stories that appeared this summer in Sports Illustrated and USA Today.


U.S. Would Bypass Factions In Arming Afghan Guerrillas
LEAD: Administration officials said today that they hoped to arrange for the direct delivery of American weapons to Afghan guerrilla commanders inside Afghanistan, bypassing leaders of rebel factions based in Pakistan.
The Pakistani intelligence directorate would continue to handle the deliveries.


Moscow Is Discussing Bloomingdale's Shops
LEAD: Marvin S. Traub, the chairman of Bloomingdale's, said yesterday that the retailing chain had had ''serious discussions'' with Soviet officials about opening two shops in Moscow.
He said he was confident that a deal could be completed soon.


Giants Tower Over the Mets
LEAD: The Mets brought their West Coast trip to a crashing close today when they lost their third straight game to the San Francisco Giants, 4-0, and lost for the sixth time in nine games on a calamitous swing through California.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on the Media Business page last Monday, about a contest to find a $25,000 golden horse, referred incorrectly to the person who retrieved the horse and to those who knew where it was.
It was recovered solely by the contest referee, an executive of D. L. Blair.
The hiding place was known only to the Blair executive and the contest's two creators, not to the sponsor, Intervision Inc.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amerifax Inc., Overland Park, Kan., a facsimile service center chain, named Richard J. Emerine chairman and chief executive.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You know what I think the whole issue is for Congress when we get back?
Money.
On 80 percent of the issues to come up this fall, there will be a general consensus that we ought to do some things and no consensus on whether we spend the money.
And that's frustrating.''
-Representative
Charles E.


Private Funeral For Giamatti
LEAD: Funeral services for A. Bartlett Giamatti, who died last Friday, will be private, according to an announcement issued yesterday by the baseball commissioner's office.


Bielecki's Streak Is Snapped As Braves Set Back Cubs, 8-5
LEAD: Jeff Blauser had three singles and three runs batted in as the Atlanta Braves ended Mike Bielecki's six-game winning streak with an 8-5 victory today over the Chicago Cubs.


Ivy's Recruiting Is Suffering
LEAD: The Ivy League championship could be resolved in the revived Thanksgiving Day game between Cornell and Pennsylvania; the Colonial League will have the player of the year in Frank Baur, the Lafayette quarterback, and the up-and-coming Yankee Conference expects a five-team race for its title.


What's a Fast-Growing Sport With a Designer Label? Golf.
LEAD: Once more, the men in the White House are golfers.
Some things, it seems, never change.
But look again. ''Golf is the fastest-growing sport in America,'' said Kit Bradshaw, director of publicity for the National Golf Foundation in Jupiter, Fla. ''Its popularity and growth is cutting across different classes, races and sexes.


Gesco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gesco Industries
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,300,000
36,800,000
Net inc
663,000
936,000
Share earns
.20
.29
9mo rev
106,300,000
96,900,000
Net inc
b2,148,000
c1,134,000
Share earns
.67
.36


WASHINGTON TALK: Policy
LEAD: It started in 1898 when the Republic was scratching for revenue to fight the Spanish-American War.
Congress levied a ''temporary'' tax of 1 cent on each telephone call valued at 15 cents or more.


S.E.C. Move On 'Baskets'
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said Friday that it would ask the full United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit to review a recent decision by a panel of the court that ordered a halt to trading on two stock exchanges of hybrid financial instruments known as stock baskets.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Steel prices have fallen to their lowest point in nearly two years, reflecting softer demand from automobile producers and appliance makers.
Analysts said prices would remain weak or decline further the rest of this year.
At the same time, the operating rates for the nation's steel mills have tumbled, to 76 percent at the end of August, from 89.5 percent in the comparable period last year and a high of 93.9 percent at the end of March.


Sparkling Weather as Rainy Summer Wanes
LEAD: On the weekend that serves as an unofficial punctuation mark at the end of summer -never mind that the seasons do not change for another 18 days - Aaron Fay's answering machine summed up what was on thousands of minds.


Fleetwood Enterprises reports earnings for 13wks to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleetwood Enterprises (NYSE)
13wks to July 30
1989
1988
Revenue
394,888,000
426,732,000
Net inc
15,620,000
19,096,000
Share earns
.68
.83


U.S. Praises Choice of Nicaragua Opposition
LEAD: American officials and other experts on Central America today welcomed the selection of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro as the opposition candidate for President of Nicaragua, saying she was the strongest possible choice and would unify the opposition.


4 Who Burned Church Give Their Apologies
LEAD: Four white people who burned a black church returned to the renovated building Saturday to give their court-ordered apologies to the congregation.


Books of The Times; Simenon and the Dark Corners of the Heart
LEAD:  Maigret and the Fortuneteller  By Georges Simenon  Translated by Geoffrey Sainsbury. 140 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $16.95.
The Man With the Little Dog  By Georges Simenon  Translated by Jean Stewart. 169 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


Papers Slug It Out in Battle for 'Doonesbury'
LEAD: THE recent effort by The Dallas Morning News to strip its archrival, The Dallas Times Herald, of syndicated treasures like ''Doonesbury,'' ''Dear Abby'' and Erma Bombeck has ignited yet another battle in one of the nation's most bruising newspaper wars.


Campaign Matters; If It's a Race For Mayor, Why No Local Issues?
LEAD: Here's a quick campaign quiz.
The positions of each of the six candidates for mayor of New York City on six different issues follow.
Name the denominator common to them all:


Limousine Import Fight
LEAD: The United States International Trade Commission has agreed to look into complaints by American stretch-limousine makers that Canadian manufacturers are dumping the limousines at unfairly low prices.
The complaints were filed in July by Southampton Coachworks Ltd. of Farmingdale, L.I., one of the largest makers of stretch limousines in the United States.


Iacocca Thinks of Cutting His Role at Chrysler
LEAD: Lee A. Iacocca, who guided the nation's third-largest auto maker from near ruin to prosperity, said he has all but decided to leave the chief executive's post at the Chrysler Corporation at the end of 1991, when his four-year contract expires.


Reviews/Music; Alternate Cast In 'Desert Song' By City Opera
LEAD: The New York City Opera's current run of ''The Desert Song'' is offering alternate casts.
Saturday afternoon's featured Michele McBride as Margot and Richard White as Pierre, with Louis Otey playing Paul Fontaine.


Ramya Thambuswamy Has Wedding
LEAD: Ramya Thambuswamy, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ayyaswamy Thambuswamy of Perrysburg, Ohio, and John Schaller Hopley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hopley of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents in Perrysburg.
Madhao Kharche, a Hindu priest, performed a Hindu ceremony, which was followed by a Presbyterian ceremony performed by the Rev.


Review/Dance; Troupe From Milwaukee Offers 'Romantic Options'
LEAD: The first third of ''Romantic Options,'' a dance by Debra Loewen and Mark Anderson, was generic modern - a neo-Brownian loop here, a post-Tharpian wheel there, performed by a group of alarmingly healthy and well-adjusted-looking dancers from a place that wasn't New York City.
Then came two oddly pungent trios.


Laura E. Carsky, Dietitian, Marries
LEAD: Laura Elizabeth Carsky, a daughter of Katherine S. Carsky of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late James B. Carsky, and Herald Franklin Stout 3d, the son of Lieut.
Col.
Herald Franklin Stout 2d, U.S.A., retired, and Mrs.
Stout of Edinburgh, Va., were married at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph in Bronxville.


Cybermedic reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybermedic
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,001,360
1,213,817
Net loss
116,650
b125,660
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
3,185,694
3,567,137
Net loss
104,295
b12,486
b-Net income and the share earnings for the 9 months was less than one cent a share.


Circus Circus Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circus Circus Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,729,000
136,643,000
Net inc
21,797,000
20,753,000
Share earns
.76
.67
Shares outst
28,553,483
31,167,486
6mo rev
267,185,000
265,068,000
Net inc
40,821,000
b50,787,000
Share earns
1.40
1.57
Shares outst
29,192,802
32,273,118


Few Gains for Qaddafi In Drive to End Isolation
LEAD: With fireworks in the night and the spectacle of the visiting Nicaraguan President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, riding an Arabian horse in a beachfront race, the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, today wound up a celebration of 20 years of what the official press agency called ''the greatest revolution ever waged.


Yankees Win Fourth Straight


As Aid to Colombia Arrives, Fears of Corruption Remain


Animosity Is On Display As Giuliani Meets Lauder
LEAD: In the first and very likely only joint encounter of the Republican mayoral primary campaign, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that even though he is the Liberal Party nominee, he would support Ronald S. Lauder if Mr.
Lauder won the Republican primary.


Corrections
LEAD: A table yesterday listing the endorsements of the six candidates for Mayor of New York City incorrectly described an endorsement for City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin.
The endorsement came from the Rachel Carson Environmental Democratic Club.


Tax Watch; Right Way to Pay Business Owners
LEAD: MANY owners of small businesses believe it makes sense to plow earnings back into the business so it will grow, while limiting what they pay themselves.
But the Internal Revenue Service does not see things that way, warns Mary Smalligan, a partner in Deloitte Haskins &amp; Sells, who points out that the agency has taken action against owners who pay themselves what it views as too much or too little.


U.S. Job Death Rate Still Relatively High
LEAD: More workers are killed on the job in the United States than in most other major industrialized countries, according to a report that says the deaths cost the nation's economy at least $15 billion each year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 25 about Voyager 2 misstated the luminosity of the Sun as it would appear from Neptune.
The Sun would appear several million times brighter than Jupiter does, as seen from Earth (although the Sun would look only slightly larger than Jupiter); the apparent difference in brightness would not be slight.


Some Luster Is Lost For Spanish Tourism
LEAD: The thousands of vacationers lured this summer to the island of Mallorca by rock-bottom hotel prices have benefited from the slump in Spain's leading industry, tourism.


OPEC Output Is Called High
LEAD: The daily output of crude oil by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries rose above its self-imposed ceiling in August to the highest level this year, reports from industry and shipping sources show.


Armenian Pianist Is Winner
LEAD: Sergei Babajan, a 28-year-old Armenian pianist, has won the first prize in the eighth Robert Casadesus International Piano Competition in Cleveland.
He will receive a $10,000 cash award and concert appearances in France, Italy and the United States, including one as soloist with the Cleveland Orchestra.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/2-6


Trade Talks Aim at Economic Habits
LEAD: The United States has in recent years let the dollar collapse in value while its trade negotiators have denounced, cajoled and pleaded to get Japan to import more American products.
But despite some progress, the trade deficit with Japan remains about what it was in 1985.


No Headline
LEAD: Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.


Alternative Fuels Are a Step to Cleaner Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


Asbestos Coats Eight Blocks Of 8th Avenue
LEAD: Nearly 50 pounds of asbestos were scattered over a half-mile stretch of Eighth Avenue in midtown Manhattan early yesterday after flood waters surging from a broken main stripped the cancer-causing fiber insulation from two underground steam pipes.


APARTHEID FOES MARCH ON A BEACH
LEAD: Thousands of blacks marched, picnicked and waded peacefully at a whites-only beach today in another in a string of recent anti-apartheid protests.
The police made 58 arrests, but waited more than two hours before breaking up the demonstration.


Ferry Your Way To Fun and Games
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barry Hyams, 78, Producer and Publicist
LEAD: Barry Hyams, a former Broadway producer and publicist in New York and San Francisco, died Friday after suffering a heart attack at his San Francisco home.
He was 78 years old.


Shoney's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shoney's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 6
1989
1988
Revenue
210,480,460
188,258,422
Net inc
6,185,765
14,317,274
Share earns
.16
.39
9mo rev
656,000,395
578,429,031
Net inc
13,689,160
41,754,000
Share earns
.36
1.14


Hatred and Social Isolation May Spur Acts of Racial Violence, Experts Say
LEAD: A volatile mixture of deep-seated racial animosities, starkly segregated environments and fear of economic change may have fostered the murder of a 16-year-old black youth in Bensonhurst last month, say social scientists who have studied race relations in large cities like New York.


Socanav Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Socanav Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
154,481,000
140,100,000
Net inc
5,024,000
5,554,000
Share earns
.37
.41
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Bush Ends a Vacation by Getting His Fish
LEAD: ''The jinx is broken!'' exclaimed President Bush.


Firm Ousted By N.A.S.D.
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers has expelled one brokerage firm and taken lesser disciplinary action against 16 others.


The Issues Waiting for the Returning Congress
LEAD:  TAXES AND SPENDING


Can Summer Survive Labor Day?
LEAD: Labor Day is a duplicitous holiday.
Poised between the lazy pleasures of summer and the prospect of life at full throttle, it carries a bittersweet message: Play today, for one must slave tomorrow.


MOST JOBHOLDERS CONTENT, POLL SAYS
LEAD: Most full-time workers in the United States say they are satisfied with their jobs at least to some degree, but workers born since World War II, who entered the work force since 1960, are much less satisfied than older workers, a Gallup Poll says.


SOUTH AFRICANS PUT RISING FAITH IN NEGOTIATIONS
LEAD: South Africa heads into its national elections on Wednesday with a growing conviction that the nation's political future, and its salvation, lie through negotiation, not confrontation.


Ivy Ozer Is Married
LEAD: Ivy Melissa Ozer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Ozer of Kings Point, L.I., and Craig Paul Zuckerman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Zuckerman of North Bellmore, L.I., were married yesterday at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in New York.
Rabbi Harvey Goldscheider performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Ephraim Biran.


Meg Newhouse, Executive, Wed
LEAD: Meg Lynne Newhouse, the daughter of Florence Newhouse of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., and Irving Newhouse of New York, and Elliot Roy Sealove, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Sealove of Manhasset, L.I., were married yesterday at their home in Hampton Bays, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated.


Uganda Opens Wildlife Parks
LEAD: Uganda has created three national parks to protect wildlife and promote the tourist industry it is reviving after 18 years of neglect.
A spokesman for the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife said today that the parks had been set up in the Ruwenzori mountains (the Mountains of the Moon) bordering Zaire, in the Bwindi forest in Kigezi district in the southwest, and in the Muhavura mountains bordering Rwanda and Zaire.


Cuban Jetliner With 124 Aboard Crashes
LEAD: A Cuban jetliner with 124 people aboard exploded and crashed this evening shortly after takeoff from Havana's Jose Marti airport, the Spanish news agency EFE reported.


3 Cardinals Defend Convent Pact Against Attack by Polish Primate
LEAD: Strongly disagreeing with Poland's Roman Catholic Primate, three of the four Cardinals who signed an accord with Jewish representatives to move a convent away from the Auschwitz death camp said today that the agreement must be upheld.


On a Stoop in Brooklyn, Life Was Good
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hollywood Still Feels Writers' Walkout
LEAD: A year has passed since Hollywood returned to work after its longest strike ever, and the industry has been assessing the damage ever since.


In Bensonhurst, Whites Honor Black Youth Slain in Racial Attack


Israeli Aircraft Raid A Target in Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli Air Force planes bombed a guerrilla base in southern Lebanon early today, a military spokesman here said.


Clergy in Bensonhurst Lead March To Lay Wreath at Site of Slaying
LEAD: Declaring that ''the church can heal,'' the Roman Catholic clergy of Bensonhurst led 200 people, virtually all of them white, in a solemn procession through the Brooklyn neighborhood's streets yesterday and laid a wreath of roses and carnations at the site where a 16-year-old black youth was gunned down 11 days ago.


Western Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Publishing (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
100,395,000
124,575,000
Net inc
1,422,000
6,528,000
Share earns
.06
.32
6mo rev
205,998,000
254,556,000
Net inc
5,173,000
12,362,000
Share earns
.24
.60


The Post-Industrial Era Is Over
LEAD: The sun is about to set on the post-industrial era.


Zenith Expects Loss in Quarter
LEAD: The Zenith ELectronics Corporation said Friday that it expects to report a loss in the third quarter and that it is now less confident that it will report a profit for the 1989 year.


Steel City Still Needs Help Despite Big Steel's Comeback
LEAD: Plumes of smoke and steam billow again from the stacks of the USX Corporation's Gary Works, signaling the dramatic revival of big steel along the southern shore of Lake Michigan.


Philadelphia Journal; From Sidewalk Artistry To a Hotel on Easy St.
LEAD: The Rittenhouse, a new hotel and condominium building here, is something of a private art gallery for Joe Barker, a street artist who sets up his easel every day in the center of the city.


Syntex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
321,100,000
331,000,000
Net inc
50,400,000
67,300,000
Share earns
.46
.57
Yr sales
1,349,400,000
1,271,500,000
Net inc
303,200,000
296,600,000
Share earns
2.67
2.51


Jackson Urges Voters' Support For Dinkins Bid
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson preached redemption and praised David N. Dinkins before an overflow congregation at a church in a black neighborhood in Brooklyn yesterday.


Lechters Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lechters Inc
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
30,736,000
22,827,000
Net inc
204,000
250,000
Share earns
.03
.04
6mo sales
57,807,000
43,526,000
Net inc
356,000
498,000
Share earns
.06
.08


U.S. Seeks to Stem Wave of Defections by Polish Fishermen
LEAD: Immigration officials say they are trying to stop Polish fishermen from jumping ship in Alaska and then using their status as political refugees to skirt immigration retrictions and get good jobs on American boats.


Fly Now, Pay Never
LEAD: Leona Helmsley's conviction for tax evasion evoked much schadenfreude, pleasure at her misfortune.
People remembered what her former housekeeper testified she had said: ''We don't pay taxes.
Little people pay taxes.''


Ferrofluidics reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferrofluidics (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
20,220,000
27,020,000
Net inc
52,000
3,636,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
12,569,648
14,447,952


Trinidad Defeats Guatemala by 2-1
LEAD: Kerry Jameson scored with two minutes left today to lead Trinidad and Tobago past Guatemala, 2-1, and into a 4-point lead over the United States in World Cup qualifying.


Hawkins Chemcial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkins Chemcial Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
13,110,233
12,639,472
Net inc
979,735
852,505
Share earns
.14
.12
9mo sales
33,060,304
30,693,865
Net inc
2,200,432
1,958,235
Share earns
.31
.27


Hudson's Bay Co reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson's Bay Co
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,070,474,000
1,064,954,000
Net inc
13,808,000
b32,992,000
Share earns
.23
-
6mo rev
2,048,174,000
2,033,384,000
Net inc
9,167,000
b56,358,000
Share earns
.13
-


Peete Is Sidelined For Lions' Opener
LEAD: The rookie Detroit Lions quarterback, Rodney Peete, will sit out three to five weeks of the regular season after spraining his knee Saturday in an exhibition game against the Los Angeles Rams, the team announced today.


Police Shoot Driver They Say Pulled a Gun
LEAD: A Brooklyn motorist was shot in the head by a police officer after he pulled a gun as the police approached his car, a police spokeswoman said yesterday.


Question Box
LEAD:  Milers Setting Pace


Jets Have a Youthful Look
LEAD: The Jets cut 10 players today, but the intriguing aspect of the move was who stayed rather than who went.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Norman Wins: Greg Norman lost a four-stroke lead, then recovered with three birdies on the final seven holes yesterday for a three-shot victory in the Greater Milwaukee Open.
Norman was at one over for the day before his late surge carried him to a final-round two-under-par 70 and a 72-hole score of 269 at the Tuckaway Country Club in Franklin, Wis.


Name as Mask: The Theory And Practice of Pseudonyms
LEAD: Robert Ludlum's Watergate-inspired novel ''Trevayne'' - which was No. 1 yesterday on the New York Times list of paperback fiction best sellers - was Jonathan Ryder's ''Trevayne'' when it was first published in hard cover in 1973.


Evert Returns To Form
LEAD: They walked onto the Stadium Court like twins, each with her sun-burnished hair pulled into a girlish ponytail caught up by a purple bow, each with a tentative smile in the other's direction.
But the resemblance ended there.


I.R.S. Delays Benefits Rule
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has delayed for two months a tax rule intended to encourage companies to provide health and life insurance benefits equally to all their workers.


Donna Hall Wed To Michael Curry
LEAD: Donna Lynn Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Russell Hall of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday to Michael Peter Curry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip J. Curry Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
Oscar Ferland performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Roman Catholic Church in Barrington.
He was assisted by Auxiliary Bishop William J.


The 1969 Cubs Still Haunt Highpockets
LEAD: It was some time in late June and the Cubs were tripping all over themselves, and over the foul lines, too.
They had been in first place for much of the season and suddenly they had dropped to second.
People in Chicago were asking, ''What's wrong with the Cubs?'' One observer said: ''It's the Cubs' annual June swoon.


Nancy Northup Weds Daniel Bergner
LEAD: Nancy Jean Northup, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Samuel Northup of Rowayton, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Daniel Martin Bergner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Bergner of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
John Buehrens, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated.


Avinda Video reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avinda Video
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,067,282
8,923,621
Net loss
171,679
322,882
9mo rev
23,396,902
28,001,739
Net loss
895,523
344,389
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Security Pacific's Asian Strategy
LEAD: The word ''Pacific'' stands out in the name Security Pacific Corporation these days.


Laurie Adams Weds
LEAD: Laurie Anne Adams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Y. Adams of Tallahassee, Fla., was married yesterday to Thomas Amory Host, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stig Host of Old Greenwich, Conn.
A Congregational ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Norman S. Ream on the lawn of the Stanley Hotel in Estes Park, Colo.


New World to Conquer for Chilean TV Star
LEAD: For a time, Mario Kreutzberger, the television showman, spent two nights of every week on an airplane, struggling to sleep as the 4,500 miles between Santiago and Miami glided by.


Bell, W &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell, W &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
23,231,000
25,928,000
Net loss
946,000
261,000
6mo sales
46,017,000
47,915,000
Net loss
1,482,000
845,000


Markets Closed
LEAD: The nation's stock, bond and commodity markets will be closed today in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices and most banks will also be closed.


Major Realty reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Major Realty (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
1,711,709
1,270,524
6mo net inc
3,273,714
b1,972,515
Share earns
.45
-
b-Net loss  The 6-month results take into account a restatement for the company's first quarter ended March 31 to $4,985,423, or 68 cents a share, from the previously reported loss of $133,390.


Soviet Student Pursues College Degree in U.S.
LEAD: An 18-year-old Soviet woman who will start classes at Emory University this week is apparently the first Soviet citizen to seek a degree from an American college.


Standard Brands Paint reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Brands Paint (NYSE)
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Sales
87,463,000
81,840,000
Net inc
1,936,000
1,538,000
Share earns
.27
.20
6mo sales
163,431,000
155,611,000
Net inc
3,514,000
b3,745,000
Share earns
.47
.53


It's No Holiday for Four In the Democratic Race
LEAD: The four Democratic candidates in next week's New York City mayoral primary took advantage of yesterday's mild weather and holiday weekend calm to carry their campaigns to beaches and street fairs and to anyone within hand-shaking range.


Teltronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teltronics Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,997,000
1,377,000
Net inc
109,000
53,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
3,744,000
2,665,000
Net inc
203,000
11,000
Share earns
.03
-


The Reagan Court - Child of Lyndon Johnson?
LEAD: Liberals may lament the emergence of a conservative majority on the Supreme Court.
But they should not forget that one of their own, Arthur Goldberg, played a major role in shaping the political complexion of the current Court.


VARIETY IS NEW SPICE IN MARATHON TRAINING
LEAD: A new approach to the marathon that calls for greater recovery between long training runs and intermittent walking during the race is being advocated by the running authority who helped popularize high-mileage training two decades ago.


Corrections
LEAD: A map in some copies on Aug. 24 with the text of secret protocols to the 1939 Soviet-German nonaggression treaty showed the 1945 status of eastern Germany incorrectly.
The German Democratic Republic was not officially proclaimed until 1949.
The map also depicted postwar Lithuania incorrectly; it extends farther east to include Vilnius, the capital.


Colombian Policemen and Soldiers Are Reportedly Tipping Off Drug Figures
LEAD: Three weeks after President Virgilio Barco Vargas declared all-out war on Colombia's narcotics traffickers, many leading drug figures are believed to have escaped to vast areas of the country under their control after being tipped off by corrupt Colombian police officers and soldiers, Colombian and United


Our Native Species Deserve Protection
LEAD: To the Editor:


WATERY TREADMILL: SWIMMING LAPS IN A MACHINE
LEAD: An engineer from New York has developed a new lap pool for swimmers, which works as a runner's treadmill does.
The swimmer strokes in place, moving against an even current.
Water in the pool moves as a river does, constantly circulating at a rate of 8,000 gallons a minute, according to James Murdock, the inventor of the Endless Pool.


Twins' Big Hitters Stop Blue Jays, 9-4
LEAD: Rick Aguilera won his first decision as a starter since Oct. 3, 1987, and the left fielder Dan Gladden hit a homer and threw two runners out at the plate as the Minnesota Twins stopped the Toronto Blue Jays, 9-4, today.
The Jays' winning streak ended at five games.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Flood Scatters Asbestos
A water main break flooded 8 blocks of midtown Manhattan with water and mud tainted with asbestos, closing the area to residents.
Page 29.
Cabinet Stakes in Poland
Solidarity and the Polish Communists appear to be near an agreement on a Cabinet that would satisfy the union's requirement that the party come to terms with a reduced role.


Apartheid Protest at a Beach
LEAD: Thousands of blacks marched, picnicked and waded peacefully at a whites-only beach in an apartheid protest in South Africa.
Page 6.


Student Gathering in Virginia Turns Violent; 4 Hurt
LEAD: An annual gathering of thousands of college students erupted early today in a five-hour melee of rock throwing and looting that did not end until the local authorities called in the state troopers and the Virginia National Guard.


Morris Injury May Be Serious
LEAD: A week before the Giants open their season, they learned that Joe Morris, their career leader in rushing, might have broken his right foot and might be sidelined for weeks, months or even the season.


Dr. Shayevitz, a Veterinarian, Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Jessie Rebecca Shayevitz, the daughter of Dr.
Myra Shayevitz and Dr.
Berton Shayevitz of Holyoke, Mass., was married in Northampton, Mass., last evening to Dr.
Robert Morton Kellman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius Kellman of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Daniel Jezer performed the ceremony at the Helen Hills Chapel at Smith


Hong Kong Journal; Frantic for Deliverance From China's Clutches
LEAD: When several local legislators recently suggested using Hong Kong's hefty budget surplus to buy an uninhabited island somewhere and resettle the colony's 5.7 million people there, other lawmakers agreed the idea was worth pursuing.


WASHINGTON TALK: Taking Measure; Everything to Know on Odometer Readings
LEAD: The Government has clarified what it takes to comply with the Truth in Mileage Act.
And what it took was 30 columns of single-spaced fine print in the Federal Register.


Ellen Farraye Marries
LEAD: Ellen Mary Farraye, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony R. Farraye of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Robert Bonaventura, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent E. Bonaventura of Garden City, L.I.
The bride's uncle, the Rev.
John Lange, and the Rev.
Bernard Camire performed the ceremony at St.


The Enemies Within Poverty Law
LEAD: So long as President Bush delays naming directors for the national Legal Services Corporation, he must share in the blame for one of Ronald Reagan's most prolonged abuses.


ANTI-SANDINISTAS CHOOSE CANDIDATE
LEAD: The Nicaraguan opposition has chosen Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, one of its most prominent figures, to run for President in the elections scheduled for Feb. 25.


Sci-Fi Fans Meet to Ponder Genre's Present
LEAD: Cyberpunk and cute aliens are out, if the science-fiction writers, readers, editors, illustrators and fans who gathered here over the weekend have anything to say about it.


Central Sprinkler Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Sprinkler Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,197,000
15,484,000
Net inc
1,637,000
1,319,000
Share earns
.39
.36
Shares outst
4,171,000
4,118,000
9mo sales
51,067,000
44,167,000
Net inc
4,263,000
3,268,000
Share earns
1.03
.93
Shares outst
4,146,000
4,134,000


Panda Cub Dies of Infection
LEAD: The tiny cub born Friday to the National Zoo's pair of giant pandas died of an infection early today, leaving officials clinging only to the tenuous hope that the aging animals might mate again.


Ames Dept Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ames Dept Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
1,219,042,000
550,901,000
Net loss
8,400,000
b7,842,000
Share earns
-
.21
6mo sales
2,327,540,000
1,044,881,000
Net loss
20,736,000
b13,710,000
Share earns
-
.37


August's Congressional Recess Brought Lawmakers Little Rest Back Home
LEAD: Congress returns to the capital after an August recess that was more restive than restful, as four weeks back home only underscored the hard political choices facing lawmakers.


Julie McMahan Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Julie Anna McMahan, the daughter of Dr.
William McMahan of Park City, Utah, and State Representative Paula Julander of Salt Lake City, and James Peter Shipman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Shipman of Rye, N.Y., were married in Durham, N.C., yesterday at the Duke Chapel at Duke University.
The Rev.


Critic's Notebook; Is She a Rising Star? Or a Flash in the Pan?
LEAD: Careful readers of the English magazine Opera, those who bother to devour all the fine print down to the ''fringe'' and school performances section of local British esoterica in the back, may have perked up a bit on page 623 of a recent issue.


Beth Joan Feller And David Printz, Students, Married
LEAD: Beth Joan Feller, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin R. Feller of Dix Hills, L.I., and David Joel Printz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton Printz of Del Mar, Calif., were married yesterday at the Dix Hills Jewish Center.
Rabbi Nathaniel Steinberg performed the ceremony.


Sports World Specials: SOCCER; Putting Information At Fans' Fingertips
LEAD: The oldest soccer publication in the United States, Soccer America, has come up with a simple idea to provide a service to soccer aficionados: a yellow pages in booklet form.


Laura M. Rubenstein, a Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Laura Meryl Rubenstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry G. Rubenstein of Gladwyne, Pa., and New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Nir Barzilai, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Barzilai of Haifa, Israel.
Rabbi Henry Cohen performed the ceremony at Beth David Reform Congregation in Gladwyne.


Pitching Is the Key In Stretch Drive
LEAD: With four weeks left to play, what wins pennant races with four teams scrambling down the home stretch?


Power Shoe-Lacing: More Than Meets the Eyelet
LEAD: You may have noticed that athletic shoes often have extra holes around the lacing area.
Usually there's a single extra hole on each side, but in the new models there may be as many as four or more extra holes.


Holiday Today
LEAD: Because of the Labor Day Parade in Manhattan, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 72d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Because of the West Indian Day Parade in Brooklyn, Eastern Parkway between Utica and Washington Avenues will be closed from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Here are Labor Day holiday schedules.


Steel Prices Are Lowest In 2 Years
LEAD: Reflecting softer demand from automobile producers and appliance makers, steel prices have declined to their lowest point in nearly two years.
And industry analysts said prices would remain weak or decline further the rest of this year.


Journeys End Resorts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Journeys End Resorts Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
270,690
177,502
Net loss
210,864
11,596
6mo rev
746,420
470,788
Net loss
167,140
11,620


Lin Loses Plea On McCaw Bid
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission has refused to block McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.'s $5.5 billion hostile takeover offer for the Lin Broadcasting Corporation.


Steinlen Takes the Million
LEAD: Steinlen, who proved himself the best grass horse in New York with two impressive victories at Saratoga last month, suggested he might be the best in the country when he scored a half-length victory over Lady in Silver today in the $1 million Arlington Million at Arlington International Race Course.


Bridge; The cornerstone of America's favorite system is the two-level response.
LEAD: A survey of the system preferences of serious tournament players would certainly show that the largest group favors ''Two Over One,'' which might be called Modern Standard American.
The cornerstone is the two-level response in a suit to guarantee game, with the possible exception of a minimum rebid in the same suit.


Developing Nations Benefit As Service Exports Grow
LEAD: Tens of millions of television viewers in more than 100 countries have followed the adventures of a sultry 19th-century Brazilian slave named Isaura who endures all sorts of adversity after falling in love with her master's son but eventually triumphs.


House of Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* House of Fabrics (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
81,331,000
71,975,000
Net loss
119,000
b454,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo sales
160,799,000
146,960,000
Net inc
1,220,000
2,456,000
Share earns
.18
.37


Leonore Guttmacher, 84, in Family Planning
LEAD: Leonore Gidding Guttmacher, who was active in family-planning work for many decades, died of cancer at Mount Sinai Medical Center Thursday.
She was 84 years old and lived on Manhattan's East Side.


Decor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 3
1989
1988
Sales
6,609,141
5,772,610
Net loss
6,687,890
817,475
Yr sales
30,769,400
26,499,717
Net loss
6,844,000
941,000
The latest quarter and year included an after-tax charge of $5,850,000 related to a store closing and corporate restructuring.


Gas Pipeline Is Planned
LEAD: The Kern River Gas Transmission Company, a joint venture of Tenneco Inc. and the Williams Companies, said on Friday that it had filed applications with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to build a natural gas pipeline from southwestern Wyoming to Kern County, Calif.


A Deadly Feud Tears at Enclave On Gorbachev's Southern Flank
LEAD: From the windows of her living room, Galya Israelyan can look down over the rooftops of this Armenian village, out to the green and gold mountains and the clearing where a few days ago her husband, Ruben, was shot dead.


Morris Out for Season; Giants Waive McConkey and Robinson
LEAD: Joe Morris will not play football this year.


Gerard Schwarz Given Award for Conducting
LEAD: Gerard Schwarz, the music director of the Mostly Mozart Festival, the New York Chamber Symphony and the Seattle Symphony, has been given the Ditson Conductor's Award.
Mr.
Schwarz is to receive the $1,000 award at a ceremony in Seattle on Monday.


A Sun God Prances With Politicians
LEAD: To the clash of cymbals, the beat of rope drums, the prancing of a golden sun god and the campaigning of mortal political candidates, the annual parade of the West Indian-American Day Carnival throbbed through Brooklyn yesterday to a calypso beat.


Rates Expected to Remain Steady
LEAD: As the final month of the third quarter gets under way, credit market analysts say little evidence exists to suggest that the Federal Reserve Board will engineer another decline in interest rates in September.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-11  China dismissed its Culture Minister Wang Meng, the Government said.
Mr.
Wang is a novelist whose rise to power three years ago was seen as a sign of new freedom.
Page A1  The Armenia-Azerbaijan struggle over a predominantly Armenian pocket surrounded by Azerbaijan has frustrated attempts at settlement.


Software To Make Life A Bit Easier
LEAD: IN the never-ending quest for computing convenience, we recently found three products especially useful.
One saves money, one saves time, and the other saves aggravation.


Confidence in U.S. Economy Sends Stocks Up in London
LEAD: The dollar fell in Europe today while United States currency markets were closed for Labor Day, but renewed confidence in the American economy lifted stock prices in London.


New York Was Gotham Before 'Batman'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iraq Expected to Seek Increase in Its Oil Quota
LEAD: Iraq is expected to fight for the right to pump more oil onto the world's markets at a meeting this month of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, oil analysts and traders say.


Nordstrom Settles Suit
LEAD: Nordstrom Inc. has agreed to pay a $200,000 fine and penalties to settle a false-advertising lawsuit.
The Seattle-based department store chain did not admit any wrongdoing.
The lawsuit filed by the Los Angeles County Consumer Protection division had contended that seven Nordstrom stores in Southern California used false labels in advertising for sales.


Vatican Declares It Takes No Position on Auschwitz Convent Issue
LEAD: Despite growing tension between Catholics and Jews, the Vatican indicated today that Pope John Paul II was determined to take no public position on the dispute over a Carmelite convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp in Poland.


13-Year-Old Boy Killed in Bronx Shooting
LEAD: A 13-year-old boy was shot and killed early yesterday while talking with friends in a Bronx parking lot near his home, and a suspect who the police said had apparently mistaken the youth for someone else was arrested.


Savings Rise As Do Debts
LEAD: Americans saved more money in 1988 than in 1987, but they have borrowed record amounts, too, suggesting they have not changed their free-spending habits.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  New Brooks Look


Bronx Shooting Leaves 2 Dead And One Hurt
LEAD: Two men were shot to death and a taxi driver was wounded late Sunday night in the Bronx when two gunmen opened fire on a cab after talking with one of its passengers, the police said yesterday.


Acupuncture for Alcoholics
LEAD: ALCOHOLICS who received acupuncture treatment for substance abuse drank less, had fewer admissions to detoxification centers and took more steps to improve their lives than others who had different acupuncture treatment, a small study has found.


Fake Furs Are Saving More Skins
LEAD: ''Take back your mink,'' sang Miss Adelaide in ''Guys and Dolls.'' A whole chorus may be joining her this winter as fake mink - and fake sable, leopard, tiger, beaver and mole - enter the high-fashion realm.
And make no mistake about it: when Giorgio Armani, Claude Montana and Christian Lacroix use fake fur, it becomes fashion.


Suit Over Care for Retarded May Bring Wider Challenges
LEAD: In a case being watched around the country, the city will argue in court this week that mentally retarded adults who live at home are entitled to the same services the state gives retarded adults in institutions or who live apart from their families.


Medellin Gunman Kills Man; Is Slain
LEAD: A gunman opened fire today at the airport here in the seat of Colombia's cocaine industry, killing a man before he was in turn slain by security officers.
Twelve other people were wounded.


8th Ave. Subway to Stay Closed for Up to 3 Weeks
LEAD: Part of the Eighth Avenue subway line will remain closed and trains will be rerouted for up to three weeks while workers try to clean up asbestos that contaminated the system after a water main broke on Sunday morning, city and transit officials said yesterday.


India Plays Its Own Rock-and-Roll
LEAD: A small but growing rock music movement is spreading across the cities of India.
Rock fans are turning to young Indian musicians who are writing original songs and music instead of merely reproducing the hits of American and other Western stars like Bruce Springsteen, Madonna, Tracy Chapman and Sting.


Confusion Over Fleeing East Germans
LEAD: A West German magazine reported today that the Hungarian Interior Minister expected a delay of at least a month before thousands of East Germans encamped in Hungary leave for West Germany, but officials in Bonn said there was no sign of such a delay.


Despite Asbestos Risk, Experts See No Cause For 'Fiber Phobia'
LEAD: ASBESTOS can be hazardous when its fibers escape into the air, as they did in an explosion near Gramercy Park in New York on Aug. 19.
But scientists now agree that what some are calling ''fiber phobia'' is unwarranted.


Economic Watch; The High Hidden Costs Of the War on Marijuana
LEAD: Cocaine is not the only losing front in the Government's war on drugs.
In what experts regard as the most authoritative study of the illegal market for marijuana, a Harvard economist has concluded that the billion-dollar Federal effort to disrupt the trade is a failure.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Marvin Davis is seeking the help of foreign airlines in an effort to top a $6.75 billion offer for UAL from a group that includes the company's management, its pilots union and British Airways, a person involved in the California billionaire's bid said.
Both European and non-European carriers have been approached, the source said.


Vandal Fleets of the Pacific
LEAD: Driftnets, gigantic traps 30 miles long and 30 feet deep, are being deployed in great numbers by the fishing fleets of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
These indiscriminate maws threaten to become a scourge of all animals that use the ocean's surface waters.
Under pressure from Washington, Japan and Taiwan have at last agreed to station observers on their fishing vessels to measure what the nets do, but South


Borg Weds Pop Singer
LEAD: Bjorn Borg married the Italian pop singer Loredana Berte in a ceremony performed by the mayor, Paolo Pillitteri, at the Milan, Italy, city hall yesterday.


Atlanta Journal; Atlanta Has a Dream: It's the 1996 Olympics
LEAD: With his colorful surfer attire and a raquetball raquet as a baton, Rob Anderson is a fitting drum major for a ragtag outfit here that goes by the name of the Seed and Feed Marching Abominable.


Grandy's Seen in Talks
LEAD: Grandy's Inc., the Southern fast-food chain that split with Chiat/Day/ Mojo last week, has been in talks with the Bloom Agency about its $6 million account, advertising executives said.
Neither Bloom nor Grandy's executives could be reached for comment.


Virginia Beach Is Quiet After Violence
LEAD: After two nights of racially tinged violence and looting by youths celebrating a final summer weekend, the authorities at this Atlantic resort declared today that they had restored ''reasonably stable'' order.


Lendl Survives 5-Set Duel With Chesnokov
LEAD: By the age of 29 he has worked to become a fixture at the United States Open, as reliable as the increase in prices, as consistent as the noise from the flight pattern overhead and as much a part of the final Sunday as the chill that provides a coming attraction of autumn in New York.


On Labor Day, Politics and Parades


Breakaway Priest Says Report of Sex Is False
LEAD: A Roman Catholic priest who leads a breakaway congregation here denied a published report today that he had a sexual relationship with an altar boy at the church he served in 1977.


Stroh May Pull Financing Of Audubon TV Specials
LEAD: The Stroh Brewing Company is reviewing its $600,000 financing of National Audubon Society television specials after loggers, upset with a future program on the Pacific Northwest's ancient forests, threatened to boycott the brewery's products.


Confidence Off Last Month
LEAD: Consumer confidence dropped in August after rising steadily for several months, according to a survey released yesterday by the Conference Board.
The business group said its


Hynes for Brooklyn District Attorney
LEAD: The Brooklyn District Attorney's office faces a rising epidemic of drug-related crime in the borough, to be fought with a burdened army of 400 assistant prosecutors and a strained $36 million budget.
Three people are seeking in the Sept. 12 Democratic primary to succeed Elizabeth Holtzman, who is running for New York City comptroller.


Report on the Iowa's Blast Called Inconclusive
LEAD: Nearly 20 weeks after an explosion in a gun turret killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa, the Navy plans to release an accident report that Pentagon officials have said will not state conclusively what caused the blast.


Prince George, Largest Hotel For the Homeless, to Close
LEAD: The Prince George, the biggest family shelter in Manhattan, is in the latest group of welfare hotels being phased out as temporary housing for the homeless.


Tool Exports Up by 25.9%
LEAD: The United States exported 25.9 percent more machine tools in June than in May, but imports remained high.
The National Machine Tool Builders Association said today that imports had dropped 5.5 percent in the month but were still 24.5 percent higher than they were a year ago.


Vereeniging Journal; Where the Boers Bargained, the Die-Hards Rally
LEAD: In 1902, the peace talks that ended the Boer War were played out in this town on the rolling grasslands of the southern Transvaal.


16 Shows and Many Stars Are Scheduled for Broadway This Year
LEAD: From Vanessa Redgrave to Dustin Hoffman, from Tyne Daly to Tommy Tune and from Rex Harrison to Sting, Broadway will be booming this fall, with 16 shows so far scheduled to open by year's end.


Our Towns; Can a Village Incorporate And Help Itself?
LEAD: Take a walk down Straight Path, a busy four-lane thoroughfare that bisects this Suffolk County hamlet.
The signs of blight and despair abound.


Chess
LEAD: There are those who play poker as though it were chess and those who play chess as though it were poker.
These latter ones get a fat share of the brilliancy prizes.


U.S. Presses Japan on Trade Surplus
LEAD: The United States today pressed Japan to make immediate changes in its economy to reduce its $50 billion-a-year trade surplus with America, saying action was vital for their relationship.


Drug May Preserve Heart Tissue After Attack
LEAD: A NEW class of drugs may prevent some of the damage to heart cells that often follows a heart attack, recent research indicates.


An Abundance of Aircraft Brings Gridlock to Skies
LEAD: To those rush hour-commuters who sit immobilized in traffic on the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Drive, gazing enviously at the helicopters above, take heart.
Gridlock has gone airborne.
More helicopters, seaplanes, airplanes and blimps are circling Manhattan than ever before.
For the last 10 years, the airborne traffic around New York has increased about 5 percent annually, said Lenny Rider, director of heliports for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


Substitution at Issue as College Play Starts
LEAD: The college soccer season started this weekend, amid some dissension over decisions made off the field since last year.


Young Pros, Aiding Those Starting Out
LEAD: WHERE does a new junior media planner, one of the multitude starting their professional lives today on Madison Avenue, turn for help if she can't tell the difference between BBDO and TBWA?
The Young Professionals may be the answer.


Collinsworth Waived As Teams Cut Rosters
LEAD: The former All-Pro wide receiver, Cris Collinsworth, and Jim Breech, a 10-year place-kicker, were cut yesterday by the Cincinnati Bengals as National Football League teams got down to their final 47-man rosters.


Hadassah Lustig Wed to Judah Isaacs
LEAD: Hadassah Rose Lustig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oskar Lustig of Downsview, Ontario, was married yesterday to Judah Ezriel Isaacs, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joakim Isaacs of Yonkers.
Rabbi Yitzchak Adler performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Avraham Yoseph in Thornhill, Ontario.


Cardinals Beat Expos, 4-1, To Run Streak to 3 Games
LEAD: Pedro Guerrero, a .419 hitter with runners in scoring position, got the ball rolling.
The Montreal Expos kept it rolling.
Guerrero's sixth-inning run-scoring single tied the score, and shoddy defense led to three more runs as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat Montreal, 4-1, tonight for their third consecutive victory.


Cardinal in the Auschwitz Whirlwind
LEAD: Long a figure in efforts to steer Poland through economic and political upheaval, the country's Roman Catholic Primate, Jozef Cardinal Glemp, now finds himself under fire from Jews and fellow Catholics for his intervention in another dispute: the presence of a convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp.


Let's Not Advocate Destruction of the Old
LEAD: To the Editor:


Azerbaijani Workers Stage a Protest Strike
LEAD: Strikers silenced factories, stores and public transportation in Azerbaijan today in a protest intended to reassert their republic's control of Nagorno-Karabakh, a region disputed with neighboring Armenia.


Venezuelan Jobless Pay
LEAD: Venezuela has established its first unemployment insurance system to compensate workers who are dismissed during a recession.
A presidential decree published in newspapers here on Sunday said employers and workers would contribute to the plan, which should be in effect by Nov. 30.
The Government plans to set up an $80 million fund to compensate workers who lose their jobs after a freeze on dismissals ends on Sept.


Officer's Second Calling Is a Weekend Ministry
LEAD: Theodore Kanellakis leads two lives.
Five days a week, he is a police officer in New York City.
But on weekends, he changes uniform and becomes the minister of an Episcopal church here in rural Dutchess County.


Space Sickness
LEAD: Three European scientist-astronauts have developed a method that simulates space sickness on the ground, using a large centrifuge to simulate the conditions of a rocket launching.


Davis Asks For Help In UAL Bid
LEAD: Marvin Davis is seeking the help of foreign airlines in an effort to top a $6.75 billion offer for the UAL Corporation from a group that includes the company's management, its pilots union and British Airways, a person involved in the California billionaire's bid said over the weekend.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Southern Drawls  Q. Why do Southerners drawl?
A.
Southern speech is not really slower, said Walt Wolfram, a dialect expert.
It is just that some vowels that are single syllables in other dialects turn out to be two syllables or are definitely lengthened in Southern speech, he said.


Dinkins Upstages Opponents at Labor Day Parade
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, the candidate endorsed by the Labor Day parade's sponsor, upstaged four of his mayoral opponents yesterday as he headed the line of march with the Governor and a handful of other elected officials while Mayor Edward I. Koch and the other candidates were relegated to the rear echelons.


Reporter's Notebook; In Sri Lanka, he Dainty and the Dead
LEAD: At a terrace restaurant here, as the Indian Ocean thundered 100 feet away, a choreographer switched on some music and instructed eight young women on how to walk, sway and pirouette for the annual Miss Sri Lanka contest.


Mets Fall a Bit Closer to the Wayside
LEAD: The fans, after several uninspired, aborted efforts at starting the wave, were finally given a compelling reason to leave their seats more or less as one in top of the ninth inning.
It was, though, a joyless bit of sychronized movement last night at Shea Stadium, as the majority of the 46,049 fans, their heads hung from too much exasperated shaking, marched for the parking lots.


Group Cuts USG Stake
LEAD: Desert Partners, an investment group based in Midland, Tex., disclosed on Friday that it had lowered its stake in the USG Corporation to 4.6 percent, or 2.4 million shares, from 5.7 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Desert Partners said its stake in the Chicago-based gypsum manufacturer was lowered because it distributed 564,422 USG shares to an unidentified limited partner that withdrew from the partnership on Thursday.


For Montana, History Flows In Cattle Drive
LEAD: The lead longhorns of a modern cattle drive crested a ridge in the golden light of sunrise this morning, with 2,700 cattle forming an undulating, bawling river of beef behind them.


INSIDE
LEAD:  139 Are Reported Dead In Cuba's Worst Air Crash  At least 139 people died when a Cuban airliner carrying Italian tourists crashed near Havana.
Page.
A9 A Brazilian jetliner with 54 people aboard was reported missing in the Amazon.
Page.
A9.
Tools Against Racism  Psychologists are refining their understanding of bigotry and devising new ways to fight and prevent it.


In a Close Shave, Yankees Prevail
LEAD: For most of the season, the Yankees' pitching resources have been bare and their hitting attack stripped naked.
Now their trainer's head is nude.


Transactions
LEAD:  FOOTBALL  ATLANTA (NFC) - Waived Bob Brotzki, offensive lineman; Keith English, punter; Undra Johnson and Greg Paterra, running backs; James Milling and Kitrick Taylor, wide receivers; Gary Baldinger, Ted Chapman and Greg Brown, defensive linemen; George Lilja, center; Ray Jackson and Calvin Loveall, defensive backs; Danta Whitaker, tight end; and George


Fahd Postpones U.S. Visit
LEAD: King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has postponed a state visit to the United States for a second time, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said today.
The King is putting off the visit, scheduled for Sept. 14, ''due to the pursuit of the peace process through the Arab League'' in Lebanon, Mr.
Fitzwater told reporters aboard Air Force One as President Bush returned from vacation in Maine.


De Roche Wins Jerome
LEAD: Almost everyone laughed when De Roche was entered for the Grade I Jerome Handicap, but the obscure 3-year-old gelding benefited from a late scratch and a lackluster performance by Fast Play to win the $224,800 race yesterday at Belmont Park.


Woman Killled as Motorboat Hits an Anchored Houseboat
LEAD: A motorboat knifed through a houseboat anchored off the Florida Keys on Sunday night, killing a woman asleep on a couch, the authorities said today.


Iran Presses Mitsui Claim
LEAD: Iran is demanding $1.5 billion in compensation from the Mitsui conglomerate of Japan for its abandonment of a petrochemical plant in southern Iran, the official Islamic Republic News Agency reported on Friday.


Justice
LEAD: Felix S. Bloch and his poodle, Mephisto, are off the front pages these days.
But the inquiry into whether the veteran diplomat was a Soviet spy quietly grinds on, with no end in sight.


Cuomo Calls For 'New Era Of Harmony'
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday dropped another cryptic hint in New York City's mayoral race when he said he supported the candidate ''who can best bring this city together,'' a remark quickly taken by supporters of David N. Dinkins to mean a tilt toward the Manhattan Borough President.


Airport Shootout in Medellin
LEAD: A gunman opened fire at the airport in the seat of Colombia's cocaine industry, killing a man before he was slain by security officers.
Page A3.


WASHINGTON TALK: Snapshot; Maneuvering by Ships and by Bureaucracies
LEAD: Analyses of rammings, groundings and collisions, the United States Coast Guard once noted, almost always focus on human error and seldom on a vessel's maneuverability.


The Editorial Notebook; Bart Giamatti's Journey
LEAD: In early 1988 it fell to A. Bartlett Giamatti to deliver a eulogy in Brooklyn for a friend named Jack Madden, who had helped recruit Mr.
Giamatti to the presidency of Yale.
Mr.
Madden, Mr.
Giamatti said, believed deeply that ideas mattered and he cared equally about institutions - not least because institutions protected ideas and gave them ''a life far longer than any individual's.


Aragon Shuts Its Doors, The Result of a Default
LEAD: Dennis P. Long, the former president of Anheuser-Busch Inc., has closed the doors of the Aragon Companies, the advertising and marketing firm he bought 11 months ago and the parent company of Kenrick Advertising, St.
Louis's largest independent agency.


Bridge
LEAD: The biggest cash prize in bridge tournament history, putting the game on a par with many professional golf and tennis tournaments, will be offered in Atlantic City next May.


At CUNY Graduate School, Struggle Over the Presidency
LEAD: In a power struggle over the leadership of the City University of New York's Graduate School and University Center, the university's Chancellor, Dr.
Joseph S. Murphy, is seeking to replace the school's president, arguing that the school needs more vigorous leadership, university officials said.


Deal to Purchase Benito
LEAD: Fahlgren &amp; Swink, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies' Lintas U.S.A. division, has agreed in principle to acquire Benito Advertising in Tampa, Fla.
A 12-year-old ad agency whose clients include McDonald's, The Tampa Tribune and the Cadillac Dealers of Florida, Kentucky and Indiana, Benito bills about $40 million annually.


Keye/Donna Creative Chief
LEAD: Keye/Donna/Pearlstein announced Friday that its chairman, Paul F. Keye, would relinquish his title of creative director on Oct. 1 to Marcus Kemp, who is joining the Los Angeles agency from Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York.


Gasser Returns
LEAD: Sandra Gasser, the Swiss middle-distance runner who unsuccesfully challenged a two-year drug ban in court, starts her comeback tomorrow in an 800-meter race at Bern.


Review/Television; The Bushes and David Frost Chat at Kennebunkport
LEAD: On a porch of President Bush's house in Kennebunkport, Me., David Frost and Mr.
Bush, both in sweaters over open-necked shirts, are having a clubby chat, joined for a time by Mrs.
Bush, to the accompaniment of the squawking of birds.
Taped last Tuesday, ''The President and Mrs.
Bush Talking With David Frost,'' is the President's first television conversation since his inauguration.


Talking Business with Hedien of Allstate Insurance; Insurers Tackle California's Law
LEAD: A representative of the Allstate Insurance Company will be the lead-off witness this week in the first public hearing by the California Department of Insurance on how large a return auto insurers should be permitted to earn under Proposition 103.
That new law, enacted by voters in November, mandates an across-the-board rollback in auto-insurance premiums.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  ROWING  Americans Impressive: Kris Karlson, the 1988 world champion in women's lightweight single sculls, won her opening heat yesterday at the world championships at Lake Bled, Yugoslavia.
The United States women's team, led by Karlson's 6.65-second victory over Angela Schuster of West Germany, in the single sculls, also had an impressive row from Anna Seaton and Stephanie Maxwell in the pair without coxswain event.


Maradona Evasive
LEAD: The soccer star Diego Maradona returned to Italy yesterday from Argentina, a month later than expected, but remained evasive whether he planned to rejoin his Italian team, Napoli.


300 Protest in Tompkins Square After Attack on 4 Homosexuals
LEAD: About 300 people demonstrated in Tompkins Square Park in lower Manhattan last night protesting an attack by four lacrosse players on four gay men who had come to the park for a concert, the police said.


Physicians See a Familial Link in Ovarian Cancer
LEAD: GILDA RADNER, the comedian, died of ovarian cancer at age 42 last May, unaware of a crucial medical fact that might have helped save her, or at least helped extend her life.


Mexico and Japan Expected To Solidify Economic Ties
LEAD: Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu arrived here today on a three-day official visit that is expected to solidify a diversifying and rapidly growing economic relationship whose importance to Mexico is exceeded only by Mexico's ties to the United States.


Violence in Coal Strike Is Increasing
LEAD: Shots have been fired and barricades set up as a coal strike that started in April turns increasingly violent in southern West Virginia.


Storm Sewage Is a Worsening Shore Threat
LEAD: As the beach season winds to a close, health officials say they have won a victory over the medical waste that closed shorelines last summer.
But even without hypodermic needles washing up, dozens of beaches were quietly closed this year by a problem far harder to avoid: rain, and the runoff that followed.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.Tuesday None Wednesday New-car sales Aug.
U.S. productivity 2d qtr.
Thursday None Friday Consumer credit July


For H.U.D. Staff, Demoralization Hasn't Ended; Carla Hills Defended
LEAD: To the Editor:


Man Dies in Boating Mishap
LEAD: A Vineland man died this morning after suffering head injuries in a boating accident in Great Egg Harbor Inlet, marine police said.
The man, Barry Lang, 43 years old, was helping to anchor a 24-foot boat about 10:45 A.M. when a large wave hit the vessel and forced it into the Ocean Drive bridge, said Sgt.


Rip Sewell, 'Eephus Ball' Pitcher For Pittsburgh Pirates, Dies at 82
LEAD: Truett Banks (Rip) Sewell, the former Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher who delighted baseball fans with his ''eephus'' pitch and later in his life inspired others by remaining active after losing both legs, died of pneumonia and kidney failure Sunday.
He was 82 years old.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 4, 1989:
TUESDAY
Albertsons Inc
Cincinnati Bell
WEDNESDAY
A L Labs
Pennwalt Corp
Allegheny Pwr Sys
Portland Gen
Browning Ferris Inds
Premier Indl
Chyron Corp
Stanhome Inc
Corroon &amp; Black
Starrett L S Co
Handleman Co Del
TIS Mortgage Invt
H J Heinz
USF&amp;G Corp
Helmerich &amp; Payne
Witco Corp
Louisville G &amp; E
THURSDAY
Angell Real Estate
Englehard Corp
Atlantic Energy Inc NJ
Fieldcrest Cannon
Baker Fentress &amp; Co
SPS Technologies
Curtiss Wright
FRIDAY
Abbott Labs$


Bush Sent Letters to Teheran, Iranian Says
LEAD: An Iranian official says President Bush has written letters to Iran's leaders, and that Western hostages held in Lebanon may be freed if Washington releases Iranian assets, the Iranian press agency said today.


Corrections
LEAD: The Personal Computers column in Science Times last Tuesday gave an incorrect price for Quicken version 3.0, a personal and small business financial management program from Intuit Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif.
It costs $59.95.


DISUNITY IS FEARED AS BUSH MAPS WAR ON DRUG USE IN U.S.
LEAD: Even as President Bush prepares to declare war on drugs Tuesday evening, bureaucratic infighting threatens to undermine the plan of attack.


In 9th Summit, Nonaligned Bloc Is Likely to Ease Anti-U.S. Policy
LEAD: The countries that consider themselves nonaligned opened a summit conference today that is expected to bring a departure from the movement's anti-American and anti-Western positions of recent years.


Bottles and Bag Breakers
LEAD: No more broken glass on highway shoulders.
No more flies feeding on discarded, not-quite-empty bottles at the beach.
No more crumpled beer cans clogging gutters.
Those were the promises of New York's bottle law - and by and large, they've been kept, particularly in smaller communities.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Solberg Barred
LEAD: The javelin thrower Trine Solberg of Norway has been barred from competition for two years because of a positive test for performance-enhancing drugs after she won a European Cup meet in Brussels last month, the Norwegian Athletics Association announced yesterday.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
DDB Needham Retail, San Francisco, a unit of the Omnicom Group, will promote participation in the 1990 United States Census through a print, broadcast and in-store campaign involving national and regional retailers.


Capital Mayor on the Offensive
LEAD: Taking the offensive against reports that he smoked crack, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. spoke to reporters today for the first time since the allegations surfaced.


Face Masks Fool the Bengal Tigers
LEAD: FOR the moment, the Bengal tiger has met its match in the two-faced human.


Saab Talks With Ford Confirmed
LEAD: Saab-Scania, the Swedish automotive and aerospace company, whose car division has been piling up steep losses, and the Ford Motor Company confirmed today that the two have been holding talks about a possible linkup.


For Dieters With a Sweet Tooth, Scientists Offer New Choices
LEAD: AMERICANS who are concerned about fitness and weight are on the verge of gaining a far wider choice of low-calorie sweeteners even as a highly competitive search goes on for a perfect sugar substitute.


Tutu and 3 Aides Arrested at Cape Town Protest
LEAD: The police briefly detained Anglican Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu and three aides today after breaking up a protest meeting against the exclusion of blacks from Wednesday's general election.


Illinois Rallies to Shock U.S.C.
LEAD: Jeff George threw two touchdown passes in the final six minutes of the game, the last a 20-yarder to Steve Williams with 2 minutes 19 seconds left, to give Illinois a 14-13 upset victory over Southern Cal tonight.


Holiday Reduces Offerings of Bond Issues
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues for this week, shortened by Labor Day, is confined to today's auction of new three-month and six-month Treasury bills.
By late on Friday, the three-month bill was bid at 7.84 percent and the six-month bill at 7.76 percent.
TAXABLE  ONE DAY THIS WEEK


All Thames Victims Found
LEAD: The police said today that they had recovered all 51 victims of a crash between a pleasure boat and a barge and identified the final victim as the man who chartered the pleasure craft to celebrate his 26th birthday.
The last body identified was that of Antonio de Vasconcellos.


East Side Drug Patrol's Tactic: Stare
LEAD: Million-dollar town houses and luxury high-rises on the East Side may seem an unlikely setting for a crack market.
But police raids and crackdowns elsewhere drove drug dealers into the affluent block bounded by 29th and 30th Streets, Park Avenue South and Lexington Avenue.


Careers; Recruiting For Nonprofit Boards
LEAD: DALE WINSTON, president of Battalia &amp; Associates Inc., a management recruiting firm in New York, thinks many nonprofit institutions need more effective boards.
To that end, she now offers to find them directors, with no fee involved.


5 Japanese Arrested In Uranium-Sale Plot
LEAD: Five Japanese tried to sell almost nine pounds of uranium to the American Embassy in Tokyo and have been arrested for illegal possesion of nuclear substances, the police announced today.


Lavish Track Also Has a Fine Attitude
LEAD: There has never been a race track like the new Arlington Park.
Unfortunately, there may never be another like it.


China Dismisses Culture Minister, An Advocate of Artistic Freedom
LEAD: The Chinese Government said Monday that it had dismissed Culture Minister Wang Meng, a noted novelist who was exiled during the Cultural Revolution and whose rise to government power three years ago was hailed as a sign of renewed literary freedom.


Executive Moves Up At American Express
LEAD: Joan Edelman Spero, a former assistant professor of political science at Columbia, is moving another notch up the corporate ladder at the American Express Company.


I.B.F. Bout in Armenia
LEAD: The first world-title boxing match in the Soviet Union will take place in Yerevan, Armenia, on Oct. 28, according to an official of the International Boxing Federation.


The Bush Drug Plan: Nothing New
LEAD: Tonight, President George Bush will unveil his new drug strategy.
Draft versions have already circulated widely, and the drug czar, William Bennett, has been actively promoting the plan.
Written with an easy candor unusual in Government documents, the report promises to spark a long-needed national debate on the goals of our drug policy.


Savings Oversight Is Big Issue for Congress
LEAD: It took Congress six months to hammer out the $159 billion bailout of the savings and loan industry, and when lawmakers return this month they will have to begin to sort out all they have wrought and to make sure the industry's new regulatory mechanisms are working.


Saving All Faces in Independent Gibraltar
LEAD: To the Editor:


15 Arabs Accused of Espionage Are Slain by Palestinian Radicals
LEAD: The Palestinian radical group headed by Abu Nidal said today that it had put 15 Palestinians to death after accusing them of espionage and committing covert operations against the Palestinian guerrilla groups in Lebanon.


More Minority Voices on the City Council?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Insider Gets a 5-Year Term
LEAD: A former partner in a large Chicago law firm has been sentenced to five years in prison in what is believed to be the longest term ever issued for insider stock trading.


Flatbush, 60's; Bensonhurst, '89
LEAD: It was a weekly ritual played out before my eyes on the corner where the schoolyard was, in the heart of Flatbush, Brooklyn, almost 30 years ago.


A.&amp;S. Makes a Big Bet In Manhattan Retailing
LEAD: Across the street from Greeley Square, where men and women living out of shopping bags sometimes doze on park benches in the middle of the afternoon, a sleeping giant is awakening.


The Edinburgh Festival Closes With Its Fringe
LEAD: Two plays that flopped in New York six years ago have delighted critics and audiences at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.


U S West Names Unit's President
LEAD: U S West Inc. yesterday put James Ozanne in charge of its financial-services unit.


Offering 'Perestroika Perks,' Aeroflot Beckons U.S. Fliers
LEAD: Aeroflot, the Soviet national airline, will begin a most American advertising campaign today, appealing directly to business travelers from the United States.


British Link Bomb To Rushdie
LEAD: Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad today investigated a bombing near a department store window display of books that an anonymous caller linked to Salman Rushdie's novel ''The Satanic Verses.''


Ravitch, Ignoring Skeptics, Says 'I Do Have a Chance'
LEAD: Publicly Richard Ravitch maintains that he ''still has a shot at winning'' the Democratic mayoral primary.


Last Titan 3 Rocket Succeeds
LEAD: The Air Force's last Titan 3 rocket blasted off today with a secret military satellite, ending a quarter-century of launchings by a workhorse booster that has lofted more than 200 satellites into space.


Connors Forfeits a Game, Then Beats Edberg
LEAD: Still mean and once-again lean, Jimmy Connors, the 37-year-old perennial rabble rouser who shed 15 pounds to be match-tough for this tournament, was in his element last night.


Psychologists Find Ways To Break Racism's Hold
LEAD: AS racial violence continues to roil communities like Bensonhurst and more subtle prejudice permeates many American institutions, psychologists are refining their understanding of how bigotry develops and devising new ways to fight and prevent it.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Aug. 12 misstated an action taken by the Termiflex Corporation.
It reduced its work force by about 20 percent, not 29 percent.


People
LEAD: *
George E. Jaccoma has been named chairman of strategic and creative services and head of a new strategic review board at Martin Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell.


Visiting a Mall, by Phone
LEAD: PRODIGY is a fairly new consumer-oriented service that takes most of the fuss out of communicating by computer.
I've been using it on and off for more than two months.


Erasing Johnson's Record Recommended
LEAD: The International Amateur Athletic Federation Council, the executive committee of track and field's world governing body, voted in Barcelona, Spain, yesterday to recommend that Ben Johnson's name be erased from the record books because of his admitted use of anabolic steroids.


Mayotte Subdues Chang Again in Four Sets
LEAD: At Wimbledon, Michael Chang put behind him the glory days of Paris and his domination there as the youngest winner of a Grand Slam event in tennis history, as he found himself pinned to the baseline in an unconditional straight-set surrender to Tim Mayotte.


Two Afghans: Two Loyalties But One Hope
LEAD: Sayed Hafizullah and Mohammed Khan are Muslims, proud of Afghanistan and eager for an end to the war that has ravaged the country.
And they have something else in common: As fighters on opposite sides of the same battlefront, one as a Government soldier and the other as a guerrilla, they shoot at each other almost every day.


Profiling the Candidates
LEAD: Others doubt it, but Richard Ravitch says he has a chance of beocming Mayor.
The first of six articles on the candidates is on page B1.


Cowboys Stake Sale
LEAD: The Dallas Cowboys are living up to their billing as ''America's team.'' At least 12 percent of the club is now owned by the Government.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is a shame that the United States cannot meet its own needs and has to import blood from anywhere.''  -Dr.
A.
William Shafer of the American Red Cross.  [ A1:1. ]


Falsifying List Prices Is Unethical and Illegal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Trade Bingham to the Falcons
LEAD: The realities of pro football struck home today for several Jets, players who had made a six-figure living because of finely honed but narrow skills.


Helping a Serious Play on Broadway
LEAD: In what the producers say is the first instance of a resident Off Broadway theater company offering a Broadway play as part of its regular subscription season, the Manhattan Theater Club plans to give its 12,000 subscribers tickets to ''The Piano Lesson'' by August Wilson when it opens in the spring.


Books of The Times; Cynthia Ozick on the Holocaust, Idolatry and Loss
LEAD:  The Shawl  By Cynthia Ozick  70 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95.


Richard Sandler, 50, An Editor at Newsday
LEAD: Richard Sandler, sports editor of Newsday, died of pancreatic cancer Sunday at Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 50 years old and lived in Northport, L.I.


At a Pigeon Shoot for Labor Day, a Protester Speaks Out


French TV Show on Books Is Ending
LEAD: Shocked French book lovers are mourning the announced demise of a talk show that turned the literary world into top-rated television.


Quartet in Free Concert
LEAD: A performance by the Composers String Quartet, with the cellist Carlos Prieto and the pianist Doris Stevenson, will close the fifth season of free concerts sponsored by WQXR.
The concert, at 7 P.M.
Sept. 12 at Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, can be heard live on WQXR FM (96.3) and AM (1560).
The program will include works by Rachmaninoff, Tchaikovsky, Faure and Jerome Kern.


Nonaligned Nations In Crisis
LEAD: Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya provides the only flashy show and firebrand talk of the ninth nonaligned summit meeting.
He sent five camels ahead to be milked for him and two horses for mounted guards at the tent pitched in his embassy's garden, and proclaimed he had come ''to save the movement.''


Brazil Victory Open to Interpretation
LEAD: While officials from Brazil and Chile traded accusations, soccer's world governing body today made no decision on Brazil's controversial 1-0 victory Sunday in a World Cup qualifying game.


'Impossible' Form of Matter Takes Spotlight In Study of Solids
LEAD: QUASICRYSTALS, a puzzling form of solid matter regarded as impossible until five years ago, have now moved to center stage in a worldwide investigation into the nature of solid matter.


Hardship Seen At Car Dealers
LEAD: Nearly half of the 25,000 automobile dealers in the United States are either losing money or just breaking even, and many may not survive until next year, the head of the National Auto Dealers Association said last week.


Is Mr. de Klerk Sincere About Blacks' Rights?
LEAD: Will F. W. de Klerk, the Afrikaner lawyer chosen by the National Party to succeed P.W.
Botha as President of South Africa, give blacks real political rights?


Slow Talks By Andersen, Waterhouse
LEAD: Arthur Andersen &amp; Company and Price Waterhouse, the two large accounting firms that had hoped to reach a merger agreement by early this month, are expected to announce shortly that they will need additional time for discussions, several people in the industry said.


For H.U.D. Staff, Demoralization Hasn't Ended
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peru Miners' New Benefits
LEAD: President Alan Garcia announced new health and wage benefits for Peru's 70,000 miners on Saturday, two days after they ended a national strike.


Augie Lio, 71, Editor And Ex-Football Star
LEAD: Augie Lio, a member of the College Football Hall of Fame and a pro kicker with four teams in the 1940's, died Sunday at his home here.
He was 71 years old.


For H.U.D. Staff, Demoralzation Hasn't Ended; On Mrs. McGann's Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


Challenging Airfone's Monopoly
LEAD: Twenty years after forming a company that helped break up the Bell telephone system, once the world's largest monopoly, John D. Goeken is seeking to crack another telephone monopoly, the GTE Corporation's service that allows airline passengers to make calls during flights.


Happy Days for Economic Advisers
LEAD: In the early 1980's, the influence of the President's Council of Economic Advisers had fallen to such an ebb that upon his re-election Ronald Reagan seriously entertained the idea of abolishing it.


Strong Hurricane May Near Caribbean, Forecasters Say
LEAD: Hurricane Gabrielle, with winds up to 130 miles per hour, continued a course in the Atlantic today that forecasters said would probably take it just north of the Caribbean islands.
They said that later this week the storm could threaten the United States coast.


By Design; Shoulder-Grazing Earrings
LEAD: A few years ago, the discreet diamond stud was the all-purpose earring for fashionable women.
Now the pendulum has swung.
Big bold buttons are the earrings of choice for daytime, and shoulder-grazing drops are the way to go for evening.
With the new short hairdos, something has to fill in the space between head and shoulder.


Cuban Air Crash Toll Rises to 139
LEAD: The death toll in Cuba's worst air crash rose to at least 139 today as local authorities disclosed that 14 people in a village near Havana's Jose Marti airport were killed when a Cubana Airlines jet went down in flames and demolished their homes.


EUROPE SUPPLYING BLOOD FOR THE U.S.
LEAD: Americans are increasingly turning to Europeans to meet the need for blood tranfusions in surgery, accidents and the treatment of cancer and many other diseases.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bell Canada, Montreal, a unit of BCE Inc., named Richard D. French vice president of government, public policy and regulatory affairs.


Markets Closed
LEAD: The nation's stock, bond and commodity markets were closed yesterday in observance of Labor Day.
Government offices and most banks were also closed.


Market Place; Conrail's Success Stirring Rumors
LEAD: CONRAIL, a company born of bankruptcies, and one whose profitable operation seemed highly unlikely less than a decade ago, has done rather well since the Government sold it off less than three years ago.


General Re Sets Debenture Offering
LEAD: The General Re Corporation, a reinsurance holding company, is offering $150 million in debentures due in 2009 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


2d Plea in First Jersey Case
LEAD: A former broker at First Jersey Securities Inc. admitted today that he had helped launder $450,000 of his clients' money, partly at the direction of a branch manager who was also identified as a top-ranking member of the firm.


Political Analysts' Leader
LEAD: Judith N. Shklar, the John Cowles Professor of Government at Harvard University, took office Saturday as the 85th president of the American Political Science Association.
Dr.
Shklar, a political theorist, is the first woman to head the 10,500-member organization, which has been meeting here.


Fred Meyer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fred Meyer Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
487,668,000
472,488,000
Net inc
7,442,000
10,630,000
Share earns
.30
.44
6mo sales
1,107,744,000
1,038,219,000
Net inc
13,178,000
16,331,000
Share earns
.53
.67


U.S. Charges Bank Fraud
LEAD: The former president of the Vernon Savings and Loan Association, Patrick G. King, was indicted today by a Federal grand jury in Dallas on 13 counts of bank conspiracy, false entry and misapplication of funds, the Justice Department said.


Dalgarno Signs
LEAD: Brad Dalgarno, a right wing for the Islanders, has signed a multiyear contract with the club, according to General Manager Bill Torrey.
The 6-3, 215-pound Dalgarno was the Islanders' first draft choice in 1985 and he had his best season last year despite missing the last 20 games of the season with a face injury.


Promoting Texas: Ribs to Chili
LEAD: ''Come to a country where the menus are in English and the food has an accent,'' an advertisement says. ''Visit a country where the natives are friendly and the language barrier is easily overcome,'' says another.
Both trumpet, ''Texas: It's Like a Whole Other Country.''


Suffering A Fool Ungladly
LEAD: The court jester at the Royal Britain Exhibition here made unkind jokes about the royal family, and the museum's managers, not amused, told him to stop or else.
He was suspended today.
The marketing director for the exhibition, Kim Keble-White, said James Lovell, a 24-year-old actor who had been appearing as the fully costumed court jester, could have his job back if he cut the offending material from his act.


Why Right-Hand Rule for Mazes Works; Ice Cream Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rivals' Contest Aids Buffalo's Mayor
LEAD: Mayor James D. Griffin is a balding, bellicose man who calls his detractors ''goofs'' and ''liars.'' And like Edward I. Koch, his sometimes caustic counterpart at the other end of New York State, he has been in City Hall ever since winning a long-shot campaign in 1977.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: HERE we are, back from our vacations and with lots to do and a few entertaining obligations left over from spring.
The microwave oven can help solve the problem by turning out pates in dazzlingly short times and with no sloppy, dangerous hot-water baths.
Put out two pates to make a cocktail party with some breads, mustards and cornichons, or use one as a lead-in to dinner.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Playtex Family Account To Margeotes, Fertitta
LEAD: Margeotes, Fertitta &amp; Weiss yesterday won the advertising account for a new line of hair care products from the Playtex Family Products Corporation.


Prague to Make Changes, but Not Dramatic Ones
LEAD: In a time of dramatic change in much of Eastern Europe, ''no dramatic change in the situation in Czechoslovakia can be expected,'' the Government spokesman insists.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It might not be the way I want people to remember me, but at least I'll be remembered.''  - Zina Garrison, after defeating Chris Evert.  [ D23:6. ]


Fabricland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fabricland Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
18,676,000
15,500,000
Net inc
680,000
475,000
Share earns
.25
.18
Yr sales
74,537,000
63,101,000
Net inc
3,100,000
b2,808,000
Share earns
1.16
1.05


Mitchell Energy &amp; Developent reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mitchell Energy &amp; Developent (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
148,476,000
131,934,000
Net inc
6,499,000
b8,388,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo rev
306,698,000
284,041,000
Net inc
12,568,000
c18,893,000
Share earns
.27
.40


Chicago
LEAD: IN its lavish food and elegant interior, Mareva's restaurant on Milwaukee Avenue evokes the all-but-vanished aristocratic culture of prewar Poland.
Lately, underneath the lively Slavic melodies from the grand piano and wandering violinist, there can also be sensed the excitement of new possibilities for the old country in the intense conversations of


Hub Recycling Company Owners Back in Court


The Nature of Racism: 2 Clergymen Disagree
LEAD: Since the killing of a 16-year-old black, Yusuf K. Hawkins, by a gang of whites in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, there have been expressions of outrage, grief and remorse.


Base Ten Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Base Ten Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,596,000
8,899,000
Net inc
b983,000
c164,000
Share earns
.28
.05
9mo rev
33,208,000
28,887,000
Net inc
b2,322,000
c607,000
Share earns
.66
.17


Unidentified Suitor Rejected by Syncor
LEAD: The Syncor International Corporation rejected a merger proposal it said it received last week from an unidentified company, adding that it is not for sale.
The rejected bid was apparently made at about the same time as a bid by the Van Kampen Merritt unit of the Xerox Corporation, which notified Syncor last week of an offer of $7.57 a share.


Adtec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adtec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,534,000
5,653,000
Net loss
245,000
b253,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr rev
21,628,000
14,690,000
Net inc
226,000
645,000
Share earns
.11
.31
b-Net income


The Bagel's New York Accent Is Fading
LEAD: THE clash between old and new, tradition and progress, father and son that befell Bell Bagels in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn started when J. J. Bell wanted to experiment with an oven that both steams and bakes bagels, eliminating the step of boiling them before baking.
His father, Marty Bell, himself the son of a bagel baker from


Mandarich Signs A Four-Year Contract
LEAD: Tony Mandarich, the No. 2 overall selection in the National Football League draft, signed a four-year contract worth $4.4 million with the Green Bay Packers yesterday.
Mandarich missed all of the Packers' training camp during the 45-day contract dispute.


Random Drug Tests for Police
LEAD: The New York City Police Department will begin random drug testing of all officers, from patrolmen to the Commissioner.
Page B1.


Wang Adds 4 New PC's
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc., seeking to restore customer confidence and increase sales after a devastating loss and management shakeup, announced a new line of four I.B.M.-compatible personal computers today.


Big Cocoa Selloff in London Sends U.S. Prices Tumbling
LEAD: The prices of cocoa futures tumbled yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York after a selloff on Monday in London that analysts attributed to signs that supplies would remain abundant.


Record Summer for Movies
LEAD: The blockbuster action film ''Batman'' and the comedies ''Honey, I Shrunk the Kids'' and ''Parenthood'' helped Hollywood rack up a record summer box office of $2.05 billion, according to figures released Tuesday.


East Germany Tries to Persuade Its Refugees in Hungary to Return
LEAD: East German officials began trying today to persuade East Germans here seeking to reach the West to return home.
But the efforts were met with disdain and anger from refugees already made edgy by indications that their release to the West could still be days or weeks away.


Soviet Astronauts En Route To Vacant Space Station Mir
LEAD: A Soviet rocket emblazoned with advertising blasted off early today, carrying two astronauts to a space station that has been vacant since April.


Japan Holds 5 in Bid to Sell Uranium to U.S.
LEAD: Five Japanese have been arrested for trying to sell almost nine pounds of refined uranium to the United States Embassy for $83 million, the police here said today.


Blacks Strike Over South African Vote
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of South African blacks stayed home from work and school today to observe a general strike protesting the exclusion of the country's black majority from the parliamentary elections on Wednesday.


Accounting Talks Go On
LEAD: Arthur Andersen and Price Waterhouse announced yesterday that their exploratory merger discussions were continuing, as the two former competitors seek to tackle the 1990's jointly.


Crossing Miles and Years to Relive a Dream
LEAD: One night a year for 22 years, Madalena Porto Tavares said, she dreamed of returning for a wintertime visit to the small college where she had studied as a freshman.
Last week, her dream became real.


Evert Bows Out as Garrison Prevails, 7-6, 6-2
LEAD: Chris Evert's retirement descended on her yesterday afternoon with the gentle thud of one of Zina Garrison's deceptive and destructive drop shots.


Can Picker: $35 a Shift, No Benefits, No Bosses
LEAD: The man with the worn blue jeans and yellow rubber gloves pushed his grocery cart down Ninth Avenue one recent evening, expertly and methodically stalking one of urban life's most ubiquitous disposable commodities - the redeemable aluminum can.


Tiverton Petroleums reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiverton Petroleums
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
442,838
558,355
Net inc
70,208
59,945
Share earns
.01
-
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Why Right-Hand Rule for Mazes Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


Silk Greenhouse Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silk Greenhouse Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
16,194,000
7,373,000
Net inc
168,000
121,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
6,365,000
4,730,000
6mo sales
31,960,000
14,844,000
Net inc
528,000
458,000
Share earns
.08
.11
Shares outst
6,313,000
4,272,000


Blank Check for the Disabled?
LEAD: With surprisingly narrow public scrutiny, Congress is moving swiftly to extend broad civil rights protection to the nation's 40 million disabled citizens.
The sentiment is laudable: to bring the disabled closer to the mainstream of American society.
But the legislation is vague; not even its defenders are able to calculate its benfits and costs.


Fish Nets Trap Dolphins In the Mediterranean, Too
LEAD: Ignoring pleas from scientists and government officials, Mediterranean fishermen are joining Pacific nations in the large-scale killing of whales, dolphins and turtles through the use of huge drift nets in commercial fishing.


West German Economy Continues to Strengthen
LEAD: West Germany's economy turned in the strongest performance in 13 years in the first half, as the gross national product expanded by 4.6 percent from the level a year earlier, the Federal Statistics Office said today.


Official Injustice on AIDS
LEAD: Last year, New York State's Office of Court Administration issued guidelines for the handling of defendants and prisoners with AIDS.
It was a sorry display of ignorance.
Among other things, the guidelines authorized use of surgical gloves, masks and plastic shields when dealing with AIDS victims.


Stronger Data Show Fiber Reduces Colon Cancer
LEAD: Adding fiber to the diet can apparently shrink precancerous polyps in the lower intestine, reducing the risk of cancer of the colon and rectum, researchers have found.


In First for TV, a Network Asks Its Rival for a Show
LEAD: The NBC television network has asked a production company owned and operated by the ABC television network to create and produce a prime-time drama series.
If it works out, it would be the first time one network has produced a television show to run on another network.


Free Performances At the Pan Am Building
LEAD: Fallfest, a series of free afternoon performances, begins with a dance presentation by Alice Farley and Company at noon today in the lobby of the Pan Am Building, 45th Street and Vanderbilt Avenue.
All of the performances are at noon on Wednesdays in the lobby.
The series is sponsored by Metropolitan Life and the Grand Central


Japan Urges U.S. to Save
LEAD: In talks today seeking solutions to the trade imbalance between Japan and the United States, Japanese representatives asked the Americans to save more, cut their budget deficit and adopt longer-term business thinking.


Weaver to Manage
LEAD: Earl Weaver, who led the Baltimore Orioles to four American League pennants, has decided to return to managing, with the Gold Coast Suns of the Senior Professional Baseball Association.


Goldin, in Campaign's 'Basement,' Runs On, With Humor
LEAD: Harrison J. Goldin had barely begun to campaign in a community center in Queens at lunch time recently when an elderly woman gave him a weary look and said bluntly: ''Make it short.
I'm hungry.''


Jets' Offense Is Wary Of Patriots' Backups
LEAD: The Patriots and the Jets got bad news this week: three of New England's best players, all defenders, are out for the year after being injured in the final exhibition game.


Fay's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fay's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,778,000
127,056,000
Net inc
3,018,000
2,232,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Shares outst
15,310,551
15,173,313
6mo rev
270,886,000
249,491,000
Net inc
4,373,000
3,148,000
Share earns
.29
.21
Shares outst
15,272,926
15,247,683


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Jackson Raps Rap


Hurricane Gabrielle Turns for the Mainland
LEAD: Hurricane Gabrielle, a huge storm with winds of 130 miles per hour, skirted the Caribbean islands today and turned northward toward the United States mainland.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


Palestinian Guerrilla Is Killed At Lebanese-Israeli Frontier
LEAD: An Arab guerrilla carrying a Kalashnikov assault rifle and explosives was shot dead by Israeli troops in southern Lebanon today.
The army asserted that the Arab had planned to cross into Israel to attack a Jewish settlement.


WASHINGTON TALK: Snapshot; The U.S. Studies Tocqueville
LEAD: Almost 160 years ago, the French statesman and writer Alexis de Tocqueville arrived in the United States to study the fledgling nation's democratic system.
Beginning Friday, the United States will be studying Tocqueville.


Populist Regains His Power In Belize General Elections
LEAD: The populist leader George Price, who led Belize to independence from Britain eight years ago, has regained power in general elections, according to results announced today.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dollar Rises Sharply  The surge prompted selling of the currency by the Federal Reserve to try to keep it from moving up.
The dollar will now buy almost 2 West German marks.
Page D1.
A Conversation on Race  For two Brooklyn clergymen concerned about improving race relations, a recent conversation revealed vast differences on the causes of racial conflict.


After Trek From Brazil Crash, Survivor Says 46 of 54 Live
LEAD: Two days after a Brazilian jetliner vanished over the Amazon, a survivor reached a remote ranch today and reported that 46 of the 54 people aboard survived a crash landing in the jungle.


NCH Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCH Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
153,167,000
134,139,000
Net inc
10,222,000
9,280,000
Share earns
1.19
1.03
Shares outst
8,624,000
9,020,000
Figures for 1988 have been reclassified to conform to 1989 presentation.


Drexel Guilty Plea Expected In Fraud Case on Monday
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. will enter its guilty plea on Monday to six felony counts of mail and securities fraud, people in the United States Attorney's office and at the investment house said yesterday.


MCA Music Group Names New Chairman
LEAD: Al Teller has been named chairman of the MCA Music Entertainment Group, which includes MCA Records, MCA Distributing, MCA Music Publishing, the Universal Amphitheater and several other operations that are part of MCA Inc., a diversified entertainment conglomerate.
He replaces Irving Azoff, who has headed the company's music operations since 1988.


New Options For I.B.M. Computers
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation yesterday introduced new hardware and software products to enhance its AS/400 system of minicomputers.


STUDY DISCOUNTS PILL-CANCER LINK
LEAD: A 10-year study of 118,273 women has found that middle-aged women who waited to take birth-control pills until their mid-20's face no unusual risk of breast cancer.


A Champion Finishes Her Career


Union Takes On China-Owned Factory
LEAD: To the United Steelworkers of America, the new management of the steel plant here has an attitude toward organized labor that is reminiscent of the American robber barons.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:


Warners Promotes Top Three Executives
LEAD: Warner Brothers has announced the promotion and re-alignment of its top three production executives.


Sanderson Farms reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanderson Farms
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
50,855,000
45,588,000
Net inc
5,965,000
5,075,000
Share earns
.66
.56
9mo sales
138,261,000
116,867,000
Net inc
11,984,000
b7,304,000
Share earns
1.32
.80


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: SINCE the devastation of Long Island's prized bay scallops by mysterious algae several years ago, I have been cooking almost exclusively with sea scallops, which are less sweet than bay scallops but are otherwise wonderfully tender and appealing when in peak condition.


United Gaming Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Gaming Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
18,010,000
15,500,000
Net inc
1,449,000
751,000
Share earns
.17
.09
Yr rev
65,389,000
52,195,000
Net inc
5,779,000
b4,832,000
Share earns
.70
.61


Occidental Petroleum To Lay Off 900 at Unit
LEAD: In a move that analysts said reflected the limited growth potential of oil and gas exploration in the United States, a subsidiary of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it would lay off 900 people in a restructuring of domestic operations intended to save nearly $100 million annually.


Brown Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brown Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
427,972,000
392,737,000
Net inc
b6,421,000
c6,020,000
Share earns
.37
.35
6mo sales
864,523,000
788,753,000
Net inc
b13,735,000
c12,232,000
Share earns
.79
.70


A DEMOCRAT LIKELY AS ARMS DELEGATE
LEAD: A conservative Democrat who has long been a confidant of Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, has been tentatively selected as the new American negotiator in talks to reduce conventional armed forces in Europe, Administration officials said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Lighthearted Look At Being Overweight
LEAD: A new television ad for Lucille Roberts Health Spas depicts a crowd fleeing from a movie theater as a ''blob'' oozes menacingly through the doors.
In the background, a puckish narrator asks, ''Thighs getting out of control?''


L.J. Simone Inc reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L.J. Simone Inc (OTC)
Year to April 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,296,000
24,112,000
Net loss
3,503,000
2,585,000
Shares outst
2,643,784
2,876,569


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about a camp for children with AIDS referred incorrectly to the site in California.
Last summer the program was in Sonoma County, near the coast.
This summer the program used a site 120 miles to the northeast, near the Tahoe National Forest.


Jerry Lewis's Telethon Sets Record in Pledges
LEAD: Jerry Lewis brought in a record $42,209,727 in pledges from viewers of his 24th annual Labor Day Telethon, with muscular dystrophy victims appealing for help.
The figure surpassed the 1988 record by slightly more than $1 million.


El Paso Utility In Note Pricing
LEAD: The El Paso Natural Gas Company yesterday priced $300 million in notes with a maturity date of Sept. 1, 1990, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Review/Film; Decency Battles Tyranny In 'Spices,' From India
LEAD: ''Spices,'' opening today at the Cinema Third Avenue, is a socially alert, cinematically primitive Indian melodrama about feminism.


Trial Winds Down
LEAD: After presenting seven witnesses in seven days in the drug and tax-evasion trial of Thomas Gioiosa, the former housemate of Pete Rose, Federal prosecutors rested their case in United States District Court in Cincinnati.
One of the two witnesses questioned after the four-day holiday break in the trial testified that he sold Gioiosa ski equipment that was bought with cash.


Decision at UAL May Take Weeks
LEAD: The bidding war for United Airlines is apparently far from over.
People close to the situation said yesterday that the board of the UAL Corporation, United's parent company, might take at least several weeks to approve a bid.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THE grape harvest of 1989, now under way in Bordeaux, has broken a record: it is the earliest in this century.
To match it, record keepers must go back 96 years, to 1893, the last time the harvest began in August.


Plea by Demjanjuk's Lawyer
LEAD: The Israeli lawyer for John Demjanjuk, a convicted Nazi war criminal, said today that new evidence had been found in a garbage can at the United States Justice Department, and he asked for a delay of at least 18 months in the case.
The lawyer, Yoram Sheftel, accused department employees of concealing the evidence, which he said includes testimony contradicting court rulings that Mr.


G.M. to Pay For 'Live From Lincoln Center'
LEAD: General Motors is to succeed Exxon as the sponsor of the ''Live From Lincoln Center'' television series beginning in January, George Weissman, the center's chairman, said yesterday.


Geren Gets All Caught Up In the New Yankee Spirit
LEAD: On the charter flight that took the Yankees from the height of a winning streak to the uncertainty of the road, Bob Geren remembered he had been talking with his teammates about the team's sudden surge.
The next thing he knew, he had agreed to let them shave his head.


Ruling Due Sunday
LEAD: The disputed 1-0 victory by Brazil over Chile in the World Cup qualifying match in Rio de Janeiro on Sunday is still causing a furor, but the Federation Internationale de Football Association, soccer's world governing body, said yesterday it would issue a ruling on the match next Sunday from its headquarters in


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  For Cholesterolphobics


Monsanto Expects '89 Profit at Searle
LEAD: The Monsanto Company said its Searle pharmaceuticals subsidiary is expected to post a pretax operating profit in 1989, largely because of brisk sales of its Calan SR anti-hypertensive drug.
The unit recorded operating losses of $62 million in 1988 and $119 million the previous year.
The parent company said sales of Searle's Calan


Now Beijing Blames a Single Villain for All Its Ills
LEAD: As China fills out its official version of the crushed democracy movement, a single villain has emerged who is held responsible for the student turmoil and virtually all of the country's economic woes: Zhao Ziyang, the ousted chief of the Communist Party.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13, B7  Salvadoran rebels will enter talks aimed at ending a decade of civil war, the rebels said.
Page A1


Social Ills Pull Educators' Concern to New Issues
LEAD: Frustrated by the number of children who are ill-prepared for school, educators are turning their attention from issues like the curriculum to social problems, including crack, AIDS, child abuse and the growing number of splintered and troubled families.


Democrats Criticize the Drug Plan As Lacking Toughness and Money
LEAD: From Capitol Hill to state capitals and city halls across the country, Democrats criticized President Bush's $7.9 billion drug control strategy as being short on toughness, imagination and, most of all, money.


Grand Met Sale Of Mecca Unit
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said today that it had signed an agreement to sell its interests in the William Hill and Mecca betting shops to Brent Walker P.L.C. for $:685 million, or about $1.06 billion.


Videotapes of Virginia Beach Are Viewed by Justice Dept.
LEAD: The Justice Department said yesterday that it was studying videotapes to see if the police in Virginia Beach, Va., used excessive force to quell disturbances there by predominantly black college students over the Labor Day weekend.


Car Bomb Kills 2
LEAD: A car bomb explosion ripped through a market in East Beirut today, and the police said two people were killed and seven wounded.


Baby Whale Holding Its Own
LEAD: A baby sperm whale washed up on a beach here over the weekend and has been taken to a marine park, where experts are trying to save its life.
The 900-pound whale is ''not getting any worse but not getting any better,'' Cheryl Snyder, senior trainer at Sea-Arama Marineworld, said today. ''He's holding his own.


Outlays for Next Fiscal Year Would Rise by $716 Million
LEAD: President Bush's drug control proposals would cost only $716 million more in the next fiscal year than drug programs already in that year's budget.


Queens Leaders Are Indicating A Shift to Koch
LEAD: With a week to go before the mayoral primary on Sept. 12, Queens Democratic leaders have signaled their intention to drop their support for Richard Ravitch and endorse Mayor Edward I. Koch's bid for a fourth term.


Jersey Bell and Union Agree
LEAD: New Jersey Bell reached a tentative agreement with its remaining striking union late yesterday and said its 15,000 workers, who have been on strike for a month, could be back on the job by Friday.


Not-So-Vegetarian Soup
LEAD: To The Living Section:


A CHILEAN LEFTIST IS SHOT TO DEATH
LEAD: Gunmen shot and killed a Chilean leftist leader in Santiago on Monday night, and a previously unknown rightist group said today that it was responsible for the slaying and warned that other killings would follow.


Keeping Software Lead Is New President's Job
LEAD: Ingram Micro D Inc., the nation's largest distributor of personal computer software, named David R. Dukes president and chief operating officer yesterday.


Books of The Times; Tales of Suspense From the Psychiatric Couch
LEAD:  Love's Executioner  And Other Tales of Psychotherapy  By Irvin D. Yalom, M.D.
Basic Books. 270 pages. $19.95.


Ex-Goldman Trader Enters a Guilty Plea
LEAD: Robert A. Freeman, once a senior trader at one of Wall Street's most powerful investment houses, pleaded guilty in Manhattan yesterday to charges that he illegally traded on insider information.


A Model for Teen-Agers
LEAD: Parents in Boron, Calif., have persuaded the school board to ban ''The Catcher in the Rye'' from a high school reading list.
That sort of stuff is forever happening to ''Catcher'': an officer of the American Library Association calls it ''a perennial No. 1 on the censorship hit list.'' She says complainants believe ''the portrayal of Holden Caulfield is not a good model for teen-agers.


Former Employees Say Gingrich Had Workers Do Prohibited Jobs
LEAD: A former district office manager for Representative Newt Gingrich said today that she had to argue with Mr.
Gingrich and his aides to prevent them from using the Congressional office and staff workers for political campaigning.


U.S. Duo Gains In World Rowing
LEAD: In the second day of qualifying heats for the world rowing championships on Lake Bled, Kris Karlson teamed up today with Cary Beth Sands to win their heat of the double sculls.
They advanced directly to the final Sunday.


Esterline Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esterline Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
67,377,000
72,942,000
Net inc
2,477,000
c1,922,000
Share earns
.29
.22
9mo sales
209,636,000
219,254,000
Net inc
b6,657,000
c6,671,000
Share earns
.78
.76


Colombia's Leaders Take Drug Fight Seriously; Leadership Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Hungary, Communists Are Cheerful
LEAD: Hungary's Communists are following with understandable concern the troubles of the Polish Communist Party, which recently lost its hold on the Government after four decades of absolute control.
But the Hungarians say they are not having nightmares about meeting the same fate.


Good Wines, Good Prices
LEAD: TUSCANY has always been a source of some of the world's best wine bargains.
This is still true, but times change: now the best Italian wines rank with the best of France and California and, not surprisingly, their prices reflect that.
Here are some particularly good values.


Bar Panel Says Courts and Jails Mishandle Prisoners With AIDS
LEAD: The handling of AIDS cases by the criminal justice system in New York State has sometimes deprived defendants of their legal rights and endangered their lives with inferior prison health care, a new report by the City Bar Association charges.


PBS Adds Disclaimer To Palestinian Program
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service said yesterday that it had added a disclaimer to ''Intifada: The Palestinians and Israel,'' a two-and-a-half hour program that features the pro-Palestinian documentary ''Days of Rage: The Young Palestinians.''


Game, Set, Match, Career
LEAD: rrChris Evert has always been her own best spin doctor, as they call those political aides who work the room after the boss's speech.


Capital
LEAD: Presidents sometimes say the most surprising things.


SALVADOR REBELS AGREE TO TALKS WITH NEW REGIME
LEAD: Leaders of El Salvador's leftist guerrillas said today that they had agreed to talks with the country's new rightist Government aimed at ending a decade of civil war.


A Question Of Good Taste
LEAD: The idea of legalizing drugs is distasteful for several reasons.


Tax Deferrals Criticized
LEAD: Tax-deferred savings plans like individual retirement accounts have become a ''cruel hoax'' for many retirees who find themselves subject to higher income tax rates than when they were young, according to a private study released today.


About New York; Doctor's Orders: Take Eye Exam And Support Arts
LEAD: We've finally secured an appointment with Dr.
Eugene Weise, an ophthalmologist whose office is at 115 East 61st Street.
We're invited to perch in a high-backed white metal swivel chair.
The lights dim.
We prepare to squint at an eye chart.


Pocketbook Issues Seen As Top Campus Priorities
LEAD: College and university officials say money-related matters, from the tuition undergraduates pay, to the salaries faculty deserve and can command, to the renovation needs of campuses, will loom large in higher education this academic year.


2d Officer's Wife Is Slain in Colombia
LEAD: Gunmen shot and killed an army colonel's wife in Bogota today.
Officials said the killing and one a day earlier were indications that the country's drug cartels might be stepping up their fight against a nationwide drug crackdown by attacking the relatives of members of the security forces.


No Headline
LEAD: He has talked of perhaps going elsewhere next season.
New York, he has said, can be a cold, intimidating and lonely place.
Last night, however, just might have given Juan Samuel reason to pause.


Navigating the Procurement Mess
LEAD: Whether a result of scandal, less military spending or bureaucratic hassle, many companies have quit doing business with the Defense Department.


Police Face Drug Testing In New York
LEAD: All New York City police officers, from those on patrol to Commissioner Benjamin Ward, will be subject to periodic random testing for drug use beginning later this month, Police Department officials announced yesterday.


Suez of Paris Buys Insurer For $4 Billion
LEAD: Ending the largest takeover battle in French history, Compagnie Financiere de Suez, the Paris-based banking group, today sweetened its bid to $4 billion and won control of Groupe Victoire, the nation's second-largest insurer.


Plastic Can Be Re-used
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Review/Television; The Palestinian View, Between Bookends


PRESIDENT OFFERS STRATEGY FOR U.S. ON DRUG CONTROL
LEAD: Calling the drug problem ''the toughest domestic challenge we've faced in decades,'' President Bush tonight proposed a national drug control strategy that focuses heavily on increased law enforcement against drug sellers and users.


For Bergman, a New Twist on an Old Love
LEAD: When Ingmar Bergman completed his Oscar-winning film ''Fanny and Alexander'' in 1984, he declared it the last of his some 50 movies.
But he seems a most reluctant retiree at times. ''I dream about doing a film about once a week,'' he conceded.


Griffey Homers as Reds Beat Giants
LEAD: Ken Griffey hit a three-run homer to cap a five-run third inning, and the Cincinnati Reds held on to stop San Francisco's winning streak at five games with a 6-5 victory tonight over the Giants.


Dow Off 7.41, but Airline Issues Are Active
LEAD: Stock prices slipped yesterday, the first day of trading following the long Labor Day weekend, with the Dow Jones industrial average down 7.41 points, to 2,744.68.


Georgia Gulf Gets Simmons Threat
LEAD: The Dallas corporate raider Harold C. Simmons threatened to start a fight for control of the board of the Georgia Gulf Corporation if the board acted to thwart his $1.38 billion offer for the company.
Mr.
Simmons had earlier said he wanted a friendly transaction with Georgia Gulf.


A Winged Insecticide Beats Mosquito Hordes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Stock Strategist Turns Cautious
LEAD: THE Labor Day weekend has often been a turning point for investors, with September proving to be a weak month for stock prices.
True to form, one of Wall Street's most influential investment strategists turned cautious over the holiday weekend and yesterday advised his institutional clients to sell 10 percent of the stocks in their portfolios.


Net Rises 15% at Heinz
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company, a leading maker of processed foods, said today that its net income rose 15 percent in the quarter that ended on Aug. 2.
The company reported profits of $126.5 million, or 95 cents a share, up from $110 million, or 84 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.


A PULLOUT BY U.S. REPORTED IN BEIRUT
LEAD: The United States Ambassador and his staff were evacuated from Beirut this morning because of deteriorating relations with the Christian army commander, official sources here said.


8th Ave. Open After Asbestos Cleanup
LEAD: Eight blocks of Eighth Avenue in midtown Manhattan, contaminated by asbestos on Sunday, were declared clean yesterday and reopened to traffic.
But it could take a month or more of round-the-clock work to remove the asbestos from a closed stretch of the subway system, New York City officials said.


Campaign Trail; Endorsements, Actual and Canceled
LEAD: The minuet of endorsements, mayoral and otherwise, continued yesterday.


Alamo for State Senate
LEAD: Who's favored to win next week's special election in the South Bronx - an election to fill the unexpired term of State Senator Israel Ruiz Jr.?
Until last week, the answer was Mr.
Ruiz himself - despite his Federal felony conviction and subsequent ouster from the Senate.


Everest &amp; Jennings Internaional reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Everest &amp; Jennings Internaional (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
45,937,000
47,854,000
Net loss
b5,572,000
c164,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo sales
89,232,000
89,884,000
Net loss
b6,614,000
c842,000
Share earns
-
.10


Limited Engagement
LEAD: Summer is the most generous season.
It still has a few weeks to go in its annual engagement but already it is stepping aside a little to let autumn come on in its familiar role.
The wild asters are showing their purplish petals and the plumed goldenrod, which countrymen call September weed, is lighting the roadsides.


How to Get Drug Strategy Report
LEAD: ''The National Drug Control Strategy,'' the report that President Bush sent to Congress today, can be ordered by mail or telephone or bought at Government bookstores.


U.S. to Join Northrop Suit
LEAD: The Justice Department will join a civil suit filed by an employee at the Northrop Corporation, accusing the contractor with fraud in connection with the MX missile project, lawyers in the case said today.


Royal M. Howard, Ophthalmologist, 67
LEAD: Royal M. Howard, former chief of ophthalmology at Staten Island and Seaview Hospitals, died of coronary artery disease on Sunday at Staten Island Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived on Staten Island.


National Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bank of Canada
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
65,459,000
68,058,000
Per share
.50
.58
9mo net inc
208,724,000
159,245,000
Per share
1.63
1.32
Assets for the latest period ended July 31 were $33,246,000,000 versus $30,666,000,000 for the year-ago period.


4 to 6 Communist Seats Seen in New Polish Cabinet
LEAD: Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki has completed his Cabinet selections, and they include at least four and perhaps as many as six Communists, officials said today.


DE KLERK STIRRING WASHINGTON HOPES
LEAD: American officials say they have high hopes, but no firm expectations, that the Acting President of South Africa, F. W. de Klerk, will be more willing than his predecessors to negotiate with blacks on steps to end apartheid.


Soviet Skaters Absorb Culture
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov haven't played a game for the Devils yet, but they have already become acclimated to life in the New Jersey suburbs, traffic in New York City and the rough-and-tumble world of the National Hockey League.


A Slice of New York (On Rye) in Texas
LEAD: A recent conversation between a customer and waiter, conducted in a Texas drawl, went something like this:


Entertainment Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entertainment Marketing (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
51,016,917
46,213,359
Net inc
b91,071
c1,321,032
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo sales
98,059,532
89,663,044
Net inc
b1,312,095
c2,328,560
Share earns
.11
.19


Varity Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varity Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
535,300,000
582,300,000
Net inc
b20,100,000
c18,300,000
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
206,434,000
201,314,000
6mo sales
1,059,100,000
1,136,500,000
Net inc
b36,200,000
c33,500,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
206,368,000
196,872,000


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshawa Group
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,522,583,000
1,248,531,000
Net inc
21,085,000
15,493,000
Share earns
.65
.48
6mo rev
2,562,100,000
2,106,998,000
Net inc
29,607,000
23,025,000
Share earns
.92
.72


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Y.&amp;R. Seeks Acquisition Of Landor
LEAD: YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM is negotiating to acquire Landor Associates, a large independent international corporate identity consultant with headquarters in San Francisco.


Psyllium in Cereal: Unknown Territory
LEAD: SINCE April, the word psyllium has probably appeared in print more times than it had in all the five centuries after Gutenberg.
General Mills and Procter &amp; Gamble are responsible for its sudden notoriety: General Mills because it introduced a cereal called Benefit that contains psyllium, and Procter &amp; Gamble because it wants the Food and Drug Administration to do something about health claims made for the General


Treasuries Fall in Slow Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved modestly lower in thin trading yesterday.


Casey's General Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Casey's General Stores Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
133,700,000
106,700,000
Net inc
2,400,000
3,300,000
Share earns
.21
.29


Parker &amp; Parsley reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker &amp; Parsley (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,649,000
7,825,000
Net inc
b1,937,000
c382,000
Share earns
.33
-
6mo rev
32,982,000
15,902,000
Net inc
5,380,000
c1,213,000
Share earns
.91
-


Newspapers Are Liable in Confidentiality Breach
LEAD: A promise of confidentiality to people disclosing information to reporters is an oral contract, a state appeals court said today in upholding $200,000 of a $700,000 damage award against Minnesota's two largest newspapers.


New Pests Threaten California Crops
LEAD: Record numbers of exotic insects are invading Los Angeles County and threatening California's $16 billion-a-year farm economy.


Economic Scene; Imported TV Sets Face Test in Japan
LEAD: IN what might seem like carrying coals to Newcastle, the Philips Consumer Electronics Company this month will begin exporting color television sets from its Greeneville, Tenn., factory to Japan.


Falcon Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falcon Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
9,486,000
8,198,000
Net inc
b853,000
c281,000
Share earns
.51
.17
9mo sales
25,468,000
22,827,000
Net inc
b1,430,000
c332,000
Share earns
.86
.20


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Help for Workers in a Complex World
LEAD: Because millions of American workers cannot read, write or reason well enough to do their jobs, demand is growing for programs to teach adults literacy and technical skills.


Colombia's Leaders Take Drug Fight Seriously; Heading for Invasion?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Group Is Pursuing American Western
LEAD: A group led by the senior management of the American Western Corporation said it is trying to raise enough money to acquire all common shares of the Sioux Falls, S.D., maker of plastic bags.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the management group, led by John L. Mulligan, American Western's chairman, did not disclose a price that it would be willing to pay for American


Dollar Rise Causes Fed To Step In
LEAD: The dollar surged yesterday, prompting a round of concerted dollar selling by the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan, the West German Bundesbank and eight other European central banks.


Colombia's Leaders Take Drug Fight Seriously
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about A. Bartlett Giamatti referred incorrectly in some copies to a book he wrote.
It is ''The Earthly Paradise and the Renaissance Epic.''


Seabrook Plan Backed
LEAD: The staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has approved emergency response plans for Massachusetts communities near New Hampshire's Seabrook nuclear plant, it was learned today, clearing another obstacle to commercial operation of the plant.


President Of Arby's Dismissed
LEAD: After days of heated dispute, Victor Posner, the Miami financier who controls Arby's restaurants, dismissed the company's president and chief executive yesterday after the executive, Leonard H. Roberts, resigned from the DWG Corporation, which owns Arby's.


Cummins Engine
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company completed the sale of certain assets in its finance unit to a Citicorp subsidiary for $45 million and said it would use the proceeds to pay off some of its short-term debt.
Cummins said last February that it would sell the unit as part of a restructuring plan to make it more competitive globally.


U.S. Tells Shrimpers to Give Sea Turtles an Escape 'Door'
LEAD: The Commerce Department ordered shrimpers today to install ''trapdoor'' devices in their nets to protect endangered sea turtles.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Carlisle Cos., Cincinnati, an industrial-products manufacturer, named Dennis J. Hall executive vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Jerome H. Eichert, who retired.


Metal Detectors Deemed Success and Will Expand in Schools
LEAD: The use of metal detectors in five public high schools in New York City reduced weapons possessions and other threatening incidents in the last school year, the Schools Chancellor, Bernard Mecklowitz, said yesterday.


Robert A. Greenberg, 59, English Professor
LEAD: Robert A. Greenberg, professor of English at Queens College, who specialized in Victorian literature, died of leukemia Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old.


After Serving Man, a Humane Home
LEAD: Paul moved into a retirement village here recently.
It was not exactly his decision, but he likes it well enough.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: * '21' Club, the Manhattan restaurant, to David L. Rawle Associates, Charleston, S.C., with an undisclosed budget.


NHD Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NHD Stores (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
16,984,000
15,227,000
Net inc
361,000
590,000
Share earns
.27
.45
6mo sales
27,452,000
24,996,000
Net inc
232,000
506,000
Share earns
.18
.39


U.S. Inquiry at Boeing Unit
LEAD: The Boeing Company today confirmed reports that a Federal grand jury is investigating suspicions that the company's military airplanes division in Wichita, Kan., overcharged the Air Force $11 million in the last decade for work replacing aluminum skins on its KC-135 tanker jets.


Agnes C. Maginnes
LEAD: Agnes C. Maginnes, who was active in charitable work in Westchester County, died of cancer of the colon yesterday at the home of her daughter, Nancy Kissinger, in Kent, Conn.
She was 94 years old and lived in Ardsley, N.Y.


Ray Mackland Dies; Photo Executive, 79
LEAD: Charles Raymond Mackland, a retired director of the photographic division at the United States Information Agency and former photo editor at Life magazine, died of cancer Monday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 78 years old and lived in Washington.


Rule That Will Strip Johnson of His World Records Is Approved
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter, was effectively stripped of his world records in the 100-meter dash and the indoor 60-meter event yesterday when the International Amateur Athletic Federation passed a rule that nullifies any mark held by someone who admits to having used performance-enhancing drugs.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50$ 10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.93
8.93
7.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.86
7.84
7.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.76
7.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.20
8.86
30-YR.


San Diego Pianist Wins Prize in Switzerland
LEAD: Gustav Romero, a 24-year-old pianist from San Diego, has won the 1989 Clara Haskil Prize for young classical pianists.


Corrections
LEAD: Articles on Aug. 18 and Sept. 3 about plans for peace talks between the Ethiopian Government and Eritrean rebels, under the sponsorship of former President Jimmy Carter, described the history of Eritrea incorrectly.
Before its colonization by Italy in 1890, it was part of Ethiopia, not an independent nation.


You'll Never Get Rich Trading Sleep for Cash
LEAD: To the Editor:


Text of President's Speech on National Drug Control Strategy
LEAD: Following is the prepared text of President Bush's speech here tonight setting out his plans for a national drug control strategy:


Sunrise Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunrise Medical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
40,948,000
38,004,000
Net inc
1,591,000
b10,003,000
Share earns
.36
-
Shares outst
4,441,000
4,450,000
Yr sales
152,696,000
140,290,000
Net inc
3,600,000
b7,700,000
Share earns
.81
-
Shares outst
4,434,000
4,435,000


In 24 Hours, Rolls to Roast
LEAD: A DAY in the life of the Homestead, based on ''Dining at the Homestead,'' by James and Eleanor Ferguson and Albert Schnarwyler.
Midnight: Assistant bakers and helpers begin mixing dough for breakfast rolls after firing the two 19th-century brick-lined ovens.  1 A.M.: A driver sets off for a twice-weekly trip to Washington with the Homestead's refrigerated tractor-trailer.


Council Delays Decision
LEAD: Baseball's executive council will meet next Tuesday in Milwaukee to determine its next step in finding a successor to A. Bartlett Giamatti.


Real Estate; Office Space In Orange County Rises
LEAD: THE shortage of affordable housing, the high commercial rents and traffic congestion in such suburban office strongholds as Westchester County, Fairfield County and Bergen County have prompted some users of office space to venture farther north into the Hudson Valley region.
A handful of developers has kept up with the demand for space in Orange


Drug Suspect Shot by Officer
LEAD: A drug suspect was shot and seriously wounded by an undercover police officer during a buy-and-bust drug operation yesterday in the Bronx, the police said.
The suspect, who was not immediately identified, was listed in serious condition at Jacobi Hospital, suffering from a chest wound.
The police said the undercover officer, who was dressed in street clothes, fired his weapon when the suspect apparently tried to rob him.


H.U.D. Plans to Tighten the Rules On a Program That Lost Millions
LEAD: The Department of Housing and Urban Development has decided to revamp a multi-billion-dollar mortgage insurance program that has cost the Government hundreds of million of dollars because of fraud and mismanagement, H.U.D. officials said today.


Peru to Get Aid From U.S. Bank
LEAD: The American Express Bank Ltd. reached an agreement with the Government of Peru and the International Foundation for Education and Self-Help to donate $5 million of its loans to the country to provide local currency financing of self-help programs, the company announced yesterday.
The deal, which will reduce


Joe De Santis, an Actor, Teacher, And Amateur Sculptor, Dies at 80
LEAD: Joseph V. (Joe) De Santis, a stage, film, radio and television actor for 60 years and an amateur sculptor of some note, died of chronic obstructive lung disease on Aug. 30 in Utah Valley Regional Medical Center in Provo, Utah.
He was 80 years old and lived in Provo.
Mr.
De Santis, who retired in May, appeared in thousands of radio and television programs.


Private Library Struggles to Find New Purpose
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Library Association, at 169 years of age one of the city's most illustrious literary adornments, no longer operates as a circulating library and is exploring new arrangements to maintain its reputation as a literary center.
The library is known for its storehouse of books and the roster of eminent writers, including Emerson, Twain and Thackeray, who crossed its threshold to lecture on their craft, The Merc, as the library at 17 East 47th Street is known, stopped its services as a circulating library in mid


A Fragile Air Freight Strategy
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation is learning to greet customers in many different languages around the world, but some replies have been unfriendly.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Careercom Corp., King of Prussia, Pa., an operator of business schools and tractor-trailer companies, accepted an offer from Home Group Investment Corp., a merchant banking unit of Ambase Corp., to merge the company with Apple Acquisition Corp., a newly formed entity, for $11.50 a share.


Industry Joins Schools to Train Pupils for Careers in Tourism
LEAD: It was a good summer for Olga Boada and Shaneseg Kamadia, who have just returned to high school for the fall term.
They not only had summer jobs, but because they belong to a select group of students, they received course credit in addition to getting paid.


Kidder Fills Equity Post
LEAD: Thomas S. Shattan, who arranged private equity financings for emerging growth companies at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, has been hired by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company to build a new department there to do the same.


Communist Leader in Lithuania Warns on Provoking Soviet Action
LEAD: The leader of the Lithuanian Communist Party said today that it was important for the Baltic republics not to push so hard in their drive for independence that they would provoke Moscow to use military force.


Lessons
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti used to argue that two of his great loves, baseball and literature, were spiritual cousins.


Teacher Strikes Keep 110,000 Pupils Home
LEAD: Teachers in Sacramento, Calif., picketed the city's schools yesterday after contract talks broke down, bringing to more than 110,000 the number of students around the country affected by teacher strikes.


Hispanic Americans Aren't Spanish, but Latins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Open 'Villain' Gracious in Victory
LEAD: She had just described herself as a villain at the United States Open, but that did not seem to be the view of the audience.
As Zina Garrison began her trip from Louis Armstrong Stadium to the dressing room at the National Tennis Center after the most difficult match of her career, she passed a small group of fans who began to applaud.


Ciudad Bolivia Journal; Forsaken Land Awaits a New Breed of Farmers
LEAD: Out on the flat plains of western Venezuela, where cows outnumber people, a seed has been sown to bring Latin Americans back to the land.


Computer Sciences Gets Subcontract
LEAD: The Computer Sciences Corporation said it had received a 13-year subcontract worth $134 million to help to modernize the nation's air traffic control system.
The main contractor on the $3.6 billion Federal Aviation Administration program is the International Business Machines Corporation.


Hugh P. Fox, Engineer, 84
LEAD: Hugh P. Fox, an architectural engineer and former commissioner of the Board of Standards and Appeals for New York City, died of heart disease yesterday at the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
He was 84 years old and lived in Rossmoor, N.J.


Bouygues Head Quits
LEAD: Francis Bouygues said today that he had resigned as chairman of Bouygues S.A., the French concern that calls itself the world's largest construction company, in favor of his 36-year-old son, Martin.
The 66-year-old Mr.
Bouygues said he would remain a board member but would no longer be active in the day-to-day activities of the company.


Drug Maker Rejects Pleas
LEAD: The Burroughs Wellcome Company yesterday rejected demands by AIDS advocacy groups that it reduce the price of the AIDS drug AZT, which costs patients up to $8,000 a year.


Colombia's Leaders Take Drug Fight Seriously; Rivals the Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Energy Corp reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Energy Corp (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,641,600
1,795,000
Net inc
b512,000
c36,400
Share earns
.16
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $282,000 from a tax credit.
c-Net loss


Ancient Province, Modern Outlook
LEAD: HANDS on his hips, Gianni Nunziante stares up at the faded apricot facade of Vignamaggio, the enormous 15th-century villa he owns here in the Tuscan hills. ''When I bought this place two years ago,'' he said, ''the building was covered with ivy.
We pulled tons of it down; this is the first time these walls have seen the sun in 200 years.


For Salty Dunking
LEAD: To The Living Section:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Sara Lee Agrees To Change Dessert Ads
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation agreed yesterday to change the advertising for its ''light'' desserts to reflect the fact that their calorie content is not substantially lower than that of Sara Lee's regular desserts, the New York State Attorney General's office said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about takeover offers for the parent company of United Airlines misstated the makeup of the board of the UAL Corporation.
Charles F. Luce resigned from the board in April after reaching the mandatory retirement age of 71.


Bridge
LEAD: There have been numerous cases of bridge players winning chess or backgammon tournaments, or making a small profit playing blackjack in casinos.
But these are all intellectual recreations with a mathematical component.
A different cross-game activity occurred in July.


A Prescription Form To Deter Forgeries
LEAD: rrUsing technology tricks borrowed from the banking industry, a medical publisher is providing doctors with tamper-resistant prescription forms intended to deter narcotics traffickers.


Diana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diana Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 22
1989
1988
Revenue
96,206,000
211,642,000
Net inc
13,105,000
b292,000
Share earns
3.54
-
b-Net loss  The company said the latest quarter included a gain of $14,661,000 from the disposition of subsidiaries.


Bakker Suffered Only Stress, His Wife Says
LEAD: The evangelist Jim Bakker, facing a hearing on whether his fraud and conspiracy trial will continue, was suffering from stress and not mental illness when he collapsed last week, his wife said today.


Democrats Get Free Publicity for Criticism of Bush Drug Proposal
LEAD: For an investment of $300, the Democratic National Committee received tens of thousands of dollars in free publicity tonight for its criticism of President Bush's new plan to fight drugs.


A System to Speed Airline Travel
LEAD: Six years ago, Mark Teflian may have been one of the few people who could have conceived of the sprawling system of interwoven computers that controls virtually every aspect of the United Airlines terminal here at O'Hare International Airport.


McDonald's Test Of Fried Chicken
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation, the world's largest restaurant chain, is testing bone-in fried chicken at a handful of outlets in Dallas and Houston, a spokeswoman said.
The fast-food chain currently sells chicken filet sandwiches and bite-sized Chicken McNuggets.
The spokeswoman declined to give details on the test.


Yields Down On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down for the week that ended yesterday, resuming a down cycle that had stalled a few weeks ago.


No Change in Basics
LEAD: President Bush's strategy for fighting drugs calls essentially for the Government to do more of what it has been doing with only marginal success for years: build more prisons, make more arrests, pay for more treatment centers and intensify efforts to break up drug-trafficking organizations.


U.N. Critical of I.M.F. Austerity Plan
LEAD: Austerity measures imposed on the poorest countries by the International Monetary Fund as a condition for new loans, have produced no results, according to a United Nations report.


Corrections
LEAD: The Sky Watch chart on Sunday misstated the distance traveled by light in a minute.
It is 11.16 million miles.


When Ordering, Watch Your Language
LEAD: SCENE I. June 1975.
The setting is the lunch counter at Bailey's in the Back Bay section of Boston.
The 21-year old woman is not carrying a suitcase, but only because her luggage was lost between Columbus, Ohio, and Logan International Airport.
She has just moved to Boston. ''May I have a cup of coffee, please,'' she said.


Soviet Plan To Cut Deficit
LEAD: The Soviet Union plans to sell off unprofitable companies and issue bonds to help cut a $200 billion budget deficit.


Orbiting Russians Prepare to Occupy Station
LEAD: Two Soviet astronauts orbited the Earth today and prepared to climb aboard the space station Mir after a four-month break in the Soviet manned space program forced by failures and disputes over costs.


Hynes Receives Cuomo Support For Prosecutor
LEAD: In a rare departure from his policy of not endorsing candidates in primary contests, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday announced his support of Charles J. Hynes, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for Brooklyn district attorney.


Sanders, a Yankee Hit, Intercepted by Falcons
LEAD: After he struck out in the sixth inning tonight, Deion Sanders walked slowly back to the dugout, grabbed his bat and glove and shook hands with Bucky Dent, the Yankee manager.
When he disappeared through the door that leads to the visiting clubhouse at the Kingdome, it signaled the end to Sanders's first season in the big leagues.


Lester C. Hopton, 87; Headed Ingersoll-Rand
LEAD: Lester C. Hopton, a former president of the Ingersoll-Rand Company, manufacturers of heavy machinery and industrial equipment, died Monday in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 87 years old and lived in Boca Raton.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Enterprise Oil Accord
LEAD: Enterprise Oil P.L.C. said today that it had reached an agreement with British Gas P.L.C. and the Amerada Hess Corporaiton of the United States under which each of the three companies is permitted to buy parts of Texas Eastern North Sea Inc., the North Sea oil assets of the Texas Eastern Corporation.


People
LEAD: *
John Blauner has been named executive creative director of the integrated communications division of FCB/Leber Katz Partners.


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: The Hong Kong investor Lo Yuk-sui offered today to lend $75 million to the Hooker Corporation, an Australian concern whose United States holdings, which include the Bonwit Teller and B. Altman department stores, are operating under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


City Opera Musicians Set Strike Vote for Tuesday
LEAD: The union representing the orchestra of the New York City Opera has tendered a seven-day strike notice to the company.
On Tuesday night the union musicians will vote either to accept management's offer or to walk out the following day.
For that evening, the City Opera's schedule lists a performance of ''Il Barbiere di Siviglia'' at Lincoln


The Limits of Audits; Counting Alone Cannot Detect Fraud If Management Is Juggling Numbers
LEAD: The allegations of fraud filed yesterday against Crazy Eddie Antar show just how easy it can be to inflate profits, fooling investors and Wall Street analysts.
What appears to have been an effort to make already-impressive results for 1985 a little prettier seems to have descended by 1987 into a complicated scheme to hide huge losses.


Takeover Rumor Propels Goodyear
LEAD: Shares of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company jumped 7.7 percent in active trading yesterday on rumors that the world's largest tire producer was the target of a takeover by Pirelli S.p.A., the giant Italian tire maker.
Both companies denied any knowledge of an acquisition.
On the New York Stock Exchange,


Currents; The Face Isn't Familiar
LEAD: RUSSIANS tell time on watches that look considerably different from those made in the United States.
Now, eight different styles of Russian watches are being imported by the Time Exchange in Manhattan.


S.E.C. Files Fraud Case On Retailer
LEAD: Eddie Antar, the reclusive entrepreneur who at Crazy Eddie Inc. brought widespread discounting to retail electronics, was accused yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission of securities fraud and illegal insider trading.


Winning Pianists in Concert
LEAD: Performances by winners of this year's Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition will open the new season of free concerts by students at the Juilliard School.
The competition winners - Samuel Chang, Edith Chen and Dan-Wen Wei - will appear next Wednesday at 9 P.M. at Paul Hall, Broadway and West 66th Street, on the first floor of the school.


JUDGE SAYS BAKKER CAN STAND TRIAL
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled today that Jim Bakker was competent to stand trial after a psychiatrist testified that ''a panic attack'' and not any permanently debilitating mental disorder or psychosis gripped the former television evangelist last week.


'Uncle Buck,' at $7.8 Million, Is No. 1 at the Box Office
LEAD: ''Uncle Buck,'' starring John Candy as an obnoxious man taking care of his two nieces and a nephew, was the hottest movie ticket during the holiday weekend, taking in $7.8 million to capture the No. 1 spot at the box office for the third straight week.


Dow Drops 24.89 Points on Rate Concerns
LEAD: Stock prices fell broadly yesterday amid investor fears of rising interest rates and speculation that foreign central banks might slow the dollar's rise, analysts said.


Review/Art; A Genius Blossoms Extravagantly in 1524
LEAD: Age brings wisdom, people say.
But the best thing that ever happened to the city of Mantua was when the top man in town, who was then aged 24, persuaded a 25-year-old artist called Giulio Romano to leave Rome and, to all intents and purposes, take over the city of Mantua.


Close to Home
LEAD: SUNDAY is a peculiar day.
The hours yawn, the streets are quiet, the newspapers pile up and swallow the furniture.


Kerkhoff Industries reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerkhoff Industries (AMEX)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,101,000
36,948,000
Net inc
b2,922,000
c5,799,000
Share earns
.97
-
Shares outst
3,017,700
2,522,900
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,791,000 from utilization of operating loss carryforwards.


Cards Get the Pitching With Unheralded Cast
LEAD: The Mets had Dwight Gooden, David Cone, Bob Ojeda, Ron Darling and Sid Fernandez, and after they lost Gooden to the disabled list, they added Frank Viola.


B.I.  Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B.I.  Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,219,000
1,651,000
Net inc
139,000
50,000
Share earns
.04
.02
Shares outst
3,333,000
2,552,000
Yr rev
5,558,000
5,472,000
Net loss
992,000
b429,000
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
2,951,000
2,625,000


Dresdner Bank
LEAD: Dresdner Bank A.G., West Germany's second-largest commercial bank, said yesterday that it planned to raise 1.2 billion marks (about $606.9 million) by offering 4 million new shares at 300 marks ($151.74) each.
The stock would be offered to shareholders of record at the end of October or early November, at the rate of a new share for every eight held.


Angotti Repurchases Stake Held by Boase
LEAD: Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, a small New York agency, said yesterday that its senior executives had bought out a minority stake in the agency held by Boase Massimi Pollitt Partnership, a British agency that was recently acquired by the Omnicom Group.


Penn Traffic Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Traffic Co (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
709,460,000
172,210,000
Net loss
2,886,000
b1,489,000
Share earns
-
.38
Shares outst
5,198,620
3,632,129
6mo sales
1,218,353,000
335,209,000
Net loss
15,284,000
b1,955,000
Share earns
-
.52
Shares outst
5,166,922
3,134,414


Topics of The Times; Opening Up New York
LEAD: Eighth Avenue in Manhattan from 44th to 51st Street has been an odd sight the last few days.
Sidewalk grates and subway entrances are shrouded in plastic.
Workmen equipped with respirators, having swept and scrubbed the streets, have now moved underground in their effort to rid the area of 50 pounds of asbestos, scattered when a main burst and stripped the insulation from two underground steam pipes.


Yields Post Slight Drop
LEAD: Yields on money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down slightly for the week that ended yesterday.


First Chicago Sale
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation said it would sell its First Chicago Investment Advisors subsidiary to a management group.
The deal, worth $102 million, calls for First Chicago to receive $70 million in cash, a $15 million subordinated note and a 10 percent ownership stake in the new company.
First Chicago said it expected to realize a pretax gain of $60 million to $65 million on the transaction.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Bank of Canada
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
239,141,000
194,011,000
Share earns
1.57
1.35
Shares outst
142,432,000
130,489,000
9mo net inc
723,884,000
491,210,000
Share earns
4.83
3.50
Shares outst
140,669,000
123,174,000


Sabatini and Graf Win In Open Quarterfinals
LEAD: Like two women sharing a punching bag, Gabriela Sabatini and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario grunted and groaned and punched tennis balls at each other for more than two hours yesterday afternoon, all for the eerie privilege of meeting Steffi Graf in the semifinals of the United States Open.


Bank of Montreal reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Montreal
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
126,090,000
162,972,000
Per share
1.04
1.46
Shares outst
109,508,049
105,504,054
6mo net inc
389,037,000
338,540,000
Per share
3.28
2.95
Shares outst
108,562,831
104,390,196


Dollar Declines Amid Fears Of Overseas Rate Increases
LEAD: The dollar drifted lower against major foreign currencies yesterday amid concerns of higher interest rates overseas.


Efforts to Teach Importance of Clear Writing Are Spreading
LEAD: After 15 years, the instructors in the Bay Area Writing Project, which recently completed its summer session, have reason to believe that the rest of the country is catching up to their concern for the importance of teaching writing.


White Is Right
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Sears and K Mart Go Head to Head
LEAD: A half-mile apart on Richmond Avenue on Staten Island, a K Mart store and a Sears store are battling for the budget-minded shopper.
It is a competition taking place in hundreds of cities nationwide as the nation's two biggest retailers, once very different in size and focus, have converged in many ways in the last year.


Drug Kingpin Is Found Guilty of Cocaine Smuggling in Los Angeles
LEAD: A leading narcotics trafficker, whose capture and extradition to the United States sparked anti-American riots in Honduras that left five people dead last year, was found guilty today of cocaine smuggling.


50 at Private Service As Giamatti Is Buried
LEAD: A. Bartlett Giamatti, the commissioner of major league baseball and a former president of Yale University, was buried today after a private graveside service at the Grove Street Cemetery.


DEALS
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CALIFORNIA (AL) - Acquired Ron Tingley, catcher, from the Cleveland Indians for a player to be named.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Called up Jeff Kaiser and Rudy Seanez, pitchers; Mark Higgins and Denny Gonzalez, infielders; and Beau Allred, outfielder, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.


HUNGARIAN PARTY IN MONEY SCANDAL
LEAD: Looking ahead to the creation of a fully functioning multiparty system, the ruling Communist Party has quietly moved to transfer the use of vast assets, including resort hotels and other real estate, schools, a computer network and garages and repair shops, to a commercial company that it formed without public announcement last month.


Heldor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heldor Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
37,568,000
39,962,000
Net inc
1,729,000
2,748,000
Share earns
.47
.75
9mo rev
73,414,000
75,389,000
Net loss
363,000
b620,000
Share earns
-
.17


COLOMBIA DEPORTS DRUG TRADE FIGURE
LEAD: A suspected financial expert for the Medellin cocaine cartel was flown out of Colombia tonight bound for the United States, the Justice Department announced.


PRETORIA'S RULERS LOSE MANY SEATS BUT RETAIN POWER
LEAD: The National Party, which has dominated South Africa's politics for 41 years, suffered substantial losses to conservative and liberal challengers in voting for the white House of Parliament on Wednesday, but maintained power by a slender margin.


Groundwater Technology reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Groundwater Technology (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
27,028,000
20,889,000
Net inc
2,565,000
1,989,000
Share earns
.32
.25
Shares outst
8,117,000
7,914,000


Beirut Christian General Calls Exit by U.S. Envoy a Sellout
LEAD: The Christian army commander today denounced the American decision to withdraw its diplomats from Lebanon, asserting that it left the Bush Administration without any influence here and amounted to a sellout to Syria.


Bolt Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Technology Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,273,000
1,769,000
Net loss
407,000
1,531,000
Yr rev
8,353,000
9,609,000
Net loss
b1,448,000
c17,669,000
b-Included a net gain of $577,000 from the sale of real estate.


Topics of The Times; Government-Issue Gambling
LEAD: The Pentagon, at the urging of the House Armed Services subcommittee on readiness, is surveying the possibility of a Government-sponsored lottery for military personnel overseas.
Like desperate state politicians who resort to lotteries when they don't dare raise taxes, the subcommittee got the idea that a lottery might help pay for recreational and family programs that are starved for funds.


Ballet Tour's Rescuers Sued for Meddling
LEAD: ICM Artists and the Howard Gilman Foundation, which jointly sponsored the continuation of an American tour by the Donetsk Ballet in February after the Soviet dancers were stranded in Baltimore, are being sued by Heart of Art, the original producer of the tour.


Court Overturns Ban on Logging
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today lifted an injunction that blocked the cutting of centuries-old trees on Federal land in Oregon, but it kept alive a lawsuit by environmentalists to protect the northern spotted owl.


Ways to Hide Valuables Of Any Size
LEAD: THE door is locked - naturally.
To enter, you must be buzzed in.
Security is this company's specialty. ''Our business is safes of every kind you can imagine, including vaults,'' said Richard Krasilovsky, president of the 85-year-old Empire Safe Company in Manhattan.


Film Directors In South Korea Protest Arrests Over Snakes
LEAD: About 20 South Korean movie directors stopped filming today and began a hunger strike to protest the arrest of two colleagues accused of having nonpoisonous snakes released in theaters showing American films.


Fraud Cited In Penny Stocks
LEAD: Traders of penny stocks are losing an estimated $2 billion a year through widespread fraud in the market of the low-priced securities, a report issued today by a group of state securities regulators said.


In a Course for Grandparents, Communication Is the Rule
LEAD: IN one of the first efforts in the nation to improve relations between grandparents, parents and grandchildren, researchers at Arizona State University have just completed a yearlong educational program of classes, discussion groups and a survey intended to increase communication and understanding between the generations.


Li Peng, in Interview, Rules Out General Amnesty
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng has declared in an interview that decision-makers in China felt nearly impotent and were forced to act as ''a clandestine government'' before moving to put down the student-led rebellion that began in Tiananmen Square in the spring.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Western Corp., Sioux Falls, S.D., a maker of plastic bags, is discussing a $64.4 million leveraged buyout with a management group.


New U.A.W. Division
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers union announced the creation on Tuesday of a new department to deal with auto makers other than the Big Three.
The department, called the Transnational and Joint Ventures Department, will be directed by the U.A.W.'s president, Owen Bieber.
It will coordinate the union's activities at American auto plants owned by overseas-based companies and joint ventures.


Campbell Reports Loss
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company said today that it had lost $194.7 million in the quarter ended July 31, because of a worldwide restructuring.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Evangelist's Trial Resumes  After psychiatric evaluation found he had suffered a ''panic attack,'' not mental illness, Jim Bakker was ruled competent to stand trial.
Page A18.
Trouble for Crazy Eddie  The S.E.C. accused Eddie Antar, founder of the electronics chain, of insider trading and fraud.


Indiana Man Is Guilty of Planting 13 Bombs
LEAD: A Federal jury has convicted a 42-year-old factory worker of participating in a failed conspiracy to blow up the southern Indiana town of Salem with 13 bombs that were planted in the community last year.


Pepsico Executive Is to Fill Top Post at Haagen-Dazs
LEAD: Haagen-Dazs, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., announced yesterday that it had named Ove Sorensen, a Pepsico Inc. executive, as its new president and chief executive.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
BDO Seidman, an accounting and consulting firm, named Thomas G. Spence, Michael E. Cuncannan and Jack R. Suzar regional managing directors.


Calendar: A Symposium for Gardeners
LEAD: Annual Symposium, New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; 212-220-8720.


Colombians Hail Bush Drug Plan, But Say the U.S. Aid Is Too Little
LEAD: Reacting to President Bush's new drug control strategy, Colombians said today that they were delighted that for the first time an American leader had stressed domestic consumption and not only foreign production and shipping.


Annette C. Murphy, Community Leader, 71
LEAD: Annette C. Murphy, a community leader in Manhattan who led the drive to convert an abandoned asphalt plant on the Upper East Side into a community center, died Monday at New York Hospital after a long illness.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Prices of Treasury Issues Inch Up
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds inched higher in light trading yesterday, with most of the trading by professionals.


Steinbrenner Reaches Accord With Winfield
LEAD: George Steinbrenner and Dave Winfield, whose running feud over contributions to the Dave Winfield Foundation has been distracting Yankee fans for the better part of a decade, announced yesterday that the Yankee owner and the ailing slugger had settled their latest dispute, in Steinbrenner's favor.


U.S. Blocking Release Of Figure in Drug Case
LEAD: Immigration officials blocked the court-ordered release on Tuesday of a former Mexican President's relative who is in Federal custody for questioning in the 1985 slaying of a Federal drug agent.


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Nova Scotia
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
157,444,000
112,332,000
Per share
.80
.58
Shares outst
185,421,561
181,825,342
9mo net inc
463,638,000
368,022,000
Per share
2.38
2.02
Shares outst
184,618,266
173,212,859


Peter Van Schaik, Aerospace Engineer, 60
LEAD: Peter Van Schaik, an engineer who developed the backpack maneuvering unit that astronauts use in space, died here on Monday of undisclosed causes.
He was 60 years old.


Becker Defeats Noah In 3 Sets
LEAD: His name had been made on grass stages in Britain.
But when Boris Becker's show was moved here late in each of the last several summers, playing before an audience eager to see a proven hit in London, something about his performances was lost in the translation.


Presidential Tastes and a Bernstein Song Cycle
LEAD: Late in the evening of April 5, 1960, Leonard Bernstein found himself in the East Room of the White House face to face with President Dwight D. Eisenhower, awkward silence all around.
He also found the title for a work that he didn't get around to composing until last year, a piece that will have its American premiere tonight at Merkin Concert Hall.


Border Agent Is Slain in Fresno
LEAD: An undercover United States Border Patrol agent was shot to death and his partner seriously wounded today while they posed as employers offering cash for illegal aliens, investigators said.


Softkey Software reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softkey Software
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,349,339
345,386
Net inc
570,992
b687,750
Share earns
.08
-
9mo sales
3,041,668
1,151,388
Net inc
863,694
b1,028,586
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Jhirmack to Backer
LEAD: The Playtex Family Products Corporation awarded its second advertising account of the week yesterday, giving its Jhirmack shampoo brand to Backer Spielvogel Bates.
The account, which bills $10 million, had been at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss since 1980.
On Tuesday Playtex assigned advertising for a line of hair care products to Margeotes, Fertitta &amp; Weiss.


Powell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Powell Industries (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,270,000
18,587,000
Net inc
b213,000
c277,000
Share earns
.02
.03
9mo rev
62,151,000
50,736,000
Net inc
b748,000
c321,000
Share earns
.07
.03


Norbert Freinkel, 63, An Expert on Diabetes
LEAD: Dr.
Norbert Freinkel, an educator and an international expert on endocrinology and diabetes, died of a heart attack on Tuesday while attending a concert on a visit to Leningrad.
He was 63 years old and lived in Evanston, Ill.


Intelligent Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intelligent Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
170,670,000
37,412,000
Net inc
2,775,000
1,516,000
Share earns
.55
.35
Shares outst
5,055,000
4,325,000
9mo rev
422,934,000
85,297,000
Net inc
5,888,000
3,379,000
Share earns
1.40
.79


The President Whispers 'Charge!'
LEAD: ''Those who judge our strategy only by its price tag simply don't understand the problem,'' President Bush said in his first big televised speech, committing his Administration to an expanded war on drugs.
But in fact, the price tag is all-important.
Laudably, Mr.
Bush offers an intelligent strategy in place of the simplistic oratory of his predecessor.


Biomet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomet Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
37,758,000
31,200,000
Net inc
6,514,000
4,677,000
Share earns
.24
.17


Whodunit? Paul Stuart, In Full Color
LEAD:  It seems that here now in this Autumn so fine,  In One Thousand Nine Hundred Eighty-Nine,  A murder's been committed  A deed none's admitted  A deliciously dastardly crime.


Mayoral Pick Creates Fight Within Paper
LEAD: The Daily News has endorsed Richard Ravitch for the Democratic mayoral nomination after a weeklong dispute in which the publisher was dissuaded from his first choice, Mayor Edward I. Koch, by strong opposition from top editorial staff members.
They wanted the newspaper to endorse Borough President David N.


Review/Pop; Neil Young's New Subjects: Drugs, Venality, Betrayal
LEAD: Loss of innocence can hurt, but few songwriters have taken it harder than Neil Young.
His songs contrast an Edenic rural past with a brutal, corrupt present.
Drugs, venality and betrayal reign in the new songs he brought to the Palladium on Tuesday - probably a preview of his album, ''Freedom,'' due for release Oct.


Campaign Trail; Nadler Says 'This Is Not My Year' and Abandons Race
LEAD: The lopsided four-way Democratic race for New York City Comptroller became a slightly less lopsided three-way contest yesterday when Assemblyman Jerrold L. Nadler, stuck at the bottom of the pack, dropped out and threw his support to a fellow Assemblyman, Alan G. Hevesi.


Jim Wright Joins Insurer
LEAD: The former House Speaker, Jim Wright, has joined the American Income Life Insurance Company in Waco, Tex., as a part-time management consultant, the company's chairman, Bernard Rapoport, said today.
Mr.
Wright will help American Income motivate its employees.
He will not engage in Congressional lobbying, the company said.


Home Improvement
LEAD: GLAZED ceramic tile is pretty, durable and moisture resistant.
To keep it sparkling, regular cleaning is necessary.
And if tiles are damaged or the filler between them - known as grout - begins to deteriorate, prompt, skillful repair is essential.


Silence! Athletes At Work
LEAD: Yowls of anguish filled the Flushing night as Mets fans booed Gary Carter and probably the manager who sent the poor chap up there to make the next to last out of yet another dismal loss last night.


Pan Am to Add Florida Flights
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation said it would increase its service to Florida by nearly 50 percent next month.
The expansion, announced as Miami-based Eastern Airlines, a unit of the Texas Air Corporation, entered the seventh month of reduced service because of a strike, will increase the average number of daily Pan Am flights to


So Many Salvias, and So Little Room
LEAD: INCREASINGLY of late, I have been of the opinion that my garden is sadly deficient in salvias.
I hasten to add that I do not mean the torrid red annual bedding plants that look so loathsome all summer, especially when they consort with orange marigolds, a combination that occurs more often than it should.


On Battleground of the Street, Few See a Victory Over Drugs
LEAD: Still perspiring from their foot chase of a crack dealer, Officers Charles Fernandez and Adam L. Burden caught their breath while listening to President Bush's drug speech over the radio in their darkened car. ''Another Band-Aid approach,'' Officer Fernandez said.


Warner Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner Computer Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,377,034
5,571,740
Net inc
609,500
217,761
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
6,411,000
6,137,000
9mo rev
18,994,602
16,665,100
Net inc
1,552,636
b1,941,100
Share earns
.25
.32
Shares outst
6,299,000
6,137,000


Editors' Note
LEAD: A picture caption on Friday with an article about the first shots of World War II described residents who ''waved as German troops entered'' the Baltic city now known as Gdansk.


Defense Lawyer Picked As Successor to Giuliani
LEAD: President Bush yesterday nominated Otto G. Obermaier, a defense lawyer, as the permanent successor to Rudolph W. Giuliani in the highly visible post of United States Attorney in Manhattan.


Loews Names President With a 41-Year Career
LEAD: Jerome Esbin, who has been in the movie industry since 1948, has been named president of the Loews Theater Management Corporation.


Hip, Hot and Hyper: Soviet TV Cuts Loose
LEAD: Imagine the gods of television had made Geraldo Rivera a Russian.


Teen-Age Hero in Amazon Jet Rescue
LEAD: Survivors of a jetliner crash in the Amazon attributed their rescue today to an unemployed 19-year-old passenger who proved to be schooled in the ways of the rain forest.


Richard E. Coffey, Promotion Director, 69
LEAD: Richard E. Coffey, advertising promotion director for the magazines of Time Inc. before his retirement in 1971, died of asthma last Thursday at his home in Longboat Key, Fla.
He was 69 years old and had lived in Scarsdale, N.Y., for many years.


Cubs' Lead Sliced to 1/2 As Phillies Rout Them
LEAD: Bruce Ruffin scattered eight hits for his first complete game since May 8, 1988, and Darren Daulton and Dickie Thon each drove in three runs as the Philadelphia Phillies, in last place in the National League East, beat the first-place Chicago Cubs tonight, 9-1.


Politics
LEAD: In the 1988 Presidential race, Southern Democrats had a great idea.
They called it Super Tuesday, the day when all Southern states would vote as one for a Presidential nominee.


Currents; Donating Material And Time
LEAD: THE Manhattan Center for Living will offer a wide range of free services to people with terminal illnesses: shiatsu massages, art workshops and counseling, among others.
The nonprofit organization, a companion to the two-year-old Los Angeles Center for Living, is to open Monday in Greenwich Village.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: FIVE-YEAR-OLD Katie Sullivan has recently expressed a strong interest in spending more time by herself. ''When she's in a snit she closes her door and tells us: 'Don't come into my room.
I want to be alone,' '' said her father, William A. Sullivan, a fund-raising executive in Minneapolis.


Sharpton Will March, Despite Claims It Might Hurt Dinkins
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton said yesterday that he plans to lead a march through the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn on Saturday, despite arguments that a demonstration could detract from David N. Dinkins's campaign in Tuesday's mayoral primary.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Sept. 1
Aug. 25
Sept. 2
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
217.7
223.5
217.8
Distillate stocks
116.8
116.3
123.4
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.5
5.5
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.2
2.1
Crude stocks
335.8
337.3
331.9
Crude production, daily
7.6
7.6
8.1
Refinery utilization (%)
91.8
91.2
89.4


Stake in Midway Raised by Ampco
LEAD: The Ampco-Pittsburgh Corporation, a Pittsburgh-based rolled-metal concern, has raised its stake in Midway Airlines Inc. to 9.6 percent from 6.6 percent, the company reported in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Ampco-Pittsburgh said earlier that it might seek control of the Chicago-based airline.


2 Brothers on Outing Found Slain in a Park
LEAD: Two brothers, 10 and 11 years old, who had told their father they were going to pick up golf balls for pocket change, were found stabbed to death in a park here Monday night.


Short of the Mark; Bush Talked, Studied and Rehearsed, But Didn't Dazzle in His Drug Address
LEAD: The White House had hoped that President Bush's speech Tuesday night would be one of those defining moments that occur in every successful Presidency, a kind of domestic policy version of the highly acclaimed addresses he made in May in Belgium and West Germany.


15 Killed as Oil Tanker Hits Trawler in Baltic
LEAD: All 15 crew members of a Soviet fishing trawler were killed when an oil tanker trying to avoid another boat veered into the trawler, sinking it in the Baltic, officials said.


Senate Leader Blames Bush for Top Vacancies
LEAD: Stung by charges that the Senate has been dragging its feet in approving Presidential nominations, Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, produced figures today to back his contention that the main cause of the delays was the Bush Administration itself.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  ROWING  U.S.
Crews Gain: Five of the eight United States crews racing in the repechage, or second chance heats, advanced yesterday to the semifinals of the world championships on Bled Lake in Yugoslavia.


Chevrolet Rebates
LEAD: Chevrolet announced rebates on two of its 1990 cars, two weeks after formally introducing them.
The auto maker, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, put a $750 cash rebate on all models of its 1990 Lumina sedan, a car introduced earlier in the year to replace the Chevrolet Celebrity.
It also offered an $800 rebate to buyers of the Geo Prism and Chevrolet Nova.


Cardinals Cash In on Mets' Mistakes
LEAD: The Mets have reached the point in their season when they can no longer afford to make mistakes in clutch situations.
But those mistakes were exactly what they made last night at Shea Stadium.
And it led to a 3-2 loss to the St.
Louis Cardinals, a team that knows how to capitalize.


New York Health Chief Proposes Medical Insurance for All in State
LEAD: The Cuomo administration's chief health official has proposed establishing an insurance system that would guarantee basic health care to every resident of New York State.


Clash at South Korean Rallies
LEAD: Students and workers clashed with the police in five towns today during demonstrations demanding the resignation of President Roh Tae Woo and the withdrawal of United States troops from South Korea.
The police fired tear gas to break up the rallies, held in Masan, Seoul, Pusan, Suwon and Taegu.


Home State Creditor Plan
LEAD: Marvin L. Warner, the former owner of the Home State Savings Bank in Cincinnati, whose collapse in 1985 touched off a crisis among Ohio savingsgsnd l aoaininititiois, ,as filed a plan in Federal bankruptcy court in Jacksonville, Fla., to pay $16 million to his creditors.


Review/Jazz; David Ware on Saxophone With Free Improvisation
LEAD: The saxophonist David Ware opened his set at the Knitting Factory on Tuesday night with a solo that contrasted blunt, drawn-out melodies with inkblots of sound, flurries that ran off into split tones and more.
His saxophone sound quivered with intensity; Mr.
Ware is one of the most powerful saxophonists playing, and the sounds from his tenor vibrated across the room.


Italian Bank's Unauthorized Credits to Iraq
LEAD: The chairman of Italy's largest state-owned bank came under strong pressure to resign today following disclosure that the bank's branch in Atlanta issued more than $1 billion in unauthorized export credits to Iraq.


Fall Classes for the Practical or Artistic
LEAD: CLASSES and workshops for adults and children in the coming months will offer lessons in home decoration, blueprints for garden planning and harvesting and instruction in creating functional, folk and fine-art objects, among other subjects.
Here is a preview of some of them.


Personal Health
LEAD: If you were a physician, what would you make of a patient who comes in depressed and anxious, complaining that she hurts all over?
She says she wakes up every morning stiff and tired, is able to do only half her work, and often has bellyaches, headaches, back aches, neck aches, numbness and abnormally cold hands and feet.


MB Group Buying U.S. Check Maker
LEAD: MB Group P.L.C. of Reading, England, agreed to buy the ABS Holdings Corporation, parent of the American Bank Stationery Company, for $300 milllion in cash.


A Small Lobby's Large Voice
LEAD: The Semiconductor Industry Association has seven professional staff members, a small budget and no office in Washington.
Its vice president in charge of Government affairs had never set foot in the nation's capital, even as a tourist, until he took the job.


Campbell Soup Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campbell Soup Co (NYSE)
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,302,200,000
1,146,300,000
Net loss
194,700,000
b72,200,000
Share earns
-
.56
Shares outst
129,300,000
129,000,000
Yr sales
5,672,100,000
4,868,900,000
Net inc
13,100,000
c274,100,000
Share earns
.10
2.12
Shares outst
129,300,000
129,400,000


Topics of The Times; Beauty Is the Beast
LEAD: The Philadelphia Zoo once had a beautiful Bengal tiger that people traveled miles to see.
But after a year, the tiger had to move on to a new home in Buffalo.
The zoo knew that its attendance would drop after the loss of its main attraction.
America's first zoo had no other guaranteed ticket-sellers, like the cuddly koalas of the San Diego


Stop Changing the Schools and Start Changing the Students; The Chancellor Hunt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking Deals; Job Contracts After Takeovers
LEAD: EXECUTIVES often gossip among themselves about the huge employment contracts -known as ''golden parachutes'' - that other executives get.
Corporations, nevertheless, seldom challenge anyone trying to collect.


Gish Biomedical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gish Biomedical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,044,000
3,364,000
Net inc
329,000
b464,000
Share earns
.18
.25
Yr sales
14,932,000
12,476,000
Net inc
983,000
b1,203,000
Share earns
.53
.67


British Hearing On B.A.T. Offer
LEAD: Britain's Panel on Takeovers and Mergers said it would hold a hearing next week to decide whether Hoylake Investments Ltd. could extend its $21.4 billion hostile bid for B.A.T.
Industries beyond the normal 60-day deadline.
Sir James Goldsmith, who leads Hoylake, said last week that it would be difficult for the offer to succeed without an extension from the panel, which monitors takeover developments.


Libyans Are Reported to Find A German Technician's Body
LEAD: A West German aeronautical engineer building an in-flight refueling capacity for the Libyan Air Force was found dead in a Tripoli beachfront hotel this year, Western diplomats here say.


Heinz, H J Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heinz, H J Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 2
1989
1988
Sales
1,451,949,000
1,379,495,000
Net inc
126,546,000
110,068,000
Share earns
.95
.84


A Dream of a Day Lily
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Doubts Greet Drug Plan in New York
LEAD: A day after President Bush unveiled his strategy for escalating the nation's war against illegal drugs, officials and drug experts in New York were skeptical about how successful it would be.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-15


The Cost of Reagan
LEAD: Self-indulgence is good for us:


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Campaign Matters; Koch, of Course, Might Label This Mayoral Matters
LEAD: A few days after Mayor Edward I. Koch formally declared his candidacy, 5,000 posters disclosing details about the city's $5.2 billion housing program went up in the subways.
Naturally, the posters mentioned the Mayor's name.
They even bore his picture.


Bensonhurst Youth Is Indicted as Gunman
LEAD: The white 18-year-old accused as the gunman in the killing of a black youth in Brooklyn was indicted yesterday on two counts of second-degree murder.


A Chic Crowd Of New Rich For Ethiopia
LEAD: At a soft-drink bar not far from the airport here, stylishly attired teen-agers in stone- washed jeans, glittery T-shirts and spiked heels socialize under a portrait of the singer Michael Jackson.


Dinkins Stresses His Appeal for Harmony
LEAD: Wherever he goes in these last days of the primary campaign - Chinatown, Harlem or the Bronx - David N. Dinkins has been incorporating the lessons of Yusuf K. Hawkins's death, often departing from his set speech to talk about the need to bind the wounds left by the killing of the black teen-ager by a gang of white youths from


Illegal Sales to Contras By Salvador Reported
LEAD: Officials of the Salvadoran Air Force illegally sold more than 61,000 gallons of aircraft fuel paid for with United States Government funds to the Nicaraguan guerrillas in 1986 and 1988, a Congressional agency said in a report issued today.


Lufthansa Plans To Issue Shares
LEAD: Lufthansa, West Germany's national airline, today announced plans to raise $478 million through issuing new shares at a discount to prepare for an expected increase in air travel in the 1990's.


Camden Forces Its Suburbs To Ask, What If a City Dies?
LEAD: This once-powerful industrial city on the Delaware River has been so battered, drained and gutted that there is little left today except neighborhoods of the extraordinarily poor and their government.


Wolfpack Report Is Public
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association's preliminary report on possible rules violations in the North Carolina State basketball program contains serious accusations but does not support contentions of drug abuse or grade changing, the school's chancellor said today.


Books of The Times; The Bork Nomination, and Why It Failed
LEAD:  Battle for Justice  How the Bork Nomination Shook America  By Ethan Bronner  Illustrated. 399 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $22.50.


MCI Gets Another Merrill Contract
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said it had awarded the MCI Communications Corporation a five-year, $50 million contract to manage the financial services firm's worldwide telecommunications network.
In June, Merrill Lynch awarded MCI a $150 million contract to provide voice and data communications for the network.


Mississippi Schools Facing Move to Stem Resegregation Tide
LEAD: Like tidal ebb and flow, desegregation followed by resegregation has been a seemingly inexorable pattern in some Mississippi school districts.


Enough Burnt Sienna to Circle the Globe
LEAD: ONCE there was a little boy who crayoned tick-tack-toe grids on the gray wool living-room rug: yard after yard of little squares, little O's and little X's.
When his mother walked in, she realized just how much could be done with only one crayon.


More Retirees Choose to Work
LEAD: Sylvia Corvo tired of retirement and went back to work when she was nearly 72 years old.
Now 80, she does not plan to retire again unless forced to by poor health.
One of two retirees who run a 700-person job bank in Hartford, she is among a growing number of people returning to work or staying on the job after they turn 65.


Our TV Signals Are Escaping Into Space
LEAD: To the Editor:


USE OF FUNGICIDES LIMITED BY MAKERS
LEAD: The manufacturers of an important class of chemicals that kill fungal diseases in plants suspended their use on roughly 50 food crops today, including apples, melons, celery and carrots.


Our TV Signals Are Escaping Into Space; Wells and Welles
LEAD: To the Editor:


School Guide Says AIDS Should Not Bar Students
LEAD: Students and teachers infected with the AIDS virus should be free to attend class without fear that their disease will be made public, according to a new guide for the nation's schools.


HURRICANE VEERS AWAY FROM U.S.
LEAD: Hurricane Gabrielle veered northward in the Atlantic today, taking its 130 mile-an-hour winds away from the United States mainland but threatening to sideswipe Bermuda.


Fidelity National Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity National Financial Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,669,000
1,519,000
Share earns
.50
.40
Shares outst
3,355,759
3,833,832
9mo net inc
2,561,000
515,000
Share earns
.72
.13
Shares outst
3,552,953
3,876,414


Dutch Leader Heading for Third Victory
LEAD: Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers's centrist party appeared headed for victory tonight in general elections, making a third consecutive term likely for the Dutch leader.


Dasibi Environmental reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dasibi Environmental
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,600,000
3,700,000
Net inc
435,000
b138,000
Share earns
.24
-
b-Net loss


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Everything has flown over the wall that could.
What is left are all those with broken wings.


Settlement On Default Is Approved
LEAD: Six years after the nation's largest municipal bond default, a Federal judge has approved settlements to allow $750 million to be distributed to holders of Washington Public Power Supply System bonds.


Becker Defeats Noah to Gain Semifinal at U.S. Open


Revised Data on Output Up a Bit in 2d Quarter
LEAD: American workers posted a modest productivity improvement in the second quarter, with significant gains by factory workers leading the way.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about an increase in blood imports to the United States misstated the type of blood -called the universal donor - that can be transfused to a patient with little risk of reaction.
It is O negative, not O positive.


Catholic Church's Tax Exemption Is Upheld
LEAD: The Federal Appeals Court in Manhattan yesterday dismissed a nine-year-old lawsuit in which abortion-rights advocates sought to challenge the Roman Catholic Church's Federal tax exemption.


Deadline Nears for Toon Decision
LEAD: The heart of the Jets' offense, Al Toon, wore a sling instead of his usual cryptic smile today.
Worse for his teammates, he may still be sporting it on Sunday, when the season opens against the New England Patriots.


Market Place; A Healthy Fear Of Overconfidence
LEAD: IN 1987, Edward S. Hyman, vice chairman of C. J. Lawrence/Morgan Grenfell Inc., predicted that the end of the 1980's stock market boom would be evident when investors began to rationalize their speculations with pronouncements about peace with the Soviet Union and an era of uninterrupted economic growth.


Frankfurt Gets Masters
LEAD: The Association of Tennis Professionals Tour Championship, played in New York since 1977 as the Masters, will be held in Frankfurt, West Germany, beginning in 1990 under terms of a three-year agreement announced yesterday in New York.


Johnson to Keep Medals
LEAD: Although Ben Johnson has been effectively stripped of two of his world records and titles because of steroid use, he can keep his two bronze medals from the 1984 Olympics, the head of the International Olympic Committee said yesterday.
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, said accomplishments at the Games were outside the scope of the decision made by the International Amateur Athletic Federation, track's governing body, this week to erase


American Realty Trust Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Realty Trust Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,967,000
6,317,000
Net inc
b3,834,000
c3,225,000
Share earns
.18
.15
6mo rev
11,578,000
12,167,000
Net inc
b7,496,000
c6,462,000
Share earns
.34
.30


Amrep Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amrep Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,115,000
19,868,000
Net inc
319,000
146,000
Share earns
.05
.02


14 Packed Into a Car Survive 70-Foot Fall
LEAD: Fourteen people packed into a sedan, none wearing seat belts, survived a 70-foot plunge into a quarry after the car was forced off the road by a swerving vehicle.


Mixed Verdict On Laundering
LEAD: A Federal jury today acquitted a Yugoslav diplomat and a bank chairman of conspiring to launder nearly $3.5 million.
But a Texas businessman was convicted in the case.


Laurentian Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laurentian Bank of Canada
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
12,755,000
4,832,000
Per share
.72
.21
9mo net inc
24,160,000
16,798,000
Per share
1.26
.78
Results are in Canadian funds.


Baltic Political Humor: A Mask for Apprehension
LEAD: The talk in the Lithuanian capital this week is of Russian troops, and the jokes are of Baltic nationalists who finally achieve solidarity - in prison trains headed for Siberia.


Fatal Blast Aboard Battleship Iowa Was Probably Intentional, Investigation Finds
LEAD: Naval investigators have concluded that the explosion that killed 47 sailors aboard the battleship Iowa in April was probably intentional, Bush Administration officials said today.


Fannie Mae Sets Offering Of $1.1 Billion in Debentures
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced $1.1 billion in debt securities consisting of $600 million in debentures due in 1996 and $500 million in indexed sinking-fund debentures due in 1999 through various securities dealers.


7 Employers Join to Provide Child Care at Home in a Crisis
LEAD: In an ambitious experiment in child-care assistance, seven large New York employers have joined to place child-care workers in the homes of employees whose usual arrangements have been disrupted.


Cordero Apologizes For Berating a Steward
LEAD: Angel Cordero Jr., the Hall of Fame jockey who sharply criticized the Saratoga stewards after being fined $1,000 for a display of temper Aug. 26, called a news conference yesterday to apologize.


MMR Holding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MMR Holding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
142,913,000
157,827,000
Net loss
b18,385,000
c2,193,000
Share earns
-
.41
Shares outst
5,676,099
5,402,000
Yr rev
574,587,000
517,573,000
Net loss
b12,265,000
c8,511,000
Share earns
-
1.58
Shares outst
5,572,166
5,402,000


The God That Failed Fidel
LEAD: While the breezes of freedom surge through much of the Communist world, Fidel Castro is resolutely turning Cuba into a fortress of reaction.
The latest sinister turn was the arrest of three Cuban human rights monitors, Elizardo Sanchez Santa Cruz, Hiram Abi Cobas and Hubert Jerez Marino.
Each was a leader of an unofficial group seeking some leeway for peaceful dissent; each was seized at 5 A.M.


Currents; Making a Statement, Page After Page
LEAD: BOOKS designed by artists defy convention.
The covers may be marble or other stone, and the pages may be shaped like stars or letters of the alphabet.
Sometimes, there are no words at all.
These handmade, one-of-a-kind books are the sole focus of the Ted Cronin Gallery, which opens tomorrow in Manhattan.


Clifford E. Vargas, Circus Founder, 64
LEAD: Clifford E. Vargas, the founder of the Circus Vargas, died of heart disease on Monday at his home in Hollywood Hills.
He was 64 years old.
The grandson of Portuguese circus owners, Mr.
Vargas founded Circus Vargas 20 years ago with three trucks and eight animals.
In the early years, he was ticket taker, ringmaster and truck driver.


Telecredit Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecredit Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
41,017,000
36,482,000
Net inc
6,627,000
b5,718,000
Share earns
.60
.52
b-Included a loss equaled to 3 cents a share from Telecredit's Light Signatures Inc. unit.


Kansas City Journal; Council Vote to Decide Conventional Center Plan
LEAD: The Kansas City Council will try Thursday to set off a chain of events that a lot of people here say will put new life into a city that is already awakening from a long slumber.


Exxon Slips Away
LEAD: The not so funny story is that it takes 10 Exxon executives to change a light bulb: one to change it and nine to do the public relations.


Currents; What Came Naturally
LEAD: LAST year, when Judith Farr, a landscape architect in Harrison, N.Y., started designing furniture, she did what came naturally.
She made chairs with backs shaped like flowers.


Stop Changing the Schools and Start Changing the Students
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Telltale Yawn Of Red Ransom
LEAD: Tommy Kelly remembers the exact moment he realized that the fifth race at Saratoga on Aug. 2 was going to be the start of something big.


Hundreds Reported to Have Died in Iraqi Explosion
LEAD: Hundreds of people may have been killed in an explosion at an Iraqi military installation last month, Egyptian military officials and diplomats in Baghdad said today.


Another Trump Project: A TV Game Show
LEAD: Having bestowed his name on an airline, a casino, a yacht and a tower, Donald Trump now plans to extend it into new territory: Trump, the television game show.


Another Blast Spews Asbestos On the West Side
LEAD: An asbestos-lined steam pipe burst in the street with a loud boom on Manhattan's Upper West Side last night, sending a geyser of steam into the air that an official said contained asbestos.


2 Hypermarts To Wal-Mart
LEAD: Wal-Mart Stores Inc. has agreed to take full ownership of two large Dallas-area Hypermart stores for an undisclosed amount, its partner in the venture, the Cullum Companies, said today.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 30 about Lane Kirkland's views on the state of the labor movement misattributed some comments.
It was Mr.
Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. - not John C. Truesdale, executive secretary of the National Labor Relations Board - who said he saw no difference between the labor policies of American-owned and foreign-owned companies.


Whitney Sponsors an Ad Against Helms Amendment
LEAD: In an unusual political action for an art institution, the Whitney Museum of American Art has placed a full-page ''open letter'' in today's New York Times and Washington Post protesting the proposed Helms amendment to restrict Federal grants for art that is deemed ''obscene and indecent.''


McKesson Chief Quits After a Disagreement
LEAD: The McKesson Corporation, a distributor of drugstore products, said yesterday that Thomas W. Field Jr. had resigned as chairman, president and chief executive because of differences with McKesson's board over management philosophy and the future direction of the company.


Georges Simenon Dies at 86; Creator of Inspector Maigret
LEAD: Georges Simenon, the masterly Belgian novelist whose Inspector Maigret mysteries and many other highly regarded works made him one of the most widely published authors of the century, died in his sleep Monday night at his home in Lausanne, Switzerland.
He was 86 years old and had been in declining health for several years.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Sports Pages yesterday listing Ben Johnson's world sprint records gave an incorrect year in some editions for Carl Lewis's 9.92-second 100-meter dash.
It was Sept. 24, 1988, not 1987.


Parties Skirmish Over a Strategy In War on Drugs
LEAD: The morning after President Bush told the nation that he did not want his drug strategy to set off a ''partisan bidding war,'' skirmishes broke out today between Republicans and Democrats over how to finance the program.


Copper Prices Fall for 3d Day On Easing of Labor Tension
LEAD: Copper futures prices tumbled yesterday, the third straight day of losses on New York's Commodity Exchange, on perceptions that labor tensions are easing in countries where strikes by miners have disrupted production.


Asbestos in the Home
LEAD: To The Home Section:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  A diplomatic cable revealed that the U.S. may soften its opposition to membership for the Soviet Union and China in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which manages the world trading system.
Such a move could offer both Moscow and Beijing a framework for normalizing trade relations with other countries.


Lomas Expects to Avoid Chapter 11
LEAD: The Lomas Financial Corporation, which defaulted on $145 million in bank notes last Friday, said today that it expected to complete an agreement soon with creditors to refinance $1.45 billion in senior debt and avoid a voluntary bankruptcy filing.


Americans at Lebanon Embassy Pull Out Amid Christian Threats
LEAD: The United States evacuated its embassy in Beirut today after the Lebanese Christian army commander reportedly threatened to take Americans hostage and settle Lebanon's problems with ''Christian terrorism.''


Everex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Everex Systems (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
97,401,000
78,852,000
Net inc
6,659,000
2,937,000
Share earns
.28
.13
Shares outst
23,627,000
23,365,000
Yr sales
377,272,000
266,730,000
Net inc
21,251,000
10,504,000
Share earns
.91
.45
Shares outst
23,448,000
23,310,000


Rozier Ends Holdout
LEAD: Mike Rozier, the Houston Oilers' running back, a holdout since the start of training camp, agreed to a one-year contract and reported to workouts yesterday in Houston.


Snags Seen in Europe Unity
LEAD: The failure of European governments to act quickly is undermining the creation of a European Community with no trade barriers by 1992, a report by the European Commission said today.


Refugees and Hungary: No Easy Road
LEAD: By punching a hole through the border between East and West and inadvertently inviting a flood of East German refugees, Hungary has found itself torn between old loyalties to the East and new aspirations in the West.
With thousands of East


Fed Dollar Sales Set 3-Month Record
LEAD: In its largest intervention ever in a three-month period, the Federal Reserve sold $11.9 billion worth of dollars, including $2 billion in two days, in its effort to curb the rise of the dollar in May, June and July.


Arby's New President
LEAD: Arby's Inc. said today that Irving Riese had been named president of the roast-beef-sandwich chain.
He succeeds Leonard H. Roberts, who was dismissed by the company Tuesday.
Arby's is a subsidiary of the DWG Corporation, which is controlled by Victor Posner.
Arby's said Mr.
Riese is a principal in the Riese Organization, which controls more than 500 restaurant and real estate operations in 33 states.


Dealership Study by Mazda
LEAD: Following the lead of other Japanese automobile makers, the Mazda Motor Corporation said today that it had created a group to study establishing a separate network of dealers in the United States to sell only luxury cars.


New Delhi Journal; The Sikh's Hour of Horror, Relived After 5 Years
LEAD: Seventy-year-old Sudini Kaur lives in a ghetto of heartbroken women, haunted by horrifying, sickening images of the night of carnage five years ago that took her son, three grandsons and her zest for life.


Vehicle Sales Jumped By 22% in Late August
LEAD: Responding to aggressive discounting of vehicles left at the end of the model year, American automobile buyers lifted the sales of domestically built cars by more than 22 percent in late August.


Elderly Poor Face Higher Costs for Medical Coverage, Study Says
LEAD: Nearly 60 percent of older Americans would pay more for insurance for catastrophic medical costs under a plan approved in July by the House Ways and Means Committee, a study released today by an advocacy group said.


Citing an Illness, A Judge Annuls Bing's Marriage
LEAD: The stormy marriage of Sir Rudolf Bing, the former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, and Carroll Douglass was annulled yesterday by a state judge.


And Now the Question, Who Is a German?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burke, Devils' Goalie, Gives Team a Scare
LEAD: Sean Burke, the Devils' regular goalie, hurt his right knee in a pickup game in Toronto Monday and will miss a week to 10 days of training camp.


Candidates Try to Woo the Undecided
LEAD: All but ignored by their more successful rivals, the two lagging Democratic candidates for mayor - Harrison J. Goldin and Richard Ravitch -are preparing last-minute television commercials that they say may help shape the outcome of the election.


Michael Rice Is Dead; Ex-TV Executive, 47
LEAD: Michael Rice, a former general manager of WGBH in Boston, a leading public broadcasting station, died of AIDS yesterday at his home in Truro, Mass.
He was 47 years old.
Mr.
Rice was a senior fellow at the Aspen Institute at the time of his death.
He worked both in radio and television at WGBH from 1965 to 1978.


Alabama College's Hospital Bonds
LEAD: The board of trustees of the University of Alabama yesterday tentatively priced $67.7 million in University of Alabama at Birmingham hospital revenue bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Canucks Sign Krutov
LEAD: With the signing of the Soviet star Vladimir Krutov, the Vancouver Canucks now have two-thirds of the KLM line of the Central Red Army team.
Krutov, 29 years old, signed a three-year deal with the Canucks yesterday and the deal was announced at the Canadian Embassy in Moscow.
He will join Igor Larionov, who agreed to terms with Vancouver earlier this summer.


Christian Lebanon Wants Syrian Army to Go; Beirut Was Syrian
LEAD: To the Editor:


Christian Lebanon Wants Syrian Army to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


103 Ethiopia Soldiers Slain, Rebels in the North Report
LEAD: Rebels in northern Ethiopia said today that they captured a strategic garrison town last week, killing 103 Government soldiers and capturing 26 in three days of heavy fighting.


Menopause Linked to Cholesterol Changes
LEAD: Women's blood cholesterol levels worsen abruptly after menopause, and this may help explain their increasing risk of heart attacks, a new study indicates.


Budding Museum at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.
LEAD: The most famous address, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, evokes images of domesticity and statehood: of Abigail Adams drying her wash in the East Room, of Franklin Delano Roosevelt broadcasting his fireside chats in the Diplomatic Reception Room.


5 Die in Spanish Train Crash
LEAD: A train carrying 120 passengers and traveling nearly 90 miles an hour rammed into a stationary freight train 70 miles northwest of Madrid today, and at least 5 people were killed and 54 injured, officials said.
A spokesman for the Governor of Alava province said the dead were the passenger train's engineer and four women.


Currents; Primitive Process Of Fire
LEAD: IN ''Primitive Fire,'' 21 potters have used ancient techniques of firing clay to create pots, vessels and vases, which are to be shown, beginning Saturday, at the Clay Pot gallery in Brooklyn.


Discussions On UAL Offer
LEAD: Stephen M. Wolf, the head of the UAL Corporation, met yesterday with Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner to discuss details of a takeover bid by a group that includes UAL's management, its pilots' union and British Airways.
A spokesman for the Transportation Department said the Secretary would not have any comment.


Pepper Successor Takes Oath
LEAD: Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Florida Republican, was sworn in today and became the first Cuban-American member of Congress.
A native of Havana, Ms.
Ros-Lehtinen won a special election on Aug. 29 to succeed Claude Pepper, a Democrat who had represented the Miami Congressional district for 26 years until his death on May 30.


Giants Realigning for Life Without Morris
LEAD: With their season opener Monday night, the Giants started preparing today without Joe Morris, their injured running back.


AIRLINER AND JET IN NEAR COLLISION
LEAD: A misunderstanding between an air traffic controller and the pilots of a Trans World Airlines jetliner nearly led to a midair collision near Chicago on Tuesday afternoon, Federal investigators said yesterday.


Autumn 'Raindrops'
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Paris Parley Is to Study Drug Profit Laundering
LEAD: France announced today that experts from the Group of Seven industrial democracies will meet here next week to seek ways to stop the laundering of drug trafficking profits, a trade said to be worth as much as oil to the world banking system.


Approval Seen for Daimler On Messerschmitt Merger
LEAD: West Germany's Economics Minister, Helmut Haussmann, will approve Daimler-Benz A.G.'s controversial takeover of Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm G.m.b.H., overriding objections from antitrust authorities to create a gigantic aerospace and armaments group, Government sources said today.


Oregon Inaugurates Football Betting
LEAD: Oregon, which advertises itself with the slogan, ''Things look different here,'' today became the only state to set up shop as an official bookmaker for professional football games.


Rediscovering the Charms of Cast-Iron Fireplaces
LEAD: In the mid-19th-century, as the Industrial Revolution roared along in Britain, uncounted millions of cast-iron fireplace mantels in myriad styles rolled off production lines.
There were floral designs, geometric patterns and classical Greek columns.
There were evocations of Georgian formality and, with the arrival of the 20th century, Art Nouveau and Art


Tolerance to Drug Patches Found in Some Users
LEAD: Nitroglycerin patches, used to control chest pain associated with heart disease, rapidly become ineffective if they are worn 24 hours a day, as they commonly are, new studies show.


Reward for 2 Suspects
LEAD: The Government offered $250,000 tonight for information leading to the arrest of two of Colombia's main drug traffickers.


Doubts Are Raised On Coolidge Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Condensation in a Window  Q. Eight years ago we had metal storm windows installed.
Two years ago we started to notice moisture forming on the inside of the inner windows during cold weather: the moisture drips down onto the sill and mildew forms.
The wood around the windows is in good condition, but the caulking on the outside of the inner windows is not.


Sphinx Mining Co reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sphinx Mining Co (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
476,000
1,084,000
Net loss
594,000
b318,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo sales
476,000
1,084,000
Net loss
664,000
b258,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
10,715,309
11,136,398


Accounts
LEAD: *
Pharmavite Corp., to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, for its Nature Made Vitamins.


National Vision Services reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Vision Services
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,397,932
2,568,343
Net loss
771,294
1,486,203


Student Rights Inquiry Opens in Resort Melee
LEAD: The Justice Department today opened a criminal inquiry into charges that law- enforcement officers committed civil rights violations while quelling a weekend disturbance by a crowd of mostly black college students at Virginia Beach, Va.


Bridge
LEAD: When it came time to select a non-playing captain for a world championship team, the American Contract Bridge League used to select someone whose political connections vastly exceeded his playing expertise.


Lawyer Says Reagan Told Aide to Give False Data
LEAD: Lawyers for John M. Poindexter said today that President Ronald Reagan directed Mr.
Poindexter, his national security adviser, to give responses to Congressional inquiries in the Iran-contra affair that their client told the President he knew to be false.


Ronald Syme, 86, Classics Scholar And Historian at Oxford, Is Dead
LEAD: Sir Ronald Syme, an Oxford historian and eminent scholar of classical Rome, died Monday, the university said Tuesday.
He was 86 years old.


LDI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LDI Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
87,170,000
56,414,000
Net inc
1,836,000
1,399,000
Share earns
.35
.29
Shares outst
5,297,554
4,825,479
6mo rev
148,580,000
96,715,000
Net inc
3,209,000
b3,887,000
Share earns
.63
.80
Shares outst
5,066,983
4,828,882


FHP International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FHP International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
199,322,000
145,126,000
Net inc
7,676,000
6,085,000
Share earns
.65
.60
Shares outst
11,755,000
10,133,000
Yr rev
699,051,000
503,508,000
Net inc
22,034,000
16,483,000
Share earns
2.05
1.45
Shares outst
10,736,000
11,378,000


SOVIETS AND CHINA MAY SEE SOFTENING FROM U.S. ON GATT
LEAD: A diplomatic cable made public today disclosed that the Bush Administration might soften its opposition to membership for the Soviet Union and China in the organization that manages the world trading system.


Internal Audits of Insurer Subpoenaed
LEAD: The House Committee on Energy and Commerce today subpoenaed all internal audits of the Travelers Insurance Company covering its role in servicing New Jersey's deficit-ridden Joint Underwriting Association, which insures half of the state's motorists.


South Africa's National Party: Vehicle for Afrikaner Power
LEAD: The National Party of South Africa, which lost ground in elections today, has been the main vehicle for Afrikaner nationalism for more than 50 years and the dominant political force in the country since it came to power in 1948, steadfastly fighting to expand the political and economic power of the descendants of the Dutch and


Inauspicious Beginning for Rutgers
LEAD: Although the season has just begun, Rutgers is already at another of those crossroads that so frequent the Scarlet Knights' football campaigns.


Baldwin Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baldwin Technology (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
33,171,000
29,095,000
Net inc
2,919,000
2,005,000
Share earns
.21
.16
Shares outst
13,750,480
12,630,000
Yr sales
125,497,000
95,503,000
Net inc
9,244,000
6,138,000
Share earns
.70
.49
Shares outst
13,213,824
12,630,000


Judge Rules Quadriplegic Can Be Allowed to End Life
LEAD: A Georgia Superior Court judge ruled today that a quadriplegic who says he no longer gets any enjoyment from life has the right to turn off his own ventilator so he can die.
The judge also allowed medical personnel to administer a sedative to assist the process.


Holiday for Nixon Is Proposed
LEAD: The Town Council of Yorba Linda, the birthplace of Richard M. Nixon, wants to declare the former President's birthday a city holiday.
Mr.
Nixon was forced to resign in 1974 by the Watergate scandal.
He was born in Yorba Linda on Jan. 9, 19l3.
The Council voted 5 to 0 Tuesday night to instruct its staff to draft a resolution declaring Jan.


Senate Adopts Sweeping Measure To Protect Rights of the Disabled
LEAD: The Senate approved sweeping legislation tonight that would prohibit discrimination against disabled Americans, including AIDS victims, in employment, access to public accommodations, transportation and communication services.


Review/Photography; The Otherworldly Abstractions of Aaron Siskind
LEAD: Although it slipped into the Museum of Modern Art this summer with little fanfare, the exhibition ''Siskind From the Collection'' is a small gem that should not be missed by anyone who cares about photography's relation to modern art.
Consisting of 31 black-and-white images dating from 1932 to 1988, the show pays tribute to the long career of Aaron


Howard Wise, 86, Dealer Who Helped Technology in Art
LEAD: Howard Wise, an art patron and a former dealer who gave important early support to the technology in art movement in the United States, died of prostate cancer yesterday at his summer home in Wellfleet, Mass.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store reports earnings for Qtr to July 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cracker Barrel Old Country Store (OTC)
Qtr to July 28
1989
1988
Sales
51,055,000
39,156,000
Net inc
5,019,000
3,498,000
Share earns
.54
.43
Shares outst
9,320,000
8,102,000
Yr sales
170,049,000
125,813,000
Net inc
10,920,000
7,236,000
Share earns
1.27
.90


Two Homers by Jefferies Lead Mets' Romp
LEAD: One day after making an error that may have cost the Mets a victory, Gregg Jefferies made amends in memorable fashion.


Palestinian Broadcast Gets Mediocre Ratings
LEAD: The two-and-a-half-hour program ''Intifada: The Palestinians and Israel'' scored only average ratings on public television on Wednesday night.
The program included ''Days of Rage: The Young Palestinians,'' a documentary that examined the uprisings in the Israeli-occupied territories from the Palestinian point of view.


Lions' Sanders May Play In Opener
LEAD: The Detroit Lions, who had lost some anticipated offense when Rodney Peete, their rookie quarterback, was injured and lost for the first six weeks of the National Football League regular season, regained some punch yesterday.
After six weeks of negotiations, the Lions signed their top draft pick, Barry Sanders, the running back from Oklahoma State who won last year's Heisman Trophy as the outstanding college player.


Steinhardt Raises Stake in USAir
LEAD: Michael H. Steinhardt, the New York money manager, has raised his stake in USAir Group Inc. to 7.83 percent from 5.8 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Steinhardt said that he made net purchases of 633,200 USAir shares on the open market between July 20 and Wednesday for prices ranging from $49.712 to $50.75 a share.


LEADER OF SERBIA PLAYS DOWN GOALS
LEAD: President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, whose rapid rise to the center of national politics has divided Yugoslavs into fervent admirers and angry detractors, said today that he had ''no personal political ambitions'' or desire to establish Serbian dominance over Yugoslavia.


Dow Declines 12.91; Airline Stocks Falter
LEAD: Stocks lost ground for a second consecutive session yesterday, led by heavy declines among airline issues.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; It Sells, But Is It Art?
LEAD: AT least since Andy Warhol deified a can of Campbell's soup, critics have pondered whether advertising can be art.
The intimate and often nervous relationship between the forms will be explored next week when the Museum of Modern Art opens its sixth annual exhibition of British advertising films.


Museum Criticized for Ad on Grants
LEAD: The full-page advertisement placed by the trustees of the Whitney Museum of American Art in The Washington Post and some copies of The New York Times against the Helms amendment - a proposal that would restrict Government grants to the arts - has brought negative reactions from at least two members of Congress.


Copenhagen Journal; In Denmark, a Bridge Troubles Europe's Waters
LEAD: For nearly a century, Danes have dreamed of building bridges to leap over the Baltic straits and connect Denmark's eastern islands with its western mainland.


GW Utilities reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GW Utilities (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,920,000,000
1,901,000,000
Net inc
b41,000,000
b276,000,000
Share earns
1.04
7.03
b-Included extraordinary credits of $4,000,000, or 10 cents a share, for the latest year and $248,000,000, or $6.32 a share, for the year-earlier period.


Panel Votes to Ban Smoking on All Flights in U.S.
LEAD: Over the objections of the tobacco industry, a Senate committee agreed today to prohibit smoking permanently on all domestic airline flights, expanding the current ban on smoking on trips of two hours or less.


Mothers Are Working to Remake the World; Inequitable Distribution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Valerie Feigen, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Valerie Kim Feigen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Feigen of New York, was married in New York last night to Steven Eisman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Eisman of New York and Atlantic Beach, L.I.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Haskel Lookstein at the Helmsley Palace.


Australian 'Rescue' Move
LEAD: A brewing industry rival of the Australian businessman Alan Bond disclosed today that he was putting together a rescue package for the owner of the G. Heileman Brewing Company in Wisconsin and the Pittsburgh Brewing Company.


William McLinn, 45, a Minister and Actor
LEAD: The Rev.
William L. McLinn, who became a United Church of Christ minister after an entertainment career in which he impersonated Mark Twain, died of complications from AIDS Monday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Phoenix.
He was 45 years old and lived in Washington.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 463 money market mutual funds increased by $1.26 billion, to $344.65 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 141 institutional funds decreased by $557.1 million, to $84.77 billion.
Those of the 227 general-purpose funds were up by $770.1 million, to $110.68 billion.


Pretoria Leader Sees Mandate For Change in Racial System
LEAD: Acting President F. W. de Klerk said today that parliamentary elections on Wednesday gave his National Party a ''clear and resounding'' mandate to push ahead with its plan for evolutionary change of the constitutional system of racial segregation.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Finding on Battleship Blast  Concluding that the Iowa explosion was ''most probably'' sabotage, the Navy also found serious mismanagement of the ship.
Page A11.
Computer Research Plan  Bush's science adviser will present to Congress a plan to aid development of far faster supercomputers and to link U.S.


Two Youths Survive 10 Days Adrift
LEAD: When two youths from Bermuda set out on a fishing expedition with an older friend on Aug. 26, they expected to return home in a matter of hours.
But their 16-foot motorboat ran out of gasoline several miles off the coast, and for 10 days they drifted without food or fresh water.


A Daughter Of Jazz Looks to Eclecticism
LEAD: Cassandra Wilson's mocha-toned, curvaceous phrases and her daring scat-singing sound are so at home in jazz standards that listeners and critics have rushed to compare her to Sarah Vaughan, Betty Carter and Ms.
Wilson's mentor and acknowledged influence, Aminata Moseka (a k a Abbey Lincoln).
She could easily carve herself a place in jazz simply by carrying on their repertory.


Pentagon
LEAD: A new feature of President Bush's more-of-the-same drug war is the increased use of the military.
But what his promise - to ''make available the appropriate resources of America's armed forces'' to governments that ask for them - ultimately means is a mystery even to the Pentagon.


No Longer Called Underdog; Koch Strides to Primary
LEAD: Walking briskly, as is his inclination, with his arms aloft to announce his presence, Mayor Edward I. Koch arrived at the Fairview Swim Club in Forest Hills, Queens, on a campaign stop the other day.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''He can't take it away; it's all over the place.
There's so much money in it.
It's worth even more than pornography.''  - Rebecca Guzman, a prostitute in the Bronx who smokes crack every day.  [ A1:3. ]


Allegheny Stake
LEAD: A group of shareholders led by the Minneapolis investor Irwin L. Jacobs has lowered its stake in Allegheny International Inc. to 6.5 percent from 7.7 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Jacobs gave no reason for the sales.Between Aug. 21 and Sept. 1, the Jacobs group sold 110,800 shares in the Pittsburgh consumer products concern for prices ranging from 56.3 cents to 75 cents a share.


Mortgage Rate Decline
LEAD: Interest rates on adjustable-rate mortgages fell to 9.55 percent in August from 9.73 percent in July and dropped for fixed-rate mortgages to 10.42 percent from 10.60 percent, the Office of Thrift Supervision said today.
It was the fourth straight monthly decline.


Review/Architecture; After 9 Years, Dallas Concert Hall Is Opening
LEAD: It cost $106 million, not the $49.5 million promised; it took nine years to build, not two, and it caused such bitter political and esthetic squabbles that it was almost canceled several times.
But Dallas will try to forget all of that Friday night at the opening of the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, a 2,066-seat hall designed by I.


Margo ('Oh! Calcutta!') Sappington No More, I'm Glad It's Over
LEAD: To the Editor:


Why So Passive About the Hostages?
LEAD: Now that all American officials have been pulled out of Lebanon, the tormenting question of what to do about U.S. hostages there stands in sharp relief again.
The diplomats were withdrawn to ships offshore because of a clear Bush Administration policy - to negate efforts by Gen.
Michel Aoun, leader of the Maronite Christian forces, to push Washington around with his own terrorist threats.


Warning From I.A.A.F.
LEAD: Track's governing body, meeting in Barcelona, Spain, warned yesterday that it might suspend athletes who renege on their commitments.


Beirut Christian Chief Denies Threat to U.S. Aides
LEAD: Lebanon's Christian military commander, Gen.
Michel Aoun, strongly denied today that he had threatened United States diplomats, who were evacuated from their embassy in Christian East Beirut on Wednesday.


Hooker Corp. Plan Typical Of Hong Kong Financier
LEAD: Lo Yuksui, the Hong Kong entrepreneur who has offered to make a $75 million loan to the ailing Hooker Corporation of Australia, has built a hotel and real estate empire through what his company literature describes as ''successful corporate rescues and reorganizations.''


Does Anybody Want to Lead N.I.H. If Job Lasts Only Till Next Election?
LEAD: As the summer shadows lengthen on the campus of the world's largest and most powerful medical institution, the National Institutes of Health, there is talk of the end of an era, and a worry that cold political winds may be blowing.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Vice Chairman Resigns
LEAD: Account shifts were not the only things roiling the waters at Della Femina this week.
The agency's vice chairman, Edward Eskandarian, resigned Wednesday.
He was the chairman of HBM/Creamer, which was merged into Della Femina last year by the WCRS Group, their parent company.
Mr.
Eskandarian, 52 years old, said he had been asked to take ''a lesser role in the agency'' after the merger.


Hoare Govett
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation, a Los Angeles commercial banking company, is considering a plan for a partial management buyout of its London-based securities subsidiary, Security Pacific Hoare Govett, the London unit said.
The London unit made the disclosure in response to The Financial Times newspaper, which said the plan would allow the bank to take Hoare Govett and two other overseas securities associates off balance sheet.


Angel Estrada, 31, Designer, Dies; Created Sculptured Evening Wear
LEAD: Angel Estrada, a fashion designer who gave downtown chic a touch of old-world glamour, died of respiratory failure arising from AIDS yesterday at his Manhattan town house.
He was 31 years old.


Cardin Plans China Trip
LEAD: The French fashion designer Pierre Cardin is scheduled to visit Beijing next month to decide whether to reopen his Maxim's restaurant, which was shut down during pro-democracy protests in June, a company spokesman said this week.
Mr.
Cardin will also discuss the future of his fashion business with Chinese authorities during a two-day visit starting Oct.


Review/Theater; Kabuki's Whirl of Illusions and Disguises
LEAD: Two men claim to be the same warrior.
One is not only an impostor, but also a fox.
Both fox and man clamber over railings and pop in and out of windows with astonishing ease.
And the roles of the fox, the fox disguised as the warrior and the real warrior are played by the same nimble actor - Ichikawa Ennosuke 3d, whose company, Ennosuke's Kabuki, opened Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Opera


U.S. Agency Allowed To Join Shoreham Suit
LEAD: A judge today let the Bush Administration join a lawsuit challenging Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's plan for the state to buy and dismantle the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


On the Block Where AIDS Hits Hardest, Residents Rally
LEAD: The first acknowledged AIDS death at the Manhattan Plaza apartment towers on West 43d Street was in 1983.
A small floral bouquet and a card of remembrance were placed in the lobby.


Laventhol Memo Notes Spicer Merger Talks
LEAD: The Philadelphia-based accounting firm of Laventhol &amp; Horwath is in ''preliminary merger discussions'' with a midsized competitor, Spicer &amp; Oppenheim, a confidential Laventhol document discloses.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums  ''THE FUNZAPOPPIN MAGIC SHOW,'' a magic, music and comedy show for young children, presented by Michael Taubenslag Productions, 1:30 P.M.
Sundays, at the Jan Hus Playhouse, 351 East 74th Street.
Tickets: $4.50.
Reservations: 772-9180.  ''CINDERELLA,'' a show by the Papageno Puppet Theater with Susan Delery Whedon, 1:30 P.M.


Egbert Van Haaften, Ex-Watchmaker, 79
LEAD: Egbert Van Haaften, a retired engineer and watchmaker, died of a heart attack Wednesday at his home in Kalamazoo, Mich.
He was 79 years old.


Businesses Plan to Increase Spending by 7.7% This Year
LEAD: Signaling an easing of recession fears, the nation's businesses plan to increase their spending on plants and equipment by 7.7 percent this year, a Commerce Department study says.


It's Time To Hire A Coach
LEAD: The next time a basketball team with USA on its jerseys takes the floor during an Olympic Games, the people sitting before televisions in this country will have exhausted their supply of rationalizations.


Ex-Aide Backs Bush on Contra Story
LEAD: A former senior aide to George Bush said today that it was unlikely that Mr.
Bush, then Vice President, was briefed by John M. Poindexter about all the crucial meetings he had missed concerning the Iran and contra operations.


On Stage
LEAD:  'Shogun': The Musical


Colombian Justice Minister Ends Her Trip to Washington
LEAD: Justice Minister Monica de Greiff of Colombia, a target of death threats from drug cartel leaders, left Washington today, ending a 13-day visit, a Colombian Embassy spokesman said.


Miller Dropping Wine Cooler Line
LEAD: The Miller Brewing Company said it would stop production of its Matilda Bay wine cooler in early November because of poor sales.
Thomas A. Koehler, vice president of sales, said the wine cooler market declined more than 14 percent in 1988.


DEALS
LEAD:  BASEBALL  ATLANTA (NL) - Appointed Frank Howard minor-league hitting director.
Announced that John Smoltz, pitcher, would miss the rest of the season.
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Recalled Dorn Taylor, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Stan Belinda, pitcher, from Buffalo.


Rivals Assail Rebuttal Ad By Holtzman As a Smear
LEAD: The Democratic primary race for New York City comptroller, already a testy contest between Elizabeth Holtzman and her rivals, turned testier yesterday as she responded to her opponents' repeated attacks on her record as Brooklyn District Attorney with a new television advertisement attacking their integrity.


Auctions
LEAD:  Moderns From Chicago  Major contemporary and modern artworks by Roy Lichtenstein, Jasper Johns, Richard Diebenkorn, Joseph Beuys, Robert Ryman, Jean Dubuffet and Alberto Giacometti are to be auctioned from two Chicago collections at Christie's in November.


Bonn Asked by Walesa To Invest in the Poles
LEAD: Lech Walesa urged West Germany today to be less cautious about investing in Poland, saying business should act quickly to back the democratization process there, which he called ''a really enormous step forward.''


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Bang on the Violin


THE LAW: At the Bar; An advocate for the homeless switches to a big law firm, but will he feel at home?
LEAD: For youngish lawyers, particularly those with a lingering altruism, the traffic between large law firms and the public sector is usually one way.
Following a time-honored ritual, they go to Wall Street, serve their apprenticeship and flee.
Robert M. Hayes did that seven years ago when he left Sullivan &amp;


U.S. Urges Pretoria to Act Quickly to Negotiate End to Apartheid
LEAD: The United States said today that the white rulers of South Africa won a ''mandate for real change'' in elections Wednesday and that they should quickly begin negotiations with blacks to end apartheid.


Rhonda Brauer, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Rhonda Lyn Brauer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Brauer of Munster, Ind., was married yesterday to Gregory John Holch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Holch of Greenwich, Conn.
Justice Felice K. Shea of State Supreme Court performed the ceremony in her chambers in Manhattan.


Olds Offers Full Credit To Unhappy Buyers
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation, moving to halt the customer defections that have plagued it since the early 1980's, is trying a new marketing ploy.
Challenging an industrywide taboo, it will permit dissatisfied buyers of new Oldsmobiles to return the cars for full credit.


New Train Will Revive an Elegant Era
LEAD: Railroad travelers taking the overnight Amtrak train between Chicago and Washington will be offered a new and more elegant option this fall: luxury service in coaches fashioned after Europe's storied Orient Express.


Mothers Are Working to Remake the World; Ending Bad Marriages
LEAD: To the Editor:


I.O.C. Criticizes Federation Steroids Rule
LEAD: A senior official of the International Olympic Committee today criticized the International Amateur Athletic Federation for passing a rule this week that penalizes world record holders who admit to having used performance-enhancing drugs.


Florio Accuses G.O.P. Rival Of Impropriety in Land Deal
LEAD: Representative James J. Florio, the Democratic candidate for governor, today accused his Republican opponent, Representative Jim Courter, of using his office to promote a $10,000 land deal involving Mr.
Courter and the State of New Jersey.


Weekend Festival Remains Faithful to Beethoven
LEAD: ''Our original idea was to have a festival that would last all summer,'' said Theodora Bookman, the executive director of Friends of the Arts, a Long Island concert-presenting organization. ''But we decided, instead, to begin with one weekend, and to concentrate on one composer.
It occurred to us that there wasn't a summer festival devoted to Beethoven.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  ON THE FERRY


Amid Scandal, Italian Banker Quits
LEAD: The chairman of Italy's largest bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, resigned today hours after it was disclosed that the bank's branch in Atlanta had issued unauthorized export credits to Iraq that amounted to more than $2.6 billion.


I. M. Pei's Concert Hall Opens Tonight in Dallas


Our Towns; Jodi's in School And, You See? Not So Different
LEAD: Jodi Goodline is like a lot of other 16-year-old girls.
She's interested in boys.
She likes sports (especially jogging and baseball).
She's into heavy-metal music (Bon Jovi! Bon Jovi!).
She's bubbly and gregarious.
In short, she's a very outgoing person.


Buick Introduces Reatta Convertible
LEAD: Buick has introduced its Reatta convertible after solving engineering problems.
Buick's general manager, Ed Mertz, said the General Motors Corporation division might make as many Reatta convertibles as hard-top versions of the car, which has two seats.


Guilty Plea In Stock Case Is Expected
LEAD: A Federal investigation into the practice of stock lending has advanced following an agreement by a former executive with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. to plead guilty to securities and tax charges and cooperate with the inquiry, people close to the investigation said yesterday.


Navy Report on Iowa Finds Mismanagement by Officers
LEAD: Formally concluding that the explosion on the battleship Iowa was ''most probably'' sabotage, the Navy said today that its 20-week investigation had also uncovered serious mismanagement of the ship and recommended disciplinary action against her senior officers.


Viola Victory Depletes Deli
LEAD: Abe Lebewohl, owner of the Second Avenue Kosher Delicatessen, at 10th Street, got a lot of publicity last month when he offered a free one-pound salami ($7 retail) to anyone presenting a ticket stub from any game won this season by Frank Viola, whose father was a regular customer of Lebewohl.


Opponents in Ethiopian War Meet With Carter in Atlanta for Talks
LEAD: Representatives of the Ethiopian Government and a rebel group seeking independence from Ethiopia met here today to begin talks aimed at ending their 28-year war, which has taken a million lives.


Guilty Pleas in Futures Case
LEAD: Two more futures traders pleaded guilty today to violating Federal commodity laws while trading in the Chicago Board of Trade's soybean pit, admitting they pocketed about $250 each at the expense of customers.


Data Design Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Design Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
26,999,000
28,232,000
Net loss
1,707,000
c1,977,000
Share earns
-
.29
Yr sales
108,323,000
107,955,000
Net loss
b12,173,000
c7,302,000
Share earns
-
1.10
Shares outst
6,706,000
6,632,000


Long Beach Journal; Eyes That Saw Horrors Now See Only Shadows
LEAD: One Cambodian woman saw Khmer Rouge soldiers tie up her parents, cut their throats and throw them into a river.
Another saw her child bashed to death against a tree.


What's New in New York City
LEAD:  Discovery Cove


2,634 Dogs at Lyndhurst For the Westchester Show
LEAD: Eighty-four years ago, the first Westchester Kennel Club show was held in White Plains.
It lasted three days and attracted 330 dogs.
This Sunday, the East Coast's premier outdoor canine event will be staged at Lyndhurst, a national landmark on Route 9 near the Tappan Zee Bridge, and it will have 2,634 dogs, 251 more than last year.


2d Maskette a Test For Winning Colors
LEAD: Last year's Maskette Stakes, in which Personal Ensign ran down Winning Colors to win by three-quarters of a length, was one of the year's best races.
Personal Ensign was retired at year's end with a perfect 13 for 13 record, but Winning Colors is back for tomorrow's renewal of the Maskette at Belmont.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  New Idea for Tomatoes


Pork Bellies Rise the Limit On Hopes of Aid to Poland
LEAD: Futures prices for frozen pork bellies soared the 2-cents-a-pound daily limit yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange on speculation that America's pork belly surplus could be sent to Poland as a package of food aid.


An Array of Series Offering Movies and Vintage Video
LEAD: All sorts of activities have arrived in a rush to sweep us toward autumn, and this weekend movies and vintage video are the thing.
Several series get under way to introduce audiences to new work from the Far East, old work about the Far West, a German emigre's view of South America and a collection of experimental films that look inward to see outward.


Futures Regulator Is Criticized by G.A.O.
LEAD: The investigative arm of Congress said today that there are shortcomings in the way the agency that regulates futures trading polices abuses at the country's exchanges.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary by The Associated Press yesterday about Sir Ronald Syme, a historian of classical Rome, misidentified Tacitus.
He was a Roman historian, not an emperor.


Senate's Blow on Drugs: Cut Free Mail by Members
LEAD: Eager to strike a symbolic first blow in the war on drugs, the Senate voted 83 to 8 today to eliminate mass mailings of Congressional newsletters and transfer the estimated $45 million in savings to treatment programs for pregnant addicts.


Excerpts From Iowa Blast Findings
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a memorandum released today by the Pentagon that was submitted Aug. 31 by the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
Carlisle A. H. Trost, to the Judge Advocate General about the investigation of the explosion on the battleship Iowa on April 19; the Navy's findings of fact concerning the No.


Colombia Drug Suspect in U.S. Court Hearing
LEAD: As the suspected ringleader of a billion-dollar Colombian drug-money laundering operation made his first court appearance under tight security today, his lawyer questioned whether he could get a fair trial in the United States.


Del Monte Fresh Food Units Sold
LEAD: After weeks of negotiations, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company said yesterday that it had sold the Del Monte fresh fruits and vegetables business of RJR Nabisco Inc. for $875 million to Polly Peck International, a London-based food company.


Extradition by Swiss
LEAD: A Lebanese businessman was extradited to West Germany Wednesday to face charges of fraud in an oil trading scandal, the Swiss justice ministry said.
West German authorities accuse the businessman, Khalil J. Ghattas, of heading an illegal scheme that cost the trading house Kloeckner &amp; Company $303 million.


A Rose-Period Picasso Is to Be Auctioned
LEAD: Picasso's brooding rose-period painting ''Au Lapin Agile,'' from 1905, is to be auctioned on Nov. 15 at Sotheby's in New York, John L. Marion, the auction house's chairman in the United States, announced yesterday.


Polish Cabinet Pact: 9 Posts to Solidarity And 4 to Communists
LEAD: Poland's new Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, presented a Cabinet list of 22 members today, with Solidarity receiving nine seats and the Communist Party four, officials said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Nestle Gives McCann Taster's Choice Coffee
LEAD: In a move to consolidate its coffee brands at one advertising agency, Nestle S.A. yesterday awarded its Taster's Choice account to McCann-Erickson Worldwide.
The account, which is worth $25 million, had been at Della Femina, McNamee WCRS Inc. since 1985.


Cavaliers Announce Signing of Morton
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers signed their first-round draft pick, John Morton, yesterday and though no terms were announced, the Cavaliers were already relishing the versatility of the former Seton Hall guard.


Kodak Rises 75/
LEAD: The stock of the Eastman Kodak Company rose yesterday amid rumors that it would get a favorable ruling in a patent infringement case brought by the Polaroid Corporation and that the investor Carl C. Icahn was accumulating Kodak shares and preparing a bid for the Rochester-based photography company.


Ex-Johnson Executive Gets Post at Schering
LEAD: The Schering-Plough Corporation said yesterday that it would combine its personal-care group with its over-the-counter pharmaceutical market and that David E. Collins, a former vice chairman at Johnson &amp; Johnson, would run the combined unit.


Trump Interest In Tiffany
LEAD: The financier Donald J. Trump has received Government clearance to purchase more than $15 million of the stock of Tiffany &amp; Company, a spokeswoman for the Trump Organization said yesterday.


One Land, One Language Unites Us All
LEAD: To the Editor:


Countdown in South Africa
LEAD: F. W. de Klerk begins his first full term as South Africa's President in difficult circumstances.
Blacks send a message of growing impatience from the streets; Congress and President Bush send the same message from Washington.
Meanwhile, Wednesday's parliamentary elections have reduced Mr. de Klerk's legislative base and suggested growing polarization among white voters.


Koch and Dinkins Plan Negative Ads 'If'...
LEAD: The Koch and Dinkins campaigns yesterday mapped their last-minute media strategies, with both candidates preparing negative radio and television advertisements but insisting that they would use them only if the other side used them first.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the start of Oregon's football lottery misidentified a spokesman for the National Football League in New York.
He is Jim Heffernan.


Legal Services: Political Test Looms for Bush
LEAD: The Legal Services Corporation, the Federal agency that provides most of the funds for legal service offices for the poor, has become an ideological battleground ever since Ronald Reagan tried to eliminate it and failed.


Lattimore a Pragmatist Among Ideologues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Restaurants
LEAD:  Primola


Sabatini And Graf Eliminated In Doubles
LEAD: Yesterday, Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini shared the same side of the court that will divide them today, facing Martina Navratilova and her new doubles partner, Hana Mandlikova, in the semifinals of the women's doubles competition at the United States Open.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: A $385 million financing by the State of California to raise mortgage money for veterans was priced yesterday through competitive bidding.


Several Rockets Fired at Israel From Jordan
LEAD: Several Soviet-made rockets were fired at Israel from Jordanian territory today, but they slammed into fields in the northern Jordan Valley and caused no damage, the army said.


Fraud Suspect Vanishes Amid Federal Inquiry
LEAD: A Manhattan executive suspected of embezzling as much as $50 million from companies he controlled and investors and banks he did business with has disappeared, just as Federal and private investigators were starting to sift through the records of his tangled finances.


Tom Blackaller, 49, Competitor in America's Cup
LEAD: Tom Blackaller, who competed in three America's Cup campaigns and was one of yacht racing's most colorful and outspoken helmsmen, died yesterday, apparently of a heart attack, at Angel of the Valley Hospital in Napa, Calif.
He was 49 years old and lived in Sausalito, Calif.


Gioiosa Testifies
LEAD: Thomas Gioiosa testified yesterday in Cincinnati that he made thousands of dollars off Pete Rose's bets with bookmakers and often shared in Rose's track winnings.


Books of The Times; A Violent Crime and What Led Up to It
LEAD:  Affliction  By Russell Banks  355 pages. Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Bank South Plans To Cut 300 Jobs
LEAD: The Bank South Corporation said a program to increase its income by $15 million annually would include reducing the company's work force by 10 percent, or about 300 jobs. ''We will reorganize certain areas, spread out layers of management, eliminate duplications and, in general, cut costs,'' Robert P.


Soviet Drama: 3 Generals Held by Crowd
LEAD: Three senior generals of the Soviet internal security forces were held hostage by a crowd of Azerbaijanis for five hours last week in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, officials disclosed today.


Hospital Policy Is Said to Hurt AIDS Patients
LEAD: Most of New York City's minority patients with AIDS, including many women and children, do not have access to experimental drugs that could prolong their lives because municipal hospitals dispense few of those medications, several AIDS organizations asserted yesterday.


A Traveling Man On Uneven Ice
LEAD: Papers tumbled from boxes strewn across the floor amid the haphazardly placed furniture.
In the middle of the room - to call the room an office suggests at least the trappings of organization - was Roger Neilson, in shorts and T-shirt, sunk in his chair, bare feet on a table top.


Making of Gas for A-Bombs Scheduled to Resume in 1990
LEAD: The Department of Energy announced yesterday that it will reopen one of its crippled nuclear reactors late next year, resuming the production of tritium, a perishable gas vital to nuclear weapons, after a two-year hiatus.
But the department refused to commit itself to completing safety testing or an environmental analysis before reopening the South


Campaign Trail; Political Philosophy on the Soup Line
LEAD: It was a day of contrasts: homeless people saying they wanted a mayor who would do something about jobs and homes, and the Mayor saying he already had.


The Nuances of Cuomo: Drawn With a Purpose
LEAD: If there is an art to insinuation, then Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo wrote the how-to guide.


Review/Art; Sherrie Levine Enters The World of Sculpture
LEAD: Sherrie Levine knows that the only way to skate on thin ice is to move fast.
Having dabbled effectively in photography and watercolor and less effectively in painting, the artist has now sped into three dimensions and is trying her hand - or more precisely her mind - at sculpture, the medium of the moment.


Holyfield Fight Set
LEAD: Evander Holyfield, considered the main challenger to Mike Tyson, the undisputed heavyweight champion, will fight Alex Stewart on Nov. 4, officials at Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City said yesterday.
Holyfield is 22-0 with 18 knockouts.
Stewart (24-0) has knocked out every opponent he has faced.(


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cablec Corp., New City, N.Y., a maker of electronic cables, said it had sold several of its Brintec Corp. unit's connector businesses to LPL Technologies Inc. for $61 million.


A.T.&amp;T. Bank Plan
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company will participate in a new program offered by a subsidiary of the American Banking Association to provide telecommunications and other services to banks.
A.T.&amp; T. said it had an exclusive contract to supply the services.
The banks, which will pay an annual fee based on their assets, could save about 15 percent on communications costs.


Times Raising Price To 40/ on Sept. 18
LEAD: The New York Times will raise the suggested newsstand price of its weekday issue to 40 cents, from 35 cents, within 75 miles of New York City and on all of Long Island starting Monday, Sept. 18.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
Child magazine, a publication of The New York Times Company, will increase its rate of publication to 10 issues a year, from 6, starting in March.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about fraud in the penny stock markets referred incorrectly to a civil action brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission against the Stuart-James Company.
Stuart-James has not settled the charges.


Treasury Prices Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: The prices of Treasury securities ended narrowly mixed in continued sluggish trading yesterday.


N.T.T. Agrees To Accept Bids
LEAD: The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation will accept a request to open the design of a building to international bidding, if the Japanese and United States Governments agree it should do so, N.T.T.'s president said Wednesday.


2 Arrested in Rape; Racial Link Is Charged
LEAD: Two security guards were charged yesterday with raping a 19-year-old woman at a construction site on the roof of the North River Sewage Treatment Plant in Harlem, the police said.


Joseph Kaskell, 97; Lawyer Helped Bonn
LEAD: Joseph Kaskell, an international lawyer who was active in the effort to rebuild Germany after World War II, died Tuesday at his summer home in Madison, N.H.
He was 97 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Rockwell Notes Total $300 Million
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation is offering $300 million in notes through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Brought to You by . . .
LEAD: After a year of controversy, public television stations gave the film ''Days of Rage: The Young Palestinians'' an airing on Wednesday evening.
The main, early argument had been whether the 90-minute pro-Palestinian documentary was too blatantly biased for treatment as broadcast journalism.
The Public Broadcasting


Generic Drug Investigation
LEAD: The Health and Human Services Secretary, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, said today that he believes the worst is over in a generic drug investigation that has rocked the Federal Food and Drug Administration.


The Right Note for the Singing Sergeants cc11.4&gt;
LEAD: From H.R. 2461, ''National Defense Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 1990,'' a proposed budget for the Pentagon in the coming year: Sec. 328.
Commercial Sale of Recording of Air Force Singing Sergeants. (a) Authority to Participate in the Production of Recording for Commercial Sale.
The musical organization known as the United States Air Force Singing Sergeants may participate with the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra in the production of audio recording that is intended for commercial sale.


Soviets Accept 'Challenge' to Conclude Arms Pact
LEAD: The Soviet Union and its allies declared today that they were accepting the Western ''challenge'' to conclude a conventional-arms treaty in 1990 as the talks resumed after a summer pause.


Rally Extends Yanks' Streak to 8
LEAD: Even if their season is over and done with, the Yankees apparently are not.
They came from behind for the second time in two games and ran off their eighth successive victory tonight, beating the Seattle Mariners, 6-4, at the Kingdome before departing for California and the next stop on their trip.


European Plan On Air Traffic
LEAD: Twenty-one European airlines proposed an air traffic control system throughout Europe on Wednesday to replace the national systems now in place.


Dollar Hits 3-Month High As Central Banks Intervene
LEAD: Traders carried the dollar to its highest levels in nearly three months yesterday, although selling by central banks knocked the currency off its peak of the day.


Tesoro Studying Offer from Harken
LEAD: The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation said it will consider the Harken Energy Corporation's $11.75-a-share merger offer at its scheduled board meeting later this month.
Tesoro, which is based in San Antonio, said its board discussed the unsolicited offer Wednesday and requested management to provide information on Harken's operations and performance projections and on industry trends.


Mothers Are Working to Remake the World; Before Betty Friedan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Meggett Sparking Giants' Offense
LEAD: When the Giants opened training camp in July, Dave Meggett seemed almost mismatched.


Hans W. Vahlteich, Chemist, 93
LEAD: Hans W. Vahlteich, a former research chemist for Best Foods Inc., a division of CPC International Inc., died Aug. 31 at his summer home in Craftsbury, Vt.
He was 93 years old and lived in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
He had lived in Fort Lee, N.J., for more than 60 years.


Council Passes Law Restricting Carriage Horses
LEAD: A law to bar horse-drawn carriages from most of midtown Manhattan was passed yesterday by the City Council, despite the bitter objections of carriage operators.


Stock Swindler Testifies
LEAD: A convicted stock swindler told a House committee today that ''penny stocks'' were routinely manipulated for the benefit of organized crime.


Grand Jury Indicts Grand Juror
LEAD: A grand jury here indicted one of its own members Tuesday.
Michael McCay, 24 years old, a former White County Democratic chairman, was charged with 10 counts of forgery and theft in a stock scheme.
Mr.
McCay is serving on the grand jury in White County, 75 miles northeast of Atlanta, but he did not sit in as it considered charges against him.


Science Academy Recommends Resumption of Natural Farming
LEAD: The National Academy of Sciences has found that farmers who apply little or no chemicals to crops can be as productive as those who use pesticides and synthetic fertilizers, and today it recommended changing Federal subsidy programs that encourage overuse of agricultural chemicals.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Quaker Sued On Cereal Ads
LEAD: The Quaker Oats Company was sued yesterday by the Attorney General of Texas for purportedly making false advertising claims for its cereals.
The Attorney General, Jim


Review/Art; A Tableau Invoking the Netherworld, by Jonathan Silver
LEAD: ''The Lower Room,'' at the Sculpture Center, is the best work Jonathan Silver has done and one of the most moving sculpture installations in New York in years.


In South Bronx, Drugs Already Claim Victory
LEAD: The war on drugs was still being lost on the battlefield of the South Bronx streets yesterday.


Petroleum-Depot Explosion Acknowledged by the Iraqis
LEAD: The Iraqi authorities acknowledged today that an explosion rocked an installation south of Baghdad last month but denied reports that the blast was at a missile depot and that up to 700 people had been killed.


Festivals and Fairs
LEAD:  Tomorrow  WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBITION, University Place, from 13th Street to Waverly Place; Washington Square East to Third Street; La Guardia Place from the park, south to Houston Street and Fifth Avenue from Eighth to 10th Streets.
Works by more than 300 artists and artisans.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Bourelly's Jazz Plus


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Shamir Peace Plan: Some Israelis Say It Is Dying
LEAD: Almost six months after Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir proposed his plan for settling the Palestinian conflict, there has not been the smallest movement toward adopting it, and some Israeli leaders are beginning to call it moribund, if not dead.


Big Band at Cat Club
LEAD: The Loren Schoenberg Big Band is to play Duke Ellington pieces for dancing in a program presented by the New York Swing Society, on Sunday at the Cat Club, 76 East 13th Street (505-0090).
Doors open at 7 P.M., with music beginning at 8; tickets are $8, $4 for the elderly.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: Companies


Datapoint Investor Challenges Board
LEAD: A shareholder in the Datapoint Corporation, Martin Ackerman, has filed a solicitation consent with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the removal of the company's directors.
Mr.
Ackerman said he would seek to have himself and four others elected to the board.


Market Place; Cost for the Shorts In Chase Medical
LEAD: IMAGINE a mugging in progress.
Just as the mugger is about to get away with the victim's wallet, the cops arrive and arrest the mugger.
Then, as the victim is thinking how wonderful the police are, they hand some of the money in the wallet to the next person to walk down the street.


Dataproducts Plans Significant Overhaul
LEAD: Reacting to a takeover bid, the Dataproducts Corporation said today that it planned a significant revamping in which it would sell a subsidiary and its corporate headquarters, offer a special dividend of about $3 a share and take a $45 million write-off.


Mothers Are Working to Remake the World; Whose Children?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Offering by Bank Of Nova Scotia
LEAD: The Bank of Nova Scotia priced $200 million of subordinated notes yesterday through competitive bidding by a group led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


The Unlettered 1.3 Billion
LEAD: For 12 years humankind's surrogate, Voyager 2, has been nosing through space telling us about the golden rings of Saturn and darkly halo'd clouds, winds that sound like waves breaking and a moon that's the pink of early dawn on Earth.
The spacecraft is a miracle, but it was not made by miracle workers.


Bad News and Good News on Oil Reserves


Czech Rower Suspended a Year For Failing Regatta Drug Test
LEAD: The International Rowing Federation today released the name of a Czechoslovak competitor who tested positive for a banned substance at an international regatta in July.


Philippine Growth Slows
LEAD: The Philippine Government announced this week that the nation's rate of economic growth had slowed in the first half of this year.
The National Statistical Coordinating Board said the gross national product, which measures the total value of goods and services produced, had grown 5.33 percent in the first six months, down from a 6.54 percent rate in the corresponding period in 1988.


Investment Abroad Is Up
LEAD: United States manufacturing companies stepped up their foreign investment in the first half of 1989, the Conference Board said in a report released yesterday.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the El Barrio Street Fair, Third Avenue between 112th and 115th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Joel Levinson and Lance Mald have been named senior vice presidents and associate creative directors at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.


Electronic Exports Up
LEAD: American exports of electronic products totaled $31.4 billion in the first half of the year, up by nearly 18 percent over the corresponding period last year, the Electronic Industries Association said this week.


Rangers Acquire Wing
LEAD: The Rangers, on the eve of the opening of training camp, yesterday acquired Kris King from the Detroit Red Wings for Chris McRae, a minor league forward, and future considerations.


U.S. Investigates Asbestos Tests By Con Edison
LEAD: The Consolidated Edison Company is under Federal investigation for six incidents since 1987 in which workers have accused the utility of failing to test properly for the presence of asbestos at work sites.


Microscopic Flaw in Engine's Disk Is Suspected as Cause of Iowa Jet Crash
LEAD: Government and industry officials said today that the leading theory for the engine failure that caused a United Airlines DC-10 to crash in July involves a microscopic metallurgical defect in the large titanium disk that spins the fan blades.


Argentine Wavers on Army Pardons
LEAD: Under pressure from families of victims, human rights groups and political parties, President Carlos Saul Menem appears to be backing away from plans to grant a broad pardon for political killings, torture and other crimes committed during the last military Government.


Caption; After 10 Days on a Disabled Fishing Boat, Rescued Boys Arrive in New York


DEBATE ESCALATES ON MEDICARE PLAN
LEAD: As the Senate Finance Committee began revising the legislation.
Bush Administration officials vowed today to fight growing efforts to repeal the Medicare expansion that protects older Americans against catastrophic medical expenses.


Chris-Craft Loss in Court
LEAD: A Delaware judge ruled yesterday that Chris-Craft Industries, a shareholder in Warner Communications Inc., had no power to veto the merger between Warner and Time Inc.


F.D.I.C. Action Ruled Illegal
LEAD: A Federal judge in Dallas has ruled that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation broke United States banking laws when it seized money owed to a healthy bank, a clerk for the judge said yesterday.


Dancing, With Piping, Bouncing And Barking
LEAD: The latest Dancing in the Streets festival has lots of dancing - also some bouncing, rolling, piping and even barking - but not exactly any streets.


Bush Plan Would Aid Computing
LEAD: President Bush's science adviser will present to Congress today a plan by which the United States would almost double over five years its spending on advanced computing research technologies to develop dramatically faster supercomputers and more powerful software.
The plan also calls for the construction of a high-speed computer network that would link the nation's research centers.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, a waste-disposal company, named Bruce E. Ranck executive vice president of North American solid waste.


TV Weekend; Showing Off the Very Special Arts of the Disabled
LEAD: Given the continuing reports about drug wars, the homeless, AIDS, racial tensions and corruption scandals, ordinary citizens can be forgiven a sense of despair.
A healthy dose of good old-fashioned uplift is almost desperately in order.
And that's what is offered, this Sunday night at 8 o'clock, in an hourlong NBC special called ''From the Heart.


Dining Out Guide: Robust Bistros
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Pierre au Tunnel  * (Oct. 30, 1987), 250 West 47th Street (575-1220) - Nearly 40 years on the scene, Pierre au Tunnel is recommended as a homey theater-district bistro serving peasant-style dishes and Gallic classics.


B.P.'s Next Chairman Once Led U.S. Unit
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company said yesterday that it intends to name Robert B. Horton, the former head of B.P.
America, as chairman.


BENNETT CONCEDES STATES WOULD PAY MUCH OF DRUG COST
LEAD: President Bush's drug policy director acknowledged today that state and local governments would have to spend billions of dollars to meet the goals of Mr.
Bush's national drug strategy, perhaps $5 billion to $10 billion next year for new prisons alone.


Cost of Farm Subsidies Cited as Trade Issue
LEAD: In an effort to persuade West European countries to end farm subsidies, the Bush Administration has begun citing new estimates of the high costs of agricultural support, which is now put at $200 billion for both the United States and the European Community, nearly 10 times higher than was estimated earlier.


Head to Quit Falconbridge
LEAD: A Canadian mining executive, Bill James, said today that he would leave the helm of Falconbridge Ltd. because of the metals producer's impending takeover by Noranda Inc. and Trelleborg A.B.
Mr.
James, who transformed


Nonaligned Bloc Ends Meeting on a New Note
LEAD: The nonaligned movement ended its meeting of heads of government tonight with a policy declaration that broke ground in moderation and brevity.


At the Movies
LEAD:  A Gala With the Bushes


Salvador Rebels Plan To Cut Level of Combat
LEAD: Leaders of El Salvador's leftist rebels announced today that they would reduce military activity in order to bring about ''as soon as possible a definitive process of negotiation'' to end the country's decade-long civil war.


U.S. Oil Discovery Off But Recovery Gains
LEAD: The Energy Department said today that its estimate of how much oil can be recovered from known reserves in the United States increased by a substantial margin in 1988, marking the fifth time in the last six years that the improvement exceeded 1.8 billion barrels.


Drexel Sued On '85 Buyout
LEAD: Three former heirs to the Pacific Lumber Company have filed a lawsuit against Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York, charging fraud in the financing of a hostile buyout of the company.


Bomb Blast in Medellin Injures Two Policemen
LEAD: A bomb that exploded in a fast-food restaurant today in Medellin wounded two policemen, and Colombia replaced the mayors of two towns with army officers but rescinded its action after an outcry that the moves were unconstitutional and antidemocratic.


About Real Estate; Sales Still Weak Despite Rate Drop
LEAD: A year after beginning their search, Kevin and Carol Bohan of Elmhurst, Queens, are finally buying their first house.
But unlike the Bohans many potential home buyers in the Northeast are not taking advantage of a sharp drop in mortgage rates.


Reagan Cook, 49, Dies; A Theater Set Designer
LEAD: Reagan Cook, a theater set designer, died of brain cancer on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Imperial Bank
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
194,600,000
139,100,000
Per share
1.04
.78
9mo net inc
576,700,000
417,000,000
Per share
3.10
2.38
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.


Ryan Is No Match For Orioles
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles continued their mastery over Nolan Ryan tonight, handing him his ninth loss in his last 12 games with an 8-3 victory over the Texas Rangers in the first game of a doubleheader.


UAL Shares Fall On Davis Rumor
LEAD: Shares of the UAL Corporation tumbled yesterday on rumors that Marvin Davis, the California financier, was selling the stock - a sign he may abandon his $6.2 billion bid for the parent of United Airlines.
UAL fell $5.125 to close at $281.75 in active New York Stock Exchange trading.Arbitragers said the rumors had Mr.


A Time for Discoveries: What's New in New York
LEAD: WHAT'S more than 350 years old, yet perennially new?


Agassi Defeats a Grappling Connors in 5 Sets
LEAD: If nothing else, it was a colorful way to go.
The sunset was more crimson even than the exertion that had painted itself across the face of Jimmy Connors as the 37-year-old veteran of 20 United States Opens inspired a standing ovation from the 20,000 fans packing the stadium court yesterday at the National Tennis


Seoul Trade Talks Stall
LEAD: The United States has given South Korea five months to loosen barriers to American telecommunications imports or risk trade sanctions, Seoul officials said today.


Group Sets Corporate Code On Environmental Conduct
LEAD: The pension funds of New York City and California and other investors joined with environmental groups and religious organizations yesterday to introduce a code of conduct to judge which corporations are environmentally responsible.
Those involved control more than $100 billion in investments, The 10-point code has been named the Valdez Principles, recalling the disastrous oil spill by the Exxon Valdez oil tanker off the Alaska coast.


Review/Television; A Poll of Viewers' Feelings About Racial Issues
LEAD: ''The RACE,'' which occupied two hours on NBC Tuesday and Wednesday nights, injected elements of a game show and a celebrity hunt into its poll of Americans' feelings about race.
The acronym stands for Racial Attitudes and Consciousness Exam.
It was given by Bryant Gumbel to groups of about 80 people of assorted races, sexes and ages, gathered in New York, Los Angeles, Milwaukee and Jackson, Miss., who used little handsets to register their approval or disapproval of activities like interracial dating.


Bertram S. Primoff, Accountant, 68
LEAD: Bertram S. Primoff, a tax consultant and certified public accountant, died Tuesday at his daughter's home in Eastchester, N.Y., after a long illness.
He was 68 years and lived in Ardsley, N.Y.


Reputed Head of Heroin Ring Is Found Guilty in U.S. Court
LEAD: A reputed New York drug chieftain and four associates have been convicted for their roles in a network based in Sicily that imported millions of dollars' worth of heroin between 1984 and 1988.


Mothers Are Working to Remake the World
LEAD: To the Editor:


For the Record
LEAD:  Status of Women  From an article by Louise A. LaMothe on the status of women in law firms.
The article appeared in the spring-summer issue of Stanford Lawyer.


Charles H. Lee Jr., Lawyer, 62
LEAD: Charles H. Lee Jr., a lawyer and an investment banker, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 62 years old.


U.S. Seeks to Overturn Oakland Nuclear Ban
LEAD: The Bush Administration has filed suit in Federal court seeking to overturn an Oakland ordinance barring nuclear weapons work in the city.


Elections Confirm the Arrival Of Regrouped White Liberals
LEAD: Leaders of the National Party laughed when South Africa's white liberals sat down last April to try to stitch together a new coalition called the Democratic Party.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-9  South Africa's Acting President, F. W. de Klerk, said that Wednesday's elections gave his party a mandate to push ahead with its plan for evolutionary change in its system of racial separation.
Page A1


Economic Scene; Robbing Peter To Fight Drugs
LEAD: CONGRESS came back to Washington this week, glumly facing - like other returning vacationers - an accumulation of money worries.
Prominent on its list was President Bush's pitch for a $7.9 billion anti-drug offensive.
Because the President proposed to pay for the program not by raising taxes but by taking funds from other programs, this set off a political dust-up on where to find the money.


Prospect Ends Bid For Recognition
LEAD: The Prospect Group said it had terminated its $11-a-share offer for 7.1 million common shares of Recognition Equipment Inc., the troubled postal-equipment maker.
Recognition's stock fell $1.375 today, to $6.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 17.5 percent decline was the day's worst.


Winthrop Hoyt, Executive, 88
LEAD: Winthrop Hoyt, a retired New York advertising executive, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Manchester Center, Vt.
He was 88 years old.


Yeltsin, Soviet Opposition Figure, Is Due Today for U.S. Tour
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the swashbuckling Soviet populist whose mass appeal made him the symbol of growing political pluralism in Moscow, arrives in New York on his first American visit Saturday to offer Americans an insight into Soviet politics and to take a crash course in American capitalism.


Robert V. Engle, Graphics Director, 65
LEAD: Robert V. Engle, graphics director for the state's Urban Development Corporation and the Department of Economic Development, died of a heart attack Wednesday at Coney Island Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Bit by Bit, Life Gets Better for Libyans
LEAD: When people explain how change has come to Libya, the talk sometimes turns to ice cream.


Kim Dae Jung's Indictment Raises Fears of New Repression in Korea
LEAD: The recent indictment of South Korea's most prominent opposition figure on charges of violating national security laws has spread bitterness in political circles and raised new concerns among many Koreans about the Government's actions to suppress dissent.


Brazil Seeks Extension for Getting Money
LEAD: Brazilian negotiators asked commercial bankers yesterday to allow Brazil more time to qualify for a $600 million payment from the banks that was scheduled to be made this month, bankers said.


Panel Refuses to Delay Pierce Hearing
LEAD: A House panel investigating political abuse in Federal housing programs refused today to delay next week's scheduled testimony by former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr.
Mr.
Pierce's lawyer, Paul L. Perito, said he had asked for a two-week postponement to help prepare Mr.
Pierce for questioning by members of the panel, the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Employment and


Deborah Baber,Actress, Is Wed
LEAD: Deborah Elwynne Baber, an actress and a playwright, and Richard R. Valcourt, the senior editor of The International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, were married yesterday by Rabbi David M. Posner at Temple Emanu-el in New York.


Patents; Running Diesel Engine With a Coal Slurry
LEAD: An engineer at Defense Research Technologies Inc. of Rockville, Md., a research concern specializing in fluid control, has patented a device that makes it possible to power a diesel engine with a coal slurry.


Casino Group Suspends Harrah's Over Contract
LEAD: Harrah's Marina Hotel and Casino has been suspended from the Casino Association of New Jersey for secretly negotiating a labor agreement.


Courage in Colombia
LEAD: While some Colombians win international notoriety as drug barons, others labor heroically to defend their country's institutions.
Without their efforts, the current U.S.-assisted drive to put the Medellin cocaine cartel out of business could have no real hope of success.


Abbott to Buy Shares
LEAD: Abbott Laboratories said today that its directors had authorized the repurchase on the open market of up to 10 million of its 224.2 million common shares outstanding.
Abbott's chairman, Robert A. Schoellhorn, said: ''We are extremely optimistic about Abbott's continued growth.
We believe the purchase of our shares represents a sound investment and wise use of our resources.


Polish Cabinet Nominees Pledge Market Economy
LEAD: As confirmation hearings opened for nominees to the new Cabinet, Communists in Parliament were shocked today to hear prospective ministers pledge publicly to return Poland to a market economy and to seek war reparations from the Soviet Union.


Our African Interlude
LEAD: Instead of birds' songs, grasshoppers and crickets are agitating the air with the force of life now.
Bull thistles, mulein stalks and ironweed stand head-high in overgrown fields.
Clusters of elderberries wait to be turned into wine.
Asters, gentian and goldenrod are the prevalent flowers; and a red-tailed hawk pauses 300 feet up, scoping for mice.


OWNER SEEKS SALE OF BLOOMINGDALE'S
LEAD: Bloomingdale's, one of the world's most famous retailers, went on the auction block yesterday, and Marvin S. Traub, its longtime chairman and chief executive, immediately said he was putting together a group to try to buy it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Armco Inc., Parsippany, N.J., said 4,700 employees at plants in Ashland, Ky.; Kansas City, Mo., and Baltimore had ratified a four-year accord.


Futures Trader Pleads Guilty
LEAD: The first Treasury bond futures trader to confess to wrongdoing in connection with a large undercover Federal investigation of the Chicago exchanges pleaded guilty today to one count of mail fraud and one count of prearranged trading.


Salvadoran Rebels in Parley
LEAD: Representatives of the Government of El Salvador and leftist insurgents will meet in Mexico on Sept. 12 and 13, both sides have agreed.
The talks, described by President Alfredo Cristiani as preliminary to formal negotiations, will be the first since Mr.
Cristiani and his right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance took power in June.


Profits Fall At Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, the nation's second-largest operator of convenience stores, reported yesterday that earnings in its first fiscal quarter declined 61 percent from a year earlier but that margins improved.


SmithKline Gets Vaccine Approval
LEAD: The SmithKline Beecham Company said it had received Federal permission to sell a hepatitis B vaccine that it hopes will establish it in the $85 million market now dominated by Merck &amp; Company.
The company declined to disclose sales estimates for the vaccine, Engerix-B, which was approved for sale in


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


PBS Executive Resigns in 'Days of Rage' Dispute
LEAD: A public television executive who acquired a pro-Palestinian documentary for the Public Broadcasting Service and who was responsible for investigating the film's financing has resigned from PBS.


Patricia Sparlow Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church in Luzerne, Pa., Patricia Ann Sparlow, a 29-year-old vice president at Ketchum Public Relations in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Curtis Morrow, a 32-year-old freelance art director in New York.
The Rev.
Paul Gerosky officiated.


Peanuts and Censors at Yankee Stadium?
LEAD: When Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, first learned that security workers at Yankee Stadium were confiscating banners denouncing George Steinbrenner, he was not inclined to act.
There were, he reasoned, more important issues on his agenda than whether signs like ''George Must Go'' or ''Bucky: Don't


Review/Music; From Bernstein, Songs About Words
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein's new ''Arias and Barcarolles'' dances the delicate dance between words and music and does it with considerable skill.
There are eight numbers using two singers, two pianists and one piano, and at every moment the composer asks the songwriter's two recurring questions: what do words say about music?


Bill for the Disabled Only Rights Civil Wrongs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents; Speeding Data by Phone
LEAD: Paul J. Giorgio, an electrical engineer with the Navy, has invented a computer modem that speeds data transmission by sending it over two or more telephone lines at once.
An ordinary phone line cannot relay data faster than 9,600 baud, about 960 characters a second, Mr.
Giorgio said.
A standard personal computer port, however, can transmit and receive data at twice that rate.


Bill for the Disabled Only Rights Civil Wrongs; More Than Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor While no one can object to a bill that bars bias against the disabled (front page, Aug. 14), the scope and implications of at least some of its provisions should be clarified.
Otherwise, the danger of a backlash against the disabled is a real possibility.


Coe Still Running, But He May Retire
LEAD: He has been running for gold for years and now he wants to run for office, so Sebastian Coe said yesterday in Barcelona, Spain, that he would announce his decision on retirement next Thursday at a news conference in London.
Coe, who is running the 1,500 meters for Britain in the World Cup meet that began yesterday, is trying to gain a seat in Britain's ruling Conservative Party and is planning a long-term political career.


Belgian Flights Canceled
LEAD: The Belgian national airline Sabena canceled 15 flights today because of labor problems and faced a 24-hour pilots' strike over the weekend.
The pilots will go on strike on Saturday morning, while flight attendants will board all Sabena planes two hours late on Sunday to push demands for better pay, said a Sabena spokesman, Daniel de Vinck.


Alcohol a Depressant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pride in the Team Turns to Dismay
LEAD: With the feeling of football in the air, a crowd gathers every weekday afternoon to watch the Carter High School varsity team charge through its drills, but this year the talk among the fans is as much of jail terms as it is of touchdowns.


Reagan Undergoes Brain Surgery To Remove Fluid Linked to Fall
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan underwent surgery yesterday to remove fluid from his brain that his doctors attributed to a fall from a horse two months ago, a spokesman for Mr.
Reagan said.


To Dent's Surprise, Yanks Extend His Contract
LEAD: Ten days after he suggested that Bucky Dent might have been summoned to manage the Yankees too soon, George Steinbrenner changed course, announcing today that he would extend Dent's contract through the 1990 season.


Elizabeth Ann Fiore Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Fiore, a daughter of Richard C. Fiore of New York and MaryAnne Viola-Fiore of Portsmouth, Va., was married yesterday to Edouard Prulhiere, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Louis Prulhiere of Neuilly-sur-Seine, France.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo performed the ceremony at the St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article and its headline on Thursday about a pretrial hearing for John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser, incorrectly characterized a statement by his lawyer regarding former President Ronald Reagan.
The lawyer, Frederick Robinson, asserted that President Reagan had approved a letter to Congress sent by Mr.


Lendl's Open So Far Is on Cruise Control
LEAD: Except for a scare from Andrei Chesnokov, Ivan Lendl has breezed through his first five matches at the United States Open.
Lendl, the top-seeded player, has been cruising on the court in the same relaxed fashion he drives his sports car to the National Tennis Center in Queens, from his home in Greenwich, Conn.


Anchor Glass Talks
LEAD: The Anchor Glass Container Corporation said it had held discussions with third parties interested in a possible transaction with the company.
The company, based in Tampa, provided no further details.
Anchor has been resisting a $20-a-share offer from Vitro S.A., based in Monterrey, Mexico.
Vitro's offer is to expire Thursday.


Cocoa Price Support Plan
LEAD: Cocoa-producing nations agreed today on a plan to present to cocoa-consuming nations next week to try to settle a long-running dispute over cocoa price support levels.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5


Thomas Hopes to Give Penn State a Big Boost
LEAD: Penn State will be in an unusual situation today as it tries to rebound from its first losing season in 50 years.


Travels in search of Graham Greene
LEAD: Speaking of Joseph Conrad, Graham Greene once said: ''That blasted Pole makes me green with envy because he writes literature when he's trying to write journalism and I write journalism when I'm trying to write literature.''


Pilot Error May Have Caused Amazon Plane Crash


2 Former PTL Aides Sentenced to Jail


U.S. to Sell 5 Savings Units
LEAD: Federal regulators put five more large savings institutions up for sale today and said they hoped to complete the multibillion-dollar deals by the end of the month.


Books of The Times; Divining the Motives Of Socialistic Ravens
LEAD:  Ravens in Winter  By Bernd Heinrich  Illustrations by the author. 379 pages.
Summit Books. $19.95.


Smear Time
LEAD: The end of a campaign brings out the worst in politicians.
This year's New York City primary campaign has been much better than others, especially among the Democratic mayoral candidates.
Recognizing that divisive campaigning could only hurt in the wake of the Bensonhurst tragedy, they have so far behaved with admirable restraint.


Parents Convicted in Starvation Death of Son
LEAD: Larry Cottam, left, a Seventh-day Adventists pastor, and his wife, Leona, leaving the Luzerne County Courthouse in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., yesterday after they were convicted of third-degree murder in the starvation death of their 14-year-old son, Eric, who died in January.


Lauder Runs Race Unlike Any Other
LEAD: For nine months, Ronald S. Lauder has waged a mayoral campaign unlike any other.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Nuclear Plant to Be Closed  The Government said a new plant that makes fuel for nuclear ships is no longer needed, but a Senate aide cited faulty construction.
Page 6.
The Good Life in Moscow  A renovated hotel in Moscow has all the trappings of a stately capitalist pleasure dome, including the Soviet Union's first casino.


How Much to Fence In the Fed
LEAD: The chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, Lee Hamilton, wants to tighten regulation of the Federal Reserve system.
The legislation he has co-sponsored sounds innocent enough.
It would strip away some of the secrecy the Fed now enjoys and make it more accountable to elected politicians.


No Headline
LEAD: More airline flights arrived on time in July than the month before, the Transportation Department reports.


Comptroller Proposes 3% Bank Capital
LEAD: Moving in response to a problem created by the Government's savings and loan rescue, the Comptroller of the Currency proposed today to establish a 3 percent minimum capital requirement for nationally chartered commercial banks and maintained it would strengthen the banking system.


I.R.A. GUNMAN KILLS WIFE OF A BRITON
LEAD: The German wife of a British soldier based in West Germany was shot to death by an Irish Republican Army gunman on Thursday night, the authorities said today.


Learning To Focus
LEAD: With today's films and cameras, taking pictures can be child's play.
That literally is the premise of ''My First Camera Book'' (Workman Publishing, $8.95).
Written by Anne Kostick and illustrated by Tedd Arnold to appeal to the single-digit set, the 64-page paperback comes complete with something new to children's book publishing: a working camera.


U.S. Opens Talks With Exiled Afghan King
LEAD: The United States has sent emissaries to talk to the exiled King of Afghanistan, Mohammed Zahir Shah, to see if he might play a role in ending the civil war in his homeland, Administration officials said today.


Baby Is Found in Toilet Tank
LEAD: A newborn boy, believed to be just one hour old, was found stuffed into the tank of a toilet in an Upper East Side pizza parlor Friday, the police said.
The infant was discovered shortly before 1:30 P.M. in the women's restroom at the Don Flippo Pizzeria at 1133 Lexington Avenue, near 78th Street, the police said.


Report for U.S. Says Somali Army Killed 5,000 Unarmed Civilians
LEAD: A report commissioned by the State Department says the Somali Army ''purposely murdered'' at least 5,000 unarmed civilians over 10 months ending in March.


Plane Crash Off Danish Coast Kills 55
LEAD: A charter plane carrying Norwegian shipping company officials to a ship-christening in West Germany crashed in the sea north of here today.
Rescue officials said all 55 people aboard were killed.


Fall in Consumer Debt Is First in 2 1/2 Years
LEAD: Consumers repaid more debt than they took out during July, as installment debt outstanding fell for the first time in two and a half years, the Federal Reserve reported yesterday.


William N. Healey, Banker, 58
LEAD: William N. Healey, a senior vice president and chief lending officer of the Ensign Bank, died of a brain tumor yesterday at the Rosary Hill Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 58 years old and lived in White Plains.


Store With an Enduring Mystique
LEAD: Bloomingdale's, one of the world's best-known retailers, has built an enduring mystique over the years.
The Manhattan store is ''New York City's greatest export, better known between Tokyo and Moscow than any Broadway show, and equal to the Statue of Liberty,'' in the words of Alan Millstein, an analyst who follows the retailing industry.


No Headline
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it might sell its Giorgio Beverly Hills Inc. and Parfums Stern Inc. fragrance businesses, suppliers of some of the country's popular scents.


Beijing Journal; At Tiananmen Exhibit, Fables From the Party
LEAD: In their drive to explain why China was forced to put down what it officially describes as an anti-Government riot in June, Beijing officials decided recently that the people should see and touch ''the weapons of counterrevolution.''


Patents; Reactor Said To Resist Meltdown
LEAD: With help from a refrigerant chemical found in large air-conditioning systems, researchers at a California company have designed what they describe as a small nuclear power plant that has an inherent tendency to avoid reactor meltdowns.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Bridge; Once a major-suit fit has been found, it's rarely right to abandon it.
LEAD: Just as a sailing-ship captain is unlikely to abandon a favorable current in search of a better one, a bidding captain rarely has second thoughts: once a major-suit fit has been found it is hardly ever right to tack away to a minor-suit or no-trump.


Appeals Court Upholds Random Drug Tests
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today upheld the Transportation Department's program of random, mandatory drug tests for 30,000 employees, including air traffic controllers.


Briton in Lebanon Reported Dead
LEAD: The wife of a Briton held hostage in Lebanon said today that she had been told that her husband had died in captivity.


One McEnroe Is Enough In Doubles
LEAD: The lanky doubles specialist Peter Fleming was once asked to pick the best doubles team in history.
His reply: John McEnroe and anybody.


Marshall Says Court's Rulings Imperil Rights
LEAD: Justice Thurgood Marshall told a group of Federal judges here today that recent Supreme Court decisions had ''put at risk not only the civil rights of minorities but the civil rights of all citizens.''


About New York; Room 910: Where Emigres Find a Home
LEAD: The number on the door, 910, hadn't changed, and Joseph Gurwin described the room even before he saw it. ''A bed on the left, a bed on the right, two little closets and a couple desks.'' When the door opened, that was exactly what he saw.


Cooney to Fight Foreman
LEAD: Gerry Cooney agreed yesterday to fight George Foreman, the former heavyweight champion, on Jan. 15 in Atlantic City.


Abby Notterman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Abby Notterman, the daughter of Dr.
Rebecca Notterman and Dr.
Joseph Notterman of Hightstown, N.J., and Frank A. Siciliano were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbi Albert Ginsberg performed the ceremony.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is difficult to characterize last term's decisions as the product of anything other than a deliberate retrenching of the civil rights agenda.''  - Justice Thurgood Marshall of the Supreme Court.  [ 6:3. ]


Victor Simonte Jr., Executive, 56
LEAD: Victor Simonte Jr., president and chief executive of Bowne &amp; Company, a large printer of financial papers and one of the oldest companies in the United States, died yesterday at his home in Brookville, L.I., after a long illness.
He was 56 years old.


Parking in Fortress Los Angeles Bares the Angeleno Psyche
LEAD: To the Editor:


Call Decade After Next 'Twenty' Hundreds'; Turn of the Century
LEAD: To the Editor:


Former Mayor of Danbury Is Indicted in Racketeering
LEAD: A former Mayor of Danbury was indicted today by a Federal grand jury on charges that he led a racketeering enterprise from the Mayor's office in the mid-1980's, using extortion to profit from the real estate and construction boom then sweeping western Connecticut.


West Virginia Senate Head Is Fourth Leader to Resign
LEAD: The State Senate President, Larry Tucker, resigned today after it was disclosed in Federal District Court that he had pleaded guilty to extortion.
He is the fourth West Virginia state official to leave office in disgrace this summer.


Review/Theater; An Ancient Tale of Conscience for a New Troupe
LEAD: In December 1170, Thomas a Becket returned to England from seven years' exile in France to reclaim his archbishopric at Canterbury.
In doing so, Becket knew he faced almost certain death at the wrathful hands of King Henry II, embittered at his former Chancellor for switching his allegiance to a Higher Power.


Association Takes No Position on Bones
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents; Guidelines Issued On Software Patents
LEAD: Attorneys specializing in patents on computer software take note: The Patent and Trademark Office has published a review of legal guidelines on patenting mathematical algorithms.


Bill for the Disabled Only Rights Civil Wrongs; Theater Patrons Also
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wider Door at Top Colleges Sought by Asian-Americans
LEAD: Pressing an increasingly aggressive campaign of charges that the nation's top universities are unfairly limiting their enrollment, Asian-Americans have begun to seek new ways to get responses to their concerns.


A Survival Curriculum for Inner-City Kids
LEAD: Young black New Yorkers are raised in a racially polarized society.
The murder in Bensonhurst of Yusuf Hawkins is not an isolated incident.
The number of racially motivated crimes has escalated since Howard Beach, as the city's mayoral candidates ought to know.
And these crimes are only the most obvious form of racism.


Jack Deacy Wed To Bonnie Stone
LEAD: Bonnie Stone, the vice president of marketing and public affairs for the Long Island Rail Road in Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday to Jack Deacy, the vice president of university affairs at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
Judge L. Priscilla Hall of New York City Criminal Court performed the ceremony at TenBrooks Restaurant in New


The L.I. Philharmonic Names Music Director
LEAD: The Long Island Philharmonic has appointed Marin Alsop as music director for a two-year period beginning with the 1990-91 season.
She will serve as music director-designate this season, and will make her conducting debut with the ensemble in February.
Ms.
Alsop succeeds Christopher Keene, the orchestra's first music director, who resigned in March after being named general director of the New York City Opera.


Messerschmitt's Sale to Daimler Approved
LEAD: West Germany's Economics Minister, Helmut Haussmann, approved Daimler-Benz A.G.'s takeover of Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm G.m.b.H. today, but required both concerns to divest themselves of some of their holdings to protect competition in the defense industry.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12.


Chicago to Hold Night Trials As Drug Suspects Crowd Jail
LEAD: Some Cook County courtrooms will be opened for night trials to ease jail crowding and a backlog of felony cases.


Posner Rules Out Sale of Arby's
LEAD: Victor Posner, the chairman of the DWG Corporation, the parent of Arby's Inc., tried to calm fears over the dsimissal of Arby's president by telling employees and franchisees in a letter that his commitment to the fast-food chain was resolute.
Leonard H. Roberts, Arby's president and chief executive, was dismissed on Tuesday after he wrote a letter criticizing Mr.


Burglar Taped Asking for Ride
LEAD: A burglary suspect was arrested, the police said, after he accidentally taped a telephone call in which he asked his father to give him a ride home from a house he had burglarized.
Paul Caliguiri, 24 years old, of Pittsburgh, was charged on Tuesday with burglary, theft and receiving stolen property.


Guerrero's Homer Rallies Cards Over Cubs, 11-8
LEAD: Pedro Guerrero's three-run homer off Mitch Williams in the eighth inning capped a comeback from a six-run deficit today as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat the Chicago Cubs, 11-8.


Wells Fargo to Buy Valley National
LEAD: Wells Fargo &amp; Company agreed to acquire the Valley National Bank in Glendale, Calif., for about $55 million.
With assets of $255.4 million, Valley National has seven branch offices in the San Fernando Valley area north of Los Angeles and employs 180 people.
The deal is expected to be completed by the end of this year or early next.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about campaigning for mayor in the New York City Democratic primary erroneously reported an endorsement for David N. Dinkins.
The Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association is nonpartisan and never endorses political candiates.


KIN OF ECHEVERRIA IS INDICTED BY U.S.
LEAD: The brother-in-law of Mexico's former president has been indicted on perjury charges, nearly a month after he was taken into custody for questioning as a material witness in the slaying of a Federal drug agent.


BENNETT CALLS USE OF ARMY POSSIBLE
LEAD: Seeking to clarify the Government's position on military intervention in Colombia, William J. Bennett said today that the Administration would have to consider such action seriously if that country requested it to fight drug traffickers.


Corrections
LEAD: The Talking Deals column in Business Day on Thursday about corporate employment contracts misidentified an executive who was found by an Ohio court not to have acted in good faith in determining that his job status had diminished.
He is Paul E. Worth, not John E. Orin Jr.


Koch Is Walking Away With Fund-Raising Contest
LEAD: With candidates scrambling for every dollar they can raise in the last days before the mayoral primaries on Tuesday, Mayor Edward I. Koch is handily winning that race-within-a race, according to financial reports filed yesterday.


Bishop, Joseph Nkoane, 60, Dies
LEAD: Joseph Simeon Nkoane, the Anglican Bishop of Johannesburg East in South Africa and an ardent opponent of apartheid, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in KwaThema, a black township.
He was 60 years old and had been ill for several years.


Israeli Defense Chief Briefs Washington on Middle East
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel briefed senior Bush Administration officials today on the situation in Lebanon and developments in the Middle East peace process.


If Asbestos Is in the House, Must You Hold Your Breath?
LEAD: Mention asbestos to New Yorkers and they think of exploding steam pipes.
Mention it to homeowners nationwide, and many envision Dracula sleeping in their basements.


Ruth Jackendoff, 80, Wool Group Economist
LEAD: Ruth Jackendoff, retired director of economics and statistics of the Wool Bureau, died of leukemia on Aug. 28 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80 years old.


Drug Inquiry Focuses on 5 Housing Officers
LEAD: The state special prosecutor is investigating an allegation that two Housing Authority police officers indicted last month on charges of robbing drug dealers were receiving information about drug shipments from a ring of five other housing police officers, authorities said yesterday.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Home-Heating Equipment
LEAD: The arrival of cooler weather and shorter days means it's time to get home-heating systems, wood stoves and fireplaces ready for use.


Radio Executives Put Hate Mongers on Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets' '3-Week Season' Starts With a Victory
LEAD: The Mets got their act together again last night, pitching when they had to pitch, hitting when they had to hit and, as a result, winning when they had to win.


Your Money; New Loan Rules For 401(k) Plans
LEAD: Many people who want to borrow against their employer-sponsored 401(k) retirement savings plans will soon face higher interest rates as a result of new regulations from the Labor Department.
And for many former employees who still have money in the plans, the rules open up a source of loans.


Arthur Rubine Is Dead; Movie Press Agent, 53
LEAD: Arthur Rubine, a motion picture press agent who specialized in independently produced films, died of cancer Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old.


A MONEY MANAGER IS IN THE MONEY
LEAD: In 1987, when the Aid Association for Lutherans, a 92-year-old fraternal organization, began searching for a professional money manager to invest $384 million in savings, representatives of the big names in money management rushed to its doorstep.


Shrimpers Grudgingly Obey Turtle Protection Rule
LEAD: Some Gulf Coast shrimpers grudgingly complied with a rule reinstated today requiring their nets to have escape doors for turtles, but others remained defiant.


Toon's Injury Places Shuler in the Spotlight
LEAD: Mickey Shuler looms larger than usual in the Jets' plans for their season opener Sunday after the team today downgraded Al Toon's playing status to doubtful.
That means the club is giving Toon, the Pro Bowl wide receiver, only a 25 percent chance of returning from a shoulder injury for the game against the New England Patriots at Giants


Davis to See UAL Books
LEAD: The UAL Corporation agreed yesterday to let Marvin Davis, the California billionaire, look at its confidential financial records, a spokesman for Mr.
Davis said.
The move would fulfill one of


Revisiting Promises Koch Made in '85
LEAD: While opponents speak in hopeful generalities, an incumbent mayor campaigning for re-election can - and Edward I. Koch does - hold forth the prospect of specific new housing and workplaces, pinpointing their locations and describing them appreciatively, almost as if they had already been built.


Noise Rule Eased
LEAD: In what appears to be a move to quiet the clamor over the new rule limiting crowd noise, National Football League referees are being instructed to penalize a team for excessive crowd noise only in extreme situations, the Indianapolis Colts' general manager, Jim Irsay, said yesterday.


Yankee Investigation
LEAD: An investigation by major league baseball into possible scouting improprieties involving the Yankees is centering on a former assistant to Syd Thrift, the team's former senior vice president.


Graf and Navratilova March to a Showdown
LEAD: One got there in revenge and the other got there in tears, but both of the last two women to be champions at the United States Open, Martina Navratilova in 1987 and Steffi Graf in 1988, survived their semifinal matches yesterday and will contest the 1989 title this afternoon.


East Germans in Budapest May Soon Get to Go West
LEAD: The future of the East Germans stranded in Hungary appeared to be nearing resolution today as Bonn and Budapest indicated that the 6,000 people would be on their way to West Germany within days.


Senate Panel Agrees on Cuts To Reduce Medicare Surtax
LEAD: The Senate Finance Committee agreed informally today on several reductions in benefits under the new Medicare plan to protect older Americans from financial catastrophe because of the expenses of extended illness.


Eastern's Pilot Union Ousts Chief
LEAD: The head of the pilots' union at Eastern Airlines, who has led its six-month strike against the carrier, has been replaced by a leader more committed to continuing the walkout.


Edwin A. Burtt, Professor And Author, Dies at 96
LEAD: Edwin A. Burtt, an author and professor emeritus of philosophy at Cornell University, died Wednesday at his home in Ithica, N.Y.
He was 96 years old.


Speedy Cray May Slow Its Pace
LEAD: Cray Research Inc., the leading American maker of the fastest kind of computer, faces a growing challenge from rival machines that are less powerful but also far less costly.


Futures Plan in Congress
LEAD: A leading Senate Democrat said today that Congress would order futures exchanges to develop a system to keep track of trading on their floors.


Barbs Fly as New York Primary Races Near Finale
LEAD: As the New York City mayoral primary campaigns enter their final weekend, the candidates traded last-minute barbs aimed at swaying voters.


Italian Bank Gets New Head After Scandal Over Credits
LEAD: The Italian Government named a socialist businessman and financier today to head the country's largest bank after its longtime chairman was forced to resign in a scandal over $2.6 billion in unauthorized export credits to Iraq.


Dollar Rises Near June Peak In Generally Light Trading
LEAD: The dollar yesterday approached the peaks reached in its June rally, with its confidence in a thin market bolstered by a comment from a Swiss national banker.
Gold edged down.


Fire Delays 95,000 on Metro-North; Vandalism Is Suspected
LEAD: A fire in a switch and signal box, possibly the result of vandalism, brought most of the Metro-North railroad system to a halt yesterday at the start of the evening rush hour, stranding tens of thousands of commuters in Grand Central Terminal, railroad officials said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.93
8.93
8.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.80
7.29
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.78
7.80
7.43
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.18
8.22
8.79
30-YR.


Call Decade After Next 'Twenty Hundreds'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Con Edison Takes Blame In Steam Blast
LEAD: A steam pipe explosion that killed three people and sprayed asbestos-contaminated mud across Gramercy Park last month occurred because workers failed to drain water from the pipe before trying to turn the steam on, the president of Consolidated Edison said yesterday.


G.E.C. and Siemens Win Battle for Plessey
LEAD: The General Electric Company of Britain and Siemens A.G. of West Germany won their 10-month battle to acquire Plessey P.L.C. today, creating Europe's largest military and electronics company.


Late Rally Pushes Bonds Higher
LEAD: A late rally sent prices of Treasury securities soaring yesterday.
Dealers attributed the rally to an unexpected drop in comsumer credit spending in July, which was reported by the Government shortly after 2 P.M.
Until then, dealers said, prices were slightly higher in lackluster trading.


Safety Questions Raised About Generic Drugs
LEAD: As questions are raised about the Government's system of approving generic drugs, some doctors are asking whether these drugs are as effective as they are said to be.
The questions are troubling many consumers who use generics instead of more expensive brand-name drugs.


4th Suspect Faces Murder Charge In Death of Youth in Bensonhurst
LEAD: A fourth young white suspect was indicted yesterday by a Brooklyn grand jury on charges of murder and manslaughter in the killing of a black youth in Bensonhurst two weeks ago.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about an environmental code for corporations misidentified the Polaroid Corporation's director of health, safety and environmental affairs in some editions.
He is Harry Fatkin.


Parking in Fortress Los Angeles Bares the Angeleno Psyche; New York Has More
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. WILL ABANDON URANIUM FACTORY
LEAD: The Energy Department is abandoning a three-year-old $176 million plant that makes fuel for nuclear-propelled submarines and surface ships for the Navy.


Giuliani Tries to Offer a Softer Image
LEAD: Rudolph William Giuliani listened intently and asked gentle questions as a young man told him this week how, given the alternative of a long prison term for selling cocaine, he had entered a residential drug treatment program.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Modifying Portfolios
LEAD:  With almost three-quarters of the year gone, now is a good time to plan or to take another look at personal investment portfolios.
In the first quarter of this year, stocks were the overwhelming favorites as interest rates edged up, spurred by fears of inflation.
Since then, interest rates have come down, but not far enough to erase the threat of inflation totally.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Aug. 30 about 12 Colombian drug-trafficking suspects being sought for extradition to the United States included an erroneous description of a suspect's legal status, as supplied by the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The suspect, Jaime Raul Orjuela Caballero, was the subject of a criminal complaint filed by the Federal drug agency in 1985 in Brooklyn.


Soybeans Advance Sharply; Soviet Demand Is Rumored
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures staged a strong rally yesterday, bursting through the $6-a-bushel barrier on the Chicago Board of Trade amid rumors of Soviet demand for soybean meal and fears of a rain-delayed harvest.


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 46.


History of Photos
LEAD: ''Selections From the Collection, 150 Years,'' an exhibition of 90 prints chronicling the history of photography, will be on view from Friday to Oct. 20 at New York University, Tisch School of the Arts, Photography Department Gallery, 721 Broadway, at Waverly Place, eighth floor.
Among the earliest items are engravings from photographs by Mathew Brady.


U.N. Begins Literacy Year With Celebration
LEAD: Aiming to help make literacy a global priority in the next decade, the General Assembly started International Literacy Year today with a celebration featuring Barbara Bush, two puppets and a group of singing schoolchildren.


Review/Music; Duo's Individual Statements
LEAD: Bob Ostertag's first show at the Knitting Factory on Wednesday night, featuring the saxophonist John Zorn, opened with an improvised duet that sounded less like a converstation than a set of statements, some of which agreed, some of which were contradictory.
By the end of the set, the two had argued heatedly, come to some similar conclusions and created a series of intense improvisations.


Mattlyn Gavers, 75; Ex-Choreographer And Ballet Teacher
LEAD: Mattlyn Gavers, a former ballet mistress of the Metropolitan Opera and a professor of ballet at the University of Utah, died of emphysema on Aug. 19 in Salt Lake City.
She was 75 years old.


RESUTLS PLUS
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD  Couple Achieve a First: David and Sandra Farmer-Patrick each won gold medals yesterday in the 400-meter hurdles at the World Cup meet in Barcelona, Spain, becoming the first married couple to win the same track event at a major international meet.
David won the men's race in 48.74 seconds.


Arlee Andre, 89, Dies; Creator of Cake Mixes
LEAD: Arlee Andre, creator of the original Duncan Hines cake mixes, died Monday.
He was 89 years old and lived in Titusville.


Party, Described as Cult, Seeks Role in Primary
LEAD: The New Alliance Party, a small left-wing organization whose 1988 Presidential candidate was on the ballot in all 50 states, is presenting itself this year as the alternative to the regular Democrats running for City Council president, comptroller and several other posts in the New York City Democratic primary


Unseen, Unsung, But Not Unloved
LEAD: Rugby in the United States is the martyred sport.
Although 150,000 play it, few watch it.
Money is short and arguments long.
It is rarely on television and seldom in the sports pages.
More than 300 colleges have teams, but on a club basis without varsity coaching or financing.


Robinson Leads Grambling In Whitney Young Classic
LEAD: With 350 victories, Eddie Robinson of Grambling is the top-winning coach in football history.
In 1985, he passed the college record of 323 set by Bear Bryant and the professional mark of 326 by George Halas of the Chicago Bears.
At 70 years of age, and 49 coaching seasons behind him, it would appear there are no more mountains for


All That Mustard
LEAD: Searching the refrigerator for a lost remnant of Stilton cheese, I was outraged to encounter jar after jar of mustard.


U.S. Player With AIDS Virus Denied Visa for Bridge Match
LEAD: The Australian Government has refused a visa request by a leading American bridge player with the AIDS virus who was scheduled to compete in the world team bridge championships, which began here today.


Moscow Hotel With a Touch of Class
LEAD: ''Not every revolutionary situation leads to a revolution,'' wrote Lenin, prophetic enough considering that he failed to live long enough to check into the new four-star Savoy Hotel near the Kremlin, to try his luck at the casino, to ponder the fate of the masses while having a nightcap at his own minibar, perchance brooding in his thick terry-cloth


Clarification by Cuomo
LEAD: A comment made by Governor Mario M. Cuomo at a news conference yesterday raised the possibility that the baseball owners are seeking a new commissioner, but Cuomo subsequently rejected that likelihood and emphasized that he himself was not interested in the job.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of El Barrio Street Fair, Third Avenue between 112th and 115th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.


2 Are Attacked in Bensonhurst
LEAD: Two Hispanic men were attacked by three white youths on a street corner in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn Thursday night, in what the police are investigating as a ''bias incident.''


Lloyd Reinstated
LEAD: Lewis Lloyd was reinstated by the National Basketball Association yesterday, two and a half years after the Houston Rockets guard tested positive for cocaine. ''On the basis of our extensive investigation, it appears that Lewis Lloyd is drug-free,'' the N.B.A. commissioner, David Stern, said.


PRETORIA OFFICER TELLS OF ABUSES
LEAD: A South African police lieutenant has sacrificed a rising career by coming forward with an account of riot policemen running amok in a mixed-race township outside Cape Town on Tuesday, the day before the whites-only parliamentary elections.


Stricken Juror Is Dismissed From Child Molestation Case
LEAD: Only 12 jurors remain to deliberate the McMartin child molestation trial after a juror was hospitalized with a rare blood ailment, the judge who is hearing the case said Thursday.


Censorship Exhibit at the Corcoran Is Proposed
LEAD: Some curators and key staff members of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, along with some of its trustees, have proposed that the museum present an exhibition on censorship that might include the photographic work of Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano, two artists who have been at the center of the Congressional debate over


Stake Is Disclosed In Heilig-Meyers
LEAD: A group of shareholders led by the Malaysian investor Vincent Tan said that it had acquired 7.8 percent of the Heilig-Meyers Company and that it would like to discuss a negotiated acquisition of the Richmond-based home furnishings concern.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group said that if it acquired Heilig-Meyers, its management would be retained.


INFLUX OF COCAINE IN U.S. HAS SLOWED, DRUG OFFICIALS SAY
LEAD: Large air shipments of cocaine from Colombia to staging areas near the United States have slowed to a crawl since the Colombian Government began its crackdown on the nation's drug industry, officials of the Customs Service and other Federal agencies said today.


2 New Fronts in Charles's Architecture War
LEAD: Contemporary British architecture has been debated fiercely here since May 30, 1984.
That night Prince Charles attended the 150th anniversary dinner of the Royal Institute of British Architects and stunned its members by accusing them of having ''consistently ignored the feelings and wishes of the mass of ordinary people.


DOW ENDS UP SLIGHTLY AFTER EARLY LOSSES
LEAD: Stock prices made slight advances yesterday, driven by takeover rumors and some positive economic data.


HE SAW HIS CHANCE AND HE TOOK IT
LEAD:  EXIT THE RAINMAKER  By Jonathan Coleman.  401 pp. New York:  Atheneum. $18.95.


Amy Sklut Is Married
LEAD: Amy Lynn Sklut, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Sklut of Wilmington, Del., and H. Ronald Cohen, a son of Mrs.
S.
John Silverberg of Greenville, Del., and the late Edward Cohen, were married yesterday at the Hotel DuPont in Wilmington.
Rabbi Herbert Yoscowitz officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Vassar College and the Dickinson School of Law, is a lawyer for Hercules Inc., a chemical company in Wilmington.


HOW USEFUL ARE PRODUCT REVIEWS?
LEAD: EXECUTIVES who want to buy computers for their companies, or at least contribute to the discussion of which machines to buy, often do not have the time or patience to evaluate the 104 different models powered by the Itel 80386 microprocessor.
Or perhaps an executive is charged with deciding which data base program to buy but doesn't know which way to turn.


Last Hurrah for Summer Vegetables
LEAD: Farmers' markets are brimming with warm, sweet tomatoes in red, orange and yellow, striped with green or white, shaped like tiny pears or medium-size pears, not much larger than currants and as big as baseballs.
Buyers should get their fill of tomatoes in the next month or so.
After that, they will not be worth more than a passing glance until next summer.


Aoun of Lebanon: Is He a National Savior or, as Foes Say, a 'Mad General'?
LEAD: Nearly a year after Gen.
Michel Aoun was selected to be what he says is Prime Minister of all Lebanon, he has cut such a controversial image that many people in his country and abroad are still trying to decide whether he is the savior he casts himself as or simply an ambitious adventurer.


On Ballot, a Charter Is Distilled to 276 Words
LEAD: With the New York City mayoral primary just two days away, most voters have not focused on the proposed changes in the City Charter that are to be voted on in the general election Nov. 7.
But the ballot language for those proposals has now been set, reducing dozens of major recommendations to two questions totaling 276 words.


Assessments
LEAD: To the Editor:


'America's Rome'
LEAD: To the Editor:


ALGERIA PRESIDENT DISMISSES PREMIER
LEAD: President Chadli Benjedid of Algeria dismissed his Prime Minister tonight over the slow pace of political and economic change, but the official, Kasdi Merbah, refused to leave his post.


Yugoslavia's Lesson
LEAD: Yugoslavia surged ahead of other Communist countries 40 years ago, leaving the Soviet bloc and launching a series of reforms.
Now it is first again, but in a different way.
It is proving demonstrably that half a reform is not half a loaf, it is no loaf.


Congress Gets Serious On the Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: ONE of President Bush's favorite ideas, to cut the capital gains tax, has been transformed this summer from long shot to near certainty.
But what form it will take is not at all certain as Congress sets out to decide how to restore a tax preference that was abolished in the tax overhaul legislation of 1986.


'Narrow Margin' Finds Its Route
LEAD: Gene Hackman sat hunched inside a white ski jacket to ward off the chill of a northern summer night and pondered the question of why he was making a movie that was set almost entirely on a train in the Canadian Rockies. ''Maybe because it's old-fashioned,'' he said.


EVERYTHING ABOUT BIRTIN' BABIES
LEAD:  MOTHERWIT  An Alabama Midwife's Story.
By Onnie Lee Logan as told to Katherine Clark.  177 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton. $16.95.


Lucy James Weds David Ordoobadi
LEAD: Lucy Wilson James, the daughter of Edward T. James of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Janet W. James, was married yesterday to David John Ordoobadi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abbas Ordoobadi of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
James H. Clark officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Amherst, Mass.


Drug Scandal
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Honor Of Black Women
LEAD: The International Center of Photography, Fifth Avenue at 94th Street, drew a crowd of more than 1,000 people to a party for the New York opening of ''I Dream a World: Portraits of Black Women Who Changed America.'' The show, which will run through Oct. 29, is a collection of 75 photographs of women whose personal visions inspired them and helped shape


Lendl Gains Meeting With Becker in Final
LEAD: Ivan Lendl does not have Andre Agassi's flamboyance or his following.
But without much extravagance in his game or any more than a rare cheer in his ears, Lendl gets along just fine.
Certainly he gets to the United States Open final with regularity.


121 New Condos
LEAD: Yet another condominium apartment house is joining the march of new residential buildings up Broadway north of Lincoln Center, this one on Sherman Square, at the intersection of Broadway, Amsterdam Avenue and West 70th Street.
Named the Coronado, the 21-story project, with an address of 155 West 70th Street, will have 121 apartments from studios to four-bedrooms, with a price range of about $175,000 to $1.5 million.


On Campus, How Free Should Free Speech Be?
LEAD: JUSTICE HOLMES once said that ''every idea is an incitement.'' The phrase has been used ever since by legal experts who argue that just about any speech should be protected by the First Amendment no matter how much it offends certain listeners.
This very notion, however, has come under attack as universities consider whether they should draw the line at racial slurs, ethnic insults or other speech that is clearly meant to cause mental harm.


Alexandra Danilova: She Continues To Be Champagne
LEAD: Alexandra Danilova is an indisputable legend in a time when legends in ballet are few.
Recently named to receive a Kennedy Center Honor this winter, she soon will be presented with the Handel Medallion from the City of New York.
In a career in dance that has spanned more than seven decades, from her days as a student at the fabled Maryinsky Theater in St.


Civil Suits Under RICO Turn Loose a Monster
LEAD: To the Editor:


Artists Aid a Stage Group
LEAD: THE saving of an endangered theater season has resulted in an alliance between two art forms - for the moment.


Headliners; The Lawyer . . .
LEAD: After seven years as a full-time lawyer for the homeless in New York City, Robert M. Hayes is cutting back to semi-pro bono.
Mr.
Hayes, who left the firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell in 1982 to head the Coalition for the Homeless, said last week that he would join the New York branch of O'Melveny &amp; Myers of Los Angeles next month, devoting a quarter of his time there to pro bono work.


DATA UPDATE
LEAD:
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSES PRICES
July 89
June 89
July 88
Nation
$96,400
$93,400
$90,700
Northeast
147,900
149,900
144,700
Midwest
73,500
72,000
69,400
South
88,200
85,000
84,700
West
138,200
134,500
125,300
Source: National Association of Realtors


THE RING CYCLE
LEAD: The engagement ring I received from my husband almost 14 years ago was bigger than some and smaller than other rings my friends received from their fiances.
But to me, it was and still is the most beautiful of all, because it was purchased by him, for me, as a surprise.
He took the time and effort pick it out, and he paid for it himself, not a mean feat for a fourth-year medical student.


FREE-TRADE CUISINE
LEAD: A RESTAURANT WRITER'S LIFE HAS BECOME exasperatingly complicated in recent years, what with all the cross-pollination of cuisines and internationalization of kitchen staffs.
Dining out used to be fairly straightforward: you went to a French restaurant and ate French food; Italian restaurants served Italian food, and the Japanese respected their gastronomic borders, as did the Spanish, Mexicans and Greeks.


Marjorie Wallace Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Marjorie Cook Wallace, a credit analyst in the private banking and securities division of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, and Peter Edward Gibson, a senior associate at Orion Consultants, a financial management consulting concern, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Miller Chapel at the Princeton (N.J.) Theological Seminary.


Miss Shorey Marries Nicholas Herold
LEAD: At the Trinity Episcopal Church in Upperville, Va., Katherine Knight Shorey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clyde E. Shorey of Washington, was married yesterday to Nicholas Henry Herold, a son of Mrs.
James K. Herold of Washington and the late Mr.
Herold.
The Rev.
Richard Peard officiated.
Mrs.
Herold, 30 years old, is a freelance graphic designer and consultant in Boston.


Oakland Outbid In Luring Raiders
LEAD: Oakland officials said their offer to lure back the Raiders amounted to $54 million, not $32 million as previously reported, but conceded that Sacramento's proposal was far more lucrative.


Fortune's Smile Glimmers on Herald Sq.
LEAD: FROM the windows of J.J.
Hat Center, his hat store just south of Herald Square, Jack Lambert has spent 15 years watching one of the nation's busiest shopping districts move from one crisis to the next. ''Things have gotten worse and worse,'' he said.
There was the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, the flight of middle-class shoppers from the city to suburban homes and shopping malls, and a spate of department store closings in the neighborhood.


Seoul Is Opening Up, But Its Jails Are Still Full
LEAD: EVEN before the end of the Seoul Olympics last year, which raised Koreans' hopes for progress and stability, leaders here fretted about a potential post-Games letdown.
Today the euphoria of that time is long gone, and South Korea is struggling with the shadows of its authoritarian past and lurching fitfully in its transition to democracy after decades of military rule.


Special Today: The New SeasonMagazine, Part 2
LEAD:  This preview of coming events includes:  Selective guides to theater, dance, film, art, classical music, pop, television and photography.
Special reports on August Wilson's new play, Jack Nicholson's latest movie and John Dexter's production of ''The Threepenny Opera.''  Plus Al Hirschfeld's first color illustration for The Times.


Dinkins Offers a Better New York Than Koch Has Given Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Working to Bolster Residential Sales
LEAD: HOW fares the residential real-estate market?
One indication, a cartoon circulating among realtors, shows a sketch of an elderly couple standing in front of a house.
The caption reads, ''At long last, we finally own our first home.''


Insure Deposits, Not Fear
LEAD: Depositor discipline: That's what Henry Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, and other influential public officials wish to create.
They propose lowering the $100,000 limit on federally insured bank deposits.


Sanders Activated
LEAD: Less than three days after he left the Yankee outfield, Deion Sanders was placed on the active roster yesterday by the Atlanta Falcons for today's National Football League opener with the Los Angeles Rams.
The Falcons also activated the All-Pro guard Bill Fralic.


Zeffirelli Pursues His Grand Design
LEAD: The Viennese musicologist Hans Keller once made a list of fraudulent professions in which he included viola player, psychoanalyst and opera director.
Looking over the sets for the Metropolitan Opera's new production of ''La Traviata,'' I ask the opera's director, Franco Zeffirelli, what he thinks of


13 Hurt in Dallas Gas Blast
LEAD: Thirteen people were injured, two of them critically, by an explosion caused by a break or a leak in a natural-gas line in an apartment complex here Friday night.


CHESS
LEAD: The ideal in chess training is to arrive at the first round of a competition with sufficient practice and leisurely - yet still intensive - theoretical preparation behind you.
But nowadays it is difficult for top players to achieve the right formula.


How the Alphabet Is Shaping Up In a Computer Age
LEAD: Of the changes being forced on the world of type by computer technology, Edward Benguiat says, ''I certainly hope that a genius will appear who can make something beautiful out of all this, but I don't see one around now.''


Long Island Journal
LEAD:  Beach Videos


WHAT'S DOING IN: Albuquerque
LEAD: Situated a mile above sea level, Albuquerque is flanked on the east by the Sandia Mountains, which rise to 10,360 feet.
To the west, open, arid mesas merge with a wide blue sky.
The Rio Grande snakes through the city, its valley so thick with trees that it is called the Bosque, the Spanish word for forest.


A Computer Course That's User-Friendly
LEAD: GOD provides, Virginia Bull believes.
But He isn't averse to accepting help along the way.
For many years Mrs.
Bull of Central Islip supplied that help.
Now she could use a little too.
Not for herself, but for her school, and the Long Island women whose lives may change because of it.


A Blessing By Sanders
LEAD: The deal that made Barry Sanders the highest-paid rookie in the history of the National Football League also meant something of a bonanza for a church in Wichita, Kan.


CASES OF CHRONIC FATIGUE
LEAD: At Harvard Medical School, we have been studying Chronic Fatigue Syndrome for several years (Body and Mind: ''Ill, or Just the Blahs?'' by Bruce H. Dobkin, July 16).
This is, as Dr.
Dobkin indicates, a mysterious illness.
When a doctor cannot figure out what is producing a patient's symptoms, often he may react by thinking the illness must not exist or that it must be ''psychological.


Just Next Door to the Polo Club, Island Homes With Riding Trails
LEAD: FOR those who prefer their horse near home and hearth, equestrian residential communities have become the latest option in a state that offers planned communities for everyone from baby-boom tennis players to golf-playing retirees.


Fire Kills Two on Resort Island in Michigan
LEAD: A fire destroyed two buildings early today on this popular resort island in northern Lake Huron, killing two people, the authorities said.


SWX AND DEATH IN CENTRAL PARK
LEAD:  WASTED  The Preppie Murder.
By Linda Wolfe.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Chinese Tale of Betrayal, With a Twist
LEAD: One of the most searing images of the crackdown on the democracy movement in China was the scene of a young woman being praised on national television for turning in her younger brother to the police for his role as a student leader.


Suspect Dies in Police Custody; Bronx Witnesses Charge Brutality
LEAD: An unarmed mugging suspect died in police custody in the Bronx early yesterday shortly after violently resisting arrest, the police said.


Neighbors Sue Over Condos
LEAD: THE Pettinaro Company, is moving ahead with its $20 million urban housing project here despite objections from neighbors.
The company has completed construction of the first phase of 475 condominiums on the border of the Browntown and Hedgeville neighborhoods, west of the city's central business district.


Hospitals Lose Power As Balloon Hits Wires
LEAD: A balloon knocked out power to two of Rhode Island's largest hospitals today, forcing surgeons to operate by flashlight and nurses to help intensive-care patients breathe by hand.


AROUND THE GARDEN
LEAD: For This Week: Plant, dig, divide and replant overgrown clumps of perennials; plant new ones.
Feed the lawn and reseed bare patches.
Take cuttings of border annuals to root and grow as winter house plants.
It's Time


Pepe Sutton, Broadcasting Executive, And Karen Bunche Pierce Are Married
LEAD: Karen Bunche Pierce, a daughter of Burton A. Pierce of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Jane Bunche Pierce, was married in New York yesterday to Pierre Monte Sutton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Percy E. Sutton of New York and Goshen, N.Y.
Justice George Donald Covington of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at Tavern on the Green.


PHOTOGRAPHY: A SELECTIVE GUIDE
LEAD:  September  Deliberate Investigations.
Four artists who use photographs as the basis for quasi-scientific installations - Dede Bazyk, David Bunn, Uta Barth and Connie Hatch - are each given a room in which their work can breathe.
Sept. 7-Nov. 12, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 5905 Wilshire Boulevard, 213 857-6111.


BABES IN MAKEUP LAND
LEAD: It seems to me the concern here is not about a child's need (''. . . to give them a brand for themselves, not their moms' '').
It's about manufacturers getting some of the $63 a week that the children spend on ''pleasures'' into their own pockets.
S.
L.
NEWMAN  Somerville, N.J.


Two Directors Reshape Classics From the 20's; 'The Threepenny Opera'
LEAD: DASHED OFF BY BERTOLT BRECHT and Kurt Weill in 1928 in order to open a a young impresario's first season, ''The Threepenny Opera'' is a sublime example of theatrical triumph achieved through catastrophe and chaos.
A script hurriedly cobbled together from a new German translation of John Gay's 18th-century satire ''The Beggar's Opera'' - along with Brecht's rewrites, Weill's music and a few borrowings from Francois Villon and Rudyard


Leslie Vought Married to C. B. Kuenne
LEAD: Leslie Vought, a daughter of Mrs.
William O. Harbach of New York and Fairfield, Conn., and Peter Vought of Santa Fe, N.M., and Christopher Brian Kuenne, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Robert E. Kuenne of Princeton, N.J., were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Fairfield.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


Kathy Dick Is Married
LEAD: Kathleen Marie Dick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Dick Jr. of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, was married yesterday in Forest Hills, Queens, to John Bundy Ashwell Nye, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Nye Jr., of Lexington, Mass.
The ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Roman Catholic Church was performed by the Rev.


On Broadway and Off, what promises to be the liveliest season in years
LEAD: DUSTIN HOFFMAN AS Shylock, Sting as Mack the Knife, Vanessa Redgrave in a play by Tennessee Williams, Maggie Smith in ''Lettice &amp; Lovage,'' a musical (''Grand Hotel'') directed by Tommy Tune and Jerry Zaks's Lincoln Center revival of ''Guys and Dolls'' - this promises to be the liveliest season in years.


Glimpsing Into World of Drug Money
LEAD: Near the end of an affidavit submitted by Government attorneys to oppose any release on bail for Eduardo Martinez Romero, accused of being a Colombian drug financier, is a tale astonishing even by the standards surrounding the Medellin cartel.


Drug Raid Closes Three Lower East Side Groceries


STAMPS
LEAD: Collectors who wish to follow the Voyager 2 spacecraft beyond Neptune and out of our solar system will find a philatelic galaxy prepared for them by the astronomy study unit of the American Topical Association.


CALL IT EXILE, CALL IT IMMIGRATION
LEAD:  JASMINE  By Bharati Mukherjee.  241 pp. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $17.95.


Elisabeth Butler, Paralegal, Is Wed
LEAD: Elisabeth Carol Butler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Copeland Butler of Sparta, N.J., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Spencer Keith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Keith of New York.
The Rev.
Wade A. Renn officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Nutley, N.J.


First the Heart, Then the Face
LEAD: To the Editor:


Under the Rainbow, Above Times Square
LEAD: When it opened last January on the 65th floor of the RCA Building at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, Rainbow &amp; Stars (632-5100), adjacent to the Rainbow Room, became the crown jewel of New York City's cabarets.
An intimate supper club that seats around 100 at tables arranged in a semicircle facing windows that overlook Central Park, Rainbow &amp; Stars exudes a pleasing mixture of grandeur and comfort, and its food is the best (and the most expensive) to be found in any New York cabaret.


Style Makers; John Reuter: Polaroid Master
LEAD: Some of the most intriguing photographs of the 1980's have been made with a huge, ungainly camera that spits out 20-by-24-inch color Polaroid prints.


Black Voters Say It's Time for Dinkins
LEAD: A few weeks ago, Thomas Key paid little attention to the mayoral primary.
The 62-year-old retiree said he had planned to vote for David N. Dinkins but was not especially inspired by the prospect.
Politicians, he said, are basically the same.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: Of course, it's a tragic fact that being black in this country makes one's life that much harder; exactly how much, however, is ultimately up to the individual.
Unavoidably, we are judged by our physical appearance.
Not only our complexion, but our carriage, style of speech and the anger (or lack thereof) in our eyes all contribute to how we are perceived.


As Reliance on National Guard Grows, So Do Questions About Readiness
LEAD: At a time when the Army is relying more than ever on the National Guard to help maintain national security, increasing concern has focused on the readiness of the Guard to meet the challenge.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: Anthony Walton should cut us all, especially himself, some slack.
Dr.
King's dream and the ''great American dream'' are, indeed, dreams and, sadly, they are mutually exclusive.
Their component parts (hope vs. status quo, spiritual vs. material) are antithetical.


Americana, Not Monet, at Auction
LEAD: At the Saugerties Auction Center in Ulster County in upstate New York, the word ''sale'' hardly describes what happens approximately every other Sunday when well-worn but cared-for artifacts - antiques and collectibles - are put up for auction.
It's choreography, perhaps, or rap music, but not simply commerce.


IT'S NOT OVER TILL ITS OVER, AND IT'S NOT OVER
LEAD:  A CRITICAL DICTIONARY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION  Edited by Francois Furet and Mona Ozouf.
Translated by Arthur Goldhammer.
Illustrated. 1,064 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  The Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.


Elizabeth B. Evans Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The wedding of Elizabeth B. Evans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Evans 3d of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and James P. Haynie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Haynie of Des Moines, took place yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee officiated.


Anita Shreve's Language
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Hungarian Buffer Zone
Hungary has proposed a security arrangement with Austria and Yugoslavia that would include arms reductions along their borders.
It is the first such proposal by a Warsaw Pact country.
Page 19.
Reagan in 'Rapid Recovery'
A day after surgery to drain fluid that had formed on his brain, the former President ate a full breakfast, read several newspapers and was visited by his wife, Nancy, a spokesman said.


Of Two Minds on the Baltics
LEAD: What are Americans to make of the nationalist pressures bubbling up in Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and across the Soviet Union?
So long as independence for ''captive nations'' was inconceivable, it was easy for Americans to espouse.
Now that a new kind of government in Moscow is offering the Baltics economic, linguistic and even political autonomy, America's goal is much harder to determine.


The President With the Biggest War on Drugs
LEAD: PRESIDENT VIRGILIO BARCO VARGAS, who has vowed to crush the drug lords who have turned his country into a killing ground, seems an unlikely field commander.
Uninspiring at the microphone and uncomfortable with the grand gestures of leadership, Mr.
Barco might be better cast as a university researcher.


Glass Wildflowers Bloom in Morristown
LEAD: PAUL STANKARD'S miniature glass wildflowers glow in the spotlighted gallery of the Morris Museum like luminous blossoms in the dappled sunlight of a dense forest.
Each stamen, petal, leaf and root is clearly visible, precise and pristine.


MEMIORS OF AN EX-BOMBSHELL
LEAD:  SHELLEY II  The Middle of My Century.
By Shelley Winters.
Illustrated. 494 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


The New Romantics Paint the Past
LEAD: The younger generation of romantic landscape painters seem to be spending less and less time confronting nature in the raw.
While struggling to produce a nonabstract painting vocabulary that works for today, they scramble ever more eagerly for motifs from the art of the past and assiduously incorporate - not without irony - sentiments and images borrowed from earlier eras.


Five Sites Chosen as a Possible Waste Dump
LEAD: Five sites - two in Cortland County and three in Allegany County - have been selected as possible locations for a low-level radioactive waste dump that New York State must open by 1993 under a Federal mandate, state officials said today.


300 Demonstrators Are Met With Silence in Bensonhurst
LEAD: Nearly 300 chanting black demonstrators protesting the killing of a black youth staged two peaceful marches through the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn yesterday, and were met with calm, even respectful silence, by residents in the embattled white neighborhood.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a production error, the continuation of a front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about bigotry in pop music omits a section on page 33.
A corrected copy of the passage may be found in the main news section, on page 69.


No New Taxes, But Plenty Of New Plans
LEAD: AS the Bush Presidency unfolds, it is becoming clear that the Administration's most ambitious goals, like the war on drugs that the President proclaimed last week, are hostage to his campaign promise not to raise taxes.
Even many of the President's strongest supporters agree that the drug initiative and some other Presidential proposals are constrained by inadequate financing, and nobody has proposed a politically feasible way to squeeze the needed funds out of the


NEW FACES
LEAD:  Constance Hauman


Paul McCartney, Meet Midnight Oil and the Lion of Zimbabwe
LEAD: WITH MAJOR STARS like the Rolling Stones, Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan, the Grateful Dead and Elton John all scheduled for concert dates in New York this fall, the coming season in pop music is more heavily stocked than usual with rock legends.


Navy Launches a Submarine Amid Protest
LEAD: The Navy launched its newest Trident submarine today, the $1.2 billion U.S.S.
Pennsylvania, in a ceremony mocked by about 100 anti-nuclear demonstrators, six of whom were arrested when they steered their small rafts too close to the submarine.


Jets Look Beyond Summer Woes
LEAD: Don't judge the Jets until after the summer.
For it could take until early October before their season takes shape.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: If it's true that not only Anthony Walton, but also all his black Ivy League friends, are waiting to ''slay the white dragon,'' then this country's future is even bleaker than I previously had feared.
His was one of the most chilling essays I've read, anywhere.
ROBERT DAVIDSON  New York, N.Y.


New Orleans's Street of Antiques
LEAD: THE seven blocks of Royal Street between Iberville and Dumaine in the French Quarter of New Orleans, chockablock with street performers and family dynasties of shopkeepers, probably concentrates more quality antique jewelry and furnishings than any comparably sized area in the United States.


Teacher Standards Are a Needed Reform
LEAD: The State Department of Education is implementing an innovative new program that is challenging the status quo regarding entry into the teaching profession.
It is called the Beginning Educators' Support and Training program, or BEST, and it emanates from the Education Enhancement Act of 1986, the foundation of the state's reform of the teaching profession.


Greed Factor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kristi White Wed in Texas
LEAD: Kristi Gail White and Wallace Legette Hall, 27-year-old graduates of the University of Texas, were married yesterday at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Fort Worth by the Rev.
William D. Nix.
Mrs.
Hall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry B. White of Fort Worth, is a vice president for institutional sales at Solomon Brothers in New York.


Question Of the Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: Bart Giamatti is baseball's John F. Kennedy.
His arrival on the scene brought a surge of glamour and excitement to major league baseball: At last, an interesting man (and fan) as commissioner.
The Pete Rose case was his Cuban missile crisis, where Giamatti demonstrated that he was tough enough for the job.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Carle Place  $155,000  287 Jerome Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $1,500.
Central Islip  $119,273  Booth Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, new split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.5-acre; taxes $700 (under Economic Development Zone tax abatement).


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:  Dream a Little Dream  1989.
Vestron Home Video. $89.98.
Laser disk, $39.95.
Closed captioned. 1 hour 44 minutes.
PG-13.
Sprinting through back yards, Bobby (Corey Feldman) and Lainie (Meredith Salenger) collide with each other and while out cold on the ground somehow assume the spirit and persona of two neighbors, one a mystically inclined older fellow played by Jason Robards and the other his wife, portrayed by Piper Laurie.


Yonkers Discord Touches Primary
LEAD: A FORESHADOWING of the election struggle expected in Yonkers in November over the issue of a court-ordered housing-desegregation plan may emerge Tuesday - Primary Day - in the mayoralty race and in four of the six City Council districts.


University Falls To Invading Birds In Dirty Defeat
LEAD: The grackle is one species of birds that University of Texas officials would love to endanger.
After years of all-out war they are employing new tactics in their continuing battle against the pesky black-feathered enemies.


Middle Eastern Dishes at Affordable Prices
LEAD: WHEN Sesame Seed opened its doors in an 1890's frame building in Danbury 12 years ago, it captured attention with its Middle Eastern and vegetarian menu and affordable prices.
But its casual spirit suggested a short life span.
That pessimism was misplaced, for Sesame Seed has not only survived, it has also prospered.


Capital Punishment Is Popular, But So Are Its Alternatives
LEAD: THE State of Virginia electrocuted Alton Waye 10 days ago for fatally beating, raping, biting and repeatedly stabbing Lavergne Marshall, an elderly widow.
The Supreme Court had rejected a last-minute appeal.
Opponents and proponents of the death penalty marched.
And, it seemed, the American criminal justice system, virtually alone among


U.S. Seeking $3 Million More for Sandinistas' Foes
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said today that they wanted at least $3 million donated to opposition candidates in Nicaragua through the National Endowment for Democracy, but some officers of the endowment contend that the contributions would be illegal.


Story Time by the Radio With Uncle Orson
LEAD: All the recent reminiscence of Orson Welles's 1938 production of ''War of the Worlds'' neglects the fact that Welles was more than a radio one-shot.
Indeed, he had a rich radio career, especially in his 20's, initially as an actor, then as a director and producer, all of it informed by a distinctive brilliance.


New Italian Fare in Huntington
LEAD: HUNTINGTON food lovers are not waiting until tulip time to try Il Tulipano, the town's newest Italian restaurant.
Its spiffy new paint job and bright emerald awning are stopping traffic on Route 25A.


Review/Rock; Jerry Garcia of the Dead, Quite Alive
LEAD: Jerry Garcia's show at Brendan Byrne Arena on Thursday night started in the second set, when Mr.
Garcia, after a short break, came out and sang ''How Sweet It Is to Be Loved by You.'' From then on, the show, which had taken its time and become a bit sleepy, jolted itself into a modest bit of excitement.


'Madama Butterfly' To Open Saturday
LEAD: BUSINESS has been booming since the Connecticut Grand and Stamford State Opera Companies became a single organization that puts on subscription series in Bridgeport and in Stamford.


Indulging a Passion for Mussels
LEAD: THESE days the roads from the North Sea are punctuated with truckloads of mussels on their way to sate one of Belgium's grandest passions.
In a small country that prefers compromise to last stands, mussels brook no argument.


Mets Falter as Pirates Get 3 in 12th
LEAD: After 12 innings of baseball that lasted 4 hours 7 minutes, the Mets departed from Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon disgusted at themselves and dejected about their situation.


Question Of the Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: The fan-turned-commissioner legacy is au naturel integrity.
Allow the grounds-keeper to tend dirt and grass.
Make the pitcher take his cut with a wooden bat.
Schedule a few more games in daylight.
Preserve the traditions and save an endangered species: the baseball fan.
NEIL HANLON  Cos Cob, Conn.


S.I. Newhouse and Conde Nast; Taking Off The White Gloves
LEAD: LAST MARCH, TINA BROWN, EDITOR OF VANITY FAIR, JETTED OFF TO LOS ANGELES with a band of her star writers to throw a party at the Museum of Contemporary Art.
The excuse was the recently opened Man Ray exhibition, but for Hollywood the bash served as a kind of finale to Academy Awards week.
It was a hot ticket, a swank event jammed with the local swells: stars like Kim Basinger, artists like David Hockney, power brokers like Jeff Berg, International Creative Management's chief, and Don Simpson, co-producer of ''Top Gun.


The True Sport of Kings
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:  Japanese Gardens


Miss Brio Winner Of Maskette Stakes
LEAD: The 4-year-old gray filly is not what she used to be.


Rap by the Bay: Oakland Emerges As a Force in Pop
LEAD: ''It's hard times city,'' Dwayne Wiggins said. ''You can't half-step here.
Whatever you do, you have to be good at it.'' Mr.
Wiggins is one of the three principals of Tony Toni Tone, an Oakland funk group whose debut album has emerged smartly on the national charts.
He was speaking of this blue-collar city, which over the last five years has become a veritable mixing board for black


Banks Cast A Hard Eye On Buyouts
LEAD: For the last several years, banks have been eager lenders to leveraged buyouts.
But in July, signs of change came when the Bank of Boston withdrew a promised $80 million financing for a management buyout of Dairy Mart Convenience Stores and some $75 million for a leveraged buyout at Recognition Equipment Inc.


Tina Stacy Is Married
LEAD: Tina Stacy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John O. Stacy of Dallas, and Peter Hawkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Hawkins of St.
Petersburg, Fla., and Asheville, N.C., were married yesterday at the Point, a former Rockefeller family camp on Upper Saranac Lake, N.Y.
A village justice of Saranac Lake, Debra Charland, officiated.


CIRME
LEAD: A sensitive young man named Philip doesn't quite know what to make of an exotic young woman named Senta when he meets her in Ruth Rendell's psychological suspense thriller THE BRIDESMAID (Mysterious Press, $17.95).
With her long silver hair and silent-movie vamp manner, Senta seems to Philip ''like a goddess of mystery and the arcane.


Installing Electrical Boxes
LEAD: WHENEVER household wiring is connected to a switch, receptacle, light fixture or other outlet, the splices that form the connection are enclosed in a firmly mounted metal or plastic box called an electrical box or switch box.


Prospects; Productivity's Problem
LEAD: The Labor Department's second-quarter productivity figures showed a modest overall increase of 0.7 percent, with gains of 2.9 percent in manufacturing accounting for nearly all of the increase.
Analysts are increasingly suspicious of the productivity numbers as indicators of economic health.
Three economists and a former auto worker discuss them.


Elizabeth Knapp Is Married
LEAD: Elizabeth Knapp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George G. P. Knapp of Bronxville, N.Y., and Nicholas Paul Hotchkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Hotchkin of Macclesfield, Cheshire, England, were married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Bronxville.
The Rev.
Robert Sweeny officiated.
Mrs.


CHAOS, EXCITMENT AND RAW EMOTION
LEAD:  GLASNOST' IN ACTION  Cultural Renaissance in Russia.
By Alec Nove.  251 pp.
Boston:  Unwin Hyman.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $13.95.


Installing Electrical Boxes
LEAD: WHENEVER household wiring is connected to a switch, receptacle, light fixture or other outlet, the splices that form the connection are enclosed in a firmly mounted metal or plastic box called an electrical box or switch box.


Why a Good Carpenter Seems So Hard to Find
LEAD: ACCORDING to a neighbor of mine, the reason it's so difficult to find a decent carpenter these days is because it's nearly impossible to buy anything made of real wood anymore.
Take the neighbor's new house, for example.


Where Addiction Is the Subject Matter
LEAD: IT carries titles like ''Fat Is a Family Affair,'' ''Is It Love or Is It Addiction?'' and ''If Only I Could Quit.'' And in less than a year, the Meridian Shoppe in Stamford, a bookstore that specializes in literature on addiction and recovery, has already turned a profit, its organizers say.


No More Than 1 in 5 Athletes Graduating at Many Schools
LEAD: At 35 of 97 American colleges and universities with major men's basketball programs, no more than one in five players ever graduates, a Federal study has found.
The graduation rates for football players were only a little better.


From Italy's Jewry Come 2,000 Years of Treasures
LEAD: At the end of Primo Levi's novel ''If Not Now, When?'' a group of Eastern European Jews arrives by train in Milan and discovers to their surprise that there are Jews in Italy. ''Italian Jews are as odd as the Catholics,'' Levi's narrator thinks to himself. ''They don't speak Yiddish; in fact, they don't even know what Yiddish is.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: After having what he described as his ''most enjoyable'' season to date in the National Basketball Assocation, Manute Bol, the 7-foot-7-inch, Sudan-born center for the Golden State Warriors, is apparently preparing for his most lucrative one.
The 26-year-old Bol, who led the N.B.A. last season with 345 blocked shots, sixth highest in N.B.A.


Prime Time Puts On A Happy Face
LEAD: TELEVISION PROGRAMMERS ALL HAVE a certain predilection for sociology.
They try to take the pulse of the nation, looking for a key that will translate into habit-forming television viewing.
This year, it's the family.
Nuclear and non-nuclear, blended and extended, families of one sort or another are the focus of most of the major networks' new shows.


Charles J. Kaiser Weds Miss Geer
LEAD: Kristen Anders Geer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl B. Geer Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., and Woodstock, Conn., and Charles John Kaiser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Kaiser of Hales Corners, Wis., were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church of Woodstock.
The Rev.
James Harrison officiated.


Ms. Oser Weds David A. Miller
LEAD: Andrea Oser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan S. Oser of St.
George, S.I., was married yesterday to David Alan Miller, a son of Rachel Galperin and Gerald L. Miller, both of Los Angeles.
The bridegroom's father, the cantor of Temple Judea in Tarzana, Calif., and a cousin of the bride, Judge Norma Shapiro of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, jointly performed the ceremony at the historical James House in North Tarrytown, N


Melodic Dissonance on the Lower East Side
LEAD: Down a short set of stairs at 165 Ludlow Street, between East Houston and Stanton Streets, you find yourself in the dining room of the Ludlow Street Cafe (353-0536).
Under a pressed tin ceiling, serving from an Ecuadorian, vaguely health-food menu, it's the sort of place where a person wouldn't be embarrassed to whip out a book and read.


About Cars; A U.S. Partnership Is in Saab's Future
LEAD: By all accounts, Saab is in a bit of trouble.


Washington Tops Texas A&amp;M by 19-6
LEAD: Washington unveiled its new one-back, short-passing offense today, and with Cary Conklin doing the passing and Greg Lewis doing most of the running, the Huskies upset Texas A&amp;M, 19-6.


Dinkins and Koch Vie for Jews' Votes
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, the Manhattan Borough President running in the Democratic primary for mayor, had just completed a swing through a Lower East Side knish shop, seeking votes among the Orthodox Jewish families gathered for an early Sunday lunch.
But the handshaking made no impression on a young man in a yarmulke at the back of the room.


Syracuse Misses a Kick
LEAD: Bill Scharr, who holds the New York State high school record for touchdown passes, today showed he could be a winning starting quarterback for Syracuse.


Turning the Tables With a Phrase. Take That, Monsieur
LEAD: France is anything but bland.
It cannot be negotiated with bland language.
Standard phrasebooks may tell you how to ask the location of the nearest railroad station, but they often fall short when you need to assert yourself in thorny situations.
The following may be helpful  TAXI DRIVER AVEC CU


New Job for Aide Who Quit Bush Campaign
LEAD: Frederick V. Malek, who resigned a high-level post in George Bush's Presidential campaign last year while denying charges of anti-Semitism, will soon be appointed by Mr.
Bush to a White House post, Administration officials said today.


Ms. McFadden Has a Wedding
LEAD: Cynthia Graham McFadden, a television producer and journalist, and Michael John Davies, the editor, publisher and chief executive officer of The Hartford Courant, were married yesterday in Old Saybrook, Conn.
The Rev.
James Kidd, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's by-the


Can This Be Love?
LEAD:  'She-Devil'


SOCIAL EVENTS
LEAD:  'Annie' Redux


Echoing Past Glories
LEAD: It might seem odd to call Town Hall (123 West 43d Street, 840-2824) new; it's been a midtown Manhattan fixture since 1921, and from the 1920's through the 1950's was one of the city's premiere forums for classical music.
With the advent of Lincoln Center in the 1960's and the increasing clutter of Times Square, however, it fell into the doldrums.


U.S. LISTS COUNTIES WITH MOST PEOPLE
LEAD: Minnesota's Hennepin County, which includes Minneapolis, has more than a million residents, bringing the number of counties in the nation with a million or more residents to 29, five more than in 1980, the Census Bureau says.


Installing Electrical Boxes
LEAD: WHENEVER household wiring is connected to a switch, receptacle, light fixture or other outlet, the splices that form the connection are enclosed in a firmly mounted metal or plastic box called an electrical box or switch box.


Jefferson Gets Jump on Season
LEAD: Although school doesn't open officially until tomorrow in New York City and the first full schedule of Public Schools Athletic League football games won't begin until next weekend, Thomas Jefferson of Brooklyn is getting a jump on the season today.


BABES IN MAKEUP LAND
LEAD: I did come of age in the 1960's (''Babes in Makeup Land,'' by Linda Wells, Aug. 13).
And you're right - I hardly ever wear makeup.
Yet my two daughters, ages 3 and 4 1/2, can't wait to wear the stuff.


A Soft Market Is Chilling Apartment Construction
LEAD: SOMETIMES when he answers his phone, Robert Ginsberg gets the feeling that home buyers in New York City today are a band of marauders driven by a thirst for rock-bottom bargains.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, misstated his age.
He is 46.


Rule by Steam and Gunpowder
LEAD:  MACHINES AS THE MEASURE OF MEN  Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance.
By Michael Adas.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:  Cornell University Press. $29.95.


2 Texas Statues Embody Century of Racial Views
LEAD: Two statues that symbolize racial attitudes a century apart have become focal points for protests against racism and statements for civil rights at the University of Texas.


Nettles a Legend
LEAD: Since the new Senior Professional Baseball Association held its first draft of former major leaguers last month, the eight Florida-based teams, which are to begin play Nov. 1, have been busy negotiating with their prospects.


Fine-Tuning 'The Piano Lesson'
LEAD: AUGUST WILSON AND LLOYD RICH-ards have been collaborating as playwright and director since 1982, when Mr.
Wilson's ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'' was given a staged reading at the National Playwrights Conference at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn.
Mr.
Richards, who is artistic director of the O'Neill conference as well as dean of the Yale School of Drama, subsequently staged the play at the Yale Repertory Theater and on Broadway.


San Francisco Opera Debut Is Disrupted by AIDS Group
LEAD: About 50 AIDS activists disrupted opening night of the San Francisco Opera on Friday, chanting, ''You have the power to stop AIDS now.''


Melissa Callan Marries
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York, Melissa Andrea Callan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Callan of Manhasset, L.I., was married yesterday to Craig Michael Donaldson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Donaldson Jr. of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The interfaith ceremony was performed by the Rev.


TOXIC SITE CLEANUP REPORTED LAGGING
LEAD: Only 34 of the 1,175 worst toxic waste dumps in the United States were cleaned in the first eight years of a program intended to solve the problem, and polluters paid less than a tenth of the cost, the Rand Corporation said in a report made public Friday.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  'STRIKER UP'


RICH MAKES HIS PITCH
LEAD: I enjoyed Irvin Muchnick's article ''Rich Makes His Pitch'' (July 30).
I was fortunate to attend a Buffalo Bisons baseball game on July 4 and was impressed by the family atmosphere (though I concede that I am biased, because my fiancee had a message flashed on the scoreboard in my honor).


SHOWMANSHIP
LEAD: OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS, THE NUMBER OF ART and antiques shows held at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 67th Street, have increased so much it appears that from October through June there is a preview party nearly every other week.
There are shows devoted solely to paintings, others that deal exclusively in drawings, some that exhibit only modern decorative arts, and one dealing exclusively in antiquarian books.


Miss Chamberlin Wed in Princeton To T. H. French
LEAD: Liane Helen Chamberlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Chamberlin of Princeton, N.J., and Timothy Hutchins French, a son of Alden French Jr. of Annisquam, Mass., and the late Dorothy Fairbanks French, were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel.
The Rev.
Robert Ferrick performed the Roman


Style Makers; Allen Fannin: Contract Weaver
LEAD: Allen Fannin, who grew up in Brooklyn and says he went to ''the school of hard knocks,'' has found a niche.
He provides apparel and home-furnishings designers with fabrics in small quantities - as little as 100 yards - that the big American mills won't even consider making.


U.S. Unease on Gorbachev: How Exposed Is He?
LEAD: In the last few months, a feeling has spread through the upper reaches of the Bush Administration that the policies of the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, have an increasingly poor chance of success over the long term.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; An Italianate Co-op and a Second Empire Facade
LEAD: This is another in a series of columns answering questions about New York's changing streetscapes.  148 West 16th St.
Rowhouse  Q. I have not been able to pinpoint the date of construction of my eight-unit tenant-sponsored co-op.
Can you help me? . . .
Pam Udis-Kessler, Manhattan.
A.


Pretoria Consulate Attacked
LEAD: Masked attackers stormed a South African Consulate in Copenhagen, throwing acid and setting small fires, newspaper reports in the Danish capital said today.
In the incident, which occurred late Friday, 20 to 30 people arrived in a truck and smashed the doors of the building with battering rams and crowbars.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Peppers, in All Kinds of Colors
LEAD: ASSORTED peppers are abundant in the market.
Not only are sweet red peppers coming from local farms, but yellow, orange and brown ones, as well as the usual green, are available.
Adding to the variety are fresh hot green and red chilies.


A Cat's Urban Jungle
LEAD: To the Editor:


West Virginia Rallies To Beat Maryland
LEAD: Major Harris and Garrett Ford ran for second-half touchdowns today as West Virginia capitalized on a pair of turnovers to beat Maryland, 14-10.


1,500-Girl School
LEAD: The way Rabbi Samuel Fogelman tells it, since 1942 his girls' school in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn ''has been wandering from one dilapidated building to another.'' But now the foundations are being dug for what the rabbi says ''will be the largest religious girls' school in the world,'' capable of holding 1,500 students aged, as he puts it, 3 to 71.


Novelist's Father Also Named Henry
LEAD: In her otherwise informative article, ''Legacy of Modern Times, an L.I.
Utopia'' (July 30), your reporter says, ''William James Sr., the father of the novelist Henry James, wrote in The Tribune . . . '' In fact, the father of the novelist was also named Henry James (often called ''the elder'') and his father, grandfather to Henry the younger, was named William.


Triplet Speaker Systems State Their Attractions
LEAD: Loudspeakers usually come in pairs and are normally delivered as identical twins.
Lately, however, there has been a surprising incidence of triplets.


Art and Archeology Clash Over Ravine Near Cropsey Studio
LEAD: IN the late 19th century Jasper Francis Cropsey painted the rural scenes outside his yellow Victorian cottage in Hastings-on-Hudson, and art historians tell us he was hurrying to capture a part of history that the Industrial Revolution was sweeping away.


While History Is Conflict, the End Is Not Yet; Only the Beginning
LEAD: To the Editor:


RICH MAKES HIS PITCH
LEAD: Although Bob Rich has yet to be awarded a major-league franchise for his team, the Buffalo Bisons, he is already making a major-league mistake.
The correct plural form of bison is simply bison.


FLOOR WARS
LEAD: I have been retained by my 4 1/2-year-old-son, Wilson, to defend his favorite toys (''Floor Wars,'' Aug. 13).


Cubs Beat Cards, 3-2, in 10th for 1 1/2-Game Lead
LEAD: Luis Salazar, who singled home the tying run in the eighth inning, doubled home the winning run in the 10th as the Chicago Cubs defeated the St.
Louis Cardinals, 3-2, today and held onto first place in the National League East.
The victory gave the Cubs a one-and-a-half-game lead over St.
Louis.


Tim Robbins, Hanging Out With the Gang
LEAD: At about 6 feet 4, walking with a loose, shambling gait, his face dimpled and wrinkle-free, Tim Robbins looks like the overgrown kid he portrayed in the 1988 movie ''Bull Durham'' - the baby-faced pitcher with unknown potential.


Indian Troops to Leave by Dec. 31, Sri Lanka Says
LEAD: India will withdraw its peacekeeping troops from Sri Lanka on or before Dec. 31, a senior Sri Lankan Government official said today.


Now Call Home And have a Chat With Your VCR
LEAD: ''Machines are only human,'' observed Karel Capek, a Czechoslovak playwright writing in 1920 about what he called ''robots.'' At that time, it was only science fiction.
Since then, the word has sneaked into dozens of languages, and the formerly imaginary robots have assumed reality.


Missy Casscells Weds Frank Hamby
LEAD: Margaret Sybil Casscells, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
Ward Casscells of Montchanin, Del., and Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Frank Stephen Hamby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Hamby of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
W.
Ramsey Richardson performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Charlottesville, Va.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE DEMISE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY?
Lessons for Democratic Control of Technology.
By Joseph G. Morone and Edward J. Woodhouse. (Yale University, Cloth, $22.50; Paper, $6.95.) This sensible little book offers a penetrating and balanced assessment of a hefty subject: how a useful form of energy turned out to be unacceptable to the American public.


Carbide's Record
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Designer Returns To Praise
LEAD: His fans did not seem to notice that George Stavropoulos had not had a formal fashion show for a year and a half. ''I always look to him for my chiffons,'' said Janice Levin, while Yveta Graff said, ''He always makes things for me and we never skipped a season.''


Anne Patterson Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At St.
John's Episcopal Church in Larchmont, N.Y., Anne Christine Patterson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Patterson of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Thayer Wilmerding, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Wilmerding of Rosemont, Pa.
The Rev.
George Zabriskie 2d performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  FRANNIE'S FRUITS  By Leslie Kimmelman.
Illustrated by Petra Mathers.  32 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $12.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''I just plain and simple can't find anything I want to buy, and experience teaches that's an important warning flag.''  Barton Biggs
chief investment strategist,
Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Party Season Comes Home to Roost
LEAD: The party circuit shifted last week from summer resorts to the city.
On Tuesday the Asia Society celebrated at a preview of the Indian film ''Spices,'' which is the first in a monthlong series of films starring the late Smita Patil.
Guests included Robert B. Oxnam, president of the society, Ismail Merchant, chairman of the Patil Film Festival, and Bianca Jagger.


Votes in Congress
LEAD: Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate  1.
Mailings: Vote on an amendment to a legislative expenses bill that would cut Senate mass mailing funds by $45 million and devote the money to drug programs.
Approved 83 to 8, September 7.  2.
Disabled Rights: Vote on passage of a bill that would prohibit discrimination against disabled Americans in employment and assure their access to public accommodations, transportation and communication services.


AUSTERITY AT ISSUE IN NORWAY'S VOTE
LEAD: The Labor Government's austerity policies, an unemployment rate that is high by local standards and the long waits for non-emergency care in the socialized medical system are the top issues here as Norwegians prepare to vote in parliamentary elections on Sunday and Monday.


Threatened Shore Bird Increasing Numbers
LEAD: A RECORD number of piping plovers, a secretive bird listed as a threatened species throughout New England, migrated to the Connecticut coast this summer, state environmental officials reported last week.


FICTION
LEAD: BLESSINGS.
By Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $19.95.) At the heart of Belva Plain's ploddingly earnest novel, ''Blessings,'' is Victoria Miller, nicknamed Jill, a vivacious, red-haired Barnard sophomore, the oldest child of a surgeon and a librarian, adopted at birth in 1969.
Well loved, well raised, both independent and romantic, Jill is determined to find her birth parents.


Cure the Industry With More Creativity
LEAD: The annual estimates of advertising in the United States have been presented for a number of years in rather a misleading way.
In addition to main media figures, the estimates cover other less relevant categories of expenditure.


Desmond Hogan's Hotels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nan Molofsky Is Married
LEAD: Nan Molofsky, a daughter of Iris Molofsky of Malverne, L.I., and the late Emanuel Molofsky, was married last evening at the Loft in New York to Arthur Nathan Skelskie, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Skelskie of Roswell, Ga.
Rabbi H. Bruce Ehrmann officiated.
Mrs.
Skelskie is an associate at the New York law firm of Corbin Silverman &amp; Sanseverino.


Installing Electrical Boxes
LEAD: WHENEVER household wiring is connected to a switch, receptacle, light fixture or other outlet, the splices that form the connection are enclosed in a firmly mounted metal or plastic box called an electrical box or switch box.


Where Addiction Is the Subject Matter
LEAD: IT carries titles like ''Fat Is a Family Affair,'' ''Is It Love or Is It Addiction?'' and ''If Only I Could Quit.'' And in less than a year, the Meridian Shoppe in Stamford, a bookstore that specializes in literature on addiction and recovery, has already turned a profit, its organizers say.


Relief For Families of Disabled
LEAD: PARENTS with retarded children, the spouses of people who have multiple sclerosis, adult children of parents with Alzheimer's disease and others who care for permanently disabled relatives often share a common struggle: the need for a break.
Hundreds of people in such situations can now take breaks more often, because of a state program that partially pays for someone else to take over temporarily, or respite care.


Mother Teresa Develops Fever
LEAD: Mother Teresa has developed a high fever and an irregular heartbeat, hospital officials said today.
Doctors said they had decided to put in a temporary pacemaker to help the 79-year-old nun, who is known for her work with the destitute and dying.
Mother Teresa suffered a heart attack on Friday.


Devils Take the Ice Fit and With Focus
LEAD: With seven players of proven quality acquired during the off season, the guaranteed jobs so apparent at the Devils' training camp last year no longer exist.


Special Today: residential Property/Section 13
LEAD: Special reports in this issue include:  First-time home buyers face hard choices.
Demographics hold key to appreciation of home values.
Confronting suburban sprawl is the big issue of the 90's.
A soft market is chilling apartment construction.
Blue Cross plans a cradle-to-grave development.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The fiberglass insulation on my attic floor has a foil vapor barrier on the bottom.
There is no insulation over the soffits or eaves, but these soffits are warping because of moisture.
The eaves are three feet wide all around the house and there are just two louvered vents, one on each side of the house.


Henderson's Mind Open on Yanks
LEAD: In the late afternoon of another summer day at home, Rickey Henderson is thinking about next season.
He is stretching and talking and looking toward the outfield grass, and he is saying what seems to be unthinkable: that he would consider coming back to New York.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  VICTORIAN FAIR


Correction
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article in The Times Magazine today about the American Civil Liberties Union appears with a line omitted on page 74.
The affected passage should read, ''There are also instances where civil liberty principles collide - where a news organization's right to report events concerning a criminal prosecution, for example, might conflict with an individual's right to a fair trial.


Deborah Frankel Has a Wedding
LEAD: Deborah Anne Frankel, a director of the seminar division of Institutional Investor, a monthly financial publication in New York, and William Woodward Bancroft Jr., an investment manager with Alex Brown &amp; Sons in New York, were married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Susan Harriss officiated.


ALASKA OIL CLEANUP NEAR END, BUT BEACHES REMAIN FOULED
LEAD: After spending $1 billion trying to clean up less oil than Americans consume in a day, the Exxon Corporation's army of 10,000 workers is disbanding, leaving miles of beaches still coated in thick black goo.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Those who count on using the difficulties of this transitional period for evil purposes and who are trying to undermine the influence of the party should know that this will not work.''
- Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ 17:1. ]


Midge Alter Marries Mark Caparosa
LEAD: Marjorie Beth Alter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Alter of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and West Tisbury, Mass., was married yesterday to Mark Alan Caparosa, a son of Dr.
Ralph J. Caparosa of Mount Lebanon, Pa., and Patricia E. Caparosa of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Edward Schecter performed the ceremony in the Tower Suite of the Time &amp; Life Building in New


For 'Miss Pat,' TV With Live Children
LEAD: ALTHOUGH Pat Swartz often hears singing behind the soup and soda displays in her local supermarket, she pretends not to notice. ''They are our songs so I know they are singing to me,'' the children's television hostess and nursery-school teacher said, ''but these are adults, and sometimes they don't want to admit they watch our show.


Details, Old or New, From Yesterday
LEAD: FLUTED pilasters, carved rosettes, bolection molding and other 18th-century architectural details are the 20th-century specialties of a millwork shop in South Windsor.


South Africa's Vote for Faster Slow Change
LEAD: SINCE his election as National Party leader last February, F. W. de Klerk has been asking South Africans to share his vision of an evolution away from apartheid.
Last week he got that support from a majority of white voters in turbulent parliamentary elections.


Question Of the Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: I think Giamatti's greatest legacy to baseball is his love of the game.
Yes, he was a dedicated and judicious administrator.
But most of all - first of all - he was a fan, a passionate fan.
He reminded us that in baseball, as in life, the important distinction is not whether one knows ancient languages, but whether one brings passion to the day and duties at hand.


More Prisoners Serving Time Outside Jail
LEAD: A STATE program that allows people convicted of nonviolent crimes to serve the bulk of their sentences outside prison has prompted three counties to create similar programs and three other counties to consider establishing them.


First-Time Buyers Face Some Agonizing Choices
LEAD: WHEN it came time to buy their first home, Jeff and Kelly Bonser of suburban Los Angeles matched the experience of many young couples setting out to buy into the American dream.
They paid more than they had expected to, and settled for less than they had hoped for.


How a Couple Imports Polish Culture
LEAD: A SOUTHINGTON couple, Jan and Zofia Sklepinski, are so sure the popularization of Polish culture will spread to the United States that they are betting on it - to the sum of about $500,000.


Convent Issue: Divisions Growing Within Divisions
LEAD: Seldom in recent times have prominent Roman Catholic cardinals been in such public disagreement as they were last weekend after Jozef Cardinal Glemp proposed discarding a 1987 agreement to move a convent of Carmelite nuns from the site of the Auschwitz death camp.


Correction
LEAD: A review in the Arts and Leisure section last week of Brahms recordings by Stanislaw Skrowaczewski and the Halle Orchestra omitted information about the company releasing them in the United States.
The recordings are available in this country through MCA Classics; the release numbers are MCAD 25188 (Symphony No.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Some breathe in the scenery, others concentrate on the music filtered through their earphones, a few practice what might be called active meditation and a minimal number simply clear their minds and operate in a vacuum.
But most joggers (well, who can prove it one way or another?) fantasize about the other joggers they encounter while running.


Days Are Numbered
LEAD: As the prospective new owner of the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League, Murray Pezim is convinced that the C.F.L.'s days are numbered.
Pezim, who announced in Vancouver on Thursday that he had formed a company, Prime Sports Inc., to buy the financially strapped franchise, said on Friday that he believes the league will eventually be displaced by expansion of the National Football League into


Bennett's New Weapon Against Drugs: Tact
LEAD: If the debut of the Bush Administration's drug strategy this week was not ''Batman through the transom,'' the phrase William J. Bennett uses for an imaginary quick fix to the drug problem, it was certainly Czar at full tilt.


Brooklyn Lyric Opera
LEAD: The Brooklyn Lyric Opera will perform Rossini's ''Barber of Seville'' at Hirsch Hall, Temple Ansche Chesed, 100th Street and West End Avenue, in Manhattan, at 3 P.M. today.
The performance, which will be in English, is to be conducted by Sue Peters Albert.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 837-1176.


Q and A
LEAD:  Succession Rights  Question: For more than 36 years my husband and I have been tenants in a rent-controlled apartment.
I conduct my business in this apartment; it was arranged through the original lease.
Our daughter used to live with us and was a partner in the business.
But a few years ago she moved to her own apartment.


POSTINGS: Trump Tower Tax Tiff; Who Pays?
LEAD: New York City's tax collectors and the partnership that built Trump Tower - the 59-story building at Fifth Avenue and 56th Street - are battling over who pays taxes on the tower's commercial space.
The partnership is seeking to force owners of 283 luxury condos above the commercial space to bear a higher share of the building's real estate taxes than they now do.


U.S. Sees No Early Accord With Iran on Hostages
LEAD: The Bush Administration has concluded that despite hints that Iran would like a deal for the release of American hostages, Teheran's new leadership has not decided to act, and Government officials say it could be a long time before it does.


Finding Out The Realities of AIDS in Prison
LEAD: WITH hundreds of prisoners already dead and thousands more infected, New York State has a bigger AIDS epidemic within its criminal justice system than most states have in their entire population.
But critics say that instead of rising to the challenge, the system has too often failed its inmates with AI


Week's Lessons Extend Beyond Football Practice
LEAD: When a football game ends with a score of 27-0, the winners usually run back to the locker room cheering and the losers try to slink off the field.
This was not the case after the Earlham College Quakers defeated the Doshisha University Hamburgers.


Baiting Brokers
LEAD: To the Editor:


REVENGE BEFORE LOVE
LEAD:  LEONARDO'S JUDAS  By Leo Perutz.
Translated by Eric Mosbacher.  154 pp.
New York:  Arcade Publishing. $16.95.


CONFORTED BY SLAUGHTER AND BY PRAYER
LEAD:  STONEWALL JACKSON  Portrait of a Soldier.
By John Bowers.
Illustrated. 367 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


A Year of Firsts and Foremosts
LEAD: WHEN IT COMES TO THE FULFILL-ment of a season's promise, our major museums have a good record.


Just Whose Cassette Is This, Anyway?
LEAD: Video advertisers, actual and potential, are ever awaiting the latest tabulations on how consumers are taking to commercials on cassettes of feature films.
Recently they got some fresh figures from Nielsen Media Research, a division of the ratings organization.


HOME WAS WHERE THE ROAD WAS
LEAD:  WHAT AM I DOING HERE  By Bruce Chatwin.  367 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


There's a New Sound in Pop Music: Bigotry
LEAD: Has hatred become hip?
From isolated spots in pop culture, racial and sexual prejudice have slithered back into view.
Andrew Dice Clay, a comedian whose Nassau Coliseum performance on Saturday sold out immediately, mixes dirty-word jokes with vicious put-downs of women, homosexuals, blacks and Japanese.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Freehold  $121,900  253 Tulip Lane  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old condominium town house; c/a, w/w carpeting; monthly maintenance $123, taxes $2,118.
Maplewood  $155,000  199 Parker Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,022.


Classics Thrive on Screen Tests
LEAD: You've watched the video, now see the movie.


Belgium's Medieval Treasure
LEAD: BRUGES is a city for those infatuated by the lost past, because it is not lost there.
Brussels, Belgium's hustling capital, the seat of NATO and of the E.E.C.'s bureaucrats, is the gateway to Europe, as its airport proclaims.
But some 30 miles to the northwest lies a small city that was, centuries ago, an artistic and commercial hub of the whole European continent.


Hot Tickets; Nights to Remember
LEAD: * ''Orpheus Descending.'' Vanessa Redgrave re-creates her celebrated London role, Sept. 24 at the Neil Simon.


'The Dybbuk' Rises From the Ruins
LEAD: On Friday, a bit of film history, painstakingly reassembled and refurbished, will be repeated: the showing in a commercial movie theater of the Yiddish classic ''The Dybbuk.'' It is a triumph of persistence that has assembled this 1937 film from pieces as mauled and scattered about the globe as the people for whom it was made to be seen.


Improbable Plots In 2 Schisgal Plays
LEAD: BOTH ''Closet Madness'' and ''The Rabbi and the Toyota Dealer'' are about men who want to change their lives.


Question Of the Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: In this age of free-agency million-dollar contracts, player strikes and cable TV negotiations, Giamatti sought to reaffirm the notion that baseball was supposed to be fun: clean, wholesome, but sacred fun.
His passion for the game, its history, its integrity and its lore, broke through all of the peripheral nonsense that has inflicted itself upon professional sports in recent years, and served to remind us that this was, after all, a game, a friend, a companion to accompany us from childhood through our adult years, and to be passed on to our children.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Does the Demon Barber Have a Human Face?
LEAD: ''When the York Theater Company asked me to direct 'Sweeney Todd,' '' says Susan H. Schulman, ''the first thing I did was laugh.''


The Voices in a Teacher's Head
LEAD: WHEN I chose the profession, I had aspirations of making a difference, of helping people and changing their lives.
I saw no other job as being more important or worthwhile.
Yet I've met so many people who have tried to deter me, who have tried to persuade me to change my course.


THE DECLINE AND FALL OF A SURE THING
LEAD:  BATTLE FOR JUSTICE  How the Bork Nomination Shook America.
By Ethan Bronner.
Illustrated. 399 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.50.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: Perhaps Mr.
Walton should have chosen, as an example, someone other than Willie Horton.
Willie Horton raped a woman, which is the supreme oppression of another group of people who have been fighting right alongside of and as hard as black Americans to remove prejudice.
SUSAN K. EVERSHED


NUMISMATICS
LEAD: A 200-year-old token issued by an Albany, N.Y. church has been discovered in the estate of a Vermont man who collected odd coins he found at his Laundromat.
Resting in the hodgepodge of Indian Head cents and foreign coins, the Albany church token is one of only five known examples and will be auctioned in New York City this week by Bowers &amp; Merena Inc.


Unusual Bulbs to Decorate Spring
LEAD: With the bulb planting season fast approaching, some of the lesser-known kinds should be considered for next spring's displays.
An alert has gone out to gardeners to avoid buying and planting many of the diminutive species bulbs because they are collected from the wild.
The selections here, are to the best of my knowledge, nursery propagated.


ROOTED IN ABRUZZI
LEAD:  ITALIAN DAYS  By Barbara Grizzuti Harrison.
Illustrated. 479 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $22.95.


Miss Uroff Wed To Z. M. C. Colt
LEAD: Elizabeth Uroff, a daughter of Margaret McKenzie Dickie of Athens, Ga., and Benjamin Uroff of Champaign, Ill., was married yesterday to Zenas Marshall Crane Colt, a son of Zenas Crane Colt of Wakefield, R.I., and the late Cynthia Means Colt.
The Rev.
James Yeary officiated at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in


DATA BANK: Sept.10, 1989
LEAD:
$
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.7
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'89
IV Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$171.6
$173.9
$146.4
Industrial Production Index
July
June
Year Ago
Percent change, monthly and year to year
0.2
-0.1
0.4
Housing Starts
July
June
Year Ago
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,430
1,420
1,490
New


EXPOSING THE F.D.A.
LEAD: Mylan Laboratories Inc., a Pittsburgh-based generic drug company, knew it was taking enormous risks when it hired private detectives in 1987 to snoop around the Food and Drug Administration, which it suspected had been stalling its applications to make new generic drugs.


Sports of The Times; Steffi Wins Survival Contest at the Open
LEAD: The marathon continued yesterday at the steamy outdoor dance hall in Flushing Meadows, with the player who had suffered from cramps outlasting the player who suffered from being 32.


Review/Dance; Immigrants' Impressions Re-enacted
LEAD: The Synergic Theater, a multimedia group, was at its best at the Pace Downtown Theater on Thursday night when dance, speech, stage settings and lighting effects were so blended that one art became inseparable from another.


Eueka and Yuck! How the Gypsy Moth Met Its Match
LEAD: THEODORE ANDREADIS leaned back in his chair, laced his fingers behind his head and thought a moment. ''What was it like around here the day we discovered the gypsy moth fungus?'' he said, beaming as he repeated his visitor's question. ''It was an exciting day.
A very exciting day.''


Solving the Problem Of 'Drug Babies'
LEAD: Olga Gurny's article ''From Drug Babies, a Cry for Help'' (Opinion page, Aug. 6) is an excellent review of the tragic problem of drug-addicted babies.
However, there are several points that need further clarification.


Demographics Hold Key To Home Appreciation
LEAD: AS vice president and chief housing analyst for the Chicago Title and Trust Company, John Pfister is among the legion of real estate professionals who consider home ownership one of the most solid long-term investments available to American families.


Amid Convent Dispute, Cardinal Cancels U.S. Trip
LEAD: Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Polish church leader who has incurred criticism for his remarks in the dispute over a convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp, has canceled a scheduled visit to several United States cities, the Polish press agency said today.


Radium Cleanup in Queens Nears End
LEAD: Late on the night of Aug. 28, a flatbed truck pulled away from a fenced-off cinderblock building in Woodside, Queens, and headed west, bound for the Nevada desert.


Trollope's Fecundity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Armenian Archbishop Remembered


Maja Paumgarten Weds John Parker
LEAD: Maria Elise Paumgarten, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Paumgarten of Brooklyn Heights and Northeast Harbor, Me., and John Forbes Parker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin E. Parker of Mendham, N.J., and Mishaum Point, South Dartmouth, Mass., were married yesterday in St.
Ignatius Church in Northeast Harbor.


Dr. Leschey Is Wed to Eliot C. Heher
LEAD: Dr.
Katrinka H. Leschey, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Leschey Jr. of Cape Elizabeth, Me., and Eliot C. Heher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Heher Jr. of Princeton, N.J., were married yesterday at the Spurwink Church in Cape Elizabeth.
The Rev.
Edward A. Thomson, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.


Catharine Scholtz Is Wed in Darien
LEAD: The wedding of Catharine Ann Scholtz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew A. Scholtz of Darien, Conn., and Naples, Fla., and Matthew Arnold Labine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
A.
Clem Labine of Brooklyn, took place yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball officiated.


FLOOR WARS
LEAD: I find it surprising that Cathleen Schine sees evidence of the decline of Western civilization in the current state of toy soldiering.
The realistic figures she admires may on rare occasions open the world of history and geopolitics to individual children; more commonly, they give children lessons in who their contemporary enemies are and how they ought to deal with them.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The fiberglass insulation on my attic floor has a foil vapor barrier on the bottom.
There is no insulation over the soffits or eaves, but these soffits are warping because of moisture.
The eaves are three feet wide all around the house and there are just two louvered vents, one on each side of the house.


Coe Loses in His Last (Maybe) Race
LEAD: One champion arrived and another departed today at the World Cup track and field meet, where Ana Quirot of Cuba reached the previously unattainable and Sebastian Coe of Britain succumbed to the inevitable.


UPWARD BOUND
LEAD: SOMETIMES TALENT SEEMS TO BE THE LEAST of it.
For a young designer or team of them to stay the course today, a strong sense of style, determination - even luck - are fine, but it takes much more.
Such is the state of the marketplace that practical things - hefty financing, good management and steady store support - are usually the elements that spell lasting success.


Jennifer Ogden Has a Wedding
LEAD: Jennifer Anne Ogden and Peter Thomas Zidlicky, 1987 graduates of Brown University, were married yesterday at the Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes officiated.


Where the Sun Shines, There He Is
LEAD: George Hamilton was not in ''The Sun Also Rises.'' He wasn't even in ''Duel in the Sun.'' He most certainly was not in ''Hideous Sun Demon.'' He is, however, in the sun whenever possible.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Penn State Upset by Virginia
LEAD: Shawn Moore threw two first-half touchdown passes to Herman Moore today as Virginia upset Penn State, 14-6, sending the Nittany Lions to their sixth loss in seven games including last season.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article today on page 48 of The New Season, part 2 of The Times Magazine, misstates the role of Tom Wopat in the CBS series ''Peaceable Kingdom.'' He plays Lindsay Wagner's brother.


Kelly Smith Weds J. Steven Kraus
LEAD: Mary Kelly Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Smith Jr. of Basking Ridge, N.J., and J. Steven Kraus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Kraus of Garden City, L.I., were married yesterday at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Basking Ridge.
Msgr.
William Capik performed the ceremony.


Jackson Stumps With Dinkins At Queens Rally
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson campaigned yesterday for David N. Dinkins as the mayoral candidate of ''hope and healing'' for New York City.


Salvador's Right Takes the Steps Its Center Couldn't
LEAD: IN recent years, the campaign song of El Salvador's Nationalist Republican Alliance has promised that the country ''will be the tomb where the Reds will meet their end.'' But last week, barely three months after coming to power, President Alfredo Cristiani and his right-wing party, called Arena, were singing a different tune.


What Do You Expect for $2.25 Million?
LEAD: ''LET ME TELL YOU ABOUT TONI,'' SAYS STEPHEN SHAPIRO, AS HE kills the engine of his black BMW 750iL with the dark glass, the black leather seats and, of course, the phone. ''Toni's been married and divorced three times.
To the same man.
So every time there's a change in status, she calls me.
She needs a new house.


Survey of Homeless: Mental Ills and Addiction
LEAD: More than 80 percent of the homeless people contacted in a survey in Baltimore were mentally ill and most of them suffered from drug or alcohol abuse and many other ailments, the study shows.


On the Ubiquity Of Gambling
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE RING CYCLE
LEAD: What a joy it was to read Renee Bacher's article, ''The Ring Cycle'' (Hers, Aug. 13).


Death in Tiananmen
LEAD: That month in Beijing six years ago was exhausting but exhilarating, too.
As the first foreign theatrical director in the People's Republic of China, I was directing ''Death of a Salesman'' with Chinese actors in Beijing's People's Art Theater, the equivalent of the Moscow Art Theater.
There was a lot of skepticism surrounding the project, with many Chinese and foreigners doubting that the Chinese audience would understand the very American play.


Anthems and Troubadours That Stirred Crowds to Protest
LEAD: On May Day 1934, in concert with laborers from around the country and the world, hundreds of workers and their supporters demonstrated in Union Square in New York.
Their marching song was a tune just published in the left-wing weekly New Masses, ''Into the Streets May First'' - by Aaron Copland.


Spare the Rod And Spoil Nothing
LEAD: As a very young child I enjoyed fishing, as does Rosanne Kalick (''Another World at End of the Fishing Line,'' Opinion Page, Aug. 20), seduced by the slow ripples of water radiating from my legs and the flashing, rainbow-colored fish.
But when I grew old enough to realize that it was wrong (and certainly no pleasure) to inflict unnecessary suffering on another, luring a fish to embed itself on my hook and pulling it from the water it needs to breathe became not magical but sickening.


Ruling Could Alter Use Of Newspapers' Sources
LEAD: A Minnesota Court of Appeals ruling Tuesday that a reporter's promise of anonymity to a news source is an enforceable contract could reduce the use of unnamed sources by news organizations, according to some leading journalists and First Amendment experts.


The Two Jacks
LEAD: JAKE GITTES IS BACK - 11 YEARS OLDER and with a permanent scar on the left side of his nose as a memento of the knife that slit his nostril in ''Chinatown.'' The cynical private detective has fought in World War II and joined a country club, and he's even learned to forgive himself, a little, for what happened on the streets of


Opposition Leader From Soviet Union Begins Visit to U.S.
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the Soviet populist opposition leader, arrived in the United States yesterday and said he had come to learn more about ''the American experience in democracy.''


Struggling for Profits in Electronics
LEAD: The last several years have been miserable ones for specialty retailers of consumer electronics.
After riding the boom in V.C.R. sales through the first half of the 1980's, most electronics chains are now being battered by flattened sales, brutal price wars and ill-conceived expansions.


Review/Concert; The Eclectix Impetus: New Music in Old Mode
LEAD: Eclectix, a group that presents new music by composers of a decidedly conservative stripe, opened its fifth season with a program of songs, flute works and light jazz on Friday evening at CAMI Hall.


On the Runway Pondering Security
LEAD: ON Wednesday evening, May 17, the headlines came home to me: The plane we were sitting in at Kennedy Airport in New York City, ready to take off for Europe, was the object of an anonymous telephone threat.


A World of Illicit Wealth
LEAD: A Federal affidavit has provided a startling glimpse into the violence and enormous wealth surrounding the Medellin drug ring.
Page 20.


Sports of The Times; Now the Mets Wait for Doctor K to Pitch Again
LEAD: Instead of getting the job done, the Mets seem to be standing around like poor little rich boys waiting for their three rich uncles in Chicago, St.
Louis and Montreal to die so they could claim what they consider to be their rightful inheritance, first place in the National League East.
And now they're waiting again, this time for Dwight


It May Be Art, but Cuomo's Aides Don't Like It
LEAD: The painting shows Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo as a puppeteer, pulling the strings to decide where nuclear waste will be dumped.


An Old Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The fiberglass insulation on my attic floor has a foil vapor barrier on the bottom.
There is no insulation over the soffits or eaves, but these soffits are warping because of moisture.
The eaves are three feet wide all around the house and there are just two louvered vents, one on each side of the house.


MERLIN WITH A LEICA
LEAD: Since the 1930's, the French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson has traveled the world with his signature Leica, to paint with light his searing vision of humanity.
He is the master of what he refers to as ''the decisive moment'' - an amalgam of time, place and circumstance - and there is perhaps no aspect of his art more revealing than his portraiture.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Naturalness of Nature


In Arts and Antiques, a Year of Gems
LEAD: Provocative works from most historical periods and much of the globe will be exhibited at museums and galleries from now through the end of the year.
Of the four areas of antiques and the decorative arts that dominate - antiquities, Americana, Oriental porcelains and jewelry - the runaway favorite is jewelry, the subject of at least six shows.


Badges of the Stylish Landlubber
LEAD: Not since the tall ships sailed into New York Harbor a few Fourths of July ago have so many insignias been seen in these parts.
No, the New York Yacht Club has not opened its membership to the populace at large.
It is just that a couple of well-known fashion houses, Chanel and Adolfo, have come out with blazers whose designers apparently believe that if one insignia looks good, then many insignias look better.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about scuba diving referred incorrectly to some equipment.
The regulator, tank-pressure gauge and timer can be attached to the inflatable vest known as a buoyancy compensator, but are sold separately.


REBELS SINCE 1969, STILL GOING STRONG
LEAD:  RED REVOLUTION  Inside the Philippine Guerrilla Movement.
By Gregg R. Jones.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
Boulder, Colo.:  Westview Press.
Cloth, $26.95.
Paper, $16.95.


Ms. Postlethwaite Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Andrea Jane Postlethwaite, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Postlethwaite of Washington, was married yesterday to Mark Joseph Riedy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cyril Joseph Riedy of Canton, Mich.
The Rev.
George Reid performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Barnseville, Md.


A Broker Is Wed To Cynthia Scully
LEAD: Cynthia Crowell Scully, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Watson Scully of Rye, N.Y., and Todd Hodges Doolan, the son of Mrs.
James A. Gobes of West Hartford, Conn., and Dwight M. Doolan of New York, were married yesterday in Rye.


Ensemble Experiments
LEAD: The Cucaracha Theater, situated in a 10,000-square-foot warehouse in TriBeCa (429 Greenwich Street, 966-8596), has become a center for some of the most interesting experimental theater work in New York.
Since it was founded four years ago by Richard Caliban, a playwright and director, and David Simonds, an actor, Cucaracha, whose sprawling ensemble pieces have an intense, homemade quality, has presented some 40 works, featuring a total of more than 100 actors.


Free Improvisation Heads Once More Into the Breach
LEAD: THE ADVENT OF THE NEW York Branch of free improvisation (in which musicians improvise with noise and music but without planned structure) in the mid- to late 1970's seemed at the time like a blessing.
Mixing the free-improvisational ideas developed in jazz with ideas taken from European improvisers and classical musicians, it made for exciting, radical music.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A Building Boom Near New Haven's Green
LEAD: THE construction crane, a bird with a ubiquitous presence in Stamford and Hartford, seems to be migrating into New Haven, judging from the half-dozen long steel necks hovering downtown.


Titleholder Keeps Single Sculls Gold
LEAD: Kris Karlson, the defending champion in women's lightweight single sculls, achieved the only gold medal for the United States today on the first day of finals at the world rowing championships.
That was the first medal awarded and by the time the day's races were over, the East Germans had won 5 of the 11 events.


Glasses Are in Demand, Even by 20/20 Children
LEAD: It's time for school eye exams.
And these days, eye-wear sellers report, glasses are more a status symbol than a stigma.


The State I Love And Love to Hate
LEAD: I FIRST came to this state as the 3-year-old captive of Italian and Irish parents, who foresaw a crumbling South Bronx.
We moved into a white box house in a spanking new suburb where the most exotic creatures were Japanese beetles.


Wagner's Passing Paces 28-13 Victory
LEAD: Ray Benvenuti, a sophomore making his debut as the starting quarterback for Wagner College, combined with Abe Higgins for three touchdown passes as the Seahawks defeated Delaware Valley, 28-13, yesterday afternoon in the season's opener for both teams at Grymes Hill on Staten Island.


Teen-age Fantasies, Literary Classics, War and Revolution
LEAD: EVER IN SEARCH OF young viewers to deliver to their advertisers, the networks have always offered a few series that exploit the fantasies of teen-agers.
This season brings us three new ones.


The Dating Game in Middle Age
LEAD: SEVERAL years ago, I, a middle-aged widow, decided to look for a mate, excluding the single bars, however.
I joined a church group of older singles.


From Caesar To MacArthur, On the Hudson
LEAD: IT would be a hard heart indeed that did not beat a little faster at the sight of the Army's Corps of Cadets, 4,361 strong, in their dress uniforms, marching in precision on the plain at the core of the United States Military Academy at West Point.
It is a site that reverberates in American history.


1,400 Hairstons Honor Kinship Born of Slavery
LEAD: The Hairstons held their annual family reunion here this weekend, not far from two of the plantations where their forebears toiled as slaves or ruled as masters.


At 70, the Bears Have Shed Their Nasty, Monster Image
LEAD: As the National Football League opens its 70th season today, so do the Chicago Bears, who meet the Cincinnati Bengals at Soldier Field.
The Bears were 1 of 12 N.F.L. charter teams that met on Nov. 17, 1920 at Ralph Hay's Hupmobile showroom in Canton, Ohio, and plunked down $100 for membership in the new league.


Health, Maine
LEAD:  How to Stay Healthy Abroad  Devised and edited by Richard Dawood, M.D.  506 pages.
Penguin Books.
Paper, $8.95.
Travel With Health II  By Herbert L. DuPont, M.D. and Margaret W. DuPont. 46 pages.
Texas InfoGroup, P. O. Box 161196, Austin, Tex. 78716.
Paper, $2.95.
The Pocket Doctor  By Stephen Bezruchka, M.D.


While History Is Conflict, the End Is Not Yet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Silence Urged For Hernandez
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Beethoven Featured In Several Concerts
LEAD: BEETHOVEN has the inside track this week in the county, with a piano concerto and symphony listed by both the Philharmonia Virtuosi and the Westchester Symphony Orchestra.


Ms. Gibbs Wed To C. P. Barton
LEAD: The wedding of Jenny MacKinnon Gibbs and Christopher Paul Barton took place in New York yesterday at the Church Center for the United Nations.
Deacon Jack Haney performed the Episcopal ceremony.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.33
7.35
7.97
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.58
8.64
7.65
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.45
6.46
5.97
Bank Rate Monitor


Jersey City Tower
LEAD: Ground is to be broken in Jersey City Tuesday for Pavonia Tower, an eight-story office building half a block north of Journal Square, which is undergoing extensive real estate development.
The 68,000-square-foot building will be divided, with retail space on its ground floor and 57,000 square feet of office space on the upper floors.


Forest Fires Blackening Acres of 'Green Spain'
LEAD: After one of the driest winters this century and a hot, parched summer, Spain is experiencing one of its worst seasons of forest fires, the National Institute for Nature Conservation says.


How Public Financing Has Changed New York City's Way of Campaigning
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY's new campaign finance law, the second-largest public financing program in the country after the one for Presidential elections, is ending its first test with Tuesday's primaries.
The verdict of candidates and other politicians is that it has drastically changed the face of city politics.


Budget Office's Economic Data Is Criticized by Agency of Congress
LEAD: A nonpartisan Congressional agency says the White House's budget office has failed to tailor the Government's data-gathering efforts to assess complex changes in the economy.


Peanut-Butter Diplomacy
LEAD: In the article ''Recycling Is An Old Idea That's Come Around'' (Opinion Page, Aug. 20), the advent of peanut butter in plastic jars is decried.


Works From The Wilder Side
LEAD: THE STAGES ARE SMALL AND DARK AND without a front curtain or even wings, carved out of schools and church halls, gymnasiums and living and factory lofts.
The performances often start late.
The seats are jammed together.
But out of these shabby, unsettled confines the imagination seems to take flight with special freedom.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Atlantic Trains Join France's T.G.V. System


Student From Latvia Anticipates 'Freedom'
LEAD: When Natalya Tsarkova registers for classes at Harvard College tomorrow, she will be the first student from the Soviet Union to enroll in a degree program at an Ivy League school.
She will have missed by only a few days being the first at any American college.


2 in Ukrainian Party Seek Ouster of Leader
LEAD: Two Ukrainian Communist Party leaders appeared before the founding meeting of a nationalist movement today to call for the removal of the republic's hard-line party chief.


DANCE: Season Preview; Historic revivals, elaborate premieres
LEAD: DANCE IS LOOKING both backward and forward this season, with both premieres and revivals of important works.


Bicoastal Momentum
LEAD: In both New York and Los Angeles this season, there's a whole lot of moving going on where art galleries are concerned, including a couple of expansions to bicoastal status.
SoHo, the Manhattan art neighborhood where more is never too much, is acquiring another gallery building, a five-story, 65,000-square-foot former bakery at 130 Prince Street (at Wooster Street) that has been under renovation for over a year.


How 'Produced by David Wolper' Made Its Mark
LEAD: By JEREMY GERARD


After 9-Victory Streak, Yankees Drop the Ball
LEAD: The sun above Mel Hall in the sixth inning today had produced another warm California afternoon.
But when Hall looked into it and tried to catch a pop fly with a runner on base, it became an overpowering glare.


'It Begins With a Belief in People'
LEAD: Max DePree is chairman of Herman Miller Inc., a furniture maker in Zeeland, Mich., known for its innovative designs and participative management system.
Herman Miller, which had $793 million in sales in the fiscal year 1989, was the first to introduce the ''open office'' concept.
It has been called one of the most admired companies by


Reagan Is 'Recovering Rapidly' After Surgery for Fluid on Brain
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan was reported today to be making a ''rapid recovery'' one day after minor surgery to drain fluid that formed on his brain, a spokesman for Mr.
Reagan said.


PRESNT AT THE SUPPRESSION
LEAD:  TIANANMEN DIARY  Thirteen Days in June.
By Harrison E. Salisbury.  176 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company.
Cloth, $18.95.
Paper, $10.95.


Hungary Plans Arms Pullback Along 2 Borders
LEAD: The Hungarian Communist Party, demonstrating anew Hungary's independent spirit, has proposed forming a 60-mile zone partly free of offensive weapons along its borders with Austria and Yugoslavia, both neutral countries.


Freshmen Choose Dormitory Floors By Subject Matter
LEAD: Pick an area of interest - any one of eight interests - and there will be a dormitory floor to suit you at Tulane University this year, where seven floors in freshman dormitories across campus and an entire three-story dormitory, Paterson, group students by their subject of choice.


Lights! Cameras! On Your Toes!
LEAD: Dance videos have come a long way.
One pioneer is Merce Cunningham, who has maintained an imaginative commitment to video over 12 years.
His newest video, CHANGING STEPS (1989, Cunningham Dance Foundation, $69), is both beautiful and provocative.
It is not a documentary of the 1973 dance.
But Mr.
Cunningham and Elliot Caplan, the company's video maker and a former painter, have created a version that is remarkably faithful in spirit to the original and to Mr.


25 YEARS LATER
LEAD:  SILVER WEDDING  By Maeve Binchy.  306 pp. New York:  Delacorte Press.


Text of the 1987 Agreement On the Convent at Auschwitz
LEAD: Roman Catholic officials, including Franciszek Cardinal Macharski of Cracow and three other European cardinals, met with Jewish representatives in Geneva in February 1987 to discuss Jewish objections to the presence of a Carmelite convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp in Poland.
Following is the text of a declaration adopted at the meeting, as translated from the French.


Modesty Sought From Trump
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Nancy Mairs's Quest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Birth Control Making Inroads in Populous Kenya
LEAD: Kenya's birth rate has dropped, the first sign that the rate of population growth, the highest in the world, may be slowing, a Government survey shows.


Being Taxed Out of One's Town
LEAD: Re: ''West Milford Journal: Angered by Tax Increases, Residents Seek an Investigation'' (Aug. 13):


Confronting Sprawl, The Big Issue of the 90's
LEAD: AS employment centers continue an inexorable expansion into suburban areas and beyond, they are posing one of the great challenges to residential development in the 90's - how to manage growth patterns so that suburbia won't choke on itself.


Yale and New Haven Become Tennis Partners
LEAD: In an unusual marriage of town and gown, New Haven, Yale University and state representatives have cooperated to bring a major tennis tournament to New Haven.


Suburbia Has Changed; So Have I
LEAD: I HAVE been living in Suffolk County since 1966 and chose to live here for all the obvious reasons.
I wanted the advantages of my own home in the country.
After 26 years of the city it was time for my American Dream!


At 'Barndominiums,' Home Is Where the Horse Is
LEAD: FOR those who cannot bear to live without their horses, developers are creating housing that caters to the needs of both owner and steed.
Designed to appeal to Connecticut's many horse owners, and newcomers who love horses, these new projects combine building lots or houses with barns, stalls and trails, a mixture that has led one developer to coin the term ''barndominium.


Woman Dies in Plant Collapse
LEAD: The mezzanine platform of a fruit packing warehouse here collapsed Friday, killing a woman and injuring seven other people.
The woman, Sharon Raschke, died as she was sorting fruit at the Hansen Fruit Company warehouse, the police said.
Barb Dunn, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Labor and Industries, said the Hansen warehouse had been inspected by the state in June and no violations were found.


Old Newspapers Hit a Logjam
LEAD: Hour after hour, around the clock, bundles of old newspapers rumble along a conveyor until they drop into a large vat at the Garden State Paper Company's recycling mill here along the Passaic River.
In a few hours they will emerge as rolls of blank newsprint, ready to be used again.


Nicki Mittman Is Married
LEAD: Nicki Lyn Mittman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Mittman of West New York, N.J., and Livingston Manor, N.Y., was married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., to Ira Robert Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris L. Cohen of Floral Park, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold B. Marans performed the ceremony.


The Postman's Palace
LEAD: WHAT DO POSTMEN DREAM about?
It is no doubt unfair to judge by a single example, but it's quite an example.
Created over the course of 33 years, from 1879 to 1912, by the hand of an obsessive French postman named Ferdinand Cheval (right, in 1905), ''Le Palais Ideal'' is the surreal, ornate reconstruction of what must have been a very beau reve.


Party Season Need Not Be So Humdrum
LEAD: FALL'S arrival heralds more than the return to school or the end of casual summer days.
It also signals the start of the school-year season for children's birthday parties.
For those parents who prefer not to play host to a child's friends and classmates at home, there are a number of places around the county that will act as substitutes.


Arthur Rubine Is Dead; Movie Press Agent, 53
LEAD: Arthur Rubine, a motion picture press agent who specialized in independently produced films, died of cancer Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 years old.


False Economy: Cutting School Costs
LEAD: I read with great interest your article on the changing Long Island economy  [ ''L.I.
Growth Years Over, Looking Beyond Defense,'' Aug. 13 ] .
All of us who have made our lives and careers here have much at stake.
A significant increase in unemployment and the subsequent impact on property values would certainly affect us all.


Newport Regatta Gaining in Status
LEAD: Women who reach the upper echelon of sailing have largely been restricted to Olympic competition.
But an international regatta for women that began five years ago in Newport, R.I., is gaining a substantial reputation, filling a void in yacht racing for women.


Boston Weighs Drastic Changes In School Board
LEAD: Boston's leaders and residents, almost unanimously dissatisfied with the public schools, are considering dramatic changes in who runs the 59,000-student system.


CAMERA
LEAD: I'm old enough to remember when Nikon replaced the original Nikon F camera with the Nikon F2.
Pros screamed, yelled and vowed never to change their equipment.
Needless to say, within a couple of years every photographer who could afford one was toting an F2.


GAY VOTE PURSUED WITH EXTRA VIGOR
LEAD: The votes of gay and lesbian New Yorkers are being courted as never before in the municipal primary campaign, gay rights advocates and political leaders say.


Auto Repair Costs And the Law
LEAD: The article ''Fixing Customers' Cars and Attitudes'' (New Jersey Q &amp; A, Aug. 6) should have also made readers aware of existing law.


China's Riches Yield To Diplomacy's Skills
LEAD: In early 1987, when Charles H. Moyer gave Chinese authorities his ''wish list'' of nearly 80 masterworks from Beijing's Forbidden City that he wanted for a major American exhibition of traditional Chinese painting, the Chinese responded with a counterproposal.


Beth H. Shuster, Reporter, Is Wed To TV Executive
LEAD: Beth Hope Shuster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Shuster of Los Angeles, and Michael Healy, a son of Mrs.
Edward G. Healy of Buffalo and the late Dr.
Healy, were married yesterday in Los Angeles.
Judge Andrew Weisz, retired presiding judge of the Municipal Court in Beverly Hills, Calif., officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Graf Struggles Early, but Captures Open
LEAD: All year long, Steffi Graf had been in a struggle with herself to prevent 1989 from becoming anticlimactic to 1988, the season she attained a Golden Grand Slam of tennis by capturing all four Grand Slam titles and, in something of a command performance for her native West Germany, an Olympic gold medal.


THE CASE FOR THE AMPERSAND
LEAD:  AN ESSAY ON TYPOGRAPHY  By Eric Gill.
Illustrated. 133 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95.


Style Makers; Emily Gwathmey and John Margolies: Postcard Collectors
LEAD: She is the author of ''Wholly Cow!,'' a book that celebrates the lure of the bovine.
He is a photographer, writer and lecturer with a special interest in popular culture.


While History Is Conflict, the End Is Not Yet; Chaos Advances
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shopping List For Steinbrenner
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Punishing Pregnant Addicts: Debate, Dismay, No Solution
LEAD: IN July, a Florida woman was convicted of child abuse for using cocaine while pregnant.


Notes From Between The Sheets?
LEAD: The speculation in this space recently about Schubert's underground sexual life, as explored in documentary detail by the musicologist Maynard Solomon, brought two typical, if opposed, reactions from readers.


The Phony War
LEAD: A President who was serious in declaring a new war on drugs would do at least these things:


Transactions
LEAD:  Football


In the fall, Hollywood's high-powered stars come out
LEAD: HOLLYWOOD reserves its most serious films for fall and winter, when the darker, chillier atmosphere encourages moviegoers to hunker down in theaters for something more solid than the action films and cartoon characters that dash across the screen in summer.
But Hollywood's version of fall will never be, in Melville's phrase, ''a damp, drizzly November in my soul.


Campione: Italy's Little Vegas
LEAD: THE slot machines start clicking and ringing at 3:15 P.M. every day and the roulettes spin night after night until dawn in the ancient village, an Italian-Swiss Atlantic City of sorts, on the eastern shore of Lake Lugano.
Determined nongamblers, too, are often captivated by Campione d'Italia, a splinter of Italy, the size of one-third of Central Park in New York, embedded in the south of Switzerland.


Looking at an Unkept Promise
LEAD: ALJIRA'S ''Promise of Progress: Present Conditions'' is the third sociopolitical show to be staged by this Newark gallery since it moved to 2 Washington Place.
It was organized by Carl Hazlewood, the gallery's artistic director, and its six participants, a press release says, ''have shed the disengaged 'cool' of much mainstream art.


Vegetarian Nostalgia With Music to Match
LEAD: Like something out of a late-1960's theme park, Wetlands Preserve (161 Hudson Street, at Laight Street, 966-4225) turns a sparkling clean TriBeCa bar into a nexus of psychedelic nostalgia and current activism.
One large nook holds bulletin boards full of leaflets (''Planet Care,'' ''All-Species Rights''), petitions to be signed and the whimsically painted shell of a VW microbus selling T-shirts, bumper stickers and underground comics.


Two Directors Reshape Classics From the 20's; 'Grand Hotel'
LEAD: THE ROOMS AT THE HOTEL DIPLOMAT ON West 43d Street in Manhattan go for $45 a night.
In the lobby, the paint is peeling from the walls and ceiling.
There are holes in the sofas, the cashiers and the clerks are imprisoned behind glass and a sign informs new guests that the maximum stay is 28 days.


Around Gorbachev, Centrifugal Forces
LEAD: AN analyst diagnosing the collective emotional health of the Soviet Union in these days of ethnic discord and economic distress need look no farther than a television set, where the political commentators are being reinforced by hypnotists and faith healers.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: I am tired of these stories by and about ''poor Ivy League Negroes'' who suddenly discover racism, as though attending Yale, Harvard or Princeton should exempt them from what other African-Americans encounter every day of their lives (''Willie Horton and Me,'' Aug. 20).
Anthony Walton should have learned at Harvard that, in this society, a Negro is a Negro is a Negro, and that there are no exceptions.


Susan Craig Wed To Thomas Stires
LEAD: Susan Joy Craig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Eugene Craig of Short Hills, N.J., and Thomas Homer Stires, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Homer Stires of New York and Bay Head, N.J., were married yesterday at the Community Congregational Church in Short Hills by the Rev.
Virginia Scott.


BRIDGE
LEAD: If one had to select, in bridge terms, the strongest geographical cluster of countries the obvious choice would be Scandinavia.
In the 1987 European Championships, crowded with teams of world class, the Scandinavians placed first, third, equal fourth and sixth in a field of 23 teams.


J. A. Griswold 2dAnd Miss Seiner Wed in Brooklyn
LEAD: Zdenka Seiner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Z.
Dennis Seiner of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., and John Augustus Griswold 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Wool Griswold of Hamilton, Mass., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
C.
Hall Powers performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Brooklyn.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A fashion article on page 108 of The Times Magazine today discusses the prospects of young designers including Angel Estrada.
On Thursday, after the magazine had gone to press, Mr.
Estrada died of AIDS-related causes.


Those Clouds of Smoke From Trucks
LEAD: Not too long ago we were hearing reports about high rates of poor maintenance on commercial vehicles, especially on their brakes.
Now we're told by the trucking industry that emissions inspections are best done on the honor system because ''the majority of truck owners want to maintain vehicles at a high level because it's smart business.


IDOLATRY IN MIAMI
LEAD:  THE SHAWL  By Cynthia Ozick.  70 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95.


Polish Church Leader Cancels Visit to U.S.
LEAD: The Polish press agency announced that Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Archbishop of Warsaw, has canceled a tour of American cities that was to begin on Sept. 22.
The Cardinal, who has angered Jews with his statements on the convent at the Auschwitz death camp, reportedly canceled the tour ''due to circumstances unfavorable for pastoral purposes.


Peppers, in All Kinds of Colors
LEAD: ASSORTED peppers are abundant in the market.
Not only are sweet red peppers coming from local farms, but yellow, orange and brown ones, as well as the usual green, are available.
Adding to the variety are fresh hot green and red chilies.


Sally Taylor Marries
LEAD: Sally Christine Taylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Stewart Taylor of Short Hills, N.J., and Nantucket, Mass., was married to John Soule Truesdale, a son of Loring Reed of Dover, Mass., and Yarmouth, Me., and the late Robert Truesdale.
The Rev.
Douglas Tompkins performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The fiberglass insulation on my attic floor has a foil vapor barrier on the bottom.
There is no insulation over the soffits or eaves, but these soffits are warping because of moisture.
The eaves are three feet wide all around the house and there are just two louvered vents, one on each side of the house.


HIS IRISH IS UP
LEAD:  HARP  By John Gregory Dunne.  235 pp. New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Elizabeth Stockbridge Winans Is Wed To Michael Carothers, Bond Salesman
LEAD: Elizabeth Stockbridge Winans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Winans of Dover, Mass., and Harwichport, Mass., and Michael Hadley Carothers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles G. Carothers 3d, also of Dover, were married yesterday at the Dover Church in Dover The Rev.
Thomas Niblock, a United Church of


For Starters, a New Jacket
LEAD: Next to a winter coat, the most important part of a woman's fall wardrobe is a jacket.
It can also be a major investment, but a worthwhile one because of its versatility and its ability to update last year's clothes.


Miami Overwhelms Wisconsin by 51-3
LEAD: Craig Erickson shook off a sluggish start to throw four touchdown passes, including two to Wesley Carroll, as Miami routed Wisconsin, 51-3, today in Dennis Erickson's debut as the Hurricanes' coach.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Aug. 26  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $500,000  30 East 10th Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar loft-co-op; dining area, large kitchen, hardwood floors, three exposures; maintenance $516, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)


Flight and Futility Are Rountine in the Horn of Africa
LEAD: THE Horn of Africa, which includes the waters of the Nile and the fertile lands of southern Ethiopia, is rich in the basic requirements for agriculture.
Without war, it could easily be self-sufficient in food.
But the last two decades have proved a time of hunger and dislocation on an enormous scale throughout the region.


Headliners; . . . the Justice . . .
LEAD: Supreme Court justices often dissent sharply from their colleagues when they're on the bench, but usually leave it at that.
Not so Justice Thurgood Marshall.
In a speech to Federal judges last week, Justice Marshall said that recent High Court decisions taking a more restrictive approach to the rights of racial minorities ''put at risk not only the civil rights of minorities but the civil rights of all citizens.


BABES IN MAKEUP LAND
LEAD: Can it be true that ''Children 11 to 17 spend $63 a week on pleasure,'' as stated by a Revlon executive in your article?
I don't know any such children, and I hope I never will.
DULCIANNE VYE  Durham, Conn.


Chrissy and Jimmy
LEAD: They were teen-age sweethearts, with two-fisted backhands, who pretty much defined the game of tennis for two decades.
And now, as this year's U.S.
Open draws to a close, one has left center court for good and the other may soon be gone.


Stacy H. Director Weds
LEAD: Stacy H. Director, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Director of White Plains, was married in New York last evening at the Pierre to David Werner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Werner, also of White Plains.
Rabbis Maurice Davis and Mark Winer officiated.
Mrs.
Werner, 22 years old, is an administrative assistant at DIR Broadcasting in New York.


Maria Neu Marries William Rorer 4th
LEAD: Maria del Pilar Neu, a daughter of Dr.
Harold Neu and Dr.
Carmen Ortiz-Neu of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Herbert Rorer 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rorer 3d of Lumberville, Pa.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
James Smyth at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Church in Hastings-on-Hudson.


Question Of the Week; What Is Giamatti's Legacy to Baseball?
LEAD: Dr.
Giamatti was baseball's finest spiritual leader.
In banning Pete Rose he affirmed baseball's highest moral ground.
Yet he also offered Rose a chance to seek redemption.


Recent Sales
LEAD:  Hamden, Conn.  $232,000  119 Haverford Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor-style home; sunroom, oversized deck, 50-ft.-by-150-ft. lot; taxes $1,759.
Hartford, Conn.  $116,000  225 Holcomb Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 74-year-old Cape Cod; fine woodwork, remodeled bath, 50-ft.-by-150-ft.-lot; taxes $1,571.


Patricia Buckman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Patricia Ann Buckman, the manager of research for Lifetime Television in New York, and Geoffrey Sumner Richards, a vice president in the treasury department at Salomon Brothers in New York, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Elizabeth in Avon-by-the-Sea, N.J.
Msgr.
David J.


Peppers, in All Kinds of Colors
LEAD: ASSORTED peppers are abundant in the market.
Not only are sweet red peppers coming from local farms, but yellow, orange and brown ones, as well as the usual green, are available.
Adding to the variety are fresh hot green and red chilies.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Golf  Estes Leads B.C.
Open: Bob Estes used five birdies on the frontside at the En-Joie Golf Club to overtake the frontrunner, Keith Clearwater, and claim the third-round lead yesterday at the $500,000 B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y.
Estes had a five-under-par 66 for a 54-hole total of 13-under-par 200 and a one-stroke lead over Dave


Bereavement Fares: A Look at Airline Policies
LEAD: IF you must travel to the funeral of a close family member, you are probably not prepared to do a lot of comparison shopping for air fares.
However, some airlines provide price breaks to people on this sad mission, and it is worthwhile to pick a flight on one of them.
Some United States airlines offer what is called bereavement fares; the majority do not.


28 Arrested in Massage Parlor Raid on L.I.
LEAD: Raids on eight massage parlors led to the arrests of 28 women who allegedly took part in a Korean prostitution ring, the Suffolk County Police said today.


Football's Muzzled Masses Unleash a Call of the Wild
LEAD: Last March, in all their might assembled in Palm Desert, Calif., the National Football League owners made a momentous decision.
They voted to impose penalties against home teams for crowd noise that continually disrupts the offenses of their opponents, and if they thought they heard noise, the indications are that they ain't heard nothin' yet.


Rebuilt Giants Use Familiar Parts
LEAD: Last Wednesday, in a telephone conference call, a football writer from Washington asked Phil Simms what he thought about the Redskins' ''rebuilt offense.'' ''What rebuilding?'' the Giants' quarterback replied.


For a Ballboy, A Love Match
LEAD: AS Mats Wilander walked off stadium court at the United States Open last year, he threw me his wristband.
I had just been a ballboy for his match against Mikael Pernfors.


A Residential Flying Community With Streets Called Taxiways
LEAD: GOLFERS and boaters long have known the advantages of living along the fairway or at a marina.
Now pilots are carving out their own niche in the residential real estate market.
The latest in this area is Meadow Creek, a 212-acre airport community under construction near Monee 35 miles southwest of the


Rock of Many Ages
LEAD: AS THE 1980'S WANE, POPULAR MUSIC is torn between nostalgia and future shock.
The past seems to hold memories of indelible music and a vast, unified audience; those memories spur everything from lucrative rock reunion tours to carefully researched jazz repertory concerts to new but revivalist jazz and rock.


Invasion of the Lawn Monsters
LEAD: AS a mother of two young children, my personal space is almost always up for grabs.
Sociologists talk about an invisible bubble that surrounds each one of us and keeps others at a comfortable distance.
Well, my bubble popped about three and a half years ago when I crossed the line from personhood to parenthood!


FLOOR WARS
LEAD: Not to worry.
The spirit of toy soldiering is alive and well - in the form of elaborate chess sets (Civil War soldiers, Roman gladiators, etc.) Hats off to Malcolm Forbes, a happy man indeed, with his motorcycles and toy soldiers.
BYRON WHITEHALL  New York, N.Y.


Heredity Plays a Leading Role
LEAD: IF your father was the winner of a singing contest in which ario Lanza was a loser, and your grandfather on your mother's side played the trumpet for Sarah Bernhardt, wouldn't that give you a head start in show business?


Jon Amiel Tracks Life in the Dreamy Lane
LEAD: ''Making a film,'' said the British director Jon Amiel, ''is like going through all the pain and anguish and tenderness that having a baby involves, then sticking it in a basket and floating it down the river.
You have no idea whether it's going to be picked up by Pharaoh's daughter or eaten by the sharks.


Hiker's Paradise Of Alpine Plants And Animals
LEAD: IN northern Italy, within sight of Mont Blanc, is the country's largest natural reserve, the Gran Paradiso National Park.
The park is named for one of the mountains within its confines, the highest entirely on Italian soil.
And the name is particularly fitting.
For the park is a paradise of unspoiled


Hurricane Stalls at Sea, Sending Swells at Coast
LEAD: Hurricane Gabrielle stalled in the Atlantic today, sending heavy swells along the Northeast coast but remaining far from land.


Miss Raymond Becomes Bride
LEAD: Barbara Morris Raymond, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Whitridge Raymond of Riverside, Conn., and Davidson Durand Williams, a son of Mrs.
G.
R.
D.
Williams of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Williams, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside.
The Rev.
Dr.
Phillip E. Perkins officiated.


In Dallas, Race Is at the Heart Of City Politics
LEAD: A STREAM of black politicians took the stand in a Federal courtroom here last week as testimony began in a suit claiming that the system of electing the city government discriminates against black and Hispanic voters.


A KILLING IN MAINE
LEAD: LAST YEAR, OUTSIDE Bangor, Me., on a November afternoon that could not have been more beautiful, Karen Ann Wood was shot in her own backyard by Donald Rogerson, a deer hunter.
The 37-year-old mother of twin baby girls died minutes later.
The incident aroused a furor in a state where the traditions of the great outdoors are more and more at odds with the realities of suburban sprawl.


Works of 39 Artists on View At 74th Hudson River Open
LEAD: THE Hudson River Open is not a golf tournament but a juried art exhibition sponsored by the Hudson River Contemporary Artists, formerly the Yonkers Art Association.
For most of its 74-year career, the show has been staged at the Hudson River Museum, first in the Trevor Mansion, which is now called the Glenview


Diplomatese
LEAD: DIPLOMATS, LIKE all practitioners of a specialized craft, have their own parlance, and in diplomacy, as elsewhere, things are not always what they seem.


Elegant East Side Chinese or Theatrical SoHo
LEAD: This is a listing of Manhattan restaurants that have been reviewed by Bryan Miller in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Auntie Yuan ** (Sept. 1, 1989), 1191A First Avenue, near 65th Street (744-4040) - This elegantly modern Chinese restaurant has a strong core menu of regional dishes with a few nods to


'THE LITTLE FRIEND CALLED THE ARCHITECT'
LEAD:  WALLACE K. HARRISON, ARCHITECT  By Victoria Newhouse.
Illustrated. 332 pp.
New York:  Rizzoli.
Cloth, $45.
Paper, $29.95.


The Idea Was Beaumarchais's
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Balance in a New Season
LEAD: IF the past theater season signaled a boom of new plays, the one about to begin (with ''42d Street'' on Wednesday at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn) promises a more sensible balance of premieres and revivals.


For Blue Cross, a Cradle-to-Grave Development
LEAD: ONE of this state's largest and most comprehensive residential communities - a $150 million project with 1,675 rental and condominum units proposed by Blue Cross &amp; Blue Shield of Connecticut that is designed to accommodate every stage of life from the cradle to the grave - is now moving through approval stages in the Town of Hamden.


'Education Is a People-Intensive Business'
LEAD: THOMAS A. AQUILA has been a member of the State Board of Governors for Higher Education since 1983 and this year he became its chairman.
The board oversees a $433 million budget and it licenses and approves all academic programs at the public and private colleges and universities in the state.
It also administers student financial aid programs.


Central Banks Act Against Rising Dollar
LEAD: The dollar surged, bringing intervention by the central banks of several nations, including the United States.
They succeeded in halting the advance, but that still left the dollar just below the two-mark level against the West German currency and around 148 against the yen.
In both cases that is considerably above what is widely assumed to be the upper limits favored by the United States and its economic partners - 1.90 marks and 140 yen.


A Game Plan For Rose
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Montana Cattle Drive Ends


Air Mess
LEAD: To the Editor:


WORSHIPING AT THE SHRINE OF A SCOUNDREL
LEAD:  MEXICO DAYS  By Robert Roper.  261 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $18.95.


Talking Condo Funds; Managing Capital Reserves
LEAD: THE roof shingles will deteriorate, the driveway will need a new surface and even the corridor carpeting will wear thin.
But unlike a co-op corporation, which can easily borrow funds for capital outlays to repair such conditions, the condominium is not so fortunate; banks are still wary since the condominium association has no collateral to pledge.


Warren S. Lockwood, Consultant, 81
LEAD: Warren S. Lockwood, a foreign trade consultant, died of a stroke and heart attack Friday at the Chesterfield Nursing Home in Chester, Conn.
He was 81 years old and lived in Essex, Conn.


U.S. Investigating Theft and Sale Of Computer Gear
LEAD: The United States Attorney's office here is investigating students and former students at the State University of New York at Buffalo in the theft of more than $100,000 worth of university computer equipment.


Commercial Property: Specialty Buildings; Putting Up a Shield Against the Market's Vagaries
LEAD: IN an effort to break from the pack in Manhattan's sluggish office market, building owners are creating specialty centers for jewelry dealers, children's wear companies, missions to the United Nations, textile manufacturers and a host of other tenants.


Shagging's a Carolina Duty and Pleasure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tigers' Lusader Ties Mark of 3 Errors in Inning
LEAD: Scott Lusader, the Detroit right fielder, tied a major league record by committing three errors in Chicago's seven-run first inning and the White Sox snapped the Tigers' seven-game winning streak today, 13-3.


District Attorney Rivals Pick Up Pace
LEAD: Like a pot of water left on a burner, the contest for the Democratic nomination for Brooklyn District Attorney has suddenly boiled over.
The closing days of the primary campaign have seen not only an increase in the political tempo but also the emergence of a sharper, angrier tone as three candidates -Charles J.


Jackie Mason Stirs Up a Chancy 'Chicken Soup'
LEAD: In a mere 48 hours, Jackie Mason will stand before four cameras and a live audience to tape the fourth episode of his new ABC series ''Chicken Soup,'' but as of this late August morning, he has yet to memorize his part.
Not that this concerns the comedian.
Indeed, as he rehearses on CBS/MTM Studios'


In Long Beach, Revaluation Brings Specter of Higher Taxes
LEAD: SEVERAL weeks ago, Cathy Northrop, a Long Beach homeowner, received a card in the mail informing her that a data collector would soon be visiting her house for purposes of reassessment.


Report Predicts 21% Rise in School Enrollment
LEAD: ELEMENTARY SCHOOL enrollment in the state will jump 21 percent over the next nine years and force many towns to add space, put more children in each classroom or build new schools, while a drop in high school enrollment may lead to more teacher layoffs, according to a state survey.


Prehistoric Metropolis in Illinois
LEAD: MONKS MOUND is a hundred feet high and a thousand years old, a big pile of dirt standing improbably amid a morass of freeways in East St.
Louis, Ill.
It is the largest prehistoric structure north of Mexico, what you might call North America's first imposing piece of architecture.
This flat-topped pyramid, constructed in phases between A.D.


A Retirement Opens a Race In New Haven
LEAD: When Mayor Biagio DiLieto, the former Police Chief who has led New Haven's powerful Democratic machine for the last decade, announced last March that he would not seek a sixth term, the spotlight turned to State Senator John C. Daniels.


Putting the Baby Sitter on the Books
LEAD: Baby sitters, housekeepers and other household help are employees and thus subject to the same mare's nest of tax rules as other workers.
Because they work in homes, though, the routine payroll responsibilities sometimes are ignored.


Noisy's the Word
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


What Does One Do When the Skunks Move In?
LEAD: IT was really time to tackle our little cellar - a small room, one step down, with a dirt floor.
As I approached I thought I saw a flicker or two - but no - my eyes were playing tricks - or so I thought until I saw the elegant tail unfurl (Walt Disney style).
At this point I turned tail and made for the door - bumping my head as I made my exit yelling ''A skunk!


Headliners; . . . but Not the Judge
LEAD: He's the Terminator, the bodybuilder turned actor, a symbol of the perfect male specimen.
What better choice to judge the Miss America pageant?
In fact, it was all set and Arnold Schwarzenegger was scheduled to go to Atlantic City next weekend for this year's contest.
But the organizers of the pageant didn't reckon on the power of a potential conflict of interest.


THE VCR AS BABYSITTER
LEAD: An Alternative To the Sandbox


Demanding exhibitions that capture decisive moments in modern art
LEAD: THIS SEASON IS distinguished by a kind of museum show that is very welcome at a time when more and more members of the art community know how to generalize and theorize about painting and fewer and fewer know how to look at it.


GORBACHEV SAYS INTERNAL ENEMIES ENDANGER CHANGE
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said tonight that his program of change was endangered by internal enemies who have whipped up public alarm and disorder.


Developer's Monorail Plan Scrutinized
LEAD: WHEN Gov.
Thomas H. Kean proposed a multibillion-dollar transportation system for the Hudson River waterfront in June, state officials acknowledged that the announcement followed months of lobbying by the Hartz Mountain Development Corporation to promote a monorail that would link its projects in the


Antwerp's Sculpture Garden
LEAD: NEXT to an 11-foot-high hedge, Rodin's ''Balzac'' stands, hunched in his bulky mantle, vertically striped with green tarnish.
From the shrubbery, Balzac glares at a sprawled and tumbling Maillol nude (called ''The River'') who seems to be reaching toward another Maillol who is seated, head tilted down, in absent-minded reverie.


Schools and Vouchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


KOCH AND DINKINS SPRINT TO FINISH
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch and Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan, the two acknowledged front-runners for New York City's Democratic mayoral nomination, stumped the city yesterday in a final frenzy of rallies and walking tours in which they largely played to their separate constituencies while they preached racial harmony.


Peppers, in All Kinds of Colors
LEAD: ASSORTED peppers are abundant in the market.
Not only are sweet red peppers coming from local farms, but yellow, orange and brown ones, as well as the usual green, are available.
Adding to the variety are fresh hot green and red chilies.


Dawn C. Byrnes Married
LEAD: Dawn Carol Byrnes and Kenneth Carey Clisham were married yesterday in the O'Bryne Chapel at Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y., by the Rev.
Michael O'Connor, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Clisham, the 25-year-old daughter of Carol Byrnes of Hampton Bays, L.I., and John F. Byrnes of East Hampton, L.I., is a bond analyst for the mortgage research department at Salomon Brothers in New York.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  TRAVELS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $4.95.) To work his way through medical school, Michael Crichton wrote five pseudonymous thrillers, finally putting his name to ''The Andromeda Strain,'' which made so much money that he didn't have to practice medicine.
Becoming disillusioned with his riches, he set off on a spiritual journey, seeking the kind of ''energy'' that doesn't come from batteries.


Measles for '89 Already at 9-Year High in U.S.
LEAD: More cases of measles have been reported in the United States this year than in any year since 1980, as a decline in the disease has abruptly ended.


Cookbook Formula To Teacher Education
LEAD: I am very appreciative of Joseph A. Ricciotti's article, ''Repressing the Teacher' (Opinion page, Aug. 13).
He hit upon some very important questions and issues in teacher education and mirrored many of the same frustrations I am having with state educationists.


THE A.C.L.U.: IMPECCABLE JUDGMENTS OR TAINTED POLICIES?
LEAD: THESE DAYS THEY ARE EVERYWHERE, IT seems.
On network television and Cable News Network, the day after the Supreme Court's recent decision on abortion, attorneys with the American Civil Liberties Union were explaining their view of the ruling's implications for women, and especially poor women and women of color; at a press conference in Washington, announcing a lawsuit against Mayor Marion S.


Donna Lee Shira, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Donna Lee Shira, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Dee Shira 2d of Fairport and Hammondsport, N.Y., and Roy Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Smith of Rochester, were married yesterday at the First Methodist Church in Fairport.
The Rev.
Margaret Scott performed the ceremony.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-19


Getting In To See the Doctor
LEAD: Re: ''Please, May I see the Doctor?,'' Opinion Page, Aug. 13.
Yes, you may see the doctor, but . . . .
The doctor's receptionist is really not the one who initiates the battle; often it is the patient who creates the war zone and offers little in the way of compromise or in establishing a neutral zone.


Correction
LEAD: Because of producers' changes, the selective guide to theater on page 60 gives outdated schedules for two Broadway openings. ''The Threepenny Opera'' is to open Nov. 5; ''The Secret Rapture,'' playing at the Public Theater through Sept. 27, is to transfer to the Barrymore on Oct. 10, with an official opening Oct.


Michael J. White, Lawyer, Marries Dana Harrington
LEAD: Dana Maddock Harrington, a daughter of Mrs.
Stuart Faulkner Harrington of Bay Head, N.J., and the late Mr.
Harrington, and Michael James White, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Francis White of Ridgefield, Conn., were married yesterday at All Saints Episcopal Church in Bay Head.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: Hopefully, essays such as Anthony Walton's, and films like Spike Lee's ''Do the Right Thing,'' will make 1989 the year black and white Americans realize that the priorities of those represented by the civil rights movement of the 1960's have matured and changed quite dramatically.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  HASTINGS BASEBALL


Maigret and Simenon
LEAD: Devotees of mystery fiction had a true friend in Georges Simenon, who died last week at the age of 86.
He gave them Inspector Maigret, 84 times, and he gave them something else as well: Paris.
Just as London belongs to Sherlock Holmes and Los Angeles to Philip Marlowe, so Paris belongs to Jules Amadee Francois Maigret, lover of good food, good wine and that very good woman, Madame


Hiker Is Found 15 Days After Breaking Leg
LEAD: A hiker who had broken his leg and was stranded for 15 days in Yosemite National Park was airlifted to safety on Friday.


PBS Storms the Barricades
LEAD: IT HAS THE BEST OF DICKENS AND THE worst of Dickens; the most tautly written dialogue and the most slackly indulgent melodrama, the most inspired and vivid beginning and the most unsatisfying end (or, for some, vice versa).
In the year of the bicentennial of the French Revolution, however, ''A Tale of Two Cities'' has proved impossible to ignore.


Content, Not Costumes, Is What Counts
LEAD: Hooray for Mr.
Wolfsohn (Why Can't Grown-ups Act Their Age, Aug. 6)!
In just a few hundred words he managed to bridge the gap between parent and child and solve the problems of mid-life crisis by stripping the over-40 set of their T- and sweat shirts.


A Lesson a Crybaby Carries Still
LEAD: I SAW the children starting off for school the other day.
It was the first day of the new school year.
The older children were walking with each other, some hand in hand, arm and arm, skipping, running, jumping.


What Rose Did
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LeMond's Finances
LEAD: There's nothing like a second world championship to improve an athlete's finances.
That seems to be the case, anyway, with Greg LeMond, the cyclist who has reportedly been getting by on just $500,000 a year as a member of the Belgian-based ADR team in Europe and with the Coors Light team in the United


Ms. Kuhns Weds Stephan A. Shea
LEAD: Ann-Louise Kuhns and Stephan Anthony Shea, program analysts for the joint legislative budget committee of the California State Legislature in Sacramento, were married yesterday at St.
John the Baptist Roman Catholic Church in Valatie, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Caldaro officiated.


Club Owners Working on a Plan to Share Salary Expenses
LEAD: The majority of major league club owners have resisted the practice of sharing their revenue with each other, but they will soon embark on a plan to share a major part of their expenses.


Outdoors; Whale of Time Bluefishing With Family
LEAD: It is my opinion, though there is no way to verify it, that the world takes the deepest breath it can just before Labor Day and that summer - true fishing doldrums summer - lasts only until the world exhales that breath, turning the first leaves of fall and signaling the start of the bluefish blitz up and down the East


Correction: On Bigotry in Rap
LEAD: Because of a production error, the continuation of a front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about bigotry in pop music omits a passage.
The section, on page 33, should read:


A Play in the Garden
LEAD: The Mettawee River Theater Company will present ''Barnacle Bill the Husband,'' a musical theater work with choreography by Wendy Overly, in the Garden of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, at 7:30 tonight.
The work's score includes chanteys, 20th-century music-hall songs and original music by Jody Kruskal.


Rutgers Suffers Second Tie
LEAD: In the second game of a now tarnished season, Rutgers again let a victory become a tie.
Today it came against Ball State, a competent Mid-American Conference team from Muncie, Ind., that earned a 31-31 deadlock when Kenny Stucker kicked a 51-yard field goal with one second left on the clock.


Who Will Subscribe to the Valdez Principles?
LEAD: Environmentalists and socially minded investment fund managers did not have to look far for a model when they began secret meetings last winter aimed at finding ways to pressure businesses to be more aggressive about protecting the environment.


Shagging's a Carolina Duty and Pleasure
LEAD: To the Editor:


ANTI-SANDINISTAS PREDICT COALITION
LEAD: Opposition leaders in Managua say they believe that the next Nicaraguan Government will be a coalition between themselves and the Sandinistas, regardless of who wins the presidential elections scheduled for Feb. 25.


Steffi Graf Wins U.S. Open Title


T-Shirts' New Mood Is Sarcastic
LEAD: Read any good T-shirts lately?
How about bad T-shirts, hostile T-shirts, cynical T-shirts, T-shirts with chips on their shoulders? ''Welcome to New York,'' says one. ''Now go home.'' Another shirt shows a cartoony snub-nosed revolver. ''New York,'' it reads. ''It Ain't Kansas.''


Sarah K. Brown Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The wedding of Sarah Kenney Brown, a daughter of Mrs.
Norman Farquhar of Washington and the late Philip Bransfield Brown, to Lawrence Peter O'Hagan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Richard O'Hagan of Toronto, took place yesterday at St.
Mary's Chapel of the Washington Cathedral.
The Rev.
Sanford Garner, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


FLOOR WARS
LEAD: Cathleen Schine left out a crucial consideration.
The toy soldiers of World War II and Korean War vintage included medics, nurses, stretcher bearers and wounded figures with casts and bandages.
They provided a hint of the gruesome realities of battle.
But none of the G.I.
Joe fantasy warriors look as if they are capable of being wounded.


Amei Wallach Marries
LEAD: Amei Wallach, the chief art critic for New York Newsday, and William P. Edwards, the chief executive officer of the Museum Company, a chain of gift stores with headquarters in Little Falls, N.J., were married last evening in the Sagaponack, L.I., home of Robert Dash.
Cantor David Benedict officiated.


Ambitious productions, rarely heard early works and modernist departures
LEAD: THE 1989-90 SEASON finds classical music in transition, as a remarkable number of institutions, including the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Philharmonic, experience instability at the top, while others, such as the New York City Opera, face the season with new leaders.


Reservation Gambling Protest
LEAD: The antigambling faction on the St.
Regis Indian Reservation is asking nonresidents to stay out of the reservation's internal affairs by not investing in or patronizing casinos.
About 30 people demonstrated Saturday in Massena in a quiet protest against gambling on the reservation, the state police said.


7 Feared Dead in Cuba Crash
LEAD: A Cuban Air Force training plane crashed into the sea several miles northwest of Havana and seven men aboard are believed dead, the Juventud Rebelde youth newspaper reported today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bearings Inc., Cleveland, a distributor of bearings, named Robert C. Stinson vice president and general counsel and Richard C. Shaw director of corporate communications.


Crown Books Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Books Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,661,000
41,258,000
Net inc
1,352,000
1,147,000
Share earns
.26
.22
Shares outst
5,188,000
5,267,000
6mo sales
84,541,000
78,651,000
Net inc
2,851,000
2,467,000
Share earns
.55
.47
Shares outst
5,183,000
5,259,000


Circle K Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circle K Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,018,923,000
815,946,000
Net inc
7,608,000
12,387,000
Share earns
.13
.25
Shares outst
45,349,862
45,798,592
The company said the latest quarter earnings included an after-tax loss of $2,696,000 incurred in the first quarter and the prior year from the company's 50 percent equity interest in its United Kingdom joint venture.


Argentina Faces Fight on Oil Plans
LEAD: Facing labor opposition, Argentina's new Government is pushing ahead with efforts to reorganize the deficit-ridden state oil company and increase private participation in oil and gas exploration and production.


Becker Foils Lendl to Win First U.S. Open Title; 3-Time Champion Is Beaten in 4 Sets
LEAD: Across the net, Boris Becker smiled a cursory smile and twice in succession served the kind of serve that invites no reply.
Ivan Lendl, put in his place in the very stadium he had come to regard as his place, made none.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about Prague's political and economic policies misidentified the Czechoslovak who will be at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington for three months.
He is Karel Dyba of the Forecasting Institute of the Academy of Sciences, not the dissident Jiri Dienstbier.


Tadeusz Sendzimir, 95; Created Metals Process
LEAD: Tadeusz Sendzimir, the developer of a widely used process of galvanizing steel and other metals and the chairman of T. Sendzimir Inc., a manufacturing concern that operates in 34 countries, died Sept. 1 at the Jupiter (Fla.) hospital.
He was 95 years old and had homes in Jupiter and in Bethlehem, Conn.


Linamar Machine reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linamar Machine
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
37,300,000
33,500,000
Net inc
800,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.11
.14
Yr sales
113,700,000
113,200,000
Net inc
b1,600,000
4,600,000
Share earns
.20
.59
Shares outst
8,000,000
7,800,000


Candidates in Tuesday's Primary
LEAD: Listed below are the candidates in the contested races in tomorrow's primary elections in New York City.
Incumbents are marked with an asterisk.
At the right is a typical ballot for the Democratic primary as it will appear in voting booths in the 67th Assembly District, on Manhattan's West Side.
Republican voting booths will list only the two mayoral candidates, Rudolph W.


Midwest Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midwest Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
46,900,000
30,900,000
Net inc
293,241
92,688
Share earns
.10
.03
Yr rev
161,400,000
114,500,000
Net inc
1,044,196
865,206
Share earns
.35
.28


2 DRUG COMPANIES FACE ACCUSATIONS
LEAD: Two members of Congress contended today that the misconduct of two generic-drug manufacturers of generic drugs that have pleaded guilty to bribing Food and Drug Administration officials appears to have been more serious and widespread than the companies led investigators to believe.


San Francisco Journal; A Bridge Of Fame Is Losing Its Glow
LEAD: Natives and tourists alike are growing increasingly curious about patches of gray on the Golden Gate Bridge, a landmark beloved for its signature orange finish.


Brazil's Berth Is Official
LEAD: Brazil officially reached the 1990 World Cup finals today when it was awarded a 2-0 victory in a qualifying game abandoned last Sunday in Rio de Janeiro by Chile, which said that its goalkeeper had been hit by a flare fired from the stands.


Mortgage Rates Fall
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages averaged 10.17 percent last week, down from a rate of 10.22 percent a week earlier, according to a national survey released Friday by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.71 percent last week, down from 8.74 percent the previous week, Freddie Mac said.


Business and the Law; Wall St. Ponders Prosecutor Shift
LEAD: AT first glance, Wall Street corruption could not be further removed from this small island in Lake George nestled in the Adirondack Mountains.
Yet the issue has been very real here, where in the last four days, prosecutors and other lawyers from Manhattan have been attending an annual conference held by Federal judges from New York, Connecticut and


Still Nit-Picking Democracy
LEAD: Running for public office shouldn't be a nightmare.
But that's how Adele Cohen, a candidate for the New York City Council in tomorrow's Democratic primary, describes the bruising court fight that has marred her race against Sam Horowitz, a veteran Council member from Brooklyn.


Washington Talk; Reaction to China Reopens Old Battle
LEAD: China has disappeared for the moment from the headlines and the newscasts, to be replaced by Poland and South Africa and Colombia, but the constriction of freedom in China continues, by all accounts, and so does the argument here about how the United States should respond.


A City Gets Excited As the Primary Nears
LEAD: James Sessioms Jr., a 44-year-old former Marine with a quiet nature and a booming voice, wearing a pair of jeans and an old sweatshirt yesterday, prepared to wax his car: a sky-blue stretch limousine.
Both the man and his Lincoln have an appointment tomorrow.


Store Owner Shoots 3 Dead
LEAD: A Brooklyn clothing store owner fatally shot three men in the head yesterday and later told investigators they had tried to rob him, the police said.
Dexter Lockhart, the owner of the Final Phase Boutique at 3407 Church Avenue in the Flatbush section, told the police that three men had entered his store at 3:55 P.M.


Medicaid Rationing Will Cost More in the End; Rescind the Program
LEAD: To the Editor:


Child World reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Child World (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
136,641,000
124,946,000
Net loss
5,140,000
2,644,000
6mo sales
268,294,000
244,500,000
Net loss
10,279,000
7,005,000
The company said the increased losses in the latest second quarter were due to high interest charges and advertising costs as well as costs associated with stores opened less than one year.


Natural Alternatives Internaional Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Natural Alternatives Internaional Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,300,000
4,200,000
Net inc
439,000
b8,000,000
b-Net loss


Tektronix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 19
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tektronix Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 19
1989
1988
Sales
294,084,000
301,037,000
Net loss
1,864,000
b7,392,000
Share earns
-
.26
b-Net income


Capital Reserve Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Reserve Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net inc
14,966
b90,407
Shares outst
6,475,500
5,409,341
6mo net loss
43,002
168,928
Shares outst
6,475,500
5,126,739
b-Net loss


War On the 'War'
LEAD: Political oppositions are in business to oppose; the television medium feels a need to provide ''balance''; commentators in print satisfy their following by the wit and acerbity of their denunciation; and plenty of people resent anything that comes from a central authority.


Judges Anguish Over Medical Issues
LEAD: Saying they increasingly face anguishing decisions about medical cases, judges debated this weekend whether the courtroom is the place to resolve them.


Vornado Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vornado Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
24,819,000
18,853,000
Net inc
2,812,000
2,541,000
Share earns
1.22
1.04
6mo rev
45,040,000
34,919,000
Net inc
4,547,000
5,388,000
Share earns
1.97
2.19


Bush to Let U.S. Anti-Drug Troops Move Outside Latin Base Camps
LEAD: President Bush has signed a directive that authorizes United States military advisers in Latin America to move outside base camps to ''secure'' areas to train local forces, opening the way for a potentially expanded role for American troops in the anti-drug effort, Administration officials said today.


Knepper Tops His Former Teammates
LEAD: Bob Knepper held his former teammates to five hits over six innings and Pat Sheridan hit a three-run double in the first inning today, leading the San Francisco Giants over the Houston Astros, 5-3.


Grand Jury Investigates Proxy Unit
LEAD: A state grand jury in New York is conducting a criminal fraud investigation of the billing practices at the Carter Organization, one of three companies that dominate the business of proxy solicitation for takeover fights, people close to the inquiry said Friday.


Exxon Must Finish Cleanup Or Pay, E.P.A. Director Says
LEAD: Exxon will have to finish the cleanup of the Valdez tanker oil spill in Alaska next spring or pay the government to do the job, William P. Reilly, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said today.


Mayoral Primary Ending With a Call for Harmony
LEAD: After months of 18-hour days spent making speeches, shaking hands and scratching for contributions, the candidates for mayor of New York marched through steaming heat yesterday into the final hours of the primary campaign.


Corrections
LEAD: The cover of the Television section yesterday carried an incomplete listing for the ABC comedy series ''Chicken Soup,'' starring Lynn Redgrave and Jackie Mason.
Channel 7, in New York City, has moved the show to 8:30 P.M. tomorrow to accommodate its coverage of the mayoral primary.
Other stations will broadcast the show at the original time, 9:30 P.M.


Housing Plan Is Central Issue In Yonkers Primary Contests
LEAD: Local officials who favor compliance with a court-ordered housing desegregation plan have long felt that a majority in this city of 190,000 agreed that continued opposition to the plan was pointless.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''All my impressions of capitalism, of the United States, of Americans that have been pounded into me over the years, including by the Short History of the Communist Party - all of them have changed 180 degrees in the day and a half I have been here.''  -Boris N. Yeltsin.  [ A1:5. ]


Smiley Thwarts Mets Again
LEAD: When Gregg Jefferies, the Mets' second baseman, unloaded on the second pitch for the first leadoff home run of his career and Juan Samuel followed with a walk, it looked as if the Mets might, for a change, be in for an easy time against John Smiley.


Elections Board Gearing Up to Avoid Voting Problems
LEAD: Anticipating charges of electoral irregularities, fraud and vote-stealing, the city's Board of Elections is taking unusual steps to cut voting problems to a minimum tomorrow, during the most hotly contested mayoral primary election in many years.


Review/Music; Rock, Blues and Jazz Blend At the Knitting Factory
LEAD: The young guitarist Jean-Paul Bourelly brought an old-fashioned guitar power trio (with occasional help from a background vocalist, Dmania Kyles) to the Knitting Factory on Saturday night.
All the traditional elements were there: hair-raising rock power, guitar virtuosity, a thundering, barely contained, improvising rhythm section.


Margaret Boyle, Reporter, 75
LEAD: Margaret Sidney Eaton Boyle, a retired reporter for The Reporter Dispatch in White Plains, died of heart failure Friday at St.
Agnes Hospital in White Plains.
She was 75 years old and lived in Katonah, N.Y.


Shaer Shoe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaer Shoe Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,881,288
5,295,560
Net inc
86,941
67,605
Share earns
.09
.06
9mo sales
15,533,703
16,665,555
Net inc
50,131
439,951
Share earns
.05
.43


Anne E. Brodsky Marries in Newport
LEAD: Anne Elizabeth Brodsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Brodsky of Newport and Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Andrew L. Sternlicht, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Sternlicht of Stamford, Conn., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Leslie Getterman officiated at the bride's parents' home in Newport.


Becker Tops Lendl to Win U.S. Open


Caltech Captures Realization Stakes
LEAD: Caltech, a Florida shipper who was running for a claiming tag earlier this summer, outdueled Valid Ordinate early and held off Pach to Batan late to win the $123,800 Lawrence Realization Stakes yesterday at Belmont Park.


Let's Not Sell Children to Advertisers on Classroom TV News
LEAD: To the Editor:


Farms, Food and Chemicals: Seeds of a Revolt
LEAD: Although the transition to natural cultivation has begun in several regions, the National Academy of Sciences' proposal to shift most of American agriculture from a heavy dependence on synthetic chemicals would take decades and require profound changes in attitudes and public policy,farmers and agricultural experts say.


Andrew Rosenthal Weds Shari Levine
LEAD: Shari Levine, the daughter of Arline Levine of Long Branch, N.J., and Gerald B. Levine of Rumson, N.J., and Andrew Rosenthal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bradley Rosenthal of Arlington, Va., were married yesterday at their home in Millbrook, N.Y.
Cantor Kerry Ben-David officiated.


Bridge
LEAD: As the World Team Championships began here today, players complained of travel problems caused by a strike of domestic airline pilots.
A worse problem, still unsolved, concerns a member of the United States team.
Peter Pender of San Francisco, who won the world title in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in 1985, has been refused a visa by the Australian authorities on medical grounds.


Elyse Leonard Is Married To R. Peter Evans on L.I.
LEAD: At Temple Beth-El of Great Neck, L.I., Elyse Jill Leonard, a daughter of Stephen Mitchell Leonard of Albertson, L.I., and Eleanor Sage Leonard of New York, was married yesterday to R. Peter Evans, a son of Carol Evans of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated.


Kansas City Papers Study Merger
LEAD: The Kansas City Star Company is conducting a study to determine whether to merge its morning and afternoon newspapers.


Interphase Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interphase Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,577,050
5,809,478
Net inc
117,375
662,594
Share earns
.03
.24
Shares outst
3,381,816
2,760,628
6mo rev
14,418,041
14,270,309
Net inc
223,300
1,245,042
Share earns
.07
.46
Shares outst
3,058,529
2,728,706


Pierce Ordered Concessions on Project, Files Show
LEAD: Samuel R. Pierce Jr. ordered broad financial concessions for a luxury apartment complex in Chicago despite opposition from a senior Federal housing official who said he became so concerned about the $23 million deal that he refused to sign mortgage documents, Government files and interviews show.


Gander Mountain reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gander Mountain (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
21,210,000
18,691,000
Net loss
901,000
439,000
Yr sales
113,798,000
89,787,000
Net inc
829,000
1,414,000
Share earns
.30
.51


Yankees Returning To Losing Ways
LEAD: The winning streak has turned into a losing streak.
The Yankees, whose ride reached nine games and carried them from the East Coast to the West, crash-landed this weekend.
But when they packed and left for another stop on their trip, they were not wondering why.


Is Bush Repeating Rockefeller's Folly?
LEAD: If Miguel Ruiz were alive today, he might tell George Bush a thing or two about getting tough on casual drug users, one objective of the President's new drug plan.


Federal Reserve Doesn't Need Fixing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Radva Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radva Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,491,000
5,285,000
Net inc
134,000
b339,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
7,245,000
8,073,000
Net inc
387,000
b688,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


General Metal &amp; Abrasives reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Metal &amp; Abrasives
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,056,656
2,069,267
Net inc
87,466
b145,365
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


Bears' Long Drive Tops Bengals, 17-14
LEAD: It seemed only fitting here today at Soldier Field that a Chicago Bears fumble in the waning seconds would give the Cincinnati Bengals one more chance, one more shot at the Bears' biting defense, which kept bending but not folding.


Weisfield's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weisfield's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,522,000
13,002,000
Net loss
280,000
b75,000
Share earns
-
.07
6mo sales
25,550,000
25,620,000
Net loss
209,000
b276,000
Share earns
-
.25
Shares outst
1,080,719
1,090,119


Earlier Blood Clot on Brain Disclosed by Reagan Doctor
LEAD: The blood clot that was removed from former President Ronald Reagan's brain on Friday was the second that he suffered since his horseback accident two months ago, Mr.
Reagan's neurosurgeon said today.


Gorbachev's Caldron Simmers On
LEAD: A month of Crimean vacation has removed the pallor and strain from Mikhail S. Gorbachev's face, but he does not sound like a man happy to be back at work.


AEP Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AEP Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,148,000
24,920,000
Net inc
1,337,000
724,000
Share earns
.42
.24
Shares outst
3,149,937
3,015,887
9mo sales
89,620,000
70,746,000
Net inc
3,542,000
2,669,000
Share earns
1.15
.89
Shares outst
3,081,250
3,013,214


Medicaid Rationing Will Cost More in the End; Rockefeller Warned
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canadex Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadex Resources
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
772,885
648,369
Net inc
81,305
8,985
Share earns
.02
-
Results are in Canadian dollars.


India's Bleakest Corner Is Where All Hope Ends
LEAD: In an era when it is common to talk of Asian economic miracles and a Pacific century, the Indian state of Rajasthan is a reminder that there are, in reality, two Asias.
There are the economic tigers and would-be tigers from Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Thailand, but also the struggling, crowded, volatile nations of South Asia, especially India, Pakistan and


Yeltsin, the Moscow Populist, Takes Manhattan (in Stride)
LEAD: When he spotted the Statue of Liberty yesterday from the window of a circling helicopter, Boris N. Yeltsin smiled broadly and applauded.
Then, in a spontaneous gesture of delight, he gave a lusty thumbs-up sign - as if he, the maverick prince of the Soviet Communist Party, and she, the symbol of American freedom, have a special thing going.


Saints Spoil Johnson's Cowboy Debut
LEAD: The plan was to have no plan.
And it worked, producing a 28-0 victory for the New Orleans Saints and ruining the National Football League coaching debut for Jimmy Johnson of the Dallas Cowboys.


Pierce Denies Favoritism
LEAD: In an interview published in this week's issue of Time magazine, Mr.
Pierce denied allegations of impropriety, saying he normally sent ''each request to the appropriate staff at H.U.D. with instructions to consider it carefully, and if the request met the necessary requirements, grant it; if not, deny it.


Campeau's Troubles Tied to Debt
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation's decision to sell Bloomingdale's was the culmination of a series of miscalculations that apparently began when the company took on too much debt to acquire Federated Department Stores Inc., the parent of Bloomingdale's, Wall Street deal makers and analysts said yesterday.


Chaus (Bernard) Inc(N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chaus (Bernard) Inc(N)
Qtr to July 1
1989
1988
Sales
55,282,000
52,924,000
Net inc
1,240,000
b7,520,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
18,887,595
18,687,599
Yr sales
268,026,000
272,232,000
Net loss
3,276,000
10,898,000
Shares outst
18,696,317
18,650,967


Turkish 'Dumping' Law
LEAD: A law to block the ''dumping'' of unfairly subsidized imports will take effect Oct. 1, a Treasury official said Friday.
He told reporters that fines would be imposed and other measures would be taken against companies responsible for such imports, which the Government says have risen sharply.
It has been estimated that almost half of Turkey's $14 billion worth of annual imports may be unfairly subsidized.


New Zealand Airline Shares
LEAD: Shares in Air New Zealand went on sale Friday in the country's first important offering since the 1987 market crash.


Scramble Is On to Develop The Unbreakable Button
LEAD: In a business that usually fusses over fit, color and style, the $2.5 billion men's dress-shirt industry is scrambling to invent a better button.


In Switch, Algerian Premier Agrees to Give Up Job
LEAD: Prime Minister Kasdi Merbah of Algeria agreed to give up his job today after refusing to step down when he was dismissed on Saturday by President Chadli Benjedid.


Five Reasons to Transform 42d Street
LEAD: A giant cylindrical sign, 27 stories high, gyrates on one corner.
The Great White Way dazzles with the brilliance of 20,000 new bulbs.
Late-night strollers wander through concourses of shops and food stands.


Micronetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micronetics Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
880,821
824,778
Net inc
51,959
59,839
Share earns
.03
.04


Peters, J M Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peters, J M Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
58,274,000
89,237,000
Net inc
3,496,000
7,279,000
Share earns
.25
.53
6mo rev
115,813,000
178,841,000
Net inc
8,508,000
14,538,000
Share earns
.61
1.06


Search Is Halted for Three Men Lost at Sea
LEAD: Searches in the Breezy Point area for a man missing from a houseboat and two Queens fishermen swept off a jetty were suspended late yesterday, the Coast Guard said.


Selection of Garcia Trial Jury to Begin
LEAD: On the day he was indicted on bribery and extortion charges in November 1988, Representative Robert Garcia said the charges were preposterous.
He pledged to ''fight this case with all of my God-given strength.''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-12  East Germans can leave Hungary for West Germany, Budapest said.
The announcement was a final chapter in a summerlong exodus through the new Hungarian gap in the Communist frontier.
Page A1


Size of Turnout to Be Vital In New York City Primary; Black Vote Is Pivotal in Mayoral Race
LEAD: While the candidates for mayor of New York City sweated through street fairs, rallies and church services yesterday, their supporters were mobilizing for the campaign that really counts: making sure the right people vote.


Campaign Matters; For Messinger, Script for Success In the Marginalia
LEAD: Whatever the outcome of tomorrow's mayoral primary, it's safe to say that New York City will have a new comptroller, Manhattan a new borough president and Brooklyn a new district attorney.


Mallon Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mallon Resources
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
748,802
-
Net loss
1,036,849
-
6mo rev
1,586,802
-
Net loss
1,734,408
-
Comparable year-ago results were not available because the company, which is a combination of publicly held Mallon Minerals and 19 limited partnerships, began operations in December 1988.


Wagnerian Opening for a Tokyo Hall
LEAD: It was one of the hottest tickets of this cultural season.
For four nights, the last of them tonight, the Bayreuth Festival Opera offered its sumptuous production of Richard Wagner's ''Tannhauser'' in the opening of Tokyo's sleekest and newest cultural center to the cheers of audiences and the acclaim of


Courier Dispatch Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Dispatch Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,307,000
10,884,000
Net inc
188,000
1267,000
Share earns
.07
.06
Shares outst
2,606,467
2,625,000
Yr rev
47,068,000
42,016,000
Net inc
723,000
b330,000
Share earns
.28
-
Shares outst
2,620,379
2,637,295


Ashland and Iran Settle 1979 Oil Bill
LEAD: Ashland Oil Inc. had agreed to pay $325 million to the National Iranian Oil Company to settle a 10-year dispute over crude oil purchases from Iran.
National Iranian Oil had sought $768 million because an Ashland unit refused to pay for crude oil in 1979.
A jury trial in the case was scheduled to begin Monday in United States District Court in


Preferred Savings Bank (N.C.) Inc(O) reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Savings Bank (N.C.) Inc(O)
12mo June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
4,893,000
b1,253,000
Share earns
-
.68
b-Net income  The bank said the loss was primarily the result of increased loan loss provisions and writedowns of $3.4 million in the fourth quarter.


Mother Teresa Said to Gain After Receiving a Pacemaker
LEAD: Mother Teresa's condition improved today after the Nobel laureate received a pacemaker to steady her heartbeat and heavy doses of antibiotics to fight a fever, doctors said.


Lewis H. Rohrbaugh, Administrator, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Lewis H. Rohrbaugh, an administrator of the Boston University Medical Center from 1962 to 1973, died yesterday at the Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Maine of complications from a hip fracture.
He was 81 years old and lived in Rockport, Me.


Crested Corp reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crested Corp
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,788,000
1,691,000
Net inc
b524,000
c3,700
Share earns
.06
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $201,000 from tax loss carryforward.
c-Net loss


Eliot Was a Good Poet With Bad Attitudes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Remember Those Old-Time Beer Jingles?
LEAD: To the Editor Your Aug. 16 article on the new dry beers included a passing reference to Rheingold Beer that should have stirred the memory of any New Yorker over the age of 45.
My beer is Rheingold, the dry beer.
Think of Rheingold whenever you buy beer.
It's not bitter, not sweet; it's the dry flavored treat.


Prague Journal; Shirley Temple Black Unpacks a Bag of Memories
LEAD: Shirley Temple Black is the last person you would think to find in Prague these days.
But she has just become the American Ambassador to Czechoslovakia.


GTC Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTC Transcontinental
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
86,532,000
79,241,000
Net inc
b1,688,000
c1,579,000
Share earns
.08
.08
9mo rev
264,333,000
239,589,000
Net inc
b4,931,000
c4,165,000
Share earns
.24
.21


Florida Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
15,877,000
35,267,000
Yr net loss
48,381,000
68,891,000
The bank said a reduction in operating expense by $23.8 million contributed to the recent year's improvement.


TV's Pace and the Ads Increase as Time Goes By
LEAD: Next time Sam plays ''As Time Goes By'' during a television rerun of ''Casablanca,'' check his tempo.
Thanks to the pervasive use of time-compression machines by broadcasters and programmers, Humphrey Bogart's time usually goes by in a New York minute rather than at the languid pace of a Moroccan night.


Question Box
LEAD:  The E.R.A.
Era  Q. What is the major league pitching record for the most years with an earned run average lower than 2.00 and who holds it?
A.
When it came to milking victories without much support by being skimpy in allowing runs to score, especially the earned kind, Walter Johnson was the cream of the crop.


Meryl Lashinsky, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Meryl Ann Lashinsky, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin M. Lashinsky of Hollis, Queens, and Tel Aviv, was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
Alexander Eugene Weingarten, a son of Dr.
Ruth Weingarten of Laurelton, Queens, and the late Dr.
Morris Weingarten.
Rabbi Raphael Butler officiated at the Waldorf


Double Sculls Victory Gives Karlson 2d Gold
LEAD: Kris Karlson of the United States, who Saturday won the women's lightweight single sculls, teamed up with Carey Beth Sands today to win the women's lightweight double sculls.


International Verifact reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Verifact
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,507,000
1,258,000
Net loss
1,284,000
662,000
The company said it had a one-time charge in the latest quarter from the retirement in May of a company founder.


Rohr Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohr Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
304,305,000
253,985,000
Net inc
8,348,000
9,152,000
Share earns
.47
.52
Yr sales
1,044,677,000
907,052,000
Net inc
33,480,000
32,473,000
Share earns
1.90
1.85


Review/Music; Re-Creating Part of a Beethoven Oboe Work From Sketches
LEAD: It is fascinating to know that Beethoven wrote an oboe concerto in his youth, frustrating to learn that someone (a publisher, probably) lost it, tantalizing to realize that some identifiable sketches for it exist.


Medicaid Rationing Will Cost More in the End
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott's Hospitality
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
234,057,000
221,827,000
Net inc
b127,896,000
16,921,000
Share earns
2.15
.29
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $107,000,000 from the sale of hotels.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Lee Hermann Marries
LEAD: Lee Hermann and Eric Holtermann were married yesterday at the Bird and Bottle Inn in Garrison, N.Y., by the Rev.
Leonard Rust, a Presbyterian minister.
The 27-year-old bride, the daughter of Barbara T. Hermann of Dix Hills, L.I., and Robert L. Hermann of New York, is the assistant managing editor of Metropolitan Home magazine in New York.


Maurice J. Saklad, Prosthodontist, 74
LEAD: Dr.
Maurice J. Saklad, a longtime clinical professor at New York University's College of Dentistry and a university trustee for whom a dental center building was named, died of a heart attack Saturday at Desert Hospital in Palm Springs, Calif., where he had lived since he retired five years ago.
He was 74 years old.


Liat Cohen Weds Dr. Brent Lasker
LEAD: At Congregation Orach Chaim in New York, Liat Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Cohen of Beersheba, Israel, was married yesterday to Dr.
Brent Lasker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Lasker of Hazel Crest, Ill.
Dr.
Manfred Fulda, a rabbi, officiated.


After Day of Protest, Work Resumes on Mill
LEAD: A paper mill expansion, brought to a halt by a violent protest over the hiring of nonunion workers, resumed today as about 370 nonunion workers returned to the site in five buses escorted by police cars, On Saturday, union supporters stormed a housing camp for nonunion workers at the Boise Cascade paper mill in this town of 6,500 residents on the


Report Finds Only Minor Injuries To Suspect Who Died in Custody
LEAD: The New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday that based on preliminary findings, a man who died in police custody on Saturday received no injuries that could have caused his death, but only minor cuts and bruises.


Kingdom Wins Hurdles
LEAD: Roger Kingdom ran the fastest 110-meter hurdle race in history today at the World Cup meet here under the worst of conditions.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Aug. 24 about treatment of crack addicts misidentified the president and medical director of the Silver Hill Foundation in New Canaan, Conn.
He is Dr.
Michael Sheehy.


Cuomo Takes Abortion Stance Favoring Women's Right to Choose
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who for years has confounded women's groups by resisting a clear pro-abortion rights stance, stated firmly Saturday night that abortion ''must be a matter of the woman's conscience.''


8 Said to Die in Mozambique
LEAD: Rightist Mozambican rebels have killed at least eight civilians and set fire to hundreds of houses in a raid on a village in southern Mozambique, the Portuguese news agency Lusa said today.
It quoted a local military informant as saying that the rebel group, the Mozambique National Resistance, had also destroyed a clinic and three stores in the attack on Muianga, in southern Gaza province, on Friday.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Arthur Rubine, a motion picture press agent who died Thursday, gave the wrong day for his memorial service.


HUNGARY ALLOWS 7,000 EAST GERMANS TO EMIGRATE WEST
LEAD: Hungary announced today that it is allowing thousands of East Germans who have refused to return home to leave for West Germany.
It was another chapter, and a dramatic one, in a summerlong exodus through the new Hungarian gap in the Communist frontier.


Amendments Rejected in W. Virginia
LEAD: Voters on Saturday overwhelming defeated three constitutional amendments that Gov.
Gaston Caperton said were necessary to complete his reorganization of state government.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Campeau's decision to sell Bloomingdale's was the culmination of miscalculations that began when the company took on too much debt to acquire Federated, analysts and deal makers say.
Documents on file with the S.E.C. indicate that Campeau had agreed to guarantee by Friday that it could repay much of its short-term debt or give a stake to three lenders.


Primary Will Provide Detroit Mayor a November Opponent
LEAD: One thing seems clear about the mayoral primary here on Tuesday: Mayor Coleman A. Young will advance to the general election in his bid for a record fifth term.
What is not so clear in a field crowded with some of the city's biggest political names, including Representative John Conyers Jr., is who will face Mr.


Esprit Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Esprit Systems Inc
Qtr to June 3
1989
1988
Sales
6,153,000
5,725,000
Net loss
b1,735,000
1,288,000
Yr sales
19,811,000
23,068,000
Net loss
b4,250,000
1,610,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $192,000 for both the quarter and year.


U.S. Prison Population Sets Record for a Year, in Six Months
LEAD: The nation's prison population increased by a record 46,004 inmates in the first six months of this year to a total of 673,565 men and women, the Bureau of Justice Statistics said today.


COLOMBIANS FEAR FOR THE ECONOMY
LEAD: As Colombia's stepped-up campaign against drug trafficking goes into its fourth week, many Colombians are divided over the wisdom of trying to abruptly shut down the country's most lucrative industry.


U.S. and Private Employee Turnover Similar
LEAD: The number of Federal workers who leave their jobs is comparable to that in private companies, a Government report shows, but some agencies say that those who leave are some of the best workers.


Climbing on Air
LEAD: Exercise machines that simulate walking up stairs have flooded the fitness market in the last two years.
The newest generation of the step climber, one that uses air instead of hydraulics for resistance, will be available soon.


New Jersey Bridal For Wendy Miller
LEAD: Wendy Lynn Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennett Miller of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip Rosenbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Rosenbach of Watchung, N.J.
Rabbi Stanley Asekoff performed the cermony at the Chanticler Chateau, a restaurant in Warren, N.J.


Jane Austen's Family Squabbles Over a House
LEAD: ''One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other,'' Jane Austen wrote 175 years ago, in the village where she spent her last years.
Today her brother's descendants are living those words, squabbling over a house she loved.


Lectec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lectec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,594,000
1,630,000
Net inc
100,000
305,000
Share earns
.03
.10
Yr rev
6,396,000
5,829,000
Net inc
626,000
927,000
Share earns
.20
.29


Horizon Healthcare Corp reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Healthcare Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,579,000
24,217,000
Net inc
39,000
c87,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Yr rev
109,621,000
82,435,000
Net loss
1,670,000
bc1,048,000
Share earns
-
.17


Scope Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scope Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,737,877
3,865,085
Net inc
1,155,873
c1,675,139
Share earns
.82
-
Yr sales
19,323,906
13,932,762
Net inc
b2,530,412
c3,248,910
Share earns
1.67
-


Amy L. Schram Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Amy Lynn Schram, a daughter of Mrs.
Leonard H. Schram of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Mr.
Schram, was married in New York yesterday to Howard Matson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis P. Matson of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Herman officated at the Terrace Restaurant atop Butler Hall at Columbia University.


Lag Expected For German Chemicals
LEAD: Facing an uncertain global economy, currency swings and new health-care regulations, West Germany's chemical industry, the fourth largest in the world, may be nearing the end of its six-year boom.


Evelyn Wallace Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Evelyn Wallace, a daughter of Bobby Wallace of Decatur, Ala., and Karin Wallace of Centreville, Va., and Steven E. Goldin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin S. Goldin of North Brunswick, N.J., were married yesterday at Anshe Emeth Memorial Temple in New Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Bennett F. Miller performed the ceremony.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Lancaster Colony Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lancaster Colony Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
128,418,000
121,336,000
Net inc
6,226,000
5,878,000
Share earns
.52
.46
Shares outst
11,896,671
12,510,054
Yr sales
492,174,000
453,408,000
Net inc
21,911,000
21,805,000
Share earns
1.81
1.72
Shares outst
12,119,795
12,699,856


Rangers Conducting Playoffs of Their Own
LEAD: Time is the first opponent that looms for Roger Neilson, the new coach of the Rangers, in his attempt to learn about his players.


Amy Ackerman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Amy Susan Ackerman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman B. Ackerman of New York, and Robert Arthur Wexler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton Wexler of Encino, Calif., took place last evening.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Steven Jacobs at the Alta Mira Hotel in Sausalito, Calif.


Court Blocks Hoylake
LEAD: A Federal judge in Tacoma, Wash., has rejected an attempt by Hoylake Investments Ltd. of Britain to prevent a review by the Washington State Insurance Commission that could block Hoylake's attempt to take over B.A.T.
Industries in a $21.7 billion deal.


Niagara Mohawk Power reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Mohawk Power (NYSE)
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,850,892,000
2,735,519,000
Net inc
147,328,000
b177,019,000
Share earns
.74
.97
b-Included write-off of $77,900,000 on disallowed Nine Mile Two costs in December 1987.


Soviets to Buy Butter
LEAD: The Soviet Union last week agreed to buy more than 110 million pounds of surplus American butter for a subsidized price of $80.9 million.
The butter was priced at slightly more than 73 cents a pound, while the United States now pays about $1.21 a pound to buy butter under domestic price support programs.


Blue Jays Stretch Lead in The East
LEAD: Now that he's on a winning team and his personal 14-game losing streak is history, Jim Acker can joke about it.


Andrea Raisfeld Weds Photographer
LEAD: Andrea Jane Raisfeld, a daughter of Marcine Hiltzik of Jericho, L.I., and the late Harold Hiltzik, and William Charles Abranowicz 3d, a son of Margret Lohli of Fords, N.J., and the late William Abranowicz 2d, were married yesterday in Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey officiated at the home of Mr.


Professional Football's Most Frustrated Team
LEAD: MIDWAY in the fourth quarter yesterday, the Jets appeared to have created the most stunning comeback victory from a halftime deficit in the history of this frustrated franchise.
After trailing the New England Patriots, 21-0, in a first half in which they produced more boos than yards, the Jets had rallied for a 24-21 lead.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Rumanian Ship Capsizes  A Rumanian passenger ship carrying 179 people capsized and sank today after colliding with a Bulgarian tugboat on the Danube.
Page A3.
Gorbachev's Caldron  After a summer of stress, Mikhail S. Gorbachev knows that the fall will test whether the Soviet people are ready for self-government.


Market Place; Cleanup of Tanks Promises Profits
LEAD: NEW Government regulations aimed at eliminating gasoline and chemical leaks from underground storage tanks should create a fast-growing business over the next several years, analysts say.


Growth Index Off in Canada
LEAD: Canada's leading economic indicator fell for the first time in five years in June, providing new evidence the economy is losing strength, a federal agency said Friday.


Giants, Redskins To Keep It Simple
LEAD: The Giants and the Redskins will open their National Football League seasons Monday night with a head-on collision in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.


BT Telecom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BT Telecom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,277,000
2,869,000
Net loss
825,000
b186,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
2,236,663
995,000
9mo rev
4,330,000
5,533,000
Net loss
2,617,000
455,000
Shares outst
1,724,938
995,000


Southmark Examiner
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation said Friday that Neal Batson, a partner in the Atlanta law firm Alston &amp; Bird, had been appointed as examiner in the company's Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization.
The appointment, which is subject to the bankruptcy court's approval, was made after a court directed that an examiner be appointed to investigate allegations of mismanagement and fraud in Southmark's operations.


Books of The Times; Writing on Writing, by One Who Should Know
LEAD: Harp  By John Gregory Dunne  235 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Salvador Talks: Hopes Are Limited
LEAD: When President Jose Napoleon Duarte walked into the heart of an area of conflict and met for the first time with guerrilla leaders in 1984, the talks in prompted collective euphoria, giving life to hopes that peace was at hand.


Ultimap International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ultimap International
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
862,230
214,896
Net loss
289,250
876,940
6mo rev
1,363,593
449,454
Net loss
663,482
1,267,326


Beaman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beaman Corp
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,208,508
11,653,944
Net inc
401,189
246,133
Share earns
.16
.10
6mo rev
24,526,931
19,588,263
Net inc
317,556
b441,749
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


Sage Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sage Laboratories Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,749,621
5,646,716
Net inc
812,338
564,448
Share earns
2.05
1.38


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 10, 1989:
MONDAY
Jamesway Corp
Rykoff Sexton
Natl City Corp (Cleve)
TUESDAY
Alaska Air Group Inc
Georgia Gulf Corp
American Stores Co
Intl Flavors &amp; Fragrances
Consolidated Nat Gas Co
MNC Finl Inc
Cummins Engine Inc
Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec Co
Fleetwood Enterpr Inc
Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc
Fluor Corp
WEDNESDAY
General Dynamics Corp
So New England Telecomm
Nicor Inc
Sysco Corp
Quaker Oats Co
THURSDAY
Brown Group Inc
Idaho Pwr Co
Dow Chem Co
Nerco Inc
Gallagher Arthur J &amp;


Direct Mail: Political Arsenal's Precision Weapon
LEAD: Keeping pace with the flood of television commercials in the final days before New York City's mayoral primary is a rain of campaign literature, as candidates fill mailboxes with pleas for money, appeals for support and attacks on their rivals.


Pope and Gorbachev to Meet
LEAD: The Soviet Ambassador to Rome said today that a long-awaited meeting between Pope John Paul II and Mikhail S. Gorbachev would take place during the Soviet President's planned visit here in November.


Awaiting the Great Boredom
LEAD: The great ideological struggles are over . . .
Western liberal democracy has proved to be the best way to run a society, and is now without serious rivals . . .
The West has not merely won the cold war: its success has put an end to history.


Britain Fails to Hinder European Money Plan
LEAD: At a meeting of the European Community's finance ministers this weekend, British officials did their best to derail a movement to establish a European central bank and a single European currency.


Synetic Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synetic Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,287,000
5,338,000
Net inc
718,000
650,000
Share earns
.14
.13
Yr sales
23,241,000
18,751,000
Net inc
2,580,000
2,195,000
Share earns
.52
.44


Jets Waste Comeback in Loss to Patriots
LEAD: The Jets nearly overcame the New England Patriots and the flip-flopping fans at Giants Stadium today, coming back from a 21-0 halftime deficit only to lose by 27-24.


Sports Psychology Becoming the Locker Room's Latest Rage
LEAD: SPORTS psychology is the current pop approach to improved sports performance, the talk of top athletes' locker rooms.
Coaches, athletes and sports psychologists are convinced that the difference between winning and losing for top-level athletes is largely a mental difference.


Becker Foils Lendl to Win First U.S. Open Title; 21-Year-Old Shows His Toughness
LEAD: Until the 3 hours 51 minutes had ended, until Boris Becker had finally overcome the soreness he felt all over, the mastery of Ivan Lendl at the United States Open and his own past disappointments at Flushing Meadows, until the moment his racquet was hoisted 20 rows up in Louis Armstrong Stadium, it had been so easy to forget that he is 21 years old.


Saatchi Rumors Swirl After Stake Is Sold
LEAD: The acquisition last week of a large stake in Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. by Southeastern Asset Management Inc., a Memphis-based investment management company, has touched off rumors in the British investment community that Saatchi may be on the block.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants Inc
Qtr to Aug 6
1989
1988
Revenue
5,709,000
4,590,000
Net inc
b320,000
c265,000
Share earns
.11
.11
Shares outst
2,932,000
2,482,000
9mo rev
18,612,000
14,591,000
Net inc
b962,000
c603,000
Share earns
.34
.25
Shares outst
2,801,000
2,471,000


Margaret B. Parkinson, Editor, 62
LEAD: Margaret B. Parkinson, a book and magazine editor, died of pancreatic cancer Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 62 years old and had homes in Manhattan and East Quogue, L.I.


Microbilt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microbilt Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,627,000
7,830,000
Net inc
1,305,000
1,265,000
Share earns
.17
.20
Shares outst
7,836,000
6,372,000
6mo rev
16,087,000
14,687,000
Net inc
2,810,000
2,391,000
Share earns
.36
.38
Shares outst
7,771,000
6,359,000


A Message on Drinking Is Seen and Heard
LEAD: AT many Labor Day barbecues and softball games this year, a new player was on the scene.
Position: designated driver.
Some people who signed up for that assignment probably found their inspiration from an episode of ''Cheers,'' ''Family Ties,'' ''The Cosby Show'' or ''Hunter.''


Son Is Now 'Emperor Of Concrete' in France
LEAD: Martin Bouygues, the youngest son of France's ''Emperor of Concrete,'' has been handed control of Bouygues S.A., the empire built by his father, Francis.
The younger Mr.
Bouygues, who is 37 years old, likes to point out that he was born in the year the company was founded.
He inherits a corporation that boasts that it has changed the face of the earth.


Semicon Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Semicon Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,480,000
4,380,000
Net inc
227,000
202,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
3,236,000
2,925,000
Yr sales
15,324,000
15,665,000
Net inc
b1,550,000
c581,000
Share earns
.50
-
Shares outst
3,107,000
2,837,000


Dover Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Industries
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
30,112,000
28,913,000
Net inc
1,329,000
1,538,000
Share earns
.39
.44
6mo sales
54,749,000
53,942,000
Net inc
2,468,000
2,481,000
Share earns
.71
.71


Mass for Slain Colombians
LEAD: Their ranks thinned by fears of reprisal, the Colombian-Americans in Washington attended a Mass today in memory of the Colombians killed in the drug-related violence that has spread as Bogota challenges the country's drug cartels.


President Steps Down At BBDO Worldwide
LEAD: Willi Schalk resigned on Friday as the president and chief operating officer of BBDO Worldwide.
Mr.
Schalk, 49 years old, said he would return to his native West Germany and pursue a career outside advertising.


Defiance Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Defiance Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
18,846,000
13,322,000
Net inc
1,212,000
b580,000
Share earns
.21
-
Shares outst
5,810,633
4,638,629
Yr rev
64,043,000
54,029,000
Net inc
2,554,000
b4,697,000
Share earns
.50
-
Shares outst
5,112,147
4,606,661


U.S. to Cite Oslo on Trade
LEAD: The United States plans to press a complaint before the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade over Norway's decision not to buy American-made electronic equipment, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, said on Friday.


Chyron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chyron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,652,000
11,939,000
Net loss
1,961,000
1,232,000
Yr sales
44,157,000
46,014,000
Net loss
2,273,000
b1,139,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income and included the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle increasing net income by $515,000, or 5 cents a share.


Africa Nations Plan Airline
LEAD: A new airline is being created by Tanzania, Zambia and Uganda with plans to fly to Europe soon, a Tanzanian official said Friday.


Evoking When Mambo Was King
LEAD: As he dies slowly in a seedy New York hotel, Cesar Castillo, a onetime mambo musician and the central character of Oscar Hijuelos's new novel, ''The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love,'' remembers the arc of his life.


ENERGY DEPT. AIMS TO STOP SPENDING ON SPACE REACTOR
LEAD: The Energy Department wants to stop spending money on the Government's main program to develop a nuclear reactor for use in outer space, Federal officials said last week.


Latin America Records Some Economic Gains
LEAD: Despite a sharp contraction in economic growth last year, Latin American countries increased both exports and imports and managed for the first time since 1982 to reduce foreign debt, the Inter-American Development Bank said Friday.


Layoffs at Jeep Plant
LEAD: About 300 Jeep workers will be temporarily laid off here when the Chrysler Corporation suspends production of the Grand Wagoneer's 1990 model for two weeks in September and two weeks in October because of slow sales.
The sales of the 1989 Grand Wagoneer are off 15 percent from a year ago, and Jeep dealers still have a three-month supply of the vehicle in stock, said a Chrysler spokesman.


Pressure on World Bank to Save the World
LEAD: As the World Bank considers how to use its considerable economic leverage to help reduce the threat of global warming, environmentalists and politicians are complaining that it is not exerting strong leadership.


Browns Trounce Steelers By 51-0
LEAD: David Grayson scored on a 28-yard fumble return and 14-yard interception return as the revamped defense of the new Cleveland coach, Bud Carson, scored three touchdowns today in a 51-0 rout of Pittsburgh.


Sharman Propp Marries on L.I.
LEAD: Sharman Toby Propp and Richard Leslie Gans, lawyers for the city of New York, were married yesterday at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman and Cantor Benjamin Siegel performed the ceremony.


Walter James Dunfey Dies at 57; Hotel Executive Active in Politics
LEAD: Walter James Dunfey, a former hotel chain co-owner who was politically active in New England and a financial supporter of Democractic Party causes, died today at Massachusetts General Hospital of complications from a brain aneurysm.
He was 57 years old.
Mr.
Dunfey, who lived in Rye, N.H., was a co-founder and the director of Dunfey Hotels, which he helped build into an international hotel company.


Skyline Chili reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skyline Chili
Qtr to Aug 6
1989
1988
Revenue
4,438,000
3,166,000
Net loss
233,000
b157,000
Share earns
-
.05
9mo rev
13,854,000
10,227,000
Net inc
68,000
448,000
Share earns
.02
.14
b-Net income


Cubs Top Cardinals In a Big Showdown
LEAD: Shortly before the first-place Chicago Cubs took their positions here Friday for the opening game of their weekend series against the second-place St.
Louis Cardinals, a bank of threatening storm clouds settled in over Wrigley Field.
The sense of impending doom created by the clouds seemed only fitting.


Scheib (Earl) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scheib (Earl) (A)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,188,000
17,376,000
Net inc
1,528,000
1,708,000
Share earns
.33
.37


Acura Prices Raised
LEAD: The Acura division of the Honda Motor Company said Friday that prices for its 1990 Legend automobiles will be increased an average of five-tenths of a percent, or $143 a car, over comparable 1989 models.
Prices for the Legend sedan will range from $22,600 to $30,410, it said, and prices for the coupe will be between $24,760 and $31,490.


Arkansas Spa Pushes Quest For Retirees
LEAD: Hot Springs has an army of people who love to boast about mineral springs, pure air and cheap living in the Ouachita Mountains.


S-K-I Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* S-K-I Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,747,398
5,373,962
Net loss
2,442,717
3,484,607
Yr rev
82,069,235
76,146,181
Net inc
4,597,705
5,259,885
Share earns
1.01
1.16


The Helmsley Trial Has Just Begun for Book Publishers
LEAD: Book publishers are losing little time in retelling the story of Leona Helmsley, the self-proclaimed hotel queen, even though her trial and tribulations have unfolded in generous (and ungenerous) detail in the press and on television.


JLG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JLG Industries (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
35,546,000
25,315,000
Net inc
2,044,000
1,820,000
Share earns
.59
.52
Yr sales
121,330,000
81,539,000
Net inc
7,552,000
5,275,000
Share earns
2.16
1.53


Inter-Arab Violence Growing in Occupied Areas
LEAD: Six Palestinians were killed in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip today, five shot by Israelis and one killed at the hands of fellow Arabs.
The body of an Israeli man who was apparently killed by a Palestinian was found today in Tel Aviv.


Lifecore Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifecore Biomedical
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,206,000
1,005,000
Net loss
13,000
27,000
Yr rev
4,788,000
3,566,000
Net inc
b362,000
b144,000
Share earns
.07
.03
b-Included tax credits of $125,000 for the latest year and $60,000 for 1988.


Intelogic Trace Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intelogic Trace Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
39,205,000
35,477,000
Net loss
3,759,000
b4,127,000
Share earns
-
.28
Yr rev
146,737,000
134,745,000
Net inc
179,000
c5,355,000
Share earns
.01
.36


Cheap Dates Are In, and Talk Is Cheap
LEAD: In New York City - where fads wax and wane, fun can be pricey and diseases are well-publicized - the ''talking date'' seems to be gaining currency.


Geraldine Parker Weds
LEAD: Geraldine Parker, an operatic soprano, and Dr.
Richard A. Eisenberg, a physician in Melville, L.I., were married yesterday at the Hemisphere Club in New York.
Rabbi Moshe Pomeranz and Cantor Paul Zim officiated.
The bride, who has appeared with the Seattle Opera and Israel National Opera, is a daughter of Lucille Parker of Bloomfield, N.J., and the late Anthony Parker.


Rypien of Redskins Is Set to Start Again
LEAD: Mark Rypien might have been the Redskins' starting quarterback this season even if Doug Williams had been healthy.
When Williams underwent back surgery last month and was lost for the season, Rypien got the job, and he will start Monday night against the Giants.


'92 Scares European Border Towns
LEAD: In this never-never-land setting of soaring mountains and burbling streams, Modane's 7,000 people have a fairy-tale wish: that 1992 never come.


In the Sports Pages
LEAD: It should come as no surprise to anyone who followed the extensive coverage of the Pete Rose gambling scandal and his eventual banishment from baseball that there is now statistical evidence that news about sports, or at least baseball, is hard to find in the sports pages of the nation's newspapers.


Cincinnati Limits Hours Street Musicians Can Play
LEAD: The City Council has passed a regulation limiting the hours that street musicians can play here to 90 minutes at midday.
It is an action that Victor Buttrom and Dishon Woody take personally, largely because they say they are the only musicians who regularly play on the city's streets.


Rymer Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rymer Foods Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
62,377,000
63,967,000
Net loss
b14,045,000
c2,128,000
9mo sales
181,761,000
159,547,000
Net loss
b13,448,000
c4,665,000
Shares outst
2,853,545
3,049,228


Fast Start For Sanders
LEAD: Deion Sanders, making his National Football League debut today only three days after signing a $4.5 million contract, returned a first-quarter punt 68 yards for a touchdown although the Atlanta Falcons lost to the Los Angeles Rams, 31-21.


Promotional News Videos Gain Support
LEAD: WITH the aid of satellite technology, Capital Cities/ABC Inc. is set to lend its stamp of approval to one of the most debated features in television news: video news releases, promotional materials that often mimic the techniques and conventions of television news programs.


Datel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datel Industries
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,371,941
2,890,410
Net loss
144,660
73,718
The company said the latest period's loss included non-recurring costs of reorganization.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Signtech reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signtech
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,300,000
6,300,000
Net loss
210,000
b550,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income  Figures are in Canadian funds.


Brady, W H reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brady, W H (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,687,000
40,149,000
Net inc
410,000
2,087,000
Share earns
.06
.27
Yr sales
174,174,000
153,016,000
Net inc
b15,733,000
10,305,000
Share earns
2.10
1.36


Gulfstream Gets Contract
LEAD: Gulfstream Aerospace Technologies announced Friday that it had signed an $85 million contract to manufacture wings for a new 29-seat British Aerospace aircraft.


Moral of the U.S. Open: You Just Never Know
LEAD: LET'S see if we've got this right.
Howard Johnson was on third base but Martina struck out.
Or was it, Kevin McReynolds was up a break and double-faulted twice?


Dump Site Opponents Vow to Step Up Fight
LEAD: Opponents of a proposed radioactive dump moved their battle over the weekend to Allegany and Cortland Counties, where a state commission has picked five sites for further study as a possible dump site.


The Lure of the Lore
LEAD: Not many people remember the movie, ''The Ball Game,'' produced by Thomas Edison in 1898.
Nor are they aware that there have been six movies entitled ''Casey at the Bat'' or that the first baseball game ever televised was between Columbia and Princeton at Baker Field on May 17, 1939, with the sports broadcaster Bill


Treasury Schedule Is Light This Week
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues for this week is confined to today's auction of new three-month and six-month Treasury bills.


Denmark to Salvage Plane
LEAD: Aviation authorities prepared an underwater salvage operation today to hoist a Norwegian charter plane that crashed off Denmark's west coast, killing all 55 people aboard.
Experts said metal fatigue in the aircraft was a likely cause of the crash.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Current Account 2d Qtr.
Wednesday  Auto Sales Early Sept.
Thursday  Retail Sales Aug.
Friday  Producer Price Index Aug  Merchandise Trade


Newbridge Networks Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 5
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newbridge Networks Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 5
1989
1988
Sales
27,300,000
-
Net inc
4,200,000
-
Share earns
.17
-
The company was not public in the year-ago first quarter.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Murdoch Gambles on Satellite TV
LEAD: In a rare public speech, Rupert Murdoch rose to the podium at the Edinburgh cultural festival two weeks ago to deliver a spirited defense of Sky Television, his biggest media gamble ever.


3 Dead and 3 Are Missing in Copter Crashes
LEAD: A Navy helicopter crashed off the California coast yesterday, and three people were reported missing.
Meanwhile, the National Guard in Idaho found the wreckage of helicopter that crashed Saturday and killed three men in a remote mountain area.


Metro Airlines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Airlines Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,760,000
39,860,000
Net loss
4,734,000
b1,458,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-Net income and included an extraordinary tax credit of $483,000, or 8 cents a share.


Critic's Notebook; London Theater Museum: Fairly New but Deeply Troubled
LEAD: ''To be or not to be'' may be the most hackneyed phrase in all Shakespeare, but it certainly sums up the present troubles of the London Theater Museum, which opened in Covent Garden in April 1987.


Bengals' Krumrie Is Back
LEAD: Tim Krumrie's belief that he could recover from his Super Bowl XXIII leg injury and once again toil along the line of scrimmage for the Bengals became reality here today as the Chicago Bears defeated Cincinnati, 17-14.


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cimarron Petroleum
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,741,580
1,657,000
Net inc
368,569
b158,517
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss  Results are in Canadian dollars.


Despite Skew Rates, Few Fear Recession
LEAD: In the opinion of some analysts, tight monetary policies in the United States and other major industrial nations are at best likely to produce a slowdown in growth next year while increasing the possibility of a global recession.


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domco Industries
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
29,862,000
26,149,000
Net loss
541,000
412,000
9mo sales
79,209,000
78,307,000
Net loss
2,375,000
743,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Hulbert Takes B.C.
Open: Mike Hulbert parred the first playoff hole yesterday to beat Bob Estes and win the B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y., for his second PGA Tour victory.


Rumanian Boat Sinks in Danube
LEAD: A Rumanian ship carrying 179 people collided with a Bulgarian tugboat and sank in the Danube today, leaving 151 people missing, Rumania's official Agerpres press agency reported.


Heritage Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,537,000
2,793,000
Net loss
211,000
b71,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  The results do not include operations from the Landmark and Seven Gables Theatre chains, which were acquired on June 27.


Pamela Tizer Marries
LEAD: Pamela Susan Tizer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Tizer of Rydal, Pa., was married yesterday at the Harmonie Club in Manhattan to David Alan Finkelstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Finkelstein of Toronto.
Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin and Cantor Richard Botton officiated.
The bride graduated from Tulane University and received an M.B.A.


ECC International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ECC International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,836,000
12,642,000
Net loss
2,105,000
b1,238,000
Share earns
-
.21
Yr sales
34,269,000
44,226,000
Net loss
2,806,000
b6,494,000
Share earns
-
1.14


Metro Tel Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Tel Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,441,686
6,295,231
Net inc
97,483
66,032
Share earns
.04
.02
Shares outst
2,004,046
2,003,322
Share earnings reflected payment of $25,200 in redeemable preferred stock dividends each year.


Review/Television; Jasper Johns: The Mystery of Simplicity
LEAD: Jasper Johns is not the most promising subject for a television biography.
With his paintings and prints fetching record prices at auctions these days, the artist has automatically been thrust into the highest celebrity circles of this celebrity-obsessed age.
Yet he remains a carefully private man, never revealing too much about himself and talking about his work in terms drenched in ambiguity.


Saztec International reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Saztec International
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,062,000
9,172,000
Net inc
1,028,000
b1,152,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
3,422,484
3,222,000
b-Net loss


United Tote Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Tote Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,300,000
4,600,000
Net inc
881,802
602,230
Share earns
.29
.25
9mo rev
21,000,000
16,200,000
Net inc
413,621
b922,043
Share earns
.14
.38
b-After an extraordinary credit of $207,862, or 9 cents a share, from an accounting change.


Biomagnetic Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biomagnetic Technologies Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,279,000
1,854,000
Net loss
1,485,000
329,000
9mo rev
6,926,000
5,055,000
Net loss
2,924,000
1,318,000


Paul Weiss, Biologist Who Won Medal Of Science, Is Dead at 91
LEAD: Dr.
Paul A. Weiss, a biologist who won the National Medal of Science for his pioneering work in the theory of cellular development, died Friday at the White Plains branch of New York Hospital after a long illness.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


South African Police to End the Use of Whips
LEAD: As a result of negative publicity generated here and abroad, the South African police were ordered today to stop using whips on protesters.


U.S. to Press for Talks On Aid Tied to Exports
LEAD: The Bush Administration told Congress today that it planned ''vigorous new negotiations'' to dissuade industrial governments from using foreign aid programs to expand their exports.


John J. Cassata, Catholic Bishop, 80
LEAD: John J. Cassata, the first Roman Catholic Bishop of the Diocese of Fort Worth, died Friday from complications after heart surgery.
He was 80 years old.


Japan to Deport Chinese 'Economic Refugees'
LEAD: Trying to stem the tide of boat people landing on its shores, Japan said today that it would deport more than 600 Chinese who reportedly misrepresented themselves as refugees from Vietnam, and who seem certain to face punishment once they return to China.


Contract Talks Continue With City Opera Orchestra
LEAD: Negotiations continued last night between the New York City Opera and its orchestra's musicians in an attempt to avert a strike that has been threatened for tomorrow.


House Fight Continues On Cutting Gains Tax
LEAD: The House Ways and Means Committee will return to its struggle over capital gains tax reduction on Tuesday with committee Democrats and the House Democratic leadership no closer to a consensus than they were before the August recess.


Drexel, as Expected, Pleads Guilty to 6 Counts of Fraud
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the Wall Street powerhouse that transformed corporate America through its pioneering use of high-yield ''junk bonds,'' pleaded guilty yesterday to six counts of mail and securities fraud in the largest such case ever on Wall Street.


Wreck Injures Jackson
LEAD: Rickey Jackson of the New Orleans Saints, a four-time Pro Bowl selection at linebacker, was injured when the auto he was driving rammed the back of a flatbed pickup on U.S. 61 west of New Orleans about 3:45 A.M. yesterday, authorities said.
Jackson will need surgery for a fractured cheekbone.
A man and woman in the pickup were not injured.


Boeing Jet Order
LEAD: Boeing Commercial Airplanes, a unit of the Boeing Company, said it had received an order from Viva Air, a Spanish charter carrier, for four of its 737-300 aircraft and options on another four.
The eight-airplane commitment is valued at about $260 million, Boeing said.
Deliveries are scheduled to begin in 1991.


'We Did Not Go to Auschwitz to Be Beaten'; In Defense of Pius XII
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gross Files Appeal on Ouster
LEAD: Dr.
Elliot M. Gross, the Chief Medical Examiner who was dismissed by Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1987, asked the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit yesterday to reinstate his damage suit against New York City and the Mayor.
In March, Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of Federal District Court in Manhattan dismissed the suit, ruling that Dr.


Non-Socialists Lead in Norwegian Vote
LEAD: Capitalizing on voter dissatisfaction with the economy and the social welfare system, non-Socialist parties appear to have won a majority in Parliament in Norway's national elections, preliminary results early this morning indicated.


Allegre's Last-Play Field Goal Wins for Giants
LEAD: In a spectacular finish, the Giants upset the Redskins, 27-24, tonight when Raul Allegre kicked a 52-yard field goal as time ran out.


World Bank Ecology Aid
LEAD: Long criticized for financing environmentally damaging projects, the World Bank today announced increased lending for population-control projects and forestry development, The bank's president, Barber B. Conable Jr., told a conference on the environment that the bank was committed to environmental issues and its commitment would not detract from its primary mission of global development.


Doctor Time at Hospitals Isn't for Patients; Malpractice Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


'We Did Not Go to Auschwitz to Be Beaten'; Birkenau's Meaning
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about a newspaper advertisement by the trustees of the Whitney Museum of American Art against a proposal to restrict Federal funds for art misstated one trustee's position in the Hearst Corporation.
The trustee, Gilbert Maurer, is a vice president of the Hearst Corporation and the president of its magazines division.


Dow Loses 5.13 Points as Trading Slows
LEAD: Stocks fell moderately yesterday in exceptionally slow trading as a late burst of blue-chip buying sharply shaved losses on the Dow Jones industrial average.


Flight International Is Told of Buyout
LEAD: Flight International Group Inc. said it had been informed that a management-led buyout of the company was being structured.


Undercover Officer Is Beaten In Brooklyn Drug Operation
LEAD: An undercover police officer was beaten with sticks last night by a group of young men during a buy-and-bust operation in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, the police said.


Harar Journal; Ethiopia Drives Its Peasants Off the Good Earth
LEAD: With rows of Marx and Lenin volumes in his bookcase and piles of tracts on his desk, Ali Youssef, the head of the ideology department here, explained the alacrity with which the process being called ''villagization'' had been accomplished in his region.


Party Chief Faults Democrats For Tax Talk in Drug Debate
LEAD: The chairman of the Democratic Party, Ronald H. Brown, said today that Democrats had bungled their response to President Bush's drug-control strategy last week by letting calls for increased taxes overwhelm their criticisms of his plan.


Major League Council To Meet on Commissioner
LEAD: When major league club owners are finished meeting in Milwaukee this week, baseball could have a new commissioner, the eighth in history; a commissioner pro tem, the first in history, or an acting commissioner, which is what Francis T. (Fay) Vincent Jr. is now.


Gas Prices Dip at Pump
LEAD: The retail price of a gallon of gasoline dropped more than a penny in the last two weeks, but wholesale prices are up, meaning an increase at the pump is possible this fall, an industry analyst says.
The nationwide average price for all grades at full- and self-service pumps was 109.07 cents a gallon Aug.


Rig Count Rises Again
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil throughout the country jumped by 14 last week, to a total of 950, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
It was the second straight increase.
A year ago, the count stood at 938.


Brokerage Unit Head Nominated by Drexel
LEAD: Edwin Kantor is a man who knows a lot about Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
After 34 years with the company, he has seen it grow from from a third-tier brokerage to one of Wall Street's most powerful investment houses.


Paul Gann, Co-Author of California Tax Revolt Measure, Dies at 77
LEAD: Paul Gann, co-author of the Proposition 13 tax revolt referendum a decade ago in California, died yesterday in a Sacramento hospital from pneumonia, complicated by AIDS.
He was 77 years old.


Bonn Ruling Party Re-elects Kohl as Chief
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl was re-elected chairman of his Christian Democratic party today, but with a record number of votes against him.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Newcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newcor Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,307,000
17,768,000
Net inc
1,595,000
282,000
Share earns
.54
.10
9mo sales
71,892,000
51,468,000
Net inc
2,346,000
544,000
Share earns
.79
.19


Slot Machine Maker Hits Jackpot
LEAD: Charles N. Mathewson, a successful investor from California, was at a golf tournament here six years ago when he noticed people lined up to play a video poker game at the Reno Hilton.
Intrigued, he checked the machines for the name of the manufacturer and bought some stock in the company, International Game Technology.


THOUSANDS SWELL TREK TO THE WEST BY EAST GERMANS
LEAD: East Germans fled to the West from Hungary today in even larger numbers than expected, with several thousand crossing into West Germany as thousands more headed for Hungary in an attempt to join the exodus.


Brain and Vision
LEAD: Researchers have found that only a small number of brain cells, perhaps as few as one, can detect visual signals, which counters commonly believed theories about visual perception and how the brain interprets signals from the eyes.


Student, 18, Shot to Death In an Attack Near His School
LEAD: An 18-year-old student was shot in the back and killed yesterday as he tried to flee three young men after a brief confrontation near Prospect Heights High School in Brooklyn, the police and education officials said.


Dr. Axelrod's Potent Health Plan
LEAD: Roughly 37 million Americans lack basic health insurance, including 2.5 million who live in New York State.
In the absence of any serious Federal attempt to address this need, Dr.
David Axelrod, the State Health Commissioner, proposes his own plan.
It includes a stunningly bold strategy for controlling medical expenses and thereby protecting the taxpayers as well as the uninsured.


Scientists Achieve New Form of 'Hot' Fusion
LEAD: SCIENTISTS at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island said yesterday they had achieved high-temperature nuclear fusion using a novel technique that might ultimately hold promise as a way of producing heat and electric power.


MORE MONEY URGED FOR AIR CONTROL
LEAD: The head of the Federal Aviation Administration today called for doubling the agency's spending on equipment to control air traffic.


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Waste Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
38,821,000
30,519,000
Net inc
1,860,000
1,147,000
Share earns
.35
.22
Yr rev
143,131,000
112,798,000
Net inc
6,958,000
6,633,000
Share earns
1.32
1.12


52 Hurt in Bus Crash Near Lincoln Tunnel
LEAD: Fifty-two people were injured, three of them seriously, yesterday evening when a New Jersey-bound commuter bus rammed into a pillar near the Lincoln Tunnel, the police said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.87
8.93
8.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.77
7.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.78
7.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.14
8.18
8.82
30-YR.


Japan Bank In Talks For CIT
LEAD: In the largest Japanese move yet into the American banking market, the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, the world's biggest, is discussing the $1.5 billion purchase of a controlling interest in the CIT Group, a business lending unit of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation.


Hadron Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hadron Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,161,135
7,024,855
Net inc
33,825
177,685


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bis Cap International, Norwell, Mass., an electronic imaging company, named John P. Bear executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Hy &amp; Zel's reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hy &amp; Zel's
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
41,900,000
33,800,000
Net inc
454,893
287,220
Share earns
.15
.10
6mo sales
79,500,000
65,600,000
Net inc
897,706
569,218
Share earns
.30
.19
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Dr. Lilian Gilbert, 85, Bellevue Pediatrician
LEAD: Dr.
Lilian A. Gilbert, a pediatrician who specialized in treating tubercular infants and children, died of a stroke Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Sun Microsystems, to J. Walter Thompson/San Francisco, with a budget of $10 million.


East Berlin Faults Bonn for Exodus
LEAD: East Germany declared tonight that its citizens had been led westward by ''silver pieces'' paid by West Germany as part of a grand crusade against Communism.


Campaign Leaflets Denounced
LEAD: The Committee on Decent Unbiased Campaign Tactics yesterday strongly criticized campaign material distributed on behalf of Daniel L. Feldman, a candidate for the Democratic nomination for Brooklyn District Attorney.


A New Vehicle From Land-Rover
LEAD: Land-Rover, the British-based maker of workhorse rural vehicles, will introduce an off-road four-wheel-drive model Tuesday that it said cost more than $150 million to develop.
The Discovery, making its debut at the Frankfurt Motor Show, will compete against such Japanese vehicles as the Mitsubishi Shogun, the Isuzu Trooper and the Nissan


Rockets' New Manager
LEAD: Steve Patterson, 31, succeeded his father, Ray Patterson, yesterday as general manager of the Houston Rockets, becoming the youngest person holding such a post.
Ray Patterson, the Rockets' president and general manager since May 1, 1972, will remain as president. (AP)


New Machines Can Detect Terrorists' Bombs, Usually
LEAD: FOR decades the problem of keeping bombs off airplanes has been a nightmare for travelers, airlines and governments.


U.S. Judge Rejects Goldsmith's Plea
LEAD: Farmers Group Inc., the United States unit of B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., said a Federal judge in California had rejected Sir James Goldsmith's plea to challenge the constitutionality of a California Insurance Commission review of his takeover offer for B.A.T.


Gioiosa Case Goes to the Jury
LEAD: A United States District Court jury began deliberations today in the trial of Thomas Gioiosa, a former friend of Pete Rose, on charges of tax evasion and conspiracy to distribute cocaine.


2 Options Firms Charged
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission today accused two commodity options firms with violating anti-fraud provisions of Federal commodities law in their sales practices.


Two Ulster Soldiers and Civilian Charged With Murder of Catholic
LEAD: Three men, including two soldiers in Northern Ireland's locally recruited security force, have been charged with the murder of a Roman Catholic man last month, a killing for which Protestant militants have claimed responsibility.


Memorial for Harrington
LEAD: A memorial service for Michael Harrington, the co-chairman of the Democratic Socialists of America and author of ''The Other America'' and other books, will be held at 7 P.M.
Friday at the Riverside Church at Riverside Drive and West 122d Street.
Speakers will include Irving Howe and City Councilwoman Ruth Messinger.


94 Arrested in Drug Raids
LEAD: Ninety-four people were arrested yesterday in an anti-drug effort near schools in the Bedford-Stuyvesant and Bushwick areas of Brooklyn, the police said.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Raymond O'Donnell, said that the raids found dealers selling heroin, crack and cocaine and that the police had seized a .45-caliber gun, money and drugs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about legislation to prohibit discrimination against disabled people referred incompletely in some copies to Republican Senators who voted against it.
The eight Republicans included Jesse


High Voltage Ends Bid for Universal
LEAD: The High Voltage Engineering Corporation said it had terminated its $38-a-share tender offer for the Universal Foods Corporation and its subsequent offer to acquire Universal at $42 a share in a negotiated transaction.
It said it would return all shares tendered.
The stock slipped 62.5 cents a share today, to $34.125, on the New York Stock


An NBC School Special To Accompany Bush
LEAD: NBC News has scheduled a one-hour educational special for students to watch in school today when President Bush delivers a speech on drugs and education at 12:15 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, some copies of the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday omitted page 9 and carried a page from the Travel section in its place.
The omitted page included the beginning of an article about the actor and playwright Tim Robbins and the continuation of a front-page article about ''Sweeney Todd.


Our Towns; Main St. Ponders An Innovation From Fifth Ave.
LEAD: Don't get Edvin Stromsten wrong.
He'd love to see planter boxes full of pansies and petunias in the Main Street business district in this waterfront Suffolk County village.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


'We Did Not Go to Auschwitz to Be Beaten'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Salvador's Troubles, in Salvador's Hands
LEAD: Washington no longer focuses much attention on the political future of El Salvador.
Its once-dramatic concern has dissipated in the wake of frustration with a seemingly endless military struggle, the election of an extreme rightist Government and progress toward a political settlement in neighboring Nicaragua.


Baker to See Visiting Soviet Politician
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d agreed today to meet with Boris N. Yeltsin, the maverick Soviet politician who is visiting the United States.
But the State Department played down the get-together, which is scheduled for Tuesday afternoon, apparently to signal to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev that the meeting was not meant to embarrass the


Behind the No-Tax Talk, The Drug War's Bill
LEAD: Like Capt.
Louis Renault, the police chief in ''Casablanca'' who professed to be ''shocked, shocked,'' that gambling was going on under his nose, the White House is shocked, shocked at the notion of new taxes to pay for the $7.9 billion war on drugs.


Mother Teresa Convalescing
LEAD: Mother Teresa was feeling better today as she continued to recover from a heart attack, a nursing home said, and she received a visit and a bouquet of flowers from Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.
The 79-year-old Roman Catholic nun was put on a pacemaker over the weekend after suffering the heart attack on Friday.


Camden's Contradictions Connect Florio's Images
LEAD: For 20 years, James J. Florio has projected a series of seemingly contradictory images: the city street fighter, the suburban Congressman; the political boss, the idealistic reformer.


Dolphins Sign Smith
LEAD: Sammie Smith, the running back from Florida State and the National Football League's last unsigned first-round draft pick, reached terms with the Miami Dolphins yesterday.
Smith agreed to a four-year, $2.5 million deal, the team said.


Endowment Nominee Making Rounds in Capital
LEAD: John E. Frohnmayer, a lanky Oregon lawyer with a contagious smile who has been nominated to be chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, arrived in town today to begin a week of courtesy calls on Capitol Hill.


Review/Music; The Acoustics of Dallas's New Concert Hall
LEAD: This high-rolling city decided nearly a decade ago to gamble heavily on the risky proposition that concert-hall acoustics had finally become a science with predictable results: beautiful data in, beautiful sound out.
The goal set for the Dallas Symphony Orchestra's new home in the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center was not at all modest: to duplicate as closely as possible the acoustical properties of the Musikvereinsaal in Vienna and the Concertgebouw in


Cascade International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cascade International (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,531,600
6,983,193
Net inc
1,282,484
1,137,097
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
14,423,530
13,698,795
Yr rev
25,708,414
21,897,308
Net inc
4,715,690
3,821,064
Share earns
.35
.31
Shares outst
13,479,073
12,215,900


Minority Students Gain on College Entrance Tests
LEAD: The scores of high school students on standardized college admission tests showed no substantial change from last year, the nation's two major testing agencies reported yesterday.


August Luebs, 100, an Expert on Heating
LEAD: August A. Luebs, a former professor at the University of Nebraska who was an expert on air-conditioning, died in Lincoln on Friday.
He was 100 years old and lived in Lincoln.


Thai Leader Trying to Break Cambodian Impasse
LEAD: The Thai Prime Minister began a form of shuttle diplomacy among the four rival Cambodian factions today, hoping to break the impasse blocking a settlement before Vietnamese troops complete their withdrawal from Cambodia this month.


U.S. Giving Colombia Names Of Possible Narcotics Figures
LEAD: Federal prosecutors are compiling new lists of Colombian citizens for indictment on drug-related crimes, which might increase the number of Colombians sought for extradition well beyond the 80 named so far, law enforcement officials said today.


150 Are Believed Dead In Danube Boat Sinking
LEAD: At least 150 passengers on a Rumanian river cruiser were killed when the boat collided with a Bulgarian tugboat on the Danube River and sank, the official Yugoslav press agency reported today from Bucharest.
There was no immediate confirmation of the report, which gave no source of the information.


A Plan for Reunifying Korea Is Offered by Seoul President
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo on proposed new steps toward North-South Korean reunification today and said he hoped a charter for an interim stage, a ''Korean Commonwealth,'' could be signed by next August by the long-divided and hostile sides.


Homeless Said to Do Poorly in School
LEAD: Only 43 percent of homeless students read at or above grade level and only 28 percent scored at or above grade level in mathematics last year, far below the percentage of other New York City public school students, a private report released yesterday said.


Poll Finds Most in U.S. Back Bush Strategy on Drugs
LEAD: Seven out of 10 Americans approve of President Bush's strategy to fight drugs, and 6 out of 10 say they think that the plan, if enacted, will significantly reduce the nation's drug problem, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


Steelers Could Use Another Start
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Steelers, who finished with a record of 5-11 last season, know that reaching Super Bowl XXIV this season is not impossible but certainly not probable.
Their fans believe that a .500 record is a lofty goal.
Reaching the playoffs would be a soothing, surprising touch.


2 Chinese Businessmen Get Death Sentences for Theft
LEAD: Two businessmen were sentenced to death today for theft and embezzlement, as part of the Government's crackdown on economic crimes.


Doris Vinton, 81, Dies; Was a 'Follies' Dancer
LEAD: Doris Vinton, a dancer in the ''Ziegfeld Follies'' on Broadway, died of a nervous-system disorder on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Brown Has Surgery
LEAD: The Los Angeles Raiders' Pro Bowl kick returner and starting wide receiver, Tim Brown, underwent surgery for a torn knee ligament yesterday and will be lost for a minimum of 10 weeks, the team said.
Brown injured his right knee Sunday against San Diego when he was hit by the Chargers' Ken Woodard on a kick return in the third quarter.


Harvey Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harvey Group (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,382,000
8,381,000
Net inc
b415,000
c359,000
Share earns
.16
.14
6mo rev
18,524,000
16,934,000
Net inc
b726,000
c785,000
Share earns
.29
.30


Review/Television; The Season Begins: A Sitcom and a Heartwarmer
LEAD: Tonight the new season gets under way in earnest, so to speak, as ABC introduces two new series.
Each is already being touted as a most promising candidate for survival.
On the sitcom side of the ledger, there is ''Chicken Soup,'' which can be seen this evening at 8:30 (its regular time will be Tuesdays at 9:30, immediately after the phenomenally successful ''Roseanne,'' a slot that would make anything promising).


Sundberg to Retire
LEAD: Jim Sundberg, the Texas Ranger catcher, said yesterday that he would retire at the end of this, his 16th season in the major leagues.


Christopher Chancellor, Who Led Reuters for 15 Years, Dies at 85
LEAD: Sir Christopher Chancellor, who spent 29 years with Reuters and was general manager of the news agency from 1944 to 1959, died at Wincanton in southwest England on Saturday, Reuters reported.
He was 85 years old.


Fannie Mae Issues Multi-Part Debt
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $400 million in real estate mortgage-investment conduit securities through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Smiles From the Guards in Hungary, Then Sips of Champagne in Austria
LEAD: There was a ritual quality to the passage as the busloads of Germans flashed their old East German passports to smiling Hungarian guards at the Hegyeshalom crossing, then produced crisp new West German passports to enter Austria and a new life.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartco Enterprises
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
40,727,000
28,916,000
Net inc
933,000
633,000
Share earns
.17
.12
6mo rev
85,802,000
59,559,000
Net inc
2,174,000
1,335,000
Share earns
.41
.25


Daimler Accepts Conditions
LEAD: The West German industrial giant Daimler-Benz A.G. today accepted conditions set by the Bonn Government that would permit it to acquire a majority stake in Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm G.m.b.H., the aerospace company.


Norma Pfeiffer, Expert on Lilies, Dies at 100
LEAD: Norma E. Pfeiffer, a botanist who was an expert on lilies, died of a brain tumor Aug. 23 at the Presbyterian Village retirement center in Dallas.
She was 100 years old and had lived for half a century in Yonkers, until 1978.


Scientists Develop New Techniques To Track Down Defects in Genes
LEAD: RESEARCHERS have developed a battery of new techniques to track down and identify defective genes that give rise to thousands of hereditary diseases.


Results Plus
LEAD:  HOCKEY  Czechoslovak Team Beats Flames: The Czechoslovak national team defeated the Calgary Flames, 4-1, yesterday to sweep their two-game series in Prague.
The hosts gained an early two-goal lead and then added another pair after Calgary had pulled within a goal.
Tomas Jelinek scored 3 minutes 16 seconds into the game and Vladimir Ruzicka scored four minutes later.


Wedding Information Network reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wedding Information Network
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,431,540
1,922,931
Net inc
63,720
b259,864
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
3,455,878
3,052,459
b-Net loss


Jets' Walker to Miss Game With Browns
LEAD: The Jets' good memories of the last 30 minutes of Sunday's game were tempered today by some bad news.


Nu-West Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu-West Industries (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
154,700,000
-
Net loss
9,400,000
-
Prior-year figures were not applicable; the company's inception was on July 15, 1987.
For the shortened year, the company reported sales of $56,000,000, net income of $6,700,000 and per share earnings of 51 cents a share.


Prices of Treasury Issues Higher
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher in listless trading yesterday.
With the exception of short-term bills and notes, dealers said there was little conviction attached to the activity that did take place.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 'Invisible Campaign' For Mayor
LEAD: ALTHOUGH millions of dollars have been spent on televised attacks and testimonials by the candidates for Mayor of New York City, many people who create ads for a living say the advertising has been so ineffectual that they are calling this the ''invisible campaign.''


Patterns
LEAD: The glitz blitz is on.
At New York's major retailers, as well as at their branches around the nation, it is a week for parties, openings, fashion shows and the start of storewide promotional campaigns for fall.


Campaign Trail; Until Tonight at Least, Candidates Are Stellar
LEAD: As the campaign draws to a close, the candidates have reached star status - which means they now attract crowds, and camera crews, just by getting out of their cars.


In Bogota, Fear Invades the Streets, the Nights, the Dreams
LEAD: Cesar Augusto, who is 8 years old, has been having trouble sleeping.


On Oily Beach, Life Amid the Muck
LEAD: Here on Sleepy Bay, in the last days of one of the world's largest environmental restoration projects, the natural and industrial worlds of Prince William Sound have intersected.


Mail-Order Learning
LEAD: TO most of us, programming is an arcane art, and that's just fine.
But many people can benefit from a working knowledge of it.


11 IN LEBANON DIE AS FIGHTING RECURS
LEAD: New fighting flared in Lebanon today, killing 11 people and wounding 30, as a fresh attempt was made to negotiate an end to six months of artillery bombardment.


Taylor Retains Title
LEAD: Meldrick Taylor retained his International Boxing Federation junior welterweight title when he won a unanimous decision over Courtney Hooper of Detroit here tonight.


Napco Security reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Napco Security (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,235,000
9,818,000
Net loss
684,000
b1,152,000
Share earns
-
.26
Yr sales
36,669,000
35,239,000
Net inc
2,257,000
4,163,000
Share earns
.52
.95


Todd Shipyards' Reorganization
LEAD: The Todd Shipyards Corporation, a leading shipbuilder for the United States Government and the private sector, filed a proposed reorganization plan with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of New Jersey.


Rockefellers Studying Revamping
LEAD: In a move to give the Rockefellers more ready cash, the Rockefeller Group Inc., owner of Rockefeller Center and Radio City Music Hall, is trying to raise between $750 million and $1 billion, real estate people familiar with the deal said yesterday.


Lionel Receives Takeover Offer
LEAD: An investment group led by the New York real estate developer Robert I. Toussie offered today to acquire all of the outstanding shares of the Lionel Corporation for a package of cash and securities it valued at $8.25 a share.


Gala Guests Preview A.&amp;S. Manhattan
LEAD: A suburban-style shopping mall in the middle of the city may seem an unlikely place to hold a party, provided such a place even existed.
Now one does.


William Mann Dead; London Critic Was 65
LEAD: William Mann, the chief music critic for The Times of London from 1960 to 1982, died last Tuesday after surgery in a hospital in Bath, England.
He was 65 years old, and had been suffering from several health problems relating to the throat and chest, including cancer.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Tambrands Goes to Ally
LEAD: Tambrands Inc. yesterday awarded a $15 million advertising account to Ally &amp; Gargano, extending that agency's string of recent successes and deepening the troubles of the incumbent agency, Campbell-Mithun-Esty.
Ally edged out Esty and


Welfare Benefit Upheld For Homeless Mothers
LEAD: The city cannot withdraw a mother's welfare payments, even if her children are in foster care, if doing so causes her to lose her home and makes it impossible to reunite the family, a State Supreme Court Justice ruled yesterday.


Enclean Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Enclean Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,296,000
9,825,000
Net inc
312,000
299,000
Share earns
.14
.20
Yr rev
37,300,000
31,071,000
Net inc
598,000
366,000
Share earns
.39
.25


Investments In Taiwan Rise
LEAD: Foreign investment in Taiwan hit a record high in the first eight months of 1989, and officials today attributed the rise to political turmoil in China and labor strikes in South Korea.


The Day of the Voter
LEAD: In this year's hotly competitive primary elections in New York City, more than ever, one vote can make a difference.
The Democratic contest for mayor continues to look close, and for the first time in years, there's real competition for the Republican nomination.


Krelitz Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Krelitz Industries
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
45,963,000
40,744,000
Net inc
b109,000
b12,000
Share earns
.05
.01
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $56,000 and $25,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Bridge
LEAD: The United States team will not compete here in the Bermuda Bowl contest for the world team championship until semifinal play begins next Monday, but its chances improved today.
The difficulty in obtaining an Australian visa for Peter Pender of San Francisco has now been resolved.
Pender, who is a carrier of the AIDS virus but does not have the full-fledged disease, will now leave for Australia with his teammates, thanks to the intervention of Representative Robert W.


Allies Faulted On Dollar Rise
LEAD: The director of a Washington research organization said today that economic cooperation among the leading industrial nations had collapsed, and as a result the dollar has risen to heights that will cause trade imbalances to worsen.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
The Omnicom Group has completed its acquisition of the Thomas A. Schutz Co., a point-of-purchase ad agency based in Morton Grove, Ill.
Terms were not disclosed.


F.D.A. Details Problems at Drug Makers
LEAD: Inspectors from the Food and Drug Administration said today that they had found irregularities in manufacturing practices and record-keeping at 11 of the 13 generic drug makers that were part of a special review.


Ross Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ross Industries
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,012,808
2,152,453
Net inc
149,584
76,133
Share earns
.12
.06
Yr sales
7,166,179
6,284,855
Net inc
153,811
74,864
Share earns
.13
.06


First Pennsylvania Deal With Meridian Could End
LEAD: After two weeks of inconclusive merger negotiations, the Meridian Bankcorp announced yesterday that it had agreed that the First Pennsylvania Corporation could solicit other bids through Sept. 25.


Gubicza to Pitch For $7.4 Million
LEAD: For $7.4 million, Mark Gubicza of Kansas City decided to forgo the opportunity to be one of the most attractive pitchers available in the free-agent market after the baseball season.
That's the value of the three-year contract the Royals gave Gubicza, and it ranks No. 4 on the list of most lucrative contracts.


Suits for Wall Street Iron-Pumpers
LEAD: ''American men today are becoming a race of Schwarzeneggers, at least in terms of their athletic physiques,'' proclaimed the August newsletter of the Men's Fashion Association of America.


Dollar Mostly Lower in U.S. After Posting Gains Abroad
LEAD: The dollar closed mostly lower amid profit taking on domestic markets today after rising in overseas trading.
Gold prices edged lower.
Analysts said the dollar's upward momentum was slowed by increases in market interest rates in other countries, including West Germany, and United States traders, fearing the dollar would decline in response to those developments, rushed to take profits.


The Mayor Who Gave The Town Its Pride
LEAD: The signs on the roofs of this village's bars blazed: ''Nude!
Nude!
Nude!
Girls!
Girls!
Girls!'' For a price, men could look at women wiggling across the stage; for another price, they could do more than look.


Violence and Poaching Threatenn India Wildlife
LEAD: A SURGE of political violence and increased poaching are posing a grave danger to as many as 22 rare species of wildlife at one of Asia's most important game sanctuaries, the Manas wildlife park in northeastern India.


Webster Clothes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Webster Clothes Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
16,091,000
15,314,000
Net loss
448,000
620,000
6mo rev
29,827,000
28,525,000
Net loss
1,328,000
2,081,000


Bacteria Said to Block Effects of Nerve Gas
LEAD: SCIENTISTS at Texas A &amp; M University say they have bred bacteria capable of neutralizing nerve gases as well as a class of similar poisons used as insecticides.


Trump Shuttle Offers Certificates
LEAD: The Trump Shuttle has started issuing $25 gift certificates that can be used at restaurants that accept the American Express card.
The promotion will run through Sept. 22, but certificates will not be given on Saturday and Sunday.
The certificates are good until the end of the year.


POINDEXTER WINS ACCESS TO DIARIES
LEAD: The judge in the Iran-contra case of John M. Poindexter ruled today that the defense was entitled to private diaries or notes prepared by President Bush, as Vice President, or by former President Ronald Reagan if the papers show they knew about Mr.
Poindexter's activities.


EUROPEAN JEWS HALT CHURCH TIES
LEAD: The 17-nation European Jewish Congress today endorsed a suspension of formal contacts between Jewish groups and the Roman Catholic Church because of the dispute over a convent at Auschwitz.


Koch and Dinkins Plan 'Unity Rally,' Regardless
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch and Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan wound up months of campaigning and unrelenting criticism of each other yesterday by agreeing to appear together tomorrow at a post-primary ''unity conference.''


School Opens and Young Friends Brave First-Day Jitters


Domino's Chief Open To a Sale
LEAD: In response to rumors that Domino's Pizza Inc. is for sale, Thomas S. Monaghan, the company's founder and chairman, has confirmed that he is considering selling the company to devote more time to his philanthropic activities.


McReynolds and Darling Lead Mets Past Phils
LEAD: When you lose 12 of 18 games in the homestretch, it's probably too late for dramatic revivals.
But the Mets gathered themselves tonight and, at least for one performance, combined all the skills that win baseball games as they defeated the last-place Philadelphia Phillies, 5-2.


Money for Minority Health Services Endorsed
LEAD: Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services, endorsed a proposal by Senate Democrats today that would earmark $117 million for improvements in the health services for minority Americans.


Kinsley Out as Editor Of The New Republic
LEAD: Martin Peretz, owner of The New Republic, named Hendrik Hertzberg yesterday to replace Michael Kinsley as editor of the weekly magazine, a leading forum of political commentary.


U.S. Sending Wrong Equipment To Fight Drugs, Colombians Say
LEAD: American and Colombian officials here say most of the equipment in a $65 million emergency package from the United States is not the type that is most needed to fight the drug war here and is unlikely to have a major effect against the traffickers.


Ms. Steinem's Allegiance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oil Trading Is Delayed
LEAD: Energy futures trading was delayed yesterday for more than an hour on the New York Mercantile Exchange after a water pipe broke.
A spokesman said the pipe break caused an electrical problem at the exchange, which is in the World Trade Center.
Trading, which ordinarily begins at 9:45 A.M., was delayed until 11.


Promising Future With Yankees Doesn't Exclude Espinoza's Past
LEAD: The dusty streets where he played the game as a child have not disappeared from Alvaro Espinoza's memory.
They are as fresh and clear as a summer morning in Valencia, the town in Venezuela where he grew up and where he still lives during the months he does not play baseball.


Winning Small Colleges Often Lose Their Foes
LEAD: ''We don't want to play you, because you're too good.''


'We Did Not Go to Auschwitz to Be Beaten'; Prayer and Atonement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bail Is Revoked for Two Owners Of Trash Site Under Interstate 78
LEAD: The operators of a trash site that burned last month and buckled an elevated section of Interstate 78 in Newark were ordered today to begin serving 17-year prison sentences from their racketeering and bribery convictions in a separate $1 million illegal-dumping case.


Doctors Enlist Toxins To Combat Tumors
LEAD: IN a handful of laboratories around the world, scientists are attempting to harness the lethal energy of nature's poisons for medical use.


Chess
LEAD: ''The winners, Vassily Ivanchuk and Lev Polugayevsky, played solidly, close to the vest, and fully deserved their 9-5 scores,'' Nick de Firmian said after his return from the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt International Grandmaster Tournament, which ran from July 18 to Aug. 6 in Biel, Switzerland.


Rangers All Business In Glens Falls Drills
LEAD: So, what do the Rangers think of this small city in the Adirondacks?


Personal Computers Gaining TV's Power Of Image and Sound
LEAD: The personal computer, which not so long ago could display no more than a small amount of text and only recently added graphic images, could soon be far more versatile, combining the brains of a computer and the beauty of television pictures and sound.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ASK Computer Systems Inc., Los Altos, Calif., a developer of integrated software systems, said it expected its fiscal first-quarter revenues to be the same as the quarter a year earlier, while earnings would be substantially lower.


Lenders Said to Like Employees' UAL Bid
LEAD: The group of pilots and management seeking to buy the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, has received a widely positive response from lenders that might finance its $6.75 billion bid, people close to the group said yesterday.


Careers; More Stress Found in the Workplace
LEAD: SYMPTOMS of stress in the workplace have increased in recent years, and more companies are recognizing the problem by setting up employee assistance programs and establishing special days when workers can wear jeans and unwind.


Casual Male Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Casual Male Corp
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
26,144,787
21,497,533
Net loss
864,273
b973,733
Share earns
-
.24
6mo sales
45,932,329
37,344,507
Net loss
2,257,463
b1,063,956
Share earns
-
.26
b-Net income and included an extraordinary item consisting of tax benefits resulting from the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards of $336,780 and $370,175 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Accountants Group Urges A Financial Officer for U.S.
LEAD: The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants has urged the Bush Administration and lawmakers to name a chief financial officer of the United States to oversee the recording, monitoring and reporting of the Government's financial operations.


Connaught To Receive An Offer
LEAD: The Chiron Corporation and Ciba-Geigy Ltd. said today that they would make an unsolicited $642.5 million cash bid for Connaught Biosciences of Canada, a major producer of vaccines.
The offer amounts to $764 million Canadian, or $30 Canadian a share ($25.23 United States).


American Medical Sells Stake in Unit
LEAD: American Medical International Inc. said it had agreed to sell its 64 percent majority interest in Professional Healthcare Systems Inc. to employees of Professional Healthcare through a restructuring of the Employee Stock Ownership Plan.
The restructuring will result in an infusion of about $15 million into Professional Healthcare, including an investment by EPIC Healthcare Group Inc.


Marriott in Europe
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation and a private Japanese company will spend about $400 million to develop up to nine Marriott hotels in Europe, Mariott said.
The joint venture formed by Marriott and Adachi Enterprise Group of Tokyo has purchased the London Marriott Hotel and will build as many as eight more hotels over several years.


Reagan Faces Added Risk of Clot
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan, who has had two blood clots on his brain since he fell from a horse two months ago, has an increased risk of suffering another, neurosurgeons not connected with his case said today.


Schools in Bensonhurst Remain Calm
LEAD: Against the backdrop of a racial killing last month in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, schools opened there yesterday with stepped up security, both inside and out.
No incidents of violence were reported.


Endangered Tortoise Slows Building Boom in Las Vegas
LEAD: Developers betting on a boom in home building in the Las Vegas Valley have been stopped in their tracks by the Federal designation of the desert tortoise as an endangered species.


The Dream Of Reunion; Idea of One Germany Gains New Currency
LEAD: As thousands of East Germans seeking freedom streamed across the Hungarian border to Austria and West Germany today, the ''German question,'' the dream, or fear, of German reunification, also came alive with them.


Betting Fans Are Back In Action
LEAD: rrAmerican sports fans purged their doubts about gambling this summer by burning Pete Rose at the stake, and the smoke is clearing just in time: The National Football League season began this weekend.
Millions of Americans are back in action again, breaking the law every week as they fill out their parlay cards and call or visit their local bookmakers.


Comterm reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comterm
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,611,000
9,311,000
Net loss
348,000
863,000
6mo sales
20,009,000
20,490,000
Net loss
304,000
531,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Successful Vocational Graduates Are Honored at White House Ceremony


5 Supermarket Chains Open Effort Against Pesticide Use
LEAD: Five supermarket chains in the United States and Canada and a food distributor in California announced today several efforts to reduce the levels of toxic pesticides on fruits and vegetables.


Industry Unit and U.S. Back Changes in Jet Maintenance
LEAD: An aviation industry panel, acting with the Federal Government in a program intended to keep older planes flying safely, today recommended extensive changes in the maintenance of aging aircraft built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.


Bank Settles S.E.C. Case
LEAD: The Toronto Dominion Bank today settled civil charges that it had violated Federal banking regulations by extending credit without sufficient collateral to two businessmen who had acquired millions of dollars worth of stock without paying for it.
The Securities and Exchange


Notes Are Offered By First Chicago
LEAD: The First Chicago Corporation is offering $100 million in notes due 1994 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Jose San Roman, A Commander At Bay of Pigs
LEAD: Jose Perez San Roman, a commander of the Cuban exile invasion force that was defeated at the Bay of Pigs in 1961, was found dead Sunday in his home in Miami, according to the police.
He was 58 years old.


Lin and BellSouth to Merge Units
LEAD: Responding to a hostile bid from McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the Lin Broadcasting Corporation said yesterday that it would merge its cellular-telephone operations with those of the BellSouth Corporation, the largest of the seven regional ''Baby Bell'' companies.


School Days, School Days: That Time For 940,000
LEAD: The night before he was to enroll in kindergarten, Luis Toro told his mother he wasn't scared but was worried that if he went to school, she would be lonely.
He offered to stay home to keep her company.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Excessive Force Not Used Subduing Man, Police Say  The Police Department said a group of officers did not use excessive force to subdue a mugging suspect who died at their feet Saturday.


Top Positons Are Filled At Mercantile Stores
LEAD: The Mercantile Stores Company, an operator of department stores in mid-American smaller cities, said yesterday that it had named David R. Huhn as its chairman and chief executive and had also chosen a new president and chief operating officer.


Thorn Apple Valley Inc reports earnings for Qtr to May 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thorn Apple Valley Inc
Qtr to May 26
1989
1988
Sales
134,580,000
127,220,000
Net inc
1,135,000
2,791,829
Share earns
.35
.78
Yr sales
604,300,338
517,930,835
Net inc
2,304,501
5,358,191
Share earns
.70
1.50


Rykoff-Sexton Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rykoff-Sexton Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
344,957,000
309,761,000
Net inc
3,876,000
4,809,000
Share earns
.33
.41
Year-ago figures have been adjusted to reflect a stock split effected in the form of a 25-percent stock dividend that was distributed Jan.


Richard M. Brett, 86, Ex-Library Executive
LEAD: Richard M. Brett, business manager of the New York Public Library from 1947 until his retirement in 1953, died of a stroke Thursday at Hartford Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Bloomfield, Conn.


Man Is Seized in Theft of Metro-North Cable
LEAD: A man was arrested yesterday and charged with stealing 300 pounds of copper cable from the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, and the police were looking for a connection to the vandalism that shut down the railroad on Friday.


By Design; The Right Proportion
LEAD: It's all a matter of proportion.
That's something designers always say when fashion silhouettes or hemlines change.
And it's certainly true.
Getting the proportion right will show that a woman is attuned to fashion.


Inacomp Computer Centers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inacomp Computer Centers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
99,778,000
64,964,000
Net inc
1,379,000
b1,019,000
Share earns
.19
.14
Yr rev
351,526,000
241,414,000
Net inc
6,317,000
b4,715,000
Share earns
.87
.66


Art Sale to Aid Disabled
LEAD: Nearly 200 contemporary artworks will be auctioned at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue, tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. to benefit Very Special Arts, a 15-year-old organization that coordinates and provides arts programs for about a million Americans with physical or mental disabilities.
The works to be auctioned, by such artists as Roy Lichtenstein, Jasper Johns, James Rosenquist, Jenny Holzer and Andy Warhol, are valued at $1,000 to $60,000.


Mandatory AIDS Test Is Repealed in Illinois
LEAD: Gov.
James R. Thompson signed legislation today to repeal Illinois' requirement of premarital testing for AIDS, the only law of its kind in the nation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Ted Colangelo has announced his retirement as chairman of Clarion Marketing and Communications, an independent subsidiary of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.


COLOMBIA SUSPECT HELD WITHOUT BAIL
LEAD: Eduardo Martinez Romero, accused of orchestrating a $1 billion money laundering operation for Colombia's Medellin drug ring, pleaded not guilty today and was ordered held without bond here.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pan Am Shuttle Takes A Wry Aim at Trump
LEAD: The Pan Am shuttle yesterday introduced a campaign that in effect acknowledges its new competitor, the Trump Shuttle, with ads that jokingly but indirectly take note of Donald J. Trump's entry into the airline business.


Police Say Force Used on Suspect Who Died Was Not Excessive
LEAD: The police officers who subdued a mugging suspect before he died at their feet in the Bronx Saturday told investigators yesterday that they struggled eight or nine minutes against fierce resistance to handcuff the man and that he fought on even after being manacled.


Financial News () reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial News ()
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
44,457,916
31,943,560
Net inc
b3,003,306
b4,704,939
Share earns
.17
.30
Shares outst
17,852,373
15,550,017
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,480,283 and $1,716,371 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Big '90 Wheat Crop Seen
LEAD: Because of improved weather conditions, John Schnittker, a private analyst, has predicted the 1990 wheat harvest could reach a six-year high of 2.5 billion bushels.
That would be up nearly one-fourth from this year's harvest of 2.04 billion bushels and 38 percent higher than the 1.81 billion bushels produced in 1988, when there was a drought.


Takeover Bid Rejected By Dunkin' Donuts
LEAD: Dunkin' Donuts Inc. said today that it had rejected a $45-a-share takeover offer from the DD Acquisition Corporation as inadequate and would explore other alternatives, including the acquisition of the doughnut chain by a third party.


Revco and Creditors in Bitter Battle
LEAD: A bitter battle erupted yester-day between creditors of Revco D.S., a drugstore chain, and the company's management, which took control in a leveraged buyout that led to the company's bankruptcy filing last year.


Savings Unit Outflow Dips
LEAD: Withdrawals exceeded deposits at the nation's savings institutions by $183 million in July, a nine-month low, the Government said today.


Metcalf &amp; Eddy Cos reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metcalf &amp; Eddy Cos (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
94,141,000
69,231,000
Net inc
4,373,000
3,195,000
Share earns
.30
.24
Shares outst
14,649,000
12,948,000
9mo rev
271,329,000
181,720,000
Net inc
11,804,000
7,559,000
Share earns
.81
.58
Shares outst
14,649,000
12,948,000


Frederic L. Chapin, 60; Long a U.S. Diplomat
LEAD: Frederic L. Chapin, a former United States Ambassador to Ethiopia and Guatemala, died of cancer on Friday at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 60 years old and lived in Washington.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-14  East Germans arrived in Passau, West Germany, to the cheers of onlookers after weeks of anguished waiting.
Five buses unloaded an estimated 700 East Germans.
Page A1


Business and Health; Limiting Outlays For Retirees
LEAD: BREAKING with the pattern of open-ended commitments that many large employers have made to their retired workers, A.T.&amp;T. and the regional telephone companies and their unions have agreed on important new limits on spending for retiree health care in the 1990's.


Phoenix to Supply PC's to Soviets
LEAD: Phoenix Group International of Irvine, Calif., has been selected to supply schools in the Soviet Union with personal computers and to help set up Soviet factories to produce PC's, Soviet officials announced.
Phoenix was picked from among 17 companies worldwide, including ones from West Germany, France, Austria, Singapore, Malaysia and the Eastern bloc.


29 Intrepid Troupers Try Out for 'Annie 2'
LEAD: For most of them, there would be no tomorrow.
But they were there anyway, and at least this day, there were lots of ''Tomorrows.''


Go Slow on Germany
LEAD: The German question is again at the heart of European affairs.
It is in the headlines in a concrete, human way, with thousands of East Germans encamped in Hungary trying to take the longer back road to the other side of their divided country.


Youth Prevails in an Open of the Ages
LEAD: Stefan Edberg found it frightening, Jimmy Connors called it a cage, Ivan Lendl termed it homey, and Jim Courier said it reminded him of a swirling toilet bowl.
But the Stadium court worked like a charm for Steffi Graf and Boris Becker, the same West German wonder duo who reigned at Wimbledon, as they captured United States Open singles championships at the National Tennis Center in steamy


Empire Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire Co
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
448,906,000
388,957,000
Net inc
b9,706,000
c6,909,000
Share earns
.19
.12
Shares outst
32,243,000
31,645,000
b-Included an income benefit item of $10,342,000, or 21 cents a share, and an extraordinary loss of $636,000.


Copper Prices Rise Sharply In a Volatile Trading Session
LEAD: Copper futures prices rose sharply today on New York's Commodity Exchange in a volatile session that saw the price for December delivery move over a range of more than 6 cents a pound.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is the finest moment, this crossing into Austria.
I have dreamed of this since I was a child.
But I never thought it would come like this.
We planned for weeks, but even when we left East Germany I never believed we would be here.
We're here.''  -Beate Fronk, a 25-year-old teacher, on arrival in Nickelsdorf, Austria, from Hungary with her husband and 1-year-old son after the family crossed into Hungary illegally across a river from Czechoslovakia.


Doctor Time at Hospitals Isn't for Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Death to Plants  Q.How do viruses kill a plant?
A.Viruses attack living cells ''like soldiers taking over a factory,'' said Dr.
David Dilcher, president of the Botanical Society of America and professor of paleobotany in the departments of biology and geology at Indiana University in Bloomington,


Watson Wise, 89, Oilman and Benefactor
LEAD: Watson William Wise, a Texas oilman and philanthropist who was appointed a United Nations delegate by President Dwight D. Eisenhower, died Saturday at Mother Frances Hospital here.
He was 89 years old.


Expos Protest Pickoff in 4-3 Loss to Cubs
LEAD: Manager Buck Rodgers of the Montreal Expos called the final out of his team's 4-3 loss today to the Chicago Cubs illegal and protested the game.


CAR MAKERS WEIGH GASOLINE CHANGES TO CUT POLLUTION
LEAD: The Big Three auto makers are close to joining leading oil companies in testing the feasability of using reformulated gasoline instead of methanol or other alternative fuels to meet stricter clean-air standards proposed by the Bush Administration.


Review/Television; 'Other Faces of AIDS,' a Frank Investigation
LEAD: AIDS is forcing the nation to speak frankly about some sensitive matters.
How frankly can be heard tonight at 8 on Channel 13 on ''Other Faces of AIDS,'' an investigation of why AIDS is afflicting disproportionate numbers of black and Hispanic Americans.


Railroad's Barnyard Art Plan Raises Suburban Hackles
LEAD: As rail officials see it, a work of art proposed for the new train station here is ''a gift to the people of Croton-on-Hudson.'' But residents of this Hudson River suburb have reacted as if they received a token of affection from Vincent van Gogh, who snipped off his ear and sent it to his beloved.


Feeling Sleepy? An Urge to Nap Is Built In
LEAD: THE human body was meant to have a midafternoon nap, according to a new consensus among sleep researchers who are studying the biological rhythms of sleep and alertness.


Judge's 40 Years of Service To Be Honored by U.S. Court
LEAD: The Federal appeals court in Manhattan has scheduled an unusual session of the full 16-member court on Nov. 1 in honor of the 40th anniversary of Circuit Judge Irving R. Kaufman's service on the Federal bench.


Books of The Times; Trying to Be Like Bogart, Unattached, Without a Past
LEAD:  The Geography of Desire  By Robert Boswell  310 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Crown American Plans Bloomingdale's Bid
LEAD: The Crown American Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest shopping mall developer, will offer more than $1 billion to buy Bloomingdale's ''if the operating numbers we are asking for hold up,'' Frank J. Pasquerilla, Crown American's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday.
The bid would be made in conjunction with its retail subsidiary, Hess's


Sallie Mae Notes at Par
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association priced through various securities dealers $500 million in floating-rate notes due on March 8, 1990.


Charter Power reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Power (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
39,998,000
35,090,000
Net inc
744,000
5,000
Share earns
.13
-
6mo sales
79,495,000
72,367,000
Net inc
1,395,000
b1,786,000
Share earns
.25
-
b-Net loss and included a $2,700,000 loss from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle.


'We Did Not Go to Auschwitz to Be Beaten'; For Continued Dialogue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Continental Notes Backed By Leveraged-Buyout Debt
LEAD: Continental Bank N.A. said yesterday that it had been offering $380 million worth of floating-rate notes backed by senior secured leveraged buyout loans from portfolios of nine banks, the first time this sort of deal has been attempted.


Primary Today
LEAD: New York City Democrats and Republicans select their mayoral nominees today.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Democrats will also select candidates for City Council president, city comptroller, Manhattan borough president, Brooklyn district attorney, 10 City Council offices and 2 Civil Court positions.


LUNG DISEASE KILLS 2 INMATES IN TEXAS
LEAD: Federal and local health officials opened an investigation today into an outbreak of respiratory infections at the Harris County Jail here.
Two inmates have died from the illness.


Fireman's Fund Stake in McFarland
LEAD: The Fireman's Fund Corporation said it holds a 13.2 percent stake in the McFarland Energy Corporation and has promised to keep its holdings below 15 percent unless it receives McFarland's approval to exceed that limit.
Fireman's said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it holds the 685,200 shares of M


Bush Seeks Slight Increase in Number of Refugees
LEAD: President Bush asked Congress today for a small increase in the number of refugees who could be admitted to the United States in the coming year, but his proposed ceiling of 125,000 would exclude tens of thousands of refugees who have applied to come here.


Polish Communist Reassures Government
LEAD: Poland's Interior Minister, Gen.
Czeslaw Kiszczak, pledged loyalty to the new Solidarity-led Government today and said that security forces would not attempt a coup against it.


Racket Suspect Is Shot to Death On Staten Island
LEAD: A Staten Island man whom Federal prosecutors had accused of illegally dumping solid waste was shot to death at close range yesterday outside his home, the police said.


Need Should Determine Student Financial Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prosecutor Slain in Madrid; Store Owner Killed by Bomb
LEAD: Attackers believed to be Basque separatists fatally shot a prosecutor in Madrid today and killed a store owner with a parcel bomb in the northern city of Bilbao, the police said.


John S. Chapman Jr., a Lawyer, Dies at 91
LEAD: John S. Chapman Jr., a lawyer for 69 years in Manhattan, died of cardiopulmunary arrest Monday at his home in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
He was 91 years old.


A Revamping Likely at B.P.
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company is expected to announce a restructuring of its exploration and production operations that could involve the sale of $1 billion or more worth of assets.


Picture Isn't Always Clear In Lobbying Over the Arts
LEAD: The intense lobbying over the National Endowment for the Arts, like other political campaigns, has sown its own share of confusion.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Tenpins at Ticknor


Alphonse Persico, 61, Is Dead; Leader of Colombo Crime Family
LEAD: Alphonse (Allie Boy) Persico, an organized-crime leader who was serving a 25-year Federal sentence, died of cancer of the larynx yesterday at the medical center for Federal prisoners in Springfield, Mo.
He was 61 years old.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''There's nothing like a tough primary to toughen you up.


Give the Poor Better Choices Than Drug Dealing and Addiction; Dangers of Abuse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colt Told to Rehire 800 Strikers; Back Pay Is to Be in Millions
LEAD: An administrative law judge has ordered Colt Firearms to rehire 800 strikers and pay them lost wages, a ruling that could deliver millions of dollars to striking workers who have picketed for three and a half years.


Washington Public Power Lifts Offering to $721 Million
LEAD: After initially planning to sell $450 million in refunding revenue bonds for two nuclear reactors that have never been used, the Washington Public Power Supply System tentatively priced a larger $721 million bond issue yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Left-Handers Get Higher Than Righties
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spitz to Try Again
LEAD: Mark Spitz, who won a record seven gold medals in the 1972 Olympic Games, says he will attempt to qualify for the 1992 Games at Barcelona, Spain, in the 100-meter butterfly, according to an article in USA Today yesterday.
Spitz, who would be 42 years old by the next Olympics, was quoted as having said he was training for the United States Olympic Trials, which will be held in two and a half years.


Mets Now At Brink of 'Wait Till Next Year'
LEAD: The Mets had the best of both worlds tonight: Dwight Gooden in the bullpen and ready to pitch for the first time in two and a half months, and Frank Viola on the mound pitching one-run ball into the ninth inning against the last-place Philadelphia Phillies.


Buddhist-Muslim Feud Divides an Indian Territory
LEAD: A mass campaign of civil disobedience in the once-peaceable mountain valleys of Ladakh has brought India's traditionally nonviolent Buddhist minority to the edge of revolt.


Review/Television; It's Vulnerability That Makes the Man
LEAD: For the better part of a decade, Jack Scalia has been a television star waiting to happen.
He may finally have found the right vehicle in ''Wolf,'' the new CBS series being introduced tonight as a two-hour ''World Premiere Movie.'' The show's regular time will be Tuesdays at 9 P.M.


BUILDERS PROPOSE HOMELESS PROJECT
LEAD: A construction industry group has proposed building a $6.9 million complex of apartments to house the homeless on surplus Federal land, but opponents of the idea say the complex would be little more than a concentration camp.


Bengals Sign Brown
LEAD: Eddie Brown, the wide receiver who was the final holdout of the Cincinnati Bengals, signed a contract yesterday with the Bengals, reported to be worth $3.6 million over four years.
Brown, who earned $350,000 last season, led the American Conference with 1,273 yards in receptions. (AP)


Holtzman, Hynes and Messinger Shake the Old Order
LEAD: Like a forest fire clearing the land for new growth, yesterday's Democratic primary swept away one crop of New York City political leaders while preparing the ground for a new one.


Now if Only It Would Pay for the Call
LEAD: A Dallas-based company has developed an electronic operator system that allows people to make collect calls and calls billed to a third party from pay telephones without a human operator.
The company, Intellicall Inc., which makes pay phones for private ownership, says its computerized operator system will reduce the need for human operators and save consumers 5 percent to 7 percent on operator-assisted calls made from pay phones.


Lucille Roberts Legerdemain
LEAD: The Lucille Roberts Health Spas account is rapidly becoming the ad industry's equivalent of ''Now you see it, now you don't.''


Optimism in Defeat


Helms Amendment Is Facing A Major Test in Congress
LEAD: After months of debate over how the National Endowment for the Arts should be permitted to spend taxpayers' money on culture in America, the legislative battle will be renewed today in the House of Representatives.
Both sides in the dispute are convinced the stakes are high, involving issues of artistic freedom and censorship, the proper role of government in the arts and the right, if any, of taxpayers not to have to pay for art they abhor.


2 Drug War Suspects Are Freed in Colombia
LEAD: A judge has released two suspected cocaine traffickers for lack of evidence, officials said today.


Giuliani Swamps Lauder In G.O.P. Mayoral Primary
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former United States Attorney in Manhattan, decisively won the Republican nomination for mayor yesterday, setting the stage for the first significant attempt to drive the Democratic Party out of City Hall since the 1960's.


Washington at Work; Emotions in Check, Intellect Not, Sununu Wins Reluctant Respect in Capital
LEAD: Talk to people who talk all the time to John H. Sununu and the word they use most often to describe him is ''focused.''


Another Blunder in Nicaragua?
LEAD: The United States is about to take another misstep in Nicaragua, and this one could jeopardize Washington's ability to nurture emerging democracies elsewhere in the world.


About New York; Voting Machines: If We Find 'Em, We'll Fix 'Em
LEAD: It takes 22,000 people to run an election in New York City, which is like bringing in the entire populations of Garden City, L.I., or Emporia, Kan., and having them make sure that everyone who goes into the voting booths comes out.
New York City did not do that.
But it did bring in John Miers, who is 1/10,337th of the population of De Ridder, La.


Learning Conditions in U.S. Get C-Plus on 'Report Card'
LEAD: American students have little incentive to achieve good grades, the head of the nation's largest school administrators' group says.


Dow Advances by 2.85 as Volume Rises
LEAD: Stock prices edged up on a broad front yesterday as volume rose moderately.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD  2 World Bests by Italians: Stefano Lambruschini and Ileana Salvador of Italy had world bests and the hurdler Roger Kingdom earned one of three victories by Americans at the City of Verona meet in Italy yesterday.
Lambruschini won the 2,000-meter steeplechase in 5 minutes 18.36 seconds, more than 6 seconds ahead of William Van Dick of Belgium.


A Food Historian Works To Give the Dutch Their Due
LEAD: AS autumn approaches in the northern reaches of the Hudson Valley, leaf-seekers are likely to find reminders of the original Dutch settlers all over - in the nearby cities of Amsterdam and Rotterdam, in local roads with names like Ten Broeck Street and in the city's basketball team, the Patroons, named for the region's early


Democrat Wins The House Seat Of Jim Wright
LEAD: A former Democratic Senate aide narrowly won a special election yesterday to fill the House seat from Texas given up by former Speaker Jim Wright, who was toppled by an ethics investigation after 34 years in office.


'I Don't Eat UUU' Plays Havoc With Parties
LEAD: CHICAGO'S premier caterer, John Calihan, still remembers the nightmare.
It was to be a dinner party a la Gatsby, a black-tie evening for 20 of the local Jays and Daisys.
The hostess, a Chicago socialite, had enlisted Mr.
Calihan to prepare her family bouillabaisse recipe.
Spare no expense!


Police Acted Properly in Shooting at Roadblock, Agency Concludes
LEAD: The State's Attorney's Office has ruled that New Canaan police officers acted properly two months ago when they fired 12 shots into a car, wounding its three occupants, after it tried to run a roadblock.


Mattingly Drives In 4, Yanks Are Driven Out
LEAD: The California Angels, still in a pennant race, survived a ninth-inning pitching lapse and beat the Yankees tonight, 7-6, when Wally Joyner lined a single to center that drove in Claudell Washington from second base in the bottom of the ninth.


Charles E. Goshen, Psychiatrist, 72
LEAD: Charles Ernest Goshen, psychiatrist and professor emeritus of Vanderbilt University, in Nashville, died of a heart attack Aug. 29 at his home in Glenwood, Md.
He was 72 years old.


Eastern Allowed To Sell Assets
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge approved the sale of $210 million of Eastern Airlines assets, including the carrier's operations in Philadelphia, to Midway Airlines Inc. of Chicago, a spokeswoman for Eastern said.
The assets include gates and facilities at Philadelphia's airport and international routes from Philadelphia to Toronto and to Montreal.


Dollar and Gold Are Mixed As Traders Await Reports
LEAD: The dollar was narrowly mixed yesterday, marking time as traders awaited a batch of economic reports to be issued later in the week.
Gold prices were also mixed.
Traders were reluctant to make significant adjustments to their positions in advance of the reports due from Washington tomorrow and Friday, analysts said.


GIULIANI EASILY WINS REPUBLICAN PRIMARY; MAYOR OFFERS HELP
LEAD: David N. Dinkins scored a decisive victory over the three-term Mayor, Edward I. Koch, in New York City's Democratic mayoral primary yesterday.


For Black Voters, an Evening of Inspiration and Giddy Celebration
LEAD: Shortly after 9 o'clock last night, the street outside of David N. Dinkins's campaign office in Harlem erupted into cheers, horn-honking and dancing as television stations projected that Mr.
Dinkins would win the Democratic mayoral primary.


Review/Music; Catskill Chamber Players In Works of Many Roots
LEAD: The Catskill Chamber Players, an ensemble from the Catskill Conservatory in Oneonta, N.Y., devoted a Sunday afternoon concert at Weill Recital Hall to music by Frank Bennett.
Mr.
Bennett, now on the faculty of the University of California at Los Angeles, was associated with the Catskill Conservatory for more than a decade.


U.S. Inspection Leads to Lilly Recall
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company said today that it was recalling 18 lots of 10 drugs from wholesalers and stopping distribution of all products from an Indianapolis plant because of manufacturing problems found in a Federal inspection.


Time Warner's Cable Head
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday that Joseph J. Collins would head its cable division, which will be called the Time Warner Cable Group.
It is the nation's second-largest cable system operator.


REVIVAL IS URGED FOR WIDER I.R.A.'s
LEAD: Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, today proposed a restoration of widely available, tax-deductible individual retirement accounts as an alternative to President Bush's plan to lower the tax rate on capital gains.


About Education
LEAD: ''I didn't take it as a job but as a mission.'' ''It'' was the presidency of Brown Unversity.
The speaker, Vartan Gregorian.


No Timeout for Knicks' Coach
LEAD: From the day Stu Jackson became the Knicks' head coach in July, his thoughts have been directed toward next season.


Books of The Times; On a Cross-Country Drive With a Blind Elderly Driver
LEAD:  The Widows' Adventures  By Charles Dickinson  William Morrow. 381 pages. $18.95.


Drift-Net Fishing Accord
LEAD: The Government of South Korea, seeking to avoid threatened trade sanctions, has agreed to give American officials the right to board Korean fishing vessels to monitor huge drift nets, which kill marine animals and sea birds.


Dinkins and Friends Exult in Victory
LEAD: Not long after the image of Mayor Edward I. Koch faded from a giant television screen above the Hotel Penta Grand Ballroom just after midnight, David N. Dinkins mounted the stage to the cheers of several thousand supporters to claim victory in the Democratic mayoral primary.


New Jersey, in 5 Years, Solves Teacher Shortage
LEAD: Four years ago, facing teacher shortages and a declining quality of instructors, New Jersey education officials started an experimental program to hire recent college graduates and mid-career professionals who have skills but who have not gone through teacher certification procedures.


Poles Approve Solidarity-Led Cabinet
LEAD: The Polish Parliament today confirmed the first Cabinet not controlled by Communists since the 1940's.


Bill Moyers Shares Poetry's Joys
LEAD: As a journalist whose beat is ideas, Bill Moyers has chosen what he calls an inevitable topic - poetry - for his latest public-television project, a six-part weekly series called ''Moyers: The Power of the Word,'' beginning at 9 P.M.
Friday on Channel 13.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about the Democratic primary for District Attorney in Brooklyn misidentified the publisher of The Amsterdam News.


Real Estate; Empire State Building Is Still Vital
LEAD: THE Merry-Go-Round, a 37-state chain of 611 specialty clothing stores, has selected the Empire State Building as the site for its flagship store.
The move is in keeping with recent shifts in the area around Fifth Avenue and 34th Street, where higher-priced stores have displaced many of the curio stands, fashion discounters and cut-rate electronics shops that had crept into the midtown neighborhood.


Cubs Extend Streak On Bielecki's Shutout
LEAD: Mike Bielecki pitched a two-hitter and Vance Law scored from third base on a passed ball to snap a scoreless tie in the fifth inning tonight as the first-place Chicago Cubs beat the Montreal Expos, 2-0.


Clayton Joins Dolphins
LEAD: Mark Clayton, the Pro Bowl wide receiver and seven-year veteran, joined the Miami Dolphins on the practice field yesterday with the understanding that negotiations on a new contract would continue and he would have an option not to sign if he were not happy with the final deal.
Clayton set a club record with 86 receptions last year.


THE NEW YORK PRIMARY: A Sense of Quiet Strength; Dinkins Triumph Is Built on Dissatisfaction With Koch and on an Unthreatening Image
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch was decisively transformed yesterday from a campaign underdog into a lame duck, but the metamorphosis began some months ago.


Red Sox Lose Burks
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox, who have slipped out of the American League Eastern Division race, have lost their regular center fielder, Ellis Burks, for the rest of the season.
Burks separated his right shoulder in a collision with the Boston left fielder, Mike Greenwell, last week in Oakland, Calif.
Burks was sidelined from June 14 until Aug.


Dissident Priest Urges Boycott of Newspaper
LEAD: A dissident Roman Catholic priest is calling on his followers at a church he organized to boycott The Washington Post and its advertisers in retaliation for articles reporting that he once had a homosexual relationship with an altar boy.


Jalalabad Shows Its Recovery As Siege by Rebels Dwindles
LEAD: Lieut.Gen.
Manokai Mangal wears no ribbons on his crisp battle fatigues, but his stature needs no underlining among supporters of the Soviet-backed Government in Kabul.


U.S. Trade In Services At a Deficit
LEAD: The service and investment sector of the United States economy, where international surpluses have long been relied upon to offset deficits in merchandise trade, is now itself showing red ink.


California County's Bonds for Hospital
LEAD: To finance a new hospital for Riverside County, Calif., the Riverside County Asset Leasing Corporation is tentatively offering about $195 million in lease revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.45 percent for an issue due in 2014.
The offering is through the First Boston Corporation.


What Went Wrong in New York's Services for Children at Risk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jury Finds Gioiosa Guilty
LEAD: A Federal jury today convicted Thomas Gioiosa of participating in a cocaine ring and conspiring to hide Pete Rose's race-track winnings from the Internal Revenue Service.
The United States District Court verdict bolsters the Government's case against Rose, who is being investigated by a Federal grand jury in


INSIDE
LEAD:  A New Trade Deficit  The service and investment sector of the economy, which has shown a surplus for about 30 years, posted a deficit in the second quarter.
Page D10.
Bush Meets Yeltsin  Boris N. Yeltsin, a rival of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, was received by President Bush in a brief visit to the White House.


Home Loan Banks' $885 Million Issue
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Banks yesterday priced $885 million in bonds with maturities of one and three years through various securities dealers.


Give the Poor Better Choices Than Drug Dealing and Addiction; Remember Prohibition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bulls Land Armstrong
LEAD: B. J. Armstrong, a 6-foot-2-inch guard from the University of Iowa who was the second pick of the Chicago Bulls in the N.B.A. college draft this year, signed a contract yesterday.
No terms were disclosed. . . .
In another signing, Tom Hammonds, the former Georgia Tech forward who was the first pick of the Washington Bullets in the draft, received a multiyear contract with the team after entertaining an offer from a team in Salonika, Greece.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Sept. 8
Sept. 1
Sept. 9
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
218.4
217.7
219.5
Distillate stocks
119.8
116.8
128.6
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.4
5.4
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.7
1.4
Crude stocks
339.2
335.8
329.2
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
92.0
91.8
89.0


Dutch Premier Fails to Form A Center-Right Government
LEAD: Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers's initial efforts to form a center-right government were dashed today when a small centrist party snubbed his offer to join a three-party coalition.


Why Dokes Lost His Chance to Fight Tyson
LEAD: As Mike Tyson's next opponent, Razor Ruddock has a million-dollar payday awaiting him, and Michael Dokes does not.


Putting the AIDS Message Where the Trouble Is
LEAD: The scene is intended to be both familiar and ambiguous: An unmarried black couple, somewhere in their late 30's, have just arrived at the man's apartment after a romantic evening.
He goes into the kitchen to fix a drink, while the woman nervously reaches into her purse and pulls out a condom packet.


Japan Inflation Is Lowest
LEAD: Japan had the lowest inflation rate among industrialized countries last year - 1 percent - while Peru had the worst with 1,722 percent, a United Nations agency said today.
The Netherlands, with 1.2 percent, was second to Japan, followed by West Germany, with 1.6 percent.


Hewlett Introduces New Laser Printer
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company introduced its lowest-priced laser printer yet, the HP Laserjet IIP, which will list for $1,495.
With discounts, the new machine could sell for as low as $1,000.
Hewlett will continue to make the Laserjet Series II, which is priced at $2,695 but is commonly available for $1,700 to $1,800.


Judge Issues Literal Gag Order
LEAD: A judge ordered a teen-ager's mouth taped shut for a court session because the youth swore at him in an earlier appearance.
The 14-year-old was brought into Juvenile Court before Judge Robert M. Foster on Monday with his hands cuffed, his ankles shackled and a strip of tape over his mouth.
He was sentenced to training school for assaulting three workers in one of his 13 earlier sentences to the juvenile detention center.


Vitro Is Refusing To Hold Bid Price
LEAD: Vitro S.A. has refused to agree not to lower its offer for the Anchor Glass Container Corporation.
Anchor Glass had said it would allow the Mexican concern to review its confidential financial information if Vitro agreed not to reduce its bid of $20 a share, or $280 million.


Philip Sterling Dies at 82; Author of 8 Books
LEAD: Philip Sterling, a writer and public relations representative, died of lung cancer Monday at his home in Wellfleet, Mass.
He was 82 years old.


Provincetown Journal; Summer Of Tension In a Haven Of Civility
LEAD: For as long as anyone can remember, this old fishing village and artists' colony on the tip of Cape Cod has been a haven for gay men and women, a place that has prided itself as an island of tolerance in an often hostile world.


Shortages Predicted for 90's In Professors of Humanities
LEAD: Unless preventive steps are taken soon, American colleges and universities face a major shortage of faculty members starting in the next several years, according to the most comprehensive study ever conducted of the academic job market.


Another Contender For Top Job at Grace
LEAD: When W. R. Grace &amp; Company named three vice chairmen three years ago, establishing a group of candidates to succeed J. Peter Grace, no one knew how long Mr.
Grace would remain chairman.


William Johnston, 67; Ran Shipping Bureau
LEAD: William N. Johnston, a marine engineer and business executive, died of cancer Thursday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 67 years old.


Incumbent Democrat Wins Mayoral Primary in Yonkers
LEAD: Mayor Nicholas C. Wasicsko of Yonkers won his Democratic primary today, moving into a general election that is expected to revolve around whether the city should comply with a court-ordered housing desegregation plan.


For a Sad Koch They Play 'New York'
LEAD: With a brave wave and a sad smile, Mayor Edward I Koch declared last night that ''there is a life after the mayoralty.''


Mona Ewell, Intelligence Analyst, 36
LEAD: Mona Ewell, an intelligence analyst at the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration, died of leukemia Sunday at Fairfax Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
She was 36 years old and lived in Sterling, Va.


'Help Wanted' Signs Sprout in West as East Germans Continue to Arrive
LEAD: As East Germans continued to stream into this border town, the local paper published a special supplement listing more than 4,000 jobs, many including the offer of an apartment or room.


Court Victory For Occidental
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that an appeals court had reversed a decision that required the company to pay more than $412 million to the Coastal Corporation, a Houston-based gas and oil company.
Occidental said the United


P.&amp;G. Payment In Cookie Case
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it would be paid $125 million in a patent settlement with three food makers.
P.&amp; G. said the companies had violated its patent on crisp and chewy cookies.
P.&amp; G. introduced its Duncan


Wine Talk
LEAD: IT may be coincidental, but the season for wine making is also the season for wine buying.
All the wine, at least in the Northern Hemisphere, will have been made in the next month or so; similarly, some 75 percent of all wine purchases for the year will be made between now and New Year's Eve, the busiest social season of the year.


Princely Love in Japan: A Semi-Public Thing
LEAD: News flash from the Department of Fairy Tales Come True:


Deals
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CLEVELAND (AL) - Dismissed Doc Edwards, manager.
Named John Hart interim manager.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Signed a three-year contract with Charleston, W. Va. of the South Atlantic League.
FOOTBALL  JETS (AFC) - Agreed to terms with Johnny Hector, running back.
Placed Wesley Walker, wide receiver, on injured reserve.


Tandy Buying Swedish Units
LEAD: The Tandy Corporation said that it had reached an understanding with Datatronic A.B. of Sweden to acquire its Victor and Micronic subsidiaries for an undisclosed amount in cash.


On Sake Bottles, More Labels Say 'Made in U.S.A.'
LEAD: AS steam hissed overhead, Teisuke Kainuma looked down into an enormous vat of gleaming finely milled rice.


Market Place; Electric Utilities Face Competition
LEAD: FOR years electric utilities have produced energy with little fear of much changing except how much the regulators allowed them to earn, and investors have counted mainly on a steady dividend.
But the industry is rapidly changing.
Analysts see investment opportunities among the bigger, more competitive utilities, but they caution that many of the smaller ones will not survive.


Giants Had Various Vantage Points, but All Agree: What a Kick!
LEAD: Raul Allegre, who kicked it, knew it would be good if it went far enough.
Jeff Hostetler, who held the ball, knew it would be good just from the sound of it.
Lawrence Taylor, who was blocking, knew it would be good the moment he watched the ball sail.
Mark Bavaro and Steve DeOssie, who were on the sideline, could not even watch it.


Rejection of a Bid Appears to Assure Closing of Reactor
LEAD: The demise of the Rancho Seco nuclear reactor in California was apparently assured on Monday night when the board of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, the agency that owns it, voted unanimously to reject the only bid to take it over and resume nuclear operations.


Intel Chip Does 2 Jobs At Once
LEAD: The Intel Corporation introduced a computer microprocessor today that employs a breakthrough technology enabling it to perform two tasks at once.


Phil Simms's New Arsenal Of Weapons
LEAD: Raul Allegre's 52-yard field goal as time expired had produced a 27-24 victory over the Redskins, what Lawrence Taylor described as the Giants' ''biggest win'' since their Super Bowl XXI triumph.
But now, in the midnight celebration in Washington, Coach Bill Parcells was assessing how Phil Simms, starting from the


Mountain Lion Kills Boy
LEAD: A 5-year-old boy last seen riding his tricycle near his home was killed by a mountain lion that was later tracked down and killed, the authorities said Monday.
The body of the boy, Jake Gardipe, was found Sunday night just 30 yards from his home two miles north of this tiny community in mountainous western Montana.


Lawmakers Urge Congress to Review Navy's Inquiry on Battleship
LEAD: Two lawmakers said today that they wanted Congress to review the Navy's investigation of the explosion aboard the battleship Iowa and the serious mismanagement of the ship that investigators said they uncovered in the four-month inquiry.


WPP Hollywood Deal
LEAD: WPP Group P.L.C. turned its sights on Hollywood yesterday, announcing it would acquire Seiniger Advertising, a motion picture advertising agency in Los Angeles.
WPP, the British owner of Ogilvy &amp; Mather and J. Walter Thompson, said it would pay up to $30 million for Seiniger.
WPP already has a presence in the movie advertising market through a subsidiary, JWT Entertainment Group.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Western Corp., Sioux Falls, S.D., which makes plastic bags, agreed to be acquired by Carlisle Plastics Inc., Boston, for $13 a share, or about $73 million.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Savings Bank, Stockton, Calif., named Patricia A. Joyce senior vice president and director of corporate planning.


Democratic Reply on Drugs: Commit Another $2.2 Billion
LEAD: In the first major Congressional response to President Bush's drug strategy, Senate Democrats today proposed trimming other Government programs to come up with $2.2 billion more for anti-drug efforts than the President has already proposed.


Thomas Cox Allen, Pilot, 82
LEAD: Thomas Cox Allen, one of the first black pilots to fly across the United States, died at Presbyterian Hospital on Monday after a long illness.
He was 82 years old and lived in Oklahoma City.


All but 1 of Council Incumbents in Race Are Renominated
LEAD: The new City Council that will take office in January is likely to receive extraordinary new powers, and Council members, mindful of their reputation for somnolence, have already begun planning for the transition.


EAST BERLIN TELLS BUDAPEST TO HALT AID TO EMIGRATION
LEAD: East Germany demanded today that Hungary stop allowing East Germans to flee to the West, and a visiting Soviet Politburo member accused West Germany of encouraging the departure of about 10,000 East Germans in the past two days.


Oswiecim Journal; A Place Where the Past Overwhelms the Present
LEAD: This is a quiet place, population 60,000, wedged into gentle hills between the meandering Vistula and Sola Rivers, actually large streams.
But now it is at the center of a dispute over the presence of a convent of Carmelite nuns just outside the walls of the Auschwitz death camp.
Jewish groups say the convent should be moved from the site, which they consider the central symbol of the Nazi genocide carried out against European


S.E.C. Exempts Bond Offering
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has exempted from its registration requirements a $30 billion bond offering planned for next month by the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency created by Congress last month to resolve the problems of insolvent savings institutions.


Economic Scene; Talk Is Cheap, Dollars Dear
LEAD: IF President Bush decided to order tail lights for the Stealth bomber or buy a scrimshaw collection for the National Gallery, he would first have to convince Congress.
But there is no such restraint on the unelected Government officials who spent $12 billion this summer to hold down the exchange value of the dollar - and kept it secret until last week.


Dallas Papers In Dispute
LEAD: A Texas judge has ordered Universal Press Syndicate to continue supplying The Dallas Times Herald with 26 comics and other features that the syndicate wanted shifted to The Dallas Morning News.


Lois/GGK Wins Time Magazine
LEAD: TIME magazine selected Lois/ GGK yesterday as the agency of record for both its trade and consumer advertising efforts, capping a day of important advertising announcements from the magazine division of Time Warner Inc.


CNN Plans Newscast
LEAD: The Cable News Network said yesterday that it would begin a one-hour evening newscast to compete directly with the network newscasts beginning next month.


DRINKING PERSISTS IN VALDEZ CREWS
LEAD: Nearly six months after excessive drinking of alcohol was linked to the nation's worst oil spill, supertanker crew members in the Port of Valdez are still trying to board their vessels while drunk.


Bush Urges Youngsters to Help Friends on Drugs
LEAD: President Bush pleaded with young people around the nation today to stop using drugs and ''not to look the other way'' when others do.


As the Film Credits Roll, So Do the Lies
LEAD: Hundreds of times in my life I have lied to friends, even fairly close friends.
I have made a habit of it, in fact, a more or less determined habit.
Lie is perhaps too strong a word, but I sure have dissembled, verbally wiggled and soft-pedaled the truth.
My voice still elevates a little when I do it, but


David Dinkins, With a Roar
LEAD: What a stunning victory - more decisive than anyone anticipated.
David Dinkins toppled Ed Koch, the man who has held the title so long that ''Mayor'' and ''Koch'' blurred into one word, the politician who dared try for an unprecedented fourth term.
Mr.
Dinkins stopped him - by offering New Yorkers everything the


Saks Kicks Off Fall Season From a New Venue
LEAD: THE multifaceted celebration called SFA/USA with which Saks Fifth Avenue traditionally opens the fall fashion season took place in Lincoln Center last night.


News Is a Hit on TV's Bottom Line
LEAD: The CBS News program ''48 Hours,'' which finished 64th out of 83 shows in prime time last season, has become one of the most valuable properties in television - not because it is a hit in the ratings, but because it is a hit in the CBS bottom line.


New Line of Wang Minicomputers
LEAD: In an effort to retain its waning customer base, Wang Laboratories Inc. introduced a new line of minicomputers yesterday, the VS 8000 series, that the company said was three times more powerful than its current VS 7000 systems.


Dow Chemical Sets Venture With United Technologies
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company and the United Technologies Corporation said yesterday that they would form a joint venture to build plastics, or composite parts, for the aerospace, automotive and military contracting industries.


Gregory Rozakis, 46, Playwright and Actor
LEAD: Gregory Rozakis, a playwright and actor, died of AIDS on Aug. 24 in Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


U.S. Delegation Meets Nicaraguan Chief
LEAD: A United States delegation, including a senior State Department official and members of Congress, met this week with President Daniel Ortega Saavedra to underline their concern about the fairness of elections to be held in Nicaragua next year.


Hong Kong Vigil


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DONORS TO CAMBODIA HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


Peter Franck, 75, Economist and Professor
LEAD: Peter Goswyn Franck, an economist and former director of the Business Research Center at Syracuse University, died of a stroke Thursday at his home in Ruckersville, Va.
He was 75 years old.


PANEL ANNOUNCES INQUIRY ON FRANK
LEAD: The House ethics committee voted today to open a preliminary investigation into the conduct of Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat who has acknowledged employing a male prostitute as a personal assistant.


Human Activity Is Found to Harm Wildlife Areas
LEAD: The wildlife on Federal preserves is being harmed by human activities ranging from water-skiing to military dogfight practice, Congressional investigators reported today.


Consumer Data for College Athletes
LEAD: The proposed Student-Athlete Right to Know Act sounds unassailable.
It would require every college or university that accepts Federal money to disclose the graduation rates of its athletic scholarship recipients.
Yet this measure - no more than a consumer information statute - was stymied in Congress last year.


Rain Forest Defender's Life Story Sold for Film
LEAD: Movie rights to the story of the life and death of the Brazilian defender of the Amazon rain forest Francisco (Chico) Mendes have been sold by his family to Peter Guber and Jon Peters, producers of the summer blockbuster ''Batman'' and of ''Rain Man,'' which won the Academy Award as best picture of 1988.


Apollo to Offer New Machines
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company's Apollo Computer division said yesterday that it would offer the industry's first work station priced under $4,000 and a line of desktop graphics work stations.


Edwards Dropped As Manager of Indians
LEAD: With his team 14 1/2 games out of first place in the American League Eastern Division after losing 24 of its last 35 games, Doc Edwards was dismissed yesterday as manager of the Cleveland Indians after a little more than two years on the job.
Edwards, 52 years old, had replaced Pat Corrales.
Last year, in his first full season, the Indians went 78-84, an improvement of 17 victories.


Smithsonian to Give Up Indian Remains
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution agreed today to return the skeletal remains of thousands of American Indians to their tribes for reburial in their homelands, resolving a dispute that pitted the research needs of scientists against the anguish of Indians who say their ancestors have been desecrated.


Smiling Soviet Visitor Meets Bush And Proves Deft in Capital's Ways
LEAD: The White House doors opened, somewhat gingerly, for Boris N. Yeltsin today, as President Bush briefly greeted the Soviet politician and reiterated his support for perestroika.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Show Drop
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to show small declines for the week that ended yesterday.


Japanese Trade Surplus Narrows by 31%
LEAD: A surge in oil imports, robust domestic demand and a strong dollar helped narrow Japan's trade surplus by 31 percent in August, and economists here say the trend should continue for the rest of 1989.


Becker Insures Himself
LEAD: A spokesman for Lloyds of London who requested anonymity said yesterday in London that Boris Becker, the West German player who added the United States Open men's singles title to his Wimbledon crown last weekend, had taken out a $10 million policy against being kidnapped.
The spokesman said Becker was paying $160,000 a year for the policy.


Comptroller Primary Won By Holtzman
LEAD: District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman of Brooklyn, who built a reputation as a crusading Congresswoman into a tempestuous eight-year tenure as a prosecutor, won the Democratic primary race for New York City comptroller yesterday, virtually assuring her election as the city's chief fiscal officer.


Council Will Recommend Vincent as Commissioner
LEAD: Baseball's executive council voted today to recommend to the owners that Francis T. (Fay) Vincent Jr. serve as commissioner for the four and a half years of the unexpired term of the late A. Bartlett Giamatti.


Need Should Determine Student Financial Aid; Assistance Is the Norm
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A report in ''At the Nation's Table'' in The Living Section last Wednesday about the restaurant Postrio in San Francisco misidentified the executive chefs.
They are David and Anne Gingrass.


De Klerk Appeals to Marchers
LEAD: On the eve of a major anti-apartheid demonstration planned here, South Africa's Acting President, F. W. de Klerk, appealed to its organizers today to comply with the law, which requires them to get permission first from the Government.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Stax in the Background


People
LEAD: *
Karen Ritchie has been named senior vice president and director of media services at McCann-Erickson/ Detroit.


Film Based on the von Bulow Case
LEAD: On a bed in a mansion swarming with cameras and spotlights sits Jeremy Irons as Claus von Bulow, in ascot and stocking feet.
He reads as Glenn Close, playing his wife, Sunny, lies beside him, pale and rigid.
The director, Barbet Schroeder, shouts, ''Action,'' and Ms.
Close lets out a rattling sound deep in her throat.


Giants and Redskins Keep the Fans in Mind
LEAD: The Giants had just upset the Redskins, 27-24, Monday night in their National Football League season opener.
While the players were still celebrating Raul Allegre's 52-yard game-winning field goal with no time left, Coach Bill Parcells tried to put the victory in perspective.


Executive Gives Prep School $1 Million
LEAD: Boston Latin School, the oldest public college preparatory school in the country, has received a gift of $1 million from a New York business executive.


Jets' Walker to Miss At Least Six Games
LEAD: Wesley Walker, the Jets' dangerous but injury-prone wide receiver, will miss at least the next six games after being placed on the injured-reserve list yesterday.


Robert Charles Wallis, Epidemiologist, 68
LEAD: Robert Charles Wallis, an epidemiologist and professor at the Yale University School of Medicine, died last Wednesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 68 years old and lived in North Haven, Conn.


U.S. Seizes Danish Ship And a Ton of Cocaine
LEAD: Federal officials said today that they had confiscated more than a ton of Colombian cocaine, a Danish freighter and several boats in the biggest narcotics seizure since President Bush announced his anti-drug strategy a week ago.


Menus That Work for All Guests
LEAD: SEVERAL caterers were recently presented with this typical but hypothetical request: ''I am entertaining 20 people whom I do not know well.
Price is no object.
Can you design a menu that is impressive but will not pose a problem for people on restricted diets?''


Zsa Zsa Gabor's Trial Is On, Amid a Flurry of Attention
LEAD: When Zsa Zsa Gabor arrived in court Monday for the opening of her trial on charges of slapping a police officer, she was accompanied by her hairdresser, her daughter and her eighth husband, and was greeted by about 100 reporters.
Today, as jury selection continued, the audience was far smaller, only about 20 people.


U.S. Expands Its Sanctions Against Panama
LEAD: The United States announced today that it has expanded economic sanctions against Panama in an effort to force Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to relinquish power there.


Lessons
LEAD: Only two American Presidents have taken the extraordinary step of convening the country's governors to discuss an important issue.
Theodore Roosevelt did it on conservation, Franklin Delano Roosevelt on the Great Depression.


Food Notes
LEAD:  A Day for Nibbling


Tropical Storm Gabrielle, Once a Hurricane, Continues to Churn Ocean


GTE Unit Prices Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: The General Telephone Company of the South, a unit of the GTE Corporation, yesterday priced $100 million in 9 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2029 through competitive bidding.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-13  East Germany called on Hungary to stop letting East Germans flee to the West.
A Soviet Politburo member assailed Bonn for encouraging the flow of some 10,000 refugees.
Page A1  East German refugees are skilled, young and most were employed at the time they left East Germany, polls show.


A Chemical-Free Cornucopia
LEAD: TOWARD the middle of August, Ken Ryan's panel truck finally died.
Until the moment of its demise, the mottled green truck, a 1970 Chevrolet, had performed faithfully.
Every Tuesday and Friday since early summer, it had made a 100-mile round trip with Mr.
Ryan at the wheel, carrying vibrantly fresh, often exotic, produce from his four-acre farm here to chefs at a dozen of


Home Rule Giving Way to Joint Plans
LEAD: For three years, 20 Bergen County fire departments have been saving money on new equipment by joining a common purchasing plan.
Last fall, officials from 50 of the county's 70 towns met in Ridgefield Park to discuss rising garbage costs.


Text of House's Measure to Protect the Flag
LEAD: Following is the text of the bill approved by the House of Representatives today to outlaw the burning or mutilation of the American flag:  A BILL


Treasury Prices Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: The prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in continued sluggish trading yesterday.
For the second straight session, short- to intermediate-term issues outperformed longer-dated securities.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Lloyd Bentsen proposed restoring I.R.A.'s on a widely available, tax-deductible basis as an alternative to President Bush's plan to lower the capital gains tax rate.
The move by the Senate Finance Committee chairman represents an attempt by Democrats to capture some political advantage on the tax issue.


Eating Well
LEAD: THOUGH it's hard to recall now, eggs once had high status.
They were thought of as a wholesome, natural and nutritious food.
But no more.


Fuji Bank To Buy Unit Of Kleinwort
LEAD: Fuji Bank Ltd. and Kleinwort Benson Ltd. announced yesterday that Fuji had agreed to buy 100 percent of the stock in Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc., a Chicago-based dealer in Treasury securities.


Bravery and Service Medals For Young in '88 Announced
LEAD: A girl who saved a tourist from drowning in Hawaii and a California youth who disarmed a fellow student holding 70 people hostage will receive the 1988 Young American Medals for Bravery, the Justice Department has announced.


Ammirati Drops Post
LEAD: Ammirati &amp; Puris resigned yesterday as The New York Post's agency for consumer advertising.
The agency had signed on last spring to help Peter O. Price, then the newspaper's publisher, start its Sunday issue.
Mr.
Price was a personal friend of the agency's chairman, Martin F. Puris.
But Mr.
Price subsequently left The Post, and the paper's Sunday issue has been considerably smaller than originally planned.


Paramount Net Declines 20%
LEAD: Paramount Communications Inc., the former Gulf and Western Inc., said yesterday that its net income for the third quarter dropped 20 percent, to $96.3 million, or 80 cents a share, from $120.5 million, or $1 a share, in the comparable quarter last year.
Its revenues rose 19.5 percent, to $950.6 million from $795 million.


Philip L. Boyd, Politician, 88
LEAD: Philip L. Boyd, the first Mayor of Palm Springs, died at Eisenhower Mecical Center in Rancho Mirage Saturday after suffering a fall.
He was 88 years old.


Excerpts of Koch Concession And Dinkins Victory Speech
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Mayor Edward I. Koch's concession speech and Borough President David N. Dinkins's victory speech as recorded by The New York Times.
Dinkins


House Passes Rewritten Law Barring Flag Burning
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved legislation today to outlaw flag burning in the aftermath of the Supreme Court's decision that such acts are protected under the First Amendment.


Ethiopia Leader Sees Trouble From Rebels in Peace Talks
LEAD: Faced with fresh fighting in the north and a dismal economy, the Ethiopian leader, Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam, presided today over the 15th anniversary of his revolution, one of the most subdued celebrations ever.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Bridge
LEAD: France and Brazil edged ahead of their rivals today in the qualifying stage of the world team championships, with Australia and Taiwan in pursuit.
The Brazilians won an important match tonight by beating the Australians 20-10.


New Twist In Bidding For Utility
LEAD: The maneuvering to end the 20-month bankruptcy of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire took an unanticipated and complex twist yesterday, as the bidding for the beleaguered electric system moved in opposite directions.


Sri Lankan Woman Slain
LEAD: The sister-in-law of former President J. R. Jayewardene was killed today by two gunmen at a traffic intersection in downtown Colombo, the police said.
Though no one claimed responsibility for the killing, the police said they believe the gunmen were members of the People's Liberation Front, a Sinhalese group trying to overthrow the Government.


In Face of Protests, Bush Decides To Back Change in Medicare Plan
LEAD: Facing waves of protest from the elderly over new taxes, the White House said for the first time today that it would support modifications of a Medicare program that protects older Americans from the huge costs of extended illness.


New Unit at Hearst
LEAD: Seeking greater publishing opportunities abroad, the Hearst Corporation said last week that it would create a new operating unit, Hearst Magazines International.
The unit will concentrate on building markets for Hearst publications in Europe, Latin America and Asia and will be headed by George J. Green, an executive vice president of the magazine division.


Dunkin' Donuts Talks With Bidder
LEAD: Dunkin' Donuts Inc. said it was talking with the DD Acquisition Corporation about providing the hostile bidder with confidential data and arranging a meeting.
The disclosure came a day after the Randolph, Mass., doughnut chain rejected DD Acquisition's sweetened $45-a-share takeover offer as inadequate.


N.C.A.A. Says It Wants to Police Itself
LEAD: Describing the issue as a battle over turf and not education, Richard Schultz, executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, told a Senate committee at a hearing today that he favored mandatory disclosure of student-athlete graduation rates, but that the mandate should come from the N.C.A.A.


Fraud Is Cited at Miniscribe
LEAD: According to an internal report released by the Miniscribe Corporation, former senior managers of the computer disk-drive maker ''perpetrated a massive fraud'' on the company for the last three years.


At Polls, Homeless Have a Voice in New York


Once More (Sigh), The Plum Torte
LEAD: FOR the last six years the plum torte column, written in response to repeated demands for the recipe, has heralded the end of summer.


A Crowd on Defense As Devils Get Ready
LEAD: The Devils' two Soviet defensemen will not play in the team's first exhibition game Saturday, but are expected to make their debut next week in Madison Square Garden.


No Quid Pro Sweat
LEAD: I saw in the paper that most college basketball and football players don't graduate.
I was shocked.
So shocked that I went personally to Buck Backbreaker, athletic director of my alma mater, dear old Alma Mater U. There were tears in my eyes when I intercepted him outside his office. ''Say it ain't so, Buck,'' I said.


A White Leader of Namibian Nationalists Is Killed
LEAD: Anton Lubowski, a white leader of the South-West Africa People's Organization guerrilla movement, was assassinated today outside his home in suburban Windhoek, the police said.


Give the Poor Better Choices Than Drug Dealing and Addiction
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Crosscurrents on Dress in High Schools
LEAD: Across the country this school term, more and more high school students are finding that peer pressure to wear ''in'' clothes and to sport the latest haircuts is clashing with dress and hair codes that impose official ideas of fashion.


In Phone Strike, Coping Is Very Big on Campus
LEAD: For students at New York University, the talk this week is not so much about science requirements or Friday night dates as about who knows the closest working pay telephone and what is the best way to get a phone installed.


Need Should Determine Student Financial Aid; Vets Benefits Ending
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture yesterday with an article about the fatal shooting of a man accused in a Federal racketeering case was published in error.
It showed the scene of the murder of Duane Lewis, an 18-year-old student killed in Brooklyn, and not the scene of the murder of Fred E. Weiss on Staten Island.


Coffee Prices Fall on News Of U.S. Stance on Quotas
LEAD: Coffee futures prices plunged yesterday on New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange on indications the United States will not support a return to international export quotas that would raise coffee prices.


Start Deferred Could Be Start Denied
LEAD: The Bush Administration seems to be deliberately going nowhere in strategic arms talks with the Soviets even while actively pursuing an East-West agreement to reduce conventional forces in Europe.
Its eagerness for conventional cuts is laudable, but not its inclination to slow Start.


Hynes Wins Nomination For Prosecutor
LEAD: Charles J. Hynes, a veteran prosecutor in his first campaign for elective office, won the Democratic nomination for Brooklyn district attorney yesterday.
The nomination is virtually tantamout to election in the heavily Democratic borough.


60-minute Gourmet
LEAD: LOIN of pork is a particularly versatile asset in the arsenal of a time-pressed home cook.
When trimmed of fat and cut into serving portions, pork loin can be used in countless recipes that require little fussing.


KREMLIN OFFICIAL ARRIVES IN BEIJING
LEAD: In the highest-level visit by a Soviet official since normalization of relations between Moscow and Beijing in May, the Soviet Vice President arrived here today for six days of discussions with Chinese leaders.


Too Much Opinion, at the Expense of Fact
LEAD: If Walter Lippmann were alive, he probably would wonder how the media had come to find themselves in league with government, helping shape public attitudes rather than questioning, examining and describing the real world to the fullest extent possible.


Don Walker, 81, an Orchestrator Of Broadway Musical Comedies
LEAD: Don Walker, a musician who did the orchestration for dozens of Broadway shows, died yesterday at Mercer Medical Center in Trenton after a long illness.
He was 81 years old and lived in New Hope, Pa.


Pilots' Union Is Divided By Walkout at Eastern
LEAD: The union that represents the vast majority of the nation's airline pilots has been drained by the six-month strike at Eastern Airlines and has begun polling its membership on whether to continue financial support for the walkout.


Amid Fear Over AIDS, One Dentist Offers Care
LEAD: Some call Dr.
Michael Glick a hero because he is a dentist who treats only patients who have AIDS, syphilis, hepatitis, tuberculosis and other contagious diseases.
But Dr.
Glick says the praise heaped on him is a sad commentary on his profession.


Making the Town Dump Sanitary
LEAD: Giant earth-moving machines growl across a hillside, gouging a huge gash in the ground.
Along the bottom of the hole, other equipment is spreading and compacting a thick layer of clay.
Later, layers of plastic sheeting will be added and a network of pipes installed, all to insure that no water seeps into the local water table.


Family-Friendly Employers
LEAD: Last week, seven large New York employers combined to offer emergency child care, at home, for more than 13,000 employees.
The program, the first of its kind in the country, is a one-year experiment.
But its existence shows how much the workplace is changing to accommodate working parents.


Richard D. Thruelsen, Author and Editor, 81
LEAD: Richard D. Thruelsen, an author and magazine editor, died of cancer on Sunday at his home in Old Lyme, Conn.
He was 81 years old.


Yugoslav Communists Anticipate Competition
LEAD: The Yugoslav Communist Party has suggested that the nation's Constitution should no longer enshrine the party's leading role in society.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transcription error, excerpts from Mayor Edward I. Koch's concession speech in some copies yesterday carried an incomplete reference to the winner of the New York City Democratic primary.
Mr.
Koch said: ''I just called David


HEALTH: Ophthalmology; Smoking of Cigarettes Is Linked for First Time To a Form of Cataracts
LEAD: For the first time, researchers have found evidence linking cigarette smoking and the formation of cataracts.


Jail Deaths Spur Talk of Release
LEAD: A Federal judge has taken under advisement a request to release up to 500 misdemeanor offenders from an overcrowded jail where a mysterious bacterial infection has killed two prisoners.


Bush Reconsiders Nominee To Oversee A-Plants' Safety
LEAD: The Bush Administration is reconsidering a widely criticized nomination to an Energy Department position, Deputy Secretary Henson Moore said today.


ERC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ERC Industries
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,961,000
3,346,000
Net inc
b231,000
47,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
7,126,000
6,185,000
Net inc
b357,000
c518,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included provisions for income taxes of $126,000 for the quarter and $198,000 for the 6 months, of which $116,000 and $181,000, respectively, represented non-cash charges reflecting the income tax benefit of the utilization of the company's net operating loss carryforward.


Ennis Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ennis Business Forms (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
32,894,000
32,341,000
Net inc
5,207,000
4,676,000
Share earns
.39
.34
6mo sales
65,109,000
63,220,000
Net inc
9,765,000
8,842,000
Share earns
.73
.65


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 3 about festivities marking the 20th anniversary of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi's rise to power incorrectly included one group as among those attending.
The group, Women Against Military Madness, based in Minneapolis, says it did not send a delegation and was not officially represented.


Mecklowitz Seeks to Stay Chancellor
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Bernard Mecklowitz, who earlier said he did not want to be considered for the job beyond December, when his contract ends, said yesterday that he has changed his mind and become a candidate.


Expanded Effort To Lure Raiders
LEAD: Sacramento County joined the city today in backing plans to lure the Los Angeles Raiders with $50 million in public funds.
The move led to a prediction from the Sacramento Sports Association head, Gregg Lukenbill, that the deal would be made in four to six weeks.


Ferdinand F. E. Kopecky, Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Ferdinand F. E. Kopecky, a retired patent lawyer, died of a heart attack on Aug. 29 at his home in the Bronx.
He was 82 years old.


Colombia Debates Role Of U.S. Armed Forces
LEAD: As Colombia continues its war on cocaine traffickers, a debate broke out here today over an age-old specter in Latin America: North American troops on South American soil.


Dukakis Offers Plan to Fight Discrimination in Mortgages
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis announced a plan today to make sure there is no discrimination in mortgage lending, including expanded enforcement and new legislation to give regulators more powers.


Pittsburgh Prices Unlimited Bonds
LEAD: The City of Pittsburgh priced $60 million in improvement unlimited tax bonds yesterday through competitive bidding.


A Pottery Style's Rebirth
LEAD: ALONG with the growing interest in Arts and Crafts furniture has come new demand for ceramics in that style.
Several sources are once again manufacturing Arts and Crafts tiles and pottery.


C. Edward Quinn, 63, A Professor of Biology
LEAD: Brother C. Edward Quinn, a professor of biology at Manhattan College for 30 years, died of heart failure Tuesday at the Christian Brothers Center in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 63 years old.


Cotton Prices Rise Sharply As Grain and Soybeans Fall
LEAD: Cotton futures prices rose sharply on the New York Cotton Exchange yesterday, climbing as much as 2 cents a pound, the permitted daily limit, on fresh signs of shrinking world supplies.


Go After Companies That Abuse Pension Funds; Look to Savings
LEAD: To the Editor:


Envoy Nominee Withdraws In H.U.D. Contracts Inquiry
LEAD: White House officials said today that the Administration's nominee as Ambassador to Luxembourg had withdrawn from consideration for the post after Senate Democrats told the Administration that he would not be confirmed.


Aluminum Unit In Sale to Noranda
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc. said it would sell the rolling division of its National Aluminum Corporation subsidiary to Noranda USA Inc., a subsidiary of Noranda Inc. of Toronto, for $117.7 million.
National Aluminum's unit employs about 500 workers in Caldwell, Ohio; Salisbury, N.C., and Newport, Ark.


SRI LANKA BEGINS TALKS ON STRIFE
LEAD: In a climate of tension, exhaustion and fear, representatives of almost all Sri Lankan political parties and ethnic groups came together in a heavily guarded conference hall here today to begin a monthlong search for a political formula to stem the drift into anarchy.


Getty Is Selling 15 Paintings
LEAD: The J. Paul Getty Museum announced yesterday that it would sell 15 paintings by Gauguin, Degas, Monet, Bonnard and Utrillo at Sotheby's in London in November.
Most of the paintings, which are expected to bring $13 million to $18 million, were acquired between 1956 and 1975 by Mr.
Getty, who died in 1976.


Aileen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aileen Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
16,726,000
17,064,000
Net loss
1,319,000
b852,000
Share earns
-
.17
9mo sales
45,128,000
44,610,000
Net loss
3,049,000
b439,000
Share earns
-
.09


Neuharth on Neuharth: Plotter, and Proud of It
LEAD: In the course of a lengthy career at the Gannett Company, Allen H. Neuharth schemed to remove his mentor, eavesdropped on a rival, manipulated his colleagues and board, and fumbled a merger with CBS because, as he puts it, his ego outran his brain.


Transnational Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transnational Industries
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,000,000
7,695,000
Net inc
106,000
c257,000
Share earns
.02
.10
6mo sales
15,498,000
15,977,000
Net inc
b332,000
c505,000
Share earns
.09
.19


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


SENATE WEIGHS BAN ON FLIGHT SMOKING
LEAD: Temporarily frustrated by the parliamentary maneuvers of tobacco-state lawmakers, who are outnumbered but determined, the Senate today debated but did not vote on a measure that would permanently ban smoking on all domestic airline flights.


Pan Am Exploring Stake Sale Abroad
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation said it was exploring the possibility of a partial sale to foreigners to survive in the global economy of the 1990's.
In an address at a luncheon of aviation industry executives in New York, the company's chairman and chief executive, Thomas G. Plaskett, suggested that Pan Am viewed foreign ownership as the most realistic way to escape an era of staggering losses that have mired the company in debt and left its future in doubt.


2 NOMINEES CLASH IN RACE FOR MAYOR WITH HARSH WORDS
LEAD: David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani began the battle yesterday for the middle ground of undecided and independent voters, exchanging harsh attacks only hours after winning the Democratic and Republican primaries for mayor.


Bond Sells Off His Lonrho Stake
LEAD: The Australian business executive Alan Bond sold his 20.4 percent stake in the British trading conglomerate Lonrho P.L.C. to financial institutions at a price of $:2.80 ($4.34) each.
The Bond holding totaled 114.3 million shares; Lonrho has about 560 million shares outstanding.


Rangers Hope for Big Lift From Little Center
LEAD: ''I got drafted by one regime, signed by another regime, and now I'll get to play for another regime,'' said Corey Millen. ''I've found it pretty interesting.''


Capitals Defeat Swedish Team
LEAD: Steve Leach and Mike Ridley scored goals in the third period today to lead Washington to a 3-1 victory over Brynas of the Swedish Elite League.
It was the Capital's last exhibition game before they begin a tour of the Soviet Union.


Personal Health
LEAD: As increasing numbers of Americans use their feet to improve their bodies, ankles are taking a beating.
Especially at risk are people who run, walk, hike, play tennis or basketball, skate, cross-country ski or dance.


The Candidates on the Issues
LEAD: In separate interviews last month with The New York Times, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani discussed their views on major issues facing New Yorkers.
Here are excerpts from their responses:


For the Jews of Italy, a History of Harmony
LEAD: At the entrance to the Jewish Museum's ''Gardens and Ghettos: The Art of Jewish Life in Italy'' is a plaster cast of a portion of the Arch of Titus, built in A.D. 81 in Rome to celebrate a victory over the Romans' most rebellious and disobedient province, Judea.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adidas A.G., Munich, West Germany, a maker of sporting goods, said Peter V. Ueberroth, the former Major League Baseball commissioner, would take a stake in the company and its three U.S. subsidiaries.
Under the agreement, Mr.
Ueberroth has an option until 1992 to buy up to 25 percent of Adidas in newly issued shares and a stake below 50 percent in its U.S.


Dow Loses 27.74 Points to Close at 2,679.52
LEAD: Stocks dropped sharply yesterday, as weaker bond and dollar prices prompted a late round of program trading.


Birthday Party at Bemelmans for Madeline, at 50
LEAD: Madeline is 50 now, though she looks as small as ever in her portrait on the wall of the Bemelmans Bar at the Carlyle Hotel.
Indeed, this elegant Manhattan establishment isn't exactly ''an old house in Paris, covered with vines,'' where ''lived 12 little girls in two straight lines.'' Those words are familiar to millions of little girls, past and present, who have read ''Madeline,'' Ludwig


Joseph P. Carucci, 76, Stock Concern Founder
LEAD: Joseph P. Carucci, a stockbroker, died of cardiac arrest Monday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 76 years old and lived in Kings Point, L.I.


Journalists in the Front Lines Of Colombia's Cocaine War
LEAD: Every morning, Maria Jimena Duzan leaves her bomb-proofed apartment, greets her armed police guard and drives a randomly chosen route to work.


Lorenz Graham, 87, Children's-Book Writer
LEAD: Lorenz Graham, a prize-winning author of children's books, died of cancer Monday in the Hospice of the East San Gabriel Valley in West Covina, Calif.
He was 87 years old and lived in Claremont, Calif.


Lucy C. Ferguson, 89, Island Preservationist
LEAD: Lucy Carnegie Ferguson, a member of the industrialist Carnegie family who worked most of her life to preserve Cumberland Island, died Monday night after a long illness.
She was 89 years old.


Safecard Services reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safecard Services (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
28,550,000
26,586,000
Net inc
5,783,000
6,051,000
Share earns
.20
.18
Shares outst
28,253,000
32,847,000
9mo rev
85,166,000
80,153,000
Net inc
b18,663,000
20,917,000
Share earns
.61
.64
Shares outst
30,646,000
32,850,000


Edwards Goes to Japan
LEAD: Teresa Edwards, who played on the United States women's basketball teams that won gold medals in the Olympic Games of 1984 and 1988, has signed a one-year, six-figure guaranteed contract with Mitsubishi Electric Sales America, to play with the Mitsubishi basketball team in Nagoya, Japan, next season.


Mr. Dinkins, Self-Defined
LEAD: In one stroke, David Dinkins has become one of the leading black political figures in the country and in one revealing moment early Wednesday morning, he gave an eloquent idea of who he is.


Wiener Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wiener Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
21,621,000
23,437,000
Net loss
57,000
b444,000
Share earns
-
.19
6mo sales
43,465,000
45,745,000
Net loss
47,000
b1,249,000
Share earns
-
.53


Chrysler in Europe
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, the No. 3 United States car maker, expects to ship about 50,000 vehicles to Europe this year and could double the figure within two years, its chairman, Lee A. Iacocca, said.
Chrysler sold 31,000 vehicles in Europe last year, its first full year of sales, and revenues from Europe have already passed $1 billion, he told reporters attending the Frankfurt Auto Show.


European Jews at Odds on Catholic Relations
LEAD: The president of the European Jewish Congress, taking issue with a French colleague's interpretation, declared today that the organization had not backed a suspension of formal contacts between Jewish groups and the Roman Catholic Church.


From Bulbous to Saucerlike, Innovative Shapes in Basketry
LEAD: ''THE Tactile Vessel: New Basket Forms,'' which opened Aug. 29 at the American Craft Museum in Manhattan, stretches all notions of the medium.
The 32 baskets on view are fashioned from an astonishing variety of materials, employing innovative techniques beyond traditional coiling, twining and interlacing.


The Soviets Proudly Present Their Friendly K.G.B. Agent
LEAD: The K.G.B. stepped up its charm offensive today with the premiere of a new film on the benign patriotism and just-folks life styles of the Soviet secret police.


Results in Tuesday's Primary Elections
LEAD:  Democrat  MAYOR  David N. Dinkins ... 537,887  Edward I. Koch* ... 445,941  Richard Ravitch ... 48,289  Harrison J. Goldin ... 28,792  CITY COUNCIL PRESIDENT  Andrew J. Stein* ... 593,101  Rafael Mendez ... 193,842  COMPTROLLER  Elizabeth Holtzman ... 431,490  Alan G.


U.S. Rejects Increase in Aid for Poland
LEAD: Despite appeals from Congress and officials in Poland, the Bush Administration has ruled out any major, immediate efforts to provide economic assistance to Poland, Administration officials said today.


'Junk Bond' Holdings
LEAD: The ''junk bond'' holdings of United States savings institutions fell to $13.25 billion in the second quarter from $14.36 billion as of March 31, Bauer Financial Reports Inc. said yesterday.
The Coral Gables, Fla., concern said its report was based on surveys it conducted and data released by Federal regulators as of June 30.


Folk Art, Through New Eyes
LEAD: FRANK MIELE, who runs Hirschl &amp; Adler Folk, has always been fascinated with how colleagues who deal in contemporary art view folk art.


Doubts About the Cholesterol Crusade
LEAD: Does reducing cholesterol, by diet or with special drugs, lessen the risk of heart disease?
Yes, says a broad consensus of experts represented by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the American Heart Association.
No, contends a vigorously iconoclastic article by Thomas J. Moore in the current Atlantic Monthly.


BEI Holdings Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Holdings Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,515,907
7,631,962
Net loss
3,387,230
b6,408,670
Share earns
-
.71
9mo rev
19,807,435
21,022,035
Net loss
4,776,258
b6,522,273
Share earns
-
.72


Foster Child Declared Brain Dead; Police Investigate Possible Abuse
LEAD: A 2-year-old girl in foster care who was brought into a Queens hospital Monday evening with bruises and abrasions on her head and face has been declared brain dead, the police said yesterday.


Jury in Los Angeles Acquits Five in Protests of Abortions
LEAD: The leader of the militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue and four associates were acquitted today of trespassing charges for blocking entrances to clinics where they said abortions were performed.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hear the One About Admen Telling Jokes?
LEAD: MIKE BERMAN, a copywriter at Geer, Dubois, furrowed his brow in deep thought before explaining why he had entered the ''Funniest Person in Advertising'' contest. ''There are three rites of passage for the Jewish male,'' he said. ''Circumcision, bar mitzvah and stand-up.''


Excerpts of the Victory Speeches of Dinkins and Giuliani
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the victory speeches of David N. Dinkins, the Democratic nominee for mayor of New York City, and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican nominee, as recorded Tuesday night by The New York Times.
Dinkins


Evangelist May Shut Hospital
LEAD: The evangelist Oral Roberts announced today that he will close his City of Faith Hospital and Medical School and sell his home to help make up for a $25 million deficit caused by a drop in donations.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 1 about Lech Walesa's comments on Solidarity's ninth anniversary referred incorrectly to Jan Nowak, a wartime resistance hero.
He chronicled his wartime experiences under the nom de guerre Jan Nowak (the name by which he is now known), not Jan Karski.
Mr.
Karski is another writer who documented the Polish resistance.


Canal Capital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canal Capital Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,292,000
7,029,000
Net loss
230,000
b1,072,000
Share earns
-
.17
9mo rev
17,546,000
17,865,000
Net inc
312,000
578,000
b-Net income  The latest periods' revenue figures have been reclassified to conform with the current year's presentation.


Pilots' Offer for UAL Is Said to Be Ready
LEAD: The $300-a-share offer for the UAL Corporation by the pilots' union and the company's top management is to be presented to a meeting of UAL's independent directors in Chicago today, people close to those making the bid said yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  An apartheid protest in Cape Town, which was permitted by the Government, was the biggest public display of opposition in South Africa since a state of emergency was imposed 39 months ago.
Page A1


H. W. Stunkard, 100, a Biologist
LEAD: Horace W. Stunkard, a parasitologist who was chairman of the Department of Biology at New York University for 29 years, died of a heart attack Sunday at the Falmouth (Mass.) Nursing Home.
He was 100 years old.


Wild Paving Roller Crushes Sleeping Man in New Jersey
LEAD: A homeless man was reported in critical condition today after a paving roller ran over him while he was sleeping.


Destruction of Our Schools and Fear in the Streets Are Connected
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reubin Clein, 83, Dies; Published Miami Life
LEAD: Reubin Clein, the scrappy publisher of the weekly tabloid Miami Life, died of pancreatic cancer on Saturday at Desert Springs Hospital in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 83 years old and lived in Las Vegas, where he had moved after his retirement in 1965.


Gas Explosion in Kentucky Leaves 10 Coal Miners Dead
LEAD: Methane gas exploded in a coal mine near here today, killing 10 miners in the nation's worst coal mine disaster in five years.


A Late-Comer Is Off To a Very Fast Start
LEAD: It took Bud Carson 33 years to become a head coach in the National Football League, and just one game to learn to worry when you win by 51-0.


Pall Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pall Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
143,959,000
122,998,000
Net inc
23,835,000
19,087,000
Share earns
.62
.51
Yr sales
496,997,000
434,019,000
Net inc
57,681,000
56,762,000
Share earns
1.51
1.50


Washington Talk; The Ideal Of Service By Youth Is Revived
LEAD: After nearly a decade out of circulation, the notion that millions of American youth should be induced, and perhaps even required, to perform some form of public service is hard currency again.


Go After Companies That Abuse Pension Funds; Short-Term Surtax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agency Rent-A-Car reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agency Rent-A-Car (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
68,222,000
53,174,000
Net inc
4,744,000
5,514,000
Share earns
.19
.22
Shares outst
25,108,000
24,641,000
6mo rev
129,553,000
98,351,000
Net inc
7,420,000
10,518,000
Share earns
.30
.42
Shares outst
25,062,000
24,593,000


Sanderson Helps Cubs Sweep Expos, 3-1
LEAD: Scott Sanderson, making his first start since Aug. 18, allowed no runs in five and one-third innings tonight, and the streaking Chicago Cubs completed a three-game sweep with a 3-1 victory over the Montreal Expos.


Go After Companies That Abuse Pension Funds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wallace Computer Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wallace Computer Services Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
109,707,000
98,092,000
Net inc
10,023,000
7,974,000
Share earns
.48
.39
Yr sales
429,008,000
383,045,000
Net inc
36,867,000
31,610,000
Share earns
1.76
1.53


Temperance Union Still Going Strong
LEAD: Inside the red-brick headquarters of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union here, a bell sounds every day at two minutes before noon.
For those two minutes, members of the temperance union are supposed to pray for prohibition.


Curator for Mapplethorpe Show Resigns Corcoran Posts
LEAD: Jane Livingston, the curator who arranged the ill-fated Robert Mapplethorpe retrospective at the Corcoran Gallery of Art, resigned this morning, the museum announced.


A Boutique as Glamorous As the Clothes Inside It
LEAD: TODAY'S fashion designers who have become retailers are as consumed with the look of their shops as with the clothes.
This is especially noticeable these days in the flourishing Flatiron district of Manhattan, where shops like Emporio Armani, Paul Smith and Williwear have become neighbors.


Mayflower Co-Operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mayflower Co-Operative Bank
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
130,000
194,000
Share earns
.15
.22
Latest quarter results included $2,000 of gains on investment securities, compared to $98,000 a year ago.
The company said it transferred loans totaling $1,202,000 to non-accrual status in the latest quarter and charged $90,000 to first quarter earnings.


Dollar in a Broad Decline; Gold Prices Up on Comex
LEAD: The dollar declined against all key foreign currencies in quiet trading yesteday.


Suspect Held in Attacks On Elderly in Brooklyn
LEAD: A Brooklyn man has been arrested and charged with assaulting and robbing elderly members of the Hasidic community, the police said yesterday.


SCS-Compute Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SCS-Compute Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,531,000
2,511,000
Net loss
2,425,000
b1,744,000
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $497,000.


Photo Engravers &amp; Electroypers Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photo Engravers &amp; Electroypers Ltd
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,339,871
3,240,994
Net loss
842,709
b153,961
Share earns
-
.20
6mo sales
18,301,706
18,939,769
Net loss
421,177
b1,008,480
Share earns
-
1.31


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: FROM May until October I sleep badly.
I like a cold room and piles of blankets, and carving a warm nest out of icy sheets.
All I have enjoyed about this summer, most summers really, are the evening rains.
Like winter winds they've made me glad to be indoors, safe and sound, at rest in what, haunted by the childhood phrase, I always call ''my own little bed.


Emons Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emons Holdings
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,820,531
1,804,838
Net inc
b319,389
c197,053
Share earns
.06
.04
Yr rev
9,391,426
7,223,277
Net inc
b2,054,009
c1,155,516
Share earns
.38
.22
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $92,324, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and $641,798, or 12 cents a share, for the year.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about President Bush's broadcast on drugs to schoolchildren misidentified the school shown.
It was the Signal Hill School in Dix Hills, L.I.


Third President in Year Named By Auto Renter
LEAD: Agency-Rent-A-Car Inc. elevated Terry W. Holt to president yesterday, following the resignation last month of Kenneth J. Lorek as president and chief financial officer.


NEW ELECTION PLAN HAS MIDEAST ASTIR
LEAD: Intrigued by President Hosni Mubarak's 10-point plan for holding Palestinian elections in the occupied territories, a large group of leading West Bank Palestinians left for Cairo this week to discuss the proposal with Egyptian officials.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Smithsonian Institution's agreement to return skeletons of American Indians to their tribes repeated an earlier error regarding the American Anthropological Association.
The association, which has no such bones in its possession, has never taken a position on the issue but has designated a commission, including two anthropologists who are American Indians, to recommend a policy for adoption at its annual meeting in November 1990.


For First Time, Democrats Choose A Black for Mayor in New Haven
LEAD: State Senator John C. Daniels, scoring well in all but a handful of New Haven's 30 wards, defeated his party's endorsed candidate to become the first black Democratic nominee for mayor in this overwhelmingly Democratic city.


French Sign LeMond To $5.5 Million Contract
LEAD: Greg LeMond announced yesterday that he would ride next year for the France-based Z team under a three-year contract worth a minimum of $5.5 million.
The agreement more than doubled the previous top salary in bicycle racing.


This Time, the Other Stottlemyre Might Provide Playoff Tickets
LEAD: The balance of playoff power in the Stottlemyre household may be on the verge of changing.


Espey Mfg &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Espey Mfg &amp; Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,491,869
3,110,170
Net inc
352,841
531,787
Share earns
.29
.45
Yr sales
14,243,888
13,137,908
Net inc
2,222,159
b2,138,775
Share earns
1.90
1.79


Seamus Twomey, 70, a Leader of Provisional I.R.A.
LEAD: Seamus Twomey, a leader of the Irish Republican Army, died Tuesday in a Dublin hospital.
He was 70 years old and had been suffering from a heart ailment.


House Votes Futures Bill
LEAD: The House today unanimously approved a bill intended to strengthen oversight of the nation's futures markets and improve their record keeping.


McDonnell Order
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said Alaska Air Group Inc. had ordered six MD-80 twin-jet aircraft in a deal valued at about $180 million.
McDonnell Douglas said its Douglas Aircraft Company unit would deliver the first of the short- to medium-range jets to Alaska Airlines in October 1993.


Canadian Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Western Bank
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
611,000
43,000
Share earns
.15
.01
9mo net inc
1,356,000
-
Share earns
.34
-
The bank was formed in April 1988 through the merger of Bank of Alberta and Western &amp; Pacific Bank of Canada and year-ago figures for the 9-month period were not available.


Teacher Union Faults History Books
LEAD: The five most commonly used high school history textbooks barely touch on such major figures as Washington and Lincoln and they largely ignore the passion and political significance of religion and economics in American history, according to a new study by the American Federation of Teachers.


Campbell Soup Co Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campbell Soup Co Ltd.
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Revenue
102,900,000
85,100,000
Net inc
b800,000
c8,300,000
Share earns
.06
.56
Yr rev
413,800,000
393,300,000
Net inc
b17,500,000
c21,900,000
Share earns
1.18
1.47


Murdoch Bidding for MGM/UA
LEAD: Just two weeks before it was to be sold to the Qintex Group of Australia for $1 billion, the MGM/UA Communications Company today received a surprise $1.35 billion counteroffer from Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.


Josette Frank, 96, Dies; Children's Book Expert
LEAD: Josette Frank, an authority on books for children and a consultant on children's programming for radio and television, died of pneumonia Saturday at a nursing home in Alexandria, Va., where she lived.
She was 96 years old.


Market Place; Cross &amp; Trecker's Debt Difficulties
LEAD: ON Tuesday, the Cross &amp; Trecker Corporation, one of the country's largest makers of factory automation systems and machine tools, said it had received an extension of a default deadline of last Friday on a $2 million industrial revenue bond.
Few analysts who follow the company were encouraged by the news.


Los Angeles Mayor Faces Suit on Ethics; No Crime Is Charged
LEAD: The City Attorney of Los Angeles filed a civil suit today against Mayor Tom Bradley, charging that he failed to disclose six personal investments as required by California law.
But the City Attorney, ending five months of inquiry into possible conflicts of interest by the Mayor, said there was not enough evidence to press criminal charges.


U.S. Oil Flow Down 6.6%
LEAD: Domestic crude oil production dropped 6.6 percent in August from the period a year earlier, falling to the lowest daily output level in 26 years, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.


A Personal Shopper, for Any Quest
LEAD: DO you need a dinner setting for 12?
A wardrobe for your first job?
A wok for the kitchen?
Susan Guth and Nancy Missett will buy them for you.


Helene Curtis's Secrets: Innovation and Timing
LEAD: With a flair for innovation, a large advertising budget and a good sense of timing, an old name in hair-care products is emerging as a leader in the brutally competitive field.


When Talk Is About, Not Across, Fences
LEAD: ONE pretty morning it wasn't there; but by lunchtime there it was: a 6-foot-high wooden stockade, grim, gray and spiked, across 40 feet of front lawn smack in the middle of the block.
On Mechanic Street that day, the emotional barometric pressure fell precipitously.


Sands Regent reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sands Regent (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,507,000
8,588,000
Net inc
1,238,000
1,793,000
Share earns
.37
.54
Shares outst
3,320,466
3,309,071
Yr rev
31,945,000
30,049,000
Net inc
5,420,000
4,103,000
Share earns
1.63
1.24
Shares outst
3,316,659
3,307,111


Jewelmasters Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jewelmasters Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
10,759,243
15,744,239
Net loss
864,685
b444,291
Share earns
-
.22
6mo sales
24,974,094
25,666,161
Net loss
994,655
b42,004
Share earns
-
.02


The Vote for Mayor and Comptroller, District by District
LEAD: (NOTE: This table may be divided, and additional information on a particular entry may appear on more than one screen.)
DEMOCRATIC MAYOR
Koch
Dinkins
Goldin
Ravitch
A. D. BRONX
73. Mott Haven, Hunts Point
5,092
12,519
634
776
74. Soundview, Bronx River
5,223
11,418
524
456
75.


Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
69,145,000
66,335,000
Net inc
1,426,000
1,353,000
Share earns
.23
.22
6mo rev
118,875,000
112,480,000
Net inc
1,527,000
1,117,000
Share earns
.25
.18


Guerrillas Begin Salvador Talks By Offering a 3-Stage Peace Plan
LEAD: Negotiations between the Government of El Salvador and the leftist guerrillas seeking its overthrow began here today, with the rebels presenting a peace proposal to bring the decade-long civil war to an end in three stages over the next five months.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Thousands of Marchers Conduct Multiracial Protest in Cape Town
LEAD: A multiracial crowd of thousands of South Africans surged through this city today in a march permitted by the Government.
It was the biggest public display of opposition to apartheid that the nation has witnessed since emergency rule was imposed more than three years ago.


Westerbeke Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westerbeke Corp
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
3,969,400
4,544,400
Net inc
12,300
36,700
Share earns
.01
.02
9mo sales
10,970,000
14,031,800
Net loss
259,200
b76,800
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Stuarts Dept Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stuarts Dept Stores (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
31,670,000
31,021,000
Net loss
143,000
b232,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
58,596,000
57,062,000
Net loss
172,000
b283,000
Share earns
-
.07


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 3 P.M.


10 Tibetans Sentenced in Rioting
LEAD: Chinese courts have sentenced 10 Tibetans to prison terms ranging from three years to life on charges of rioting and spying during pro-independence unrest in March, the official New China News Agency said today.


President Plans Bill to Aid in Adoption
LEAD: Seeking to deal with what he called ''one of America's most difficult and saddest problems,'' President Bush today announced legislative proposals to encourage the adoption of children who have disabilities, who are members of minorities or who are otherwise difficult to place.


A Portrait of the Primary Voters
LEAD:  THE DEMOCRATS
*2*All Voters
$ J*2*Whites
*2*Blacks
White
Black
Dinkins
Koch
Dinkins
Koch
$60%
29%
Total
29%
61%
93%
3%
*4*Sex
$28
11
Men
29
60
89
2 32
19
Women
29
61
96
4
*4*Age
$


Kirstein, 82, To Retire As Director Of City Ballet
LEAD: Lincoln Kirstein announced yesterday that he would retire on Nov. 1 as the New York City Ballet's general director and as the president of the School of American Ballet.


Bush Agrees to Compromise On Financing of Drug Plan
LEAD: The Bush Administration agreed today to small across-the-board cuts in Federal programs to raise money for fighting drugs, rather than deeper cuts in just a handful of specific programs.


Deal in Advanced TV By Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. said today that it had become the first company outside Japan to acquire the designs chip makers need to compete in the vast market in high-definition television that is expected to emerge by the mid-1990's.


The Monster That Haunts The Mets
LEAD: In the closing days of 1984 and 1985, when it was clear the Mets were not going to win this time, the players took curtain calls for their adoring fans.


Arrow Automotive Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Automotive Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 24
1989
1988
Sales
25,455,000
28,004,000
Net loss
805,000
b56,000
Share earns
-
.02
Yr sales
97,532,000
106,547,000
Net loss
3,907,000
729,000
b-Net income


Henry Forster, 100, Real-Estate Executive
LEAD: Henry Forster, a real-estate executive with Brown, Harris, Stevens for nearly half a century, died Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 100 years old.


Calendar: The History of Parks
LEAD:  In the Parks, Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; 212-860-6871.


Fed Ex-Official Gets 6 Months
LEAD: A former director of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, Robert A. Rough, was sentenced today to six months in prison for leaking secret interest rate data.
United States District Judge


Bell to Head Young's Drive
LEAD: Former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell will head Mayor Andrew Young's campaign for Governor next year, Mr.
Young's office announced today.
It said Mr.
Bell had agreed to be campaign chairman and Hobby Stripling, former Mayor of Vienna, Ga., had been named campaign manager.
Mr.
Young is expected to announce his candidacy for Governor early next year, shortly after he leaves the Mayor's office.


Man Charged in Death of Brooklyn Drug Fighter
LEAD: A 26-year-old homeless man, described as a small-time heroin dealer, was charged with murder yesterday in the death of Maria Hernandez, a Brooklyn woman who, with her husband, had fought to rid her neighborhood of drug dealers, the police said.


Campaign Trail; A New Hurrah in the Democratic Party Girds for Battle to Take City Hall
LEAD: As David N. Dinkins mounted the stage in the Penta Hotel's grand ballroom on primary election night, an exultant smile creasing his face, he was surrounded by the labor leaders, liberals and black politicians who over the last decade have come to constitute a muncipal government in exile in New York


Brazil Payments Seen
LEAD: The chairman of Citicorp, John R. Reed, said yesterday that he expected Brazil to pay part, but not all, of its interest payments on commercial bank debt in the third quarter. ''They will make a significant payment, but not the entire payment,'' he said after a meeting of securities analysts.
Brazil has an interest payment of $1.6 billion due on Monday.


Sun City Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun City Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
15,669,344
13,417,841
Net inc
30,080
b511,831
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
33,795,094
27,858,901
Net inc
123,173
b831,162
Share earns
.08
-


Tuesday's Primary Election Results
LEAD:  DEMOCRAT  MAYOR  David N. Dinkins . . . 537,845  Edward I. Koch* . . . 445,892  Richard Ravitch . . . 48,290  Harrison J. Goldin . . . 28,797  CITY COUNCIL PRESIDENT  Andrew J. Stein* . . . 593,101  Rafael Mendez . . . 193,842  COMPTROLLER  Elizabeth Holtzman . .


Just a Comfy Country Couple and Their Objets d' Art
LEAD: HE'S a photographer, art collector, artist and writer.
She's a physical-fitness expert.
They drive a red Isuzu Trooper and have been vegetarians for 12 years.
This summer Michael and Deborah McKenzie moved into their new country house.


Rochester Cable Outlet To Become TV Station
LEAD: To compete with traditional broadcast television stations, Time Warner Inc. is transforming a channel on the cable system it owns in Rochester into an independent station, programmed with network reruns, sports and locally produced children's shows.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Veto on Fighter Sustained  Senators failed by one vote to override a veto of limits on U.S.-Japan production of the FSX.
Page D1.
Arrest in Brooklyn Slaying  The police charged a man with the murder of Maria Hernandez, who fought against drug dealers.
Page B1.
Strike at City Opera


Continental Medical Sys reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Medical Sys (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
48,111,000
30,890,000
Net loss
b4,740,000
c1,422,000
Share earns
-
.11
Yr rev
151,168,000
112,440,000
Net inc
b45,000
4,785,000
Share earns
-
.36


Detroit Mayor Easily Wins Primary but Faces Runoff
LEAD: Mayor Coleman A. Young, one of the first blacks to lead a major American city, won a big victory Tuesday over a dozen challengers, with Representative John Conyers Jr. coming in third in the city's nonpartisan primary.


Interpoint Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpoint Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,561,000
5,942,000
Net inc
269,000
142,000
Share earns
.11
.06
9mo sales
20,510,000
18,888,000
Net inc
399,000
365,000
Share earns
.16
.16
The company said its results included the operations of Micra Corp., which was acquired on July 5.


A Panel Backs Punishment Therapy
LEAD: A Federal panel of experts on treatments for retarded or disturbed people who repeatedly injure themselves said yesterday that punishments like electric shock or pinches were acceptable therapy to discourage the destructive behavior.


Books of The Times; The Question Is: Will the Ranch Be Saved?
LEAD:  Keep the Change  By Thomas McGuane  230 pages.
Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $18.95.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A DAY after I moved into a new neighborhood, a preschooler who lives down the block came over to say hello.
Within seconds he was telling me about his new baby sister, Katy.
I asked the boy how old he was.


Completions Of Houses Up
LEAD: Lower mortgage lending rates and rising construction fueled a 1.1 percent jump in completions of new homes in July after a steep drop of 6.1 drop in June, the Commerce Department reported today.


The New York Primary; For Koch, Sigh of Relief; For Aides, Tight Smiles
LEAD: For a last hurrah, it sounded distinctly like a sigh of relief.


Kansas to Honor Sayers
LEAD: The University of Kansas announced it would retire the No. 48 uniform worn by Gale Sayers when he played at Lawrence, Kan., from 1962 to 1964.
The ceremony will take place at halftime of the Jayhawks' game against Oklahoma on Sept. 30.


Day Wins 8 of 9
LEAD: Pat Day rode eight winners in nine mounts at Arlington International Racecourse outside Chicago yesterday, the best percentage day ever for a rider in that many races at a North American track.
Three riders have had eight winners on a single program - David Gall in 1978, and R. D. Williams and Chris Loseth in 1984, but they each had 10 mounts.(


Victorious Mayor of Yonkers Sees End to Housing Dispute
LEAD: Mayor Nicholas C. Wasicsko, winner by a wide margin in Tuesday's Democratic primary, said today that he felt that the results of his race and those for the City Council were ''the beginning of the end'' of the city's desegregation stalemate.


Aftermath of a Pacific Storm


Unexpected Fat in Fast-Food Menus
LEAD: Would you believe that a fast-food chicken sandwich has as much fat as a pint and a half of ice cream, or that half a dozen chicken nuggets are fattier than a hamburger?


Scribner's Site to Be a Bookstore Again: a Brentano's Branch
LEAD: The street-level floor of the Scribner Building on Fifth Avenue near 48th Street, vacant since early this year, will become a bookstore again in October when a branch of the Brentano's chain moves into the space, executives of the company said yesterday.


'Days of Rage' Dispute Revives Debate on Rules
LEAD: For nearly a year before the broadcast last week of ''Days of Rage: The Young Palestinians,'' a pro-Palestinian documentary, public television officials and journalists expressed concern about the financing of the film.
Now, however, Public Broadcasting Service executives, independent film makers and experts in public-television policy say the dispute over the film has revived a much broader debate about P


U.S. Expects Chemical-Arms Accord
LEAD: Administration officials say they expect to sign an agreement on chemical weapons verification during a meeting next week between the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.


Sale of Sears Tower Stalls
LEAD: An official with Olympia &amp; York Development Ltd., a Canadian real estate development concern, confirmed today that negotiations for the sale of the Sears Tower had broken down after Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and Olympia &amp; York, the potential buyer, were unable to agree on who would pay a tax increase under a reappraisal that is expected to follow the sale of the world's tallest building.


Rules Passed by Metro-North Could Help to Rout Homeless
LEAD: The Metro-North Commuter Railroad adopted draft rule yesterday intended to regulate public conduct aboard trains and in passenger stations in New York State, including Grand Central Station.


Emigres' Stooped Ceiling; Soviets Ease Exits, but U.S. Curbs Entries And Would-Be Refugees Are Caught in Gap
LEAD: The new refugee ceilings announced this week by President Bush are not high enough to accommodate the Soviet citizens who have already applied for admission to the United States as refugees, much less the thousands expected to apply in the coming year.


City Opera Is Struck; Fall Season Halted
LEAD: The New York City Opera orchestra, unhappy with the company's proposals on wages and guaranteed work, struck the opera last night before the beginning of the company's fall season, which was to have been a performance of Rossini's ''Barbiere di Siviglia.'' The strike imperils the rest of the City Opera's season, which is scheduled to run through Nov.


Reitman's (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reitman's (Canada)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
94,908,000
85,321,000
Net inc
3,690,000
2,181,000
Share earns
.40
.24
6mo sales
168,200,000
158,907,000
Net inc
3,719,000
b124,000
Share earns
.40
-


'Junk Bond' Market Rattled by News
LEAD: Worries about the liquidity crisis facing the Campeau Corporation, sent ''junk bond'' prices down in an already battered market yesterday.


Fed Further Widens Rights Of Banks to Sell Securities
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board yesterday opened the door to further expansion of banking companies into the corporate securities market by allowing them to sell and trade securities backed by loans of their affiliated banks.


Proler International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Proler International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,112,457
28,503,380
Net inc
4,097,660
6,606,393
Share earns
.87
1.40
6mo sales
55,809,027
58,119,821
Net inc
7,499,243
11,324,489
Share earns
1.59
2.41


Kissinger on CBS Board
LEAD: Henry Kissinger, the former Secretary of State who once worked for NBC after leaving the White House and still appears on network news programs as a guest, was named yesterday to the board of CBS Inc.
His election to the board, whose other members include Walter Cronkite, the former CBS anchorman, raises the number of board members to 15.


Student Is Hurt in Gun Accident at School
LEAD: A 16-year-old student was wounded yesterday at an Upper West Side high school after the semi-automatic handgun she was showing to a friend went off accidentally, the police said.


Isle of Peace Is Threatened In Salvador
LEAD: When the army began rounding up people in her village suspected of collaborating with the Salvadoran rebels, Rosita Maria fled with her teen-age son to this demilitarized municipality, which has risen from the ashes of the single most devastating aerial attack of the country's decade-old war.


The New York Primary; From Primary, Swelling Pride and Easing Tensions
LEAD: Until yesterday morning, the class in participation in government at Martin Luther King High School had seemed to the students, all seniors and all black, something of an abstraction.


Jefferson Smurfit In Merger Accord
LEAD: SIBV/Holdings Inc. and the Jefferson Smurfit Corporation jointly announced yesterday that they had made a definitive agreement to merge.
SIBV/Holdings will acquire all the outstanding shares of Jefferson Smurfit common stock for $41.75 a share in cash.
SIBV/Holdings is a joint venture equally owned by Smurfit International B.V., a subsidiary of Jefferson Smurfit Group P.L.C., and the Morgan Stanley Leveraged Equity Fund II L


Stroh Stake Sought
LEAD: A company controlled by a Milwaukee investor is interested in obtaining a share of the Stroh Brewery Company, the No. 3 brewer in the United States.
The Christiana Companies in San Diego has had discussions with Stroh for about six weeks, said Sheldon B. Lubar, who heads Lubar &amp; Company, a Milwaukee venture capital firm that owns a controlling stake in Christiana.


A Glittering Run Brings Instant Glory in Atlanta
LEAD: Since he became the first man to hit a major league home run and score a National Football League touchdown in the same week, Deion Sanders has drawn an even larger crowd.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; S.O.S. Pads Shift
LEAD: Griffin Bacal yesterday lost a $3 million to $4 million advertising account with Miles Laboratories.
Miles, a Chicago-based maker of household products, reassigned the account for S.O.S. soap pads to Zwiren Collins Karo Trusk, a small Chicago agency that handles other Miles household cleaners.


Democrats Keep House Seats That Wright and Coelho Left
LEAD: Democrats have held the House seats vacated by Speaker Jim Wright in Texas and Tony Coelho, the Democratic whip, in California.


Randolph Guthrie, 83, Lawyer and Executive
LEAD: Randolph H. Guthrie, a lawyer, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 83 years old and was a longtime resident of New York City.


Ford Says 2 New '90 Models Won't Be Ready Till Spring
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company introduced its lineup of 1990 cars and trucks today and set optimistic sales goals.
But Ford executives, speaking at a news briefing, conceded that the company's two completely new domestic vehicles for the coming year would not be ready until spring.


National Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
397,600,000
444,900,000
Net loss
21,900,000
b30,500,000
Shares outst
102,500,000
107,900,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $44,100,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Warwick Takes A New Name
LEAD: Celebrating its 50th birthday and its impending move to downtown Manhattan and what its president half-jokingly calls ''the cutting edge of creativity,'' Warwick Advertising announced yesterday that it was changing its name to Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.


The Perils of Gender-Neutral Pronouns
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


Remic Securities From Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, yesterday priced its 101st real estate mortgage investment conduit securities deal since the company began issuing them in August 1987.


A Store's Celebration Of France In Fantasy
LEAD: IN this bicentennial year of the French Revolution, Bloomingdale's is celebrating with a storewide promotion, ''Vive la France.'' Variations on the Gallic theme have been carried out in seven new model rooms that will be on view today through Nov. 4 at the flagship store at Lexington Avenue and 59th Street in Manhattan.


2 Ex-Transit Officers Sentenced To 2-Year Terms for False Arrests
LEAD: Two former New York City transit police officers convicted in March of making false sex-abuse arrests were sentenced yesterday to prison terms of two years.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Loose Floor Tiles  Q.Five years ago the old linoleum was removed from our kitchen floor.
A layer of 3/8-inch plywood was put down with new 12-inch square vinyl tiles on top.
There has been no water damage, yet the tiles are coming loose in various places, especially where four tiles come together.


S.E.C. Losing a Member
LEAD: Charles C. Cox, a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission since 1983, said Tuesday that he would leave the Federal regulatory agency at the end of the month to join a consulting firm.
The resignation of Mr.
Cox, 44 years old, a former chief economist of the agency, had been expected because his term technically had expired.


The Disappearance of Room 16
LEAD: Sometimes a century-old story or legend rattles around in the back of your mind, raising gooseflesh when a new thought triggers its recollection.


General Host Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Host Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 13
1989
1988
Sales
109,033,000
96,819,000
Net loss
b2,875,000
c4,339,000
6mo sales
267,680,000
253,384,000
Net loss
b1,344,000
cd102,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,424,000.


Hired Pathologist Disputes Report on Suspect
LEAD: The family of a robbery suspect who died early Saturday in police custody in the Bronx has commissioned an independent autopsy that challenges the findings of the Chief Medical Examiner's office.


Tons of Toys Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tons of Toys Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
5,375,000
4,651,000
Net loss
1,505,000
178,046
6mo sales
10,047,000
7,610,000
Net loss
2,701,000
451,979


U.S. Notes and Bonds End Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were mixed in moderately active trading yesterday.


Foodarama Supermarkets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foodarama Supermarkets Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
153,190,000
127,800,000
Net loss
164,000
b1,370,000
Share earns
-
1.16
Shares outst
1,136,000
1,154,000
9mo sales
416,917,000
370,652,000
Net inc
472,000
2,900,000
Share earns
.41
2.47
Shares outst
1,138,000
1,174,000


Latvian Farmers Leave Stalinist Shadow at Last
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dart Group Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dart Group Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
226,196,000
142,895,000
Net inc
2,611,000
3,071,000
Share earns
1.37
1.68
6mo rev
434,543,000
239,536,000
Net inc
b5,163,000
c13,829,000
Share earns
2.72
7.55


Paramount Communications Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paramount Communications Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
950,600,000
795,100,000
Net inc
b96,300,000
c120,500,000
Share earns
.80
1.00
9mo rev
2,422,800,000
2,120,300,000
Net inc
b231,100,000
c240,700,000
Share earns
1.93
2.00


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thor Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,594,000
45,058,000
Net inc
804,000
1,772,000
Share earns
.16
.35
Yr sales
162,494,000
162,214,000
Net inc
3,259,000
5,752,000
Share earns
.65
1.13


Holtz, With No. 1 Team, Worries About No. 2
LEAD: Considering the normal sense of paranoia that seems to come with the job of coaching college football at the highest level, and the low public expectations that became a weekly feature of Notre Dame's perfect season in 1988, Lou Holtz's outlook going into the first serious threat to the Irish this season is a predictable one.


Topps Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Topps Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
55,946,000
41,299,000
Net inc
10,034,000
8,425,000
Share earns
.48
.41
6mo sales
118,733,000
107,246,000
Net inc
18,567,000
15,787,000
Share earns
.89
.76


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.81
8.87
8.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.61
7.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.55
7.59
7.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.13
8.14
8.74
30-YR.


Panel Votes Today on Gains Tax
LEAD: Dan Rostenkowski, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, today exhausted his options for compromise on capital gains taxes and scheduled a vote for Thursday on a cut in the tax rate.
The cut is backed by the Bush Administration and supported by a majority of committee members.


Ogivar Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ogivar Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
35,920,000
27,708,000
Net inc
1,024,000
600,000
Share earns
.12
.07
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Dunkin' Donuts In Several Pacts
LEAD: Dunkin' Donuts Inc. said it had signed confidentiality agreements with several parties interested in pursuing the possible acquisition of the doughnut-store chain.
The parties to be given confidential corporate data include the DD Acquisition Corporation, which has been conducting a hostile tender offer for Dunkin' Donuts.


Indians Hold Protest in Brazil
LEAD: More than 300 Indians held a war dance outside the Brazilian Congress today to protest the invasion of Yanomami Indian lands by thousands of gold prospectors.
The Yanomami, who live in the rugged hills along Brazil's Amazon border with Venezuela, are the largest tribe of forest Indians left in the Americas.


Sale Effort Is Ended By Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, the nation's second-largest operator of convenience stores, said yesterday that it was ending its efforts to sell the company and was suspending payment of its 7-cent quarterly dividend.


Bridge
LEAD: France and Brazil moved further ahead of their rivals in the qualifying stage of the world team championships here this afternoon.
Both teams won their seventh-round matches while their closest challengers, Australia and Taiwan, played each other in a match that was almost a tie.


Ingram Named to Post
LEAD: Cecil W. (Hootie) Ingram, an all-Southeastern Conference football and basketball star at the University of Alabama in 1952-54, was named athletic director at his alma mater.
Ingram, who for the last nine years was the director of athletics at Florida State University, called his selection ''a dream come true.


Joyner's Single in 10th Gives Angels a Lift
LEAD: Wally Joyner, who won a game for the California Angels in the ninth inning Tuesday night, won another tonight when he singled through the right side of the infield to beat the Yankees, 4-3, in the 10th inning.


Senate Sustains Bush Veto Of Limits on Japan Jet Deal
LEAD: The Senate failed today by one vote to override President Bush's veto of Congressional restrictions on the joint American-Japanese production of an advanced jet fighter.


Jones Spacelink Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Spacelink Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,469,000
20,954,000
Net loss
2,784,000
b1,034,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
61,173,000
55,245,000
Yr rev
77,287,000
57,757,000
Net loss
6,053,000
b10,612,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
58,233,000
55,226,000


A Dirtier Air Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Riley's Datashare Internaional reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riley's Datashare Internaional
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,124,100
5,174,800
Net inc
296,100
152,400
Share earns
.23
.12
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Review/Television; '48 Hours' Opens Season By Tackling Drug Problem
LEAD: Three hours of addicts, drug busts, threatened neighborhoods, strained emergency rooms and desperate therapy efforts may not be anybody's idea of prime-time entertainment, but the nation seems agreed that they demand prime-time attention.
CBS kicks off the new season of ''48 Hours'' at 8 P.M. tonight with a full evening of ''Return to Crack Street,'' which sends an imposing team of CBS correspondents, led by Dan Rather, out to report on what has happened since


Car Sales Off 2.8% on Low Supplies
LEAD: Sales of American-built cars dropped by 2.8 percent in early September as consumers found that some 1989 models were in short supply at dealers after two months of brisk sales that had surprised some analysts.


HOUSE SHUNS BILL ON 'OBSCENE' ART
LEAD: The House today rejected a Senate effort to restrict Federal grants for art deemed ''obscene or indecent.''


Laura Ashley Expanding Into Department Stores
LEAD: OVER the last five years, a staggering number of Laura Ashley stores, featuring the late designer's sweet version of the English country style, have opened in large cities around the world.
In fact, there are now 500 shops, from Los Angeles to Tokyo.


A Singular Observer Of Everyday Places
LEAD: THIS is J. B. Jackson country: a trailer camp, a horse barn, a highway crew paving a road to nowhere at a pace between lethargy and stillness.
The route, calculated to befuddle the urban brain and dismantle sedans, is nonetheless a document on the preachings of the man.
It is, in the word that John Brinckerhoff


Chiron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chiron Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,569,000
7,083,000
Net loss
b3,882,000
2,364,000
Shares outst
14,129,000
11,659,000
b-Included a $581,000 charge for a delay in construction of New Pilot manufacturing facilities.


Avante-Garde Computing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avante-Garde Computing Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,516,000
3,819,000
Net loss
318,000
b1,654,000
b-Included restructuring charges of $950,000.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have already won, Mr. de Klerk.
If you know really what is good for you, join us in the struggle for this new South Africa.''  - Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu.  [ A1:1. ]


Bloomingdale's Gives Party Honoring French Style and Ends Up Stealing Show
LEAD: AFTER a week in the national financial spotlight, Bloomingdale's turned the kleig lights on its Lexington Avenue facade last night and rolled out the red carpet for 1,200 high-powered people.
The occasion was a charity gala, and while the cash registers were closed, a few guests may have had serious shopping in mind now that the Campeau


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Omnicom's Dutch Unit
LEAD: The Omnicom Group said yesterday that it had signed an agreement with Boulet Dru DuPuy Petit, a French agency, for B.D.D.P. to acquire a majority interest in Omnicom's Dutch subsidiary, ARA.
The terms of the deal, under which Omnicom will maintain a 15 percent interest in ARA, were not disclosed.
Omnicom said it had sold the stake to focus on its two worldwide agency networks, DDB Needham and BBDO.


Giacomini to Open Chicago Opera Season
LEAD: Giuseppe Giacomini will sing the role of Radames in the season's first two performances of ''Aida'' at the Lyric Opera of Chicago, the company has announced.
Mr.
Giacomini will replace Luciano Pavarotti tomorrow, which is opening night, and in Tuesday's performance.
The Icelandic tenor Kristjan Johannsson, who was scheduled to sing two performances in the ''Aida'' series, will sing six: on Sept.


Alimentation Couche-Tard Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alimentation Couche-Tard Inc
Qtr to July 23
1989
1988
Revenue
3,956,000
3,390,000
Net inc
546,000
477,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Results are in Canadian funds.


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,414,000
18,877,000
Net inc
b1,381,000
828,000
Share earns
.28
.16
Yr rev
34,834,000
44,534,000
Net loss
b2,388,000
c56,000
Share earns
-
.01


Arye Leon Dulzin Is Dead at 76; Israeli Official and Zionist Leader
LEAD: Arye Leon Dulzin, a former Israeli Government official and former chairman of the World Zionist Organization and of Israel's Jewish Agency, died after a prolonged kidney illness yesterday in Tel Hashomer Hospital in Tel Aviv.
He was 76 years old and had lived in Tel Aviv.


Citicorp Auction Rates Down Again
LEAD: For the second consecutive week, interest rates fell at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Japanese Putting Off Sale Of Stock in Nippon Phone
LEAD: Japan today delayed a planned sale of shares in the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, the giant telecommunications company that was involved in a bribery scandal that rocked the Government earlier this year.


Maloney Impressing Islanders
LEAD: Don Maloney's allegiance has turned from Broadway Blue to Blue and Orange.


U.S. and India Sign Tax Pact
LEAD: After 30 years of negotiations, India and the United States signed an agreement yesterday to avoid double taxation, and American officials said today that the accord could set a precedent for tax relations between the United States and other developing nations.


Rheometrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rheometrics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,312,000
8,319,000
Net inc
b194,000
c871,000
Share earns
.06
.28
Yr sales
25,828,000
24,301,000
Net inc
b54,000
c401,000
Share earns
.02
.13


Gooden Finally Returns And It's Like Old Times
LEAD: In the debris of their disintegrating season, the Mets had a moment of reflected glory tonight: Dwight Gooden came out of the bullpen and pitched three scoreless innings against the Philadelphia Phillies in his first appearance since he tore a shoulder muscle 10 weeks ago.


U.S. Widens Inquiry on College Price Fixing
LEAD: A Justice Department inquiry into whether prestigious colleges and universities may have violated Federal antitrust laws in tuition and scholarship practices has been broadened to include six more schools, officials at the institutions said today.


Campaign Matters; 'Rumpled Genius' And Hard Work Spell Triumph
LEAD: Bill Lynch stood in the sunshine at City Hall yesterday, letting reporters ask him how it felt to be a guru while supporters told him where they had met him.
He answered the questions and shook the hands, but the wry, rumpled architect of David N. Dinkins's primary victory was really having none of it.


Barge Runs Aground; Gasoline Spills in East River
LEAD: A gasoline barge carrying nearly 100,000 barrels of gasoline ran aground and began leaking last night in the East River, forcing the closing of the Queens span of the Triborough Bridge, the police said.


Foreign Exchange Trading Is Near $500 Billion a Day
LEAD: The world's foreign exchange market is growing rapidly, according to reports released by central banks yesterday.
London is still the largest foreign exchange market in the world, but the United States and Japan are catching up.


Mexico and Banks Agree On Debt Accord Language
LEAD: The Mexican Government and a committee of banks announced an agreement today on detailed language covering the debt-reduction plan reached between that nation and the bank group in July.


Soap Operas Get a Weekly
LEAD: Murdoch Magazines will introduce a weekly color magazine about television soap operas in November, its second publication on the subject, according to an announcement from the organization.
Murdoch, a division of News


Digital Offers Severance Deal
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation, the nation's second-largest computer company, has offered 40 to 104 weeks of pay to 700 employees if they voluntarily leave the company.


Chefs International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chefs International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,460,353
5,129,205
Net inc
322,573
298,991
Share earns
.01
.01
6mo sales
8,164,682
9,526,147
Net inc
322,810
21,154
Share earns
.01
-


Destruction of Our Schools and Fear in the Streets Are Connected; Our Brother's Keepers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yields End Week Mixed
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday, as yields on taxable funds rose and yields on tax-exempt funds declined.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Sports Pages on Aug. 19 about Bucky Dent, the Yankees' new manager, reported incorrectly that he had been adopted by the uncle and aunt who raised him after his parents' divorce.
Although his name was changed from O'Dey to Dent, his mother's maiden name and his uncle's surname, there was no adoption.


Israelis Give Doomed Nazi A Longer Period to Appeal
LEAD: The Israeli Supreme Court today put off an appeal by a convicted Nazi war criminal, enabling his attorney to verify what he contends is new evidence covered up by the United States.


Talking Deals; Auditing Mergers Expected to Clear
LEAD: ANTITRUST regulators at the Justice Department are investigating a flurry of mergers that would significantly consolidate the number of top accounting firms. ''We are looking at each of the mergers,'' Robert Bloch, an official in the agency's antitrust division, said yesterday.


Cash-Flow Problems For Campeau
LEAD: The gravity of the Campeau Corporation's financial problems became clearer yesterday as the Canadian company reported that for the rest of the year its two American retail subsidiaries would face problems with cash flow and debt repayment.


Dinkins Starts With Numerical Advantage, But Uneasy Democrats Could Go to Giuliani
LEAD: A proven political machine, a 5-to-1 Democratic edge in enrollment and a party that appears to be unusually united help make David N. Dinkins the heavy favorite in the November mayoral race against his Republican opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But Mr.
Dinkins may be vulnerable to defections from some Democrats who are concerned about crime and may be reluctant to vote for a black candidate.


Mobil Lease Swap
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation said it would earn $192 million on the exchange of property leases with the government of Hong Kong.
The gain would be reflected in the oil company's third-quarter results.
The company said in a statement that its affiliate Mobil Oil Hong Kong had exchanged the lease for its current terminal in Hong Kong for $192 million and a new lease on a site a mile away.


Exodus Galls East Berlin; Nation's Sovereignty Seems to Be Mocked
LEAD: To the East German Government, the drain of its citizens to the West, by way of Hungary, has been both an economic loss and a source of acute embarrassment.
But what seems to provoke the sharpest anger is the open challenge posed by the exodus to East Germany's shaky legitimacy.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: SEALING a house against drafts is important year round, but it is especially crucial in cool or cold weather.


Dip in Farm Workers Could Open Door for Aliens
LEAD: Officials of the Departments of Agriculture and Labor have been meeting over the last few days to determine whether there is a shortage of seasonal workers on the nation's farms.
Such a shortage could open the door for nonresident aliens to gain legal status.


New Hazard Is Seen at Colorado Weapons Plant
LEAD: Colorado's effort to protect drinking water supplies around the highly contaminated Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant has raised a new safety problem: what to do with tainted water that is filling a storage pond now that the state has barred releases from it.


New York Mortgage Unit Sells $290 Million in Bonds
LEAD: The State of New York Mortgage Agency, which is known as Sonyma, is offering $290 million in negotiated taxable and tax-exempt homeowner mortgage revenue bonds through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Small Decline In Chip Index
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's book-to-bill ratio for August was down slightly from July's level, but it was above expectations, indicating the semiconductor business may be holding steady, analysts said yesterday.
The August number of 0.94


Staodynamics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staodynamics Inc
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Sales
2,503,513
1,902,215
Net inc
100,147
b118,883
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
4,671,493
3,715,400
Net inc
130,711
b163,564
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Help Nicaragua's Democrats, Openly
LEAD: Early next year, Nicaraguans will at last be able to register a meaningful choice about their political future in free, internationally observed elections.
A coalition of democratic parties is now preparing to challenge the Sandinista regime in accordance with the Central American peace agreement.


Vincent Succeeds Giamatti as Commissioner
LEAD: Major league club owners, as expected, elected Francis T. (Fay) Vincent Jr. baseball's eighth commissioner today, a move that was filled with irony.


Keetmanshoop Journal; Politicians' Clever Foes: Namibian Sheep Farmers
LEAD: Like other Namibians of color, the Rev.
Willem Simon, a Roman Catholic priest in this desert town, anticipates a heady new experience in November. ''I'll be 50 years old this year and this is the first time I'm going to be able to vote for the government of my choice,'' Father Simon said. ''I've never been able to vote.


Nehemiah Triumphs
LEAD: Four weeks after Renaldo Nehemiah's longtime world record for the 110-meter hurdles was lowered by Roger Kingdom, the old champion, defeated the new one yesterday at a meet in Jerez de la Frontera, Spain.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iona Appliances
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
16,285,270
14,667,770
Net loss
1,172,339
196,437
The company said the latest year's loss was partly due to about $830,000 of non-recurring expenses related to its new carpet dry cleaning machine, inventory provisions and other expenses.


Steego Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steego Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
52,212,000
48,041,000
Net loss
104,000
b801,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income and included a loss from discontinued operations of $322,000.
Year-ago period's net included a gain of $1,400,000 from the sale of property.


JG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JG Industries
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
68,133,000
67,812,000
Net loss
1,411,000
b581,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
126,552,000
120,793,000
Net loss
3,364,000
b552,000
Share earns
-
.09
b


Freddie Mac Sells Debentures
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, yesterday priced $750 million in one-year noncallable debentures due Sept. 21, 1990, through its member selling group of securities dealers.


From an Armful of Twigs, A Choice of Furnishings
LEAD: ONE answer to the rising cost of furniture is to make it yourself, a task that is often easier said than done.
Yet Abby Ruoff, a furniture designer, says even a novice can fashion a lamp table or settee out of twigs.


Huffman Koos Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffman Koos Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,400,000
20,000,000
Net loss
1,418,000
679,000
6mo sales
36,300,000
37,600,000
Net loss
2,297,000
b1,243,000
b-Included income tax benefit of $339,000.


Sensor Control Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sensor Control Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,331,756
1,321,675
Net inc
131,794
b48,153
Share earns
.06
.02
Yr sales
4,695,583
5,068,306
Net inc
531,185
b528,004
Share earns
.24
.24
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $66,000, or 3 cents a share.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
David Perry has been named executive vice president, director of broadcast production, and Gene Johnson has been promoted to senior vice president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., an insurance brokerage firm, named R. Alan Kershaw vice president and treasurer.


Morton D. Joyce, 89, Tax Stamp Collector And Ex-Stockbroker
LEAD: Morton Dean Joyce, a former stockbroker and internationally recognized philatelist, died of prostatic cancer Tuesday at Southern Maine Medical Center in Biddeford.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan and Kennebunk, Me.


50% Cutback in Money for Homeless Is Fiercely Protested in Philadelphia
LEAD: Scores of homeless people and their advocates jammed the City Council chamber here today, waving placards and chanting slogans to protest the city's 50 percent cut in money for programs for the homeless this year.


Review/Theater; New 'Sweeney' With a New Message
LEAD: Of all the powerful moments in the American musical theater, there may be none more perverse than the Act I apex of ''Sweeney Todd.'' That moment has never seemed either more moving or more sick than as played by Bob Gunton, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street, in the revival of Stephen Sondheim's musical that has arrived at the Circle in the Square.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Randolph H. Guthrie, a Manhattan lawyer, misidentified a sister who survived him.
She is Thomasia Phillips of Hilton Head, S.C.


Fairs, Festivals and Parades
LEAD:  Today  SAN GENNARO FESTIVAL, Mulberry Street, between Park Row and Prince Street.
Food, games, entertainment.
Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Through Sept 24.
Information: 226-9546.
Tomorrow  NINTH ANNUAL WASHINGTON SQUARE PARK CRAFTS AND ANTIQUES FAIR, Washington Square South, from Macdougal to Mercer Streets, and along the park on West Fourth Street.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Virgin Islands Public Finance Authority is offering $79.3 million in revenue bonds, with a maximum yield of 7.25 percent, for an issue due in 2007 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


PANEL SET TO DROP MEDICARE BENEFIT
LEAD: Considering changes to reduce the costs of insurance that protects the elderly from being catastrophically high medical expenses, the Senate Finance Committee agreed informally today to drop either increased protection against doctor bills or payments for prescription drugs.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 3 P.M.


Mets' Veteran Co-Captains Have Backs Up as Backups
LEAD: Dwight Gooden reported no complaints with his right shoulder yesterday on the day after he had pitched for the first time in 10 weeks.
And Darryl Strawberry reported no new complaints after extensive testing disclosed that he was suffering from stiffness in the lower back and not from any kidney ailment.


A Book Fair With Its Eye on the Future
LEAD: SCIENCE-FICTION writers have been writing about the 21st century for years.
So it's entirely appropriate that science fiction should take the limelight in Sunday's New York Is Book Country fair, which has as its theme ''Cultural Literacy for the 21st Century.'' The question is, whose 21st century?


U.S. Is Backing the Wrong Horse in Cambodia
LEAD: To the Editor:


Text of Pierce's Statement
LEAD: Following is the statement released today by Samuel R. Pierce Jr., the former Housing Secretary, about his decision not to appear for questioning before a Congressional committee Friday.


Professor Solomon Fabricant, 83, New York University Economist
LEAD: Solomon Fabricant, an educator and economist, and his wife, Bessie, died in an automobile accident Wednesday near Katonah, N.Y.
Dr.
Fabricant was 83 years old, and his wife was 82.
They lived in South Salem, N.Y.


Palestinian Sought by U.S. Asking for Release by Greece
LEAD: A Palestinian accused in the bombing of a Pan Am jet asked today to be released from prison while Greece decides on a United States extradition request, his lawyer said.


Helping the Customer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gorbachev Is Said to Back Baltic Autonomy
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met today with Communist Party and Government leaders from the three Baltic republics, and expressed support for greater autonomy for the area, according to the Estonian party leader.


Mitsubishi Bank Listing On Big Board
LEAD: Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., the world's fourth-largest bank, with some $350 billion in assets, next week will become the first Japanese financial institution to be listed for trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
It will be the largest commercial bank and the largest foreign company ever listed on the Big Board.


Air France-Boeing
LEAD: Air France ordered five 747-400 freighter aircraft for $600 million, Boeing Commercial Airplanes said.
With the order, Air France became the first airline to buy the cargo version of the company's new airplane.
The passenger version of the 747-400 now serves nine airlines.
The first of the freighters ordered by Air France will be delivered in August 1993.


Washington at Work; Barney Frank's Public and Private Lives: Lonely Struggle for Coexistence
LEAD: When he was first elected to the State Legislature from the Back Bay of Boston in 1973, Barney Frank's friends told him that if he was going to be a politician he would have to spruce up.
His hair was a mess, his shoes were unpolished, and, to be blunt, he was fat.


SENATE APPROVES A BAN ON SMOKING ON ALL U.S. FLIGHTS
LEAD: The Senate voted today to ban smoking on all domestic airline flights, rolling over the objections of tobacco-state lawmakers and illustrating a sweeping change in society's attitudes toward smoking and health.


House Panel Assails U.S. Policy on Khmer Rouge
LEAD: The Administration's policy of supporting a settlement in Cambodia that would bring the Khmer Rouge guerrillas into a transitional government came under stinging attack today in Congress.


REAGAN TO LEAVE HOSPITAL TODAY
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan is to leave for his Los Angeles home Friday from a hospital here where he underwent brain surgery last week, a spokesman for Mr.
Reagan said today.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 463 money market mutual funds increased by $2.42 billion, to $347.07 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 141 institutional funds increased by $79.9 million, to $84.85 billion.
The assets of the 227 general-purpose funds were up by $805.2 million, to $111.48 billion.


Argentine Chief Faces Economic Test
LEAD: The surge in inflation that overcame Argentina as it changed governments two months ago has run itself down in recent weeks, dropping to a relatively modest 37.9 percent for August.
And the September rate is expected to be less than 10 percent.


A Milestone for Labor But No Silver Lining
LEAD: The pending takeover of the UAL Corporation by a group including its pilots' union and its management is a coup for the labor movement.
But experts on employee-owned companies say that difficulties even more trying than winning control of the company may lie ahead.


AIDS Treatment Costs Put at $5 Billion a Year
LEAD: The cost of finding and treating hundreds of thousands of people who are infected with the AIDS virus but are not yet ill could reach $5 billion or more a year, health experts say.


Cadets Could Field The Forward Pass
LEAD: The forward pass, a foreign element in the Cadet wishbone offense, may play a role in Army's game against Syracuse at the Carrier Dome tomorrow because the Orange coach, Dick MacPherson, has a long memory.


Delays in Filling Vacancies Create U.S. Court Backlogs
LEAD: The Federal trial courts in New York are developing critical backlogs because of White House and Justice Department delays in filling judicial vacancies, court officials said yesterday.


TV Weekend; Three New Sitcoms Offer 'Parents' Who Are Offbeat
LEAD: When it comes to families, primetime television has a problem.
The studios and networks love children, especially the kind that may grow up to be audience-grabbing teen-age idols - Michael J. Fox in ''Family Ties,'' for instance, or Kirk Cameron in ''Growing Pains.'' But the standard marriage situation is confining when it comes to developing plot lines.


Individuality Amid Unity: The Guarneri in Action
''To be a performer, you have to be somewhat neurotic,'' says David Soyer, the cellist who appears to be the least fussy, most philosophical of the four principals in the splendid new documentary, ''High Fidelity -the Adventures of the Guarneri String Quartet.''
It is also clear that in their neuroses, separate and collective, the members of the Guarneri String Quartet must every day come to terms with a discipline in which the individual is always more or less at war with the group.
Each performance demands that the player give up his own personality for the greater good of the quartet.
At the same time, the player is of value to the quartet only by being the individual he is.


'Fishbait' Miller, 80, Former Doorkeeper Of the U.S. House
LEAD: William M. (Fishbait) Miller, who served three decades as the doorkeeper of the House of Representatives, died Tuesday night at his home in Greensboro.
He was 80 years old.


Lions' Sanders Is Cool As First Start Nears
LEAD: Barry Sanders has been ever modest this week, ever quiet and ever unassuming.
Sure, the Detroit Lions' rookie running back rushed for 71 yards and a touchdown after entering the game in the third quarter against the Phoenix Cardinals last Sunday in his pro debut.
Sure, he accomplished that knowing only two running plays and after only two practices.


A Model Prison, Even if Only Temporary
LEAD: Put up a month ago by the state as a stopgap to reduce overcrowding at the Hudson County Jail, Tent City, a minimum-security camp on a patch of the Hackensack Meadowlands here, may have inadvertently provided a glimpse of what a humane prison can be.


Gilles Andriamahazo Of Madagascar Is Dead
LEAD: Madagascar's former military head of state, Gen.
Gilles Andriamahazo, has died of a heart attack, officials said today.
He was 70 years old.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Palio


In Colombia, Cocaine Is the Elixir for Rich and Poor
LEAD: In a chic neighborhood in Bogota, young executives gather in private clubs, set in mansions and fashionable apartments to smoke a powerful and extremely addictive form of cocaine.


Olajuwon Still Healing
LEAD: Two months after a clot in his calf curtailed his blood flow and landed Akeem Olajuwon in a hospital for a week, the 7-foot National Basketball Association All-Star center said yesterday in Houston he was still recovering and unable to predict if he would be ready to play when the Rockets open training camp on Oct.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Associated Natural Gas Corp., Denver, a subsidiary of Arkansas Power &amp; Light, appointed Donald H. Anderson president.


Bush Doubles Food Aid to Poland After Being Pressed by Congress
LEAD: In a reversal apparently prompted by pressure from Congress, President Bush announced today that the United States would double food aid for Poland to $100 million in the next fiscal year.


R.G. Douglas Sr., 93, Retired Obstetrician
LEAD: Dr.
R.
Gordon Douglas Sr., a former chief of obstetrics and gynecology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, died of Parkinson's disease on Sept. 9 at a nursing home in Bristol, R.I.
He was 93 years old and lived in Little Compton, R.I.


A Lot of Rain in a Short Time Equals Floods


Accounts
LEAD: *
Vintwood International, to Korey Kay &amp; Partners, with a budget of $3 million to $5 million.


Jazz Re-sign Eaton
LEAD: Mark Eaton, the 1988-89 National Basketball Association defensive player of the year, signed a five-year contract yesterday with the Utah Jazz, for whom he has played for the last six seasons.
The 7-foot 4-inch center, who has led the league in blocked shots four times, said, ''It's nice for me to feel appreciated for my efforts.


Review/Art; Rome as Piranesi Saw It Under Archeology's Spell
LEAD: The glory that was ancient Rome was the rage of Europe in the 18th century.
After nearly a three-century lull, the excavation of the ancient city had resumed in earnest, and the sense of its rich and anarchic mix of architectural time and space -Classical, Renaissance and Baroque - was beginning to cast its deepest spell.


Shift at DM News
LEAD: After 10 years of exploring the technological boundaries of the increasingly intricate direct-marketing industry, DM News is switching from biweekly to weekly frequency, Adrian Courtenay, its founder and publisher, said yesterday.
The change for the magazine, which is published by the Mill Hollow Corporation and has an audited circulation of 35,000, will occur in January.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Steuben Day Parade, Fifth Avenue between 61st and 86th Streets will be closed tomorrow from noon to 4 P.M.


Spot Contracts for Copper Surge to a 4 1/2-Month Peak
LEAD: Copper for spot delivery on New York's Commodity Exchange surged to a four-and-a-half-month high yesterday as the market ignored news of a settlement of a miners' strike in Chile and focused on continuing supply disruptions in other parts of the world.


Editor of The Daily News Resigning
LEAD: F. Gilman Spencer, editor of The Daily News, resigned yesterday after five years in which he and James Hoge, the newspaper's publisher, were often at odds.


Tampa Airport Tax-Exempt Issue
LEAD: A $119.3 million bond issue for the Tampa International Airport is tentatively being offered, with a maximum yield of about 7.23 percent for a bond due in 2019.


Mosbacher in Japan: Little Progress Seen
LEAD: Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher, ending a three-day trip to Japan today, made little apparent progress on trade questions.
He left many Japanese and Americans here wondering about the Bush Administration's goals.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Victory for Capriati: Thirteen-year-old Jennifer Capriati, the youngest player ever in Wightman Cup competition, beat Clare Wood of Britain, 6-0, 6-0, last night in the second match in Williamsburg, Va.
Wood, 21, and a member of last year's British Olympic team, had only 17 points in the match, which lasted 42 minutes.


Namibian Rebels' Leader Returns Home


SENATORS TO OFFER OWN CLEAN AIR BILL
LEAD: In a challenge to a major part of President Bush's clean air proposal, several senators plan to introduce anti-smog legislation Friday that would have less emphasis on the use of alternative fuels and on vehicles that would run on such fuels.


New Breed of Paralegals Get There by Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stock Prices Fall, Reacting to 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: Stock prices declined broadly yesterday in a carry-over of selling from Wednesday afternoon, as investors were rattled by the price plunge in the 'junk bond' market.


Worker on Disability Leave Kills 7, Then Himself, in Printing Plant
LEAD: A man with an assault rifle killed seven people and wounded 13 today as he went from floor to floor in a printing plant where he used to work.
Co-workers said he was ''looking for bosses.''


Rolls-Royce Shifts Jet Unit to Virginia
LEAD: Rolls-Royce P.L.C. plans to move its American subsidiary from Greenwich to Reston, Va., which company officials said would allow the British jet-engine maker to take advantage of the Washington aerospace market.
The move to Reston, about 20 miles west of the nation's capital, will take place next summer.


DEALS
LEAD:  BASEBALL  MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL - Appointed Joe Black special consultant and part-time assistant on the Player Personal Development Committee.
BASKETBALL  UTAH (NBA) - Signed Mark Eaton, center, to a five-year contract.
FOOTBALL  DALLAS (NFC) - Waived Kevin Robbins, offensive tackle.


New York Complies on Ocean Dumping, but Sludge Never Stops
LEAD: To the Editor:


MGM/UA Shares Fall
LEAD: Shares of the MGM/UA Communications Company dropped today on the New York Stock Exchange despite a surprise $1.35 billion acquisition offer Wednesday by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.
MGM/UA shares closed down 62.5 cents, at $20.625.
Shares of the News Corporation, the holding company for Mr.
Murdoch's media interests, closed down $1 at $24.


Major 'Junk Bond' Sells Quickly
LEAD: The high-yield ''junk bond'' market, reeling from financial problems at a broad range of companies, got something of a boost late yesterday, when Salomon Brothers successfully priced a $300 million issue for a major Coca-Cola bottler.


Review/Film; Animated Shorts, Some Already Shown on TV
LEAD: As anthologies of short animated films go, and more seem to be flooding in all the time, ''The Second Animation Celebration: The Movie'' is an ordinary affair.
The 24 shorts include a few bright, witty narratives, along with many cutesy exercises and several computer-generated films that seem to exist to flaunt their technical expertise.


Soviet Refugees, by Any Other Name
LEAD: How can the Bush Administration turn so heartlessly against Soviet Jews yearning for freedom? ''Heartlessly'' does not, at first, seem too strong -not when Jewel Lafontant, the Administration's refugee coordinator, tells Congress, so what if the U.S. doesn't admit them; they can ''always go to Israel or return to Russia.


On Stage
LEAD:  A 1990 'Band Wagon'


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Consumer's World page last Saturday about generic drugs misidentified the executive director of the Epilepsy Institute.
She is Reina Berner.
A chart accompanying the article misstated the generic equivalent of the drug Dyazide.
It is hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene.


Anti-Fraud Link Sought
LEAD: The new president of a North American securities regulators group said today that she planned to enlist Canada and Mexico in the battle against stock fraud by linking them to a United States enforcement computer network.
The officer, Susan Bryant, said at a conference of the North American Securities Administrators Association that the enforcement computer link-up would be an expansion of the Central Registration Depository.


Jury in Los Angeles Acquits Five in Protests of Abortions
LEAD: Randall Terry, the leader of the militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue, has been acquitted of trespassing charges along with four associates with whom he blocked entrances to clinics where the defendants said abortions were performed.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is our conclusion that Mr.
Henry Hughes died as a result of cocaine intoxication.
Physical injuries neither caused nor contributed to his death.''  - Dr.
Charles S. Hirsch, Chief Medical Examiner of New York.  [ B4:3. ]


Auctions
LEAD:  Kaufmann Collection


Writing Coaches Helping to Stamp Out Legalese
LEAD: ''Dear Miss Grammar: What's the difference between 'commence' and 'begin'?''


Georgia Gulf Board Is Studying a Sale
LEAD: The Georgia Gulf Corporation's board said it was exploring a sale, a move seen as a response to the Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons, who has threatened a takeover battle for the chemical company.
Mr.
Simmons, who last week said he was seeking shareholder consent to oust the board, said he would proceed with that strategy but at a slower pace while Georgia


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  A $6.75 billion bid for United Airlines was approved by the board of UAL, the carrier's parent company.
The $300-a-share offer came from a group that includes the airline's pilots, top executives and British Airways.
If the deal is completed, UAL would be the nation's largest employee-owned company.


Mariners Sold For a Record $77 Million
LEAD: Major league club owners today approved the sale of the Seattle Mariners for $77 million, the highest price ever paid for an American League club.


Beijing Ousts Governor Tied to Zhao
LEAD: In a sign that Beijing is trying to crack down on freewheeling economic policies in the provinces, China today announced the dismissal of the Governor of the nation's most experimental economic region.


Giuliani Attends Memorial for Federal Judge  The Mass honored Judge Lloyd F. MacMahon of Federal District   Court in Manhattan, who died last April, and celebrated the opening of the governmental and judicial year. (The New York Times/Ruby Washington)


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: A $200 million offering of notes issued by the Associates Corporation of North America, a financial services unit of Paramount Communications Inc.'s subsidiary Associates First Capital Corporation, was priced yesterday in competitive bidding, and awarded to Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Review/Art; Searching for Some Order In a Show Based on Chaos
LEAD: ''Strange Attractors: Signs of Chaos'' is not a complete disaster.
There are a few memorable works among the several dozen paintings, sculptures, photographs, installations and video presentations that have been crammed into the New Museum of Contemporary Art, and there are, as well, a few good ideas floating around.


Selling Earth Photos To Broader Audience
LEAD: In an age of marketing jargon, there is something almost quaint about Grace &amp; Rothschild's new ad campaign for the Eosat Company.
Both company and agency profess to know nothing about the potential market for Eosat's product - photographs of the Earth taken from a satellite.


Michigan's Reputation On the Line
LEAD: Having won the Big Ten football championship and the Rose Bowl last season, the Michigan Wolverines face an unusual campus challenge: living up to the success of the basketball team.


Dollar Rebounds in the U.S.; Gold Prices Are Also Higher
LEAD: After closing lower overseas, the dollar rebounded to finish higher in choppy domestic trading yesterday.


Melee Follows 5th Indictment In Racial Case
LEAD: A melee erupted yesterday in front of a Brooklyn courthouse shortly after a hearing announcing the indictment of a fifth white man in what the police have called the racially motivated slaying of Yusuf K. Hawkins in the Bensonhurst section last month.


People
LEAD: *
Marilyn Keenan has joined Campbell-Mithun-Esty/Chicago as senior vice president.


Fuhr Is Stricken
LEAD: Grant Fuhr, the Edmonton goaltender who caused a mild furor when he retired in the offseason, then changed his mind before training camp opened, will be sidelined for up to two months after having an emergency appendectomy yesterday in Edmonton.


Commonwealth Games Will Be Coe's Finale
LEAD: Sebastian Coe, the British middle-distance runner who set a dozen indoor and outdoor records between 1979 and 1983, said yesterday at a news conference in London that he would make the final appearance of his career in the Commonwealth Games from Jan. 24-Feb. 2 at Auckland, New Zealand.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Hispanic Dropout Rate Is Put at 35%
LEAD: The high school dropout rate among the nearly four million Hispanic students in the United States rose to 35.7 percent last year, almost triple that of white students and more than double that of blacks, according to a report released today by the Department of Education.


Officials See Little Damage From Spill


In Moyers's Poetry Series, The Stress Is on Listening
LEAD: Television and poetry are not natural bedfellows.
The ordinary currencies of talk shows, local news programs and sports coverage are misused words, stale images, sloppy syntax, loony locutions and sheer blather.
For lovers of language, it's a cower of Babel.
All of which is by way of welcoming ''The Power of the Word,'' Bill Moyers's new series on poetry that starts tonight at 9 on


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  ARCTIC DRAMA


New Pretoria President Under Fire on Right
LEAD: F. W. de Klerk was elected today to a five-year term as President, and immediately drew criticism from conservative opponents for allowing an anti-apartheid protest by thousands of marchers Wednesday.


Boufford Quits Post as Chief Of Hospitals
LEAD: Dr.
Jo Ivey Boufford, who has headed New York City's municipal hospital system during a period of crisis, announced her resignation yesterday to take a fellowship in England.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Alto Emeritus Lou Donaldson, Carlos 1, 432 Avenue of the Americas, between Ninth and 10th Streets (982-3260).
Lou Donaldson can rip silence; a slashing alto saxophonist, he's on some of the finest be-bop sessions from the 1950's.
He's also someone whose series of organ records in the 60's has somewhat tarnished his credibility as a jazz musician.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:  Back to Baltimore


Jackson Has Surgery
LEAD: Rickey Jackson of the New Orleans Saints underwent three and a half hours of reconstructive surgery yesterday on the cheekbone the linebacker fractured in a car wreck, and a team spokesman said he was expected to be out at least four weeks.
Jackson narrowly escaped death early Monday when he drove a Corvette under the back of a flatbed truck about three miles from his home north of New Orleans.


Jets Wonder if Absences Make the Players Grow Softer
LEAD: Barely three weeks after the Jets signed three important veterans for a total of $2.5 million this season, the club will face the Cleveland Browns on Sunday with one missing, one returning from an injury and one out of shape.


Boy, 5, Used as Drug Runner
LEAD: A 5-year-old boy was used as a drug runner by the cousin who was his baby sitter, the police said today.
Three people, including the baby sitter, were arrested and charged with fifth-degree criminal possession of a controlled substance and endangering the welfare of a minor.
The police said the boy's mother was unaware of what was happening to her son in his baby sitter's care.


Economic Scene; How Has Bush Done So Far?
LEAD: THE Bush Administration this month released a report on its ''initiatives and accomplishments.'' So far, how does its record stack up?


Energy Chief Won't Have to Testify in Ohio Case
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Cincinnati has rescinded an order that would have forced the Secretary of Energy to testify about a dispute over a proposed $78 million settlement with neighbors of a highly contaminated nuclear bomb plant.


Computers' Role Enlarged In Auto Pollution Control
LEAD: In an effort to harness the power of computers to the problem of dirty air, California officials voted yesterday to require new automobiles to carry better computers that will continuously monitor 10 pollution control systems and diagnose malfunctions.


Grey Will Promote New Eisenhower Coin
LEAD: The United States Mint awarded Grey Advertising yesterday the $3 million account for a silver coin commemorating the 100th birthday of Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Grey will do advertising, direct marketing, sales promotion and public relations for the coin, which goes on sale next January.
Grey has handled four assignments for the Mint since 1985.


Arts Endowment Official to Run Met Opera
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera announced yesterday that Hugh Southern, the acting chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts and the man who brought the half-priced TKTS booth to Duffy Square, would become its new general manager.


Italian Music, Free
LEAD: The Brooklyn Philharmonic and the Cathedral Singers will present a free concert of Italian music at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, tonight at 8 o'clock.
The program, which is to be conducted by Luciano Berio and Eduardo Muller, includes Mr.
Berio's ''O King,'' Vivaldi's ''Dixit Dominus,'' Petrassi's ''Beatitudes'' and Respighi's ''Ancient Italian Dances'' Suite No.


Playoffs? Mattingly Can Only Watch
LEAD: He will have the numbers that mark his consistency - 20 homers, 100 runs batted in, most likely a .300 average - but Don Mattingly will not have the thing he craves most when September turns to October.
He will watch the leaves turn at home in Evansville, Ind., miles from the playoffs and the World Series, the place where he still longs to be.


Surviving Without Television
LEAD: ADVERTISING aimed at customers inside their local grocery stores can be a potent substitute for television, a top executive whose ads were forced from the air told many of the nation's top marketers this week.


Our Towns; Sssh! And Scram! A Library Fights The Homeless
LEAD: At the front desk of the public library, there is a spiral notebook for patrons to jot down comments.
Usually, people write to complain about things like dim reading lights or not enough books on rock climbing.


Topics of The Times; Zzzzzz's
LEAD: That humankind was not meant to be awake at 3 o'clock in the afternoon is known to everyone who ever had to prop his eyelids open after lunch.
Now sleep researchers say so, too, in a book titled ''Sleep and Alertness: Chronological, Behavioral and Medical Aspects of Napping.''


Reebok Planning Inflatable Footwear
LEAD: Reebok International Ltd. said it was introducing sneakers that could be inflated with air and that would sell for $170 a pair. ''The wearer will be able to inflate the shoe using a pump on the tongue of the shoe, making it fit round the wearer's foot perfectly,'' the company said.


Computer Lessor Deal With Geneen Group
LEAD: The board of the Continental Information Systems Corporation in Syracuse said yesterday that it would sell substantially all of its assets to an investor group led by Harold S. Geneen, the former chairman of the ITT Corporation.


Review/Film; Al Pacino As Detective In Love With His Suspect
LEAD: Detective Frank Keller (Al Pacino) of the New York Police Department is hollow-eyed and short-tempered, a physical and emotional wreck.
He doesn't eat properly.
He drinks too much.
He's lonely and on edge.
You've met the type before.
It doesn't help that his partner is married to his ex-wife, which means, as Frank points out when drunk, that the two men can't have a comradely beer at the end of the day.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bio-Response Inc., Hayward, Calif., a bioprocessing company, said it had filed for creditor protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S.
Bankruptcy Code after failing to reach an arrangement with debenture holders.


Topics of The Times; Moon Over Manhattan
LEAD: A friend who recently moved to the high floor of an apartment tower has been luxuriating in the expansiveness of her view: the Hudson River down to the Statue of Liberty, sunsets over New Jersey, the wide, blue sky.
She's also discovered an unexpected treat: the moon.


Calloway, Who Says Entertaining Is All
LEAD: Cab Calloway, the 82-year-old singer and entertainer performing at the Beacon Theater tomorrow night, is one of those mythic American characters.
Through his band leading, singing, dancing, dressing and sense of both humor and nonsense, Mr.
Calloway introduced almost singlehandedly a new wildness and extravagance to American culture that fit right into several of the other predominant movements of the time, from modernism through Surrealism to


Smoking Restrictions Increased Dramatically in Recent Years
LEAD: Restrictions on smoking in the workplace and a wide array of public accommodations have increased dramatically across the nation in recent years as corporations, state legislatures and local lawmakers have responded to the growing demands of health advocates and nonsmokers.


Red Ransom Will Miss the Futurity
LEAD: Red Ransom, the unbeaten 2-year-old who was scheduled to run in the Futurity Stakes at Belmont on Sunday, has been sidelined with a shin irritation just below the knee in his left foreleg.
Mack Miller, his trainer, said it was possible that the colt might be back in time for the Cowdin Stakes Sept.


The Invasion of the Bibliophiles: A Guide for Fairgoers
LEAD: Imagine the biggest book in the universe, one that extends for half a mile from cover to cover, with trillions of words and hundreds of thousands of characters.
Then imagine that you have just six hours to make your way through it before it vanishes.


38 Die in Sri Lanka Amid New Peace Effort
LEAD: A television announcer was among 38 people killed in Sri Lanka in political violence in the 24 hours that ended this morning, military officials said.


Construction Sites Raided for Traffic Violations


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums FREE FESTIVAL, with magicians, storytellers and other entertainment, and refreshments, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Sunday, at the 91st Street Playground, Riverside Park.
Rain date: Sept. 24.
Information: 678-0189.
ANNUAL QUEENS COUNTY FAIR, with music, dancing, tours of a restored 1770 farmhouse, cooking demonstrations, games and other entertainment, 11 A.M.


FLAW IN $12 PART SIDELINES ROCKET
LEAD: Defects in a $12 circuit board have forced the Pentagon to delay deployment of the newest rocket for Air Force fighters and have raised doubts about the effectiveness of tens of thousands of other missiles fired from aircraft.


Labatt May Seek Assets of Bond
LEAD: The president of North America's seventh-largest brewer, John Labatt Ltd., said his company might be interested in buying the brewing assets of Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd., estimated to be worth $2.6 billion.
Sid M. Oland, who is also Labatt's chief executive, said Labatt would study a possible purchase if the Australian company decided to sell the assets.


No Talks Scheduled In City Opera Strike
LEAD: The New York City Opera and its orchestra players have not yet met to discuss the salary and scheduling issues that led to a walkout on Wednesday evening.


Books of The Times; George Bernard Shaw And the Urge to Dominate
LEAD:  Bernard Shaw  Volume II: 1898-1918 The Pursuit of Power  By Michael Holroyd  421 pages.
Random House. $24.95.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-11, D17


Valentina, a Designer of Clothes For Stars in the Theater, Dies at 90
LEAD: Valentina Nicholaevna Sanina Schlee, the fashion designer known by her first name who made clothes for social and theater personalities in the 1920's through the 50's, died of Parkinson's disease yesterday at her Manhattan home.
She was 90 years old.


'Junk' Market Nervous As Selling Continues
LEAD: In an attempt to ease the fear and uncertainty that has gripped the ''junk bond'' market in recent days, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company yesterday told its institutional customers that the investment firm stood ready to provide trading liquidity and buy junk bonds ''across the board.''


Navarez Wins Opener At Boxing's New Stage
LEAD: By 7 o'clock, Steve Corwin, a dockworker from Ozone Park, Queens, was settled into his balcony seat as the tuxedoed ring announcer was saying, ''Welcome to the ancient Beacon Theater.''


Beijing Journal; With Democracy in Dust, a Cloud Falls on Science
LEAD: For two years Zhao Zhongxian, a leading Chinese physicist, had one goal: organizing a major international conference on high-temperature superconductivity, in hopes that it would prove that a third-world country can carry out first-class research.


Experts Cite 3 Ways Cocaine Effects Can Lead to Death
LEAD: Pathologists and experts in toxicology say that cocaine intoxication usually leads to death in at least one of three ways.
They can all occur without outside stimuli.


Ex-Ashland Chief Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Orin E. Atkins, the former chairman of Ashland Oil Inc., pleaded guilty yesterday to criminal charges that he tried to sell company secrets to an Iranian oil concern for use in its lawsuit against Ashland.


Seamus Twomey, 70, a Leader of Irish Guerrillas
LEAD: Seamus Twomey, a leader of the Irish Republican Army, died Tuesday in a Dublin hospital.
He was 70 years old and had been suffering from a heart ailment.


I.M.F. Weighed Action on Peru
LEAD: Members of the board of the International Monetary Fund discussed the possibility of declaring Peru in noncompliance with the fund's articles of agreement, a prelude to expulsion, monetary officials said this week.


Johnson Signs With Giants For 2 Years
LEAD: Pepper Johnson, the Giants' last unsigned player, signed today, one week into the season and more than seven weeks after training camp began.


MX Missile Destroyed Three Minutes Into Test
LEAD: An MX missile pulled from a silo in Wyoming for a test was destroyed three minutes into flight today, the Air Force said.


Charles Russell, 85, Ex-Governor of Nevada
LEAD: Charles H. Russell, a newspaper publisher who turned to politics and served as Governor and Congressman, died of a heart attack Wednesday at a hospital here.
He was 85 years old.


From a legal dugout on West 57th Street, plans are hatched for a new baseball league.
LEAD: If David LeFevre has his way, Opening Day of the 1990 baseball season will have a decidedly different look.
The players, or at least some of them, will be familiar, but they will toiling in strange cities, wearing caps with unfamiliar insignias, playing for clubs with strange new names.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Flaw in Part Delays Rocket  A defect in a $12 circuit board has forced the Pentagon to delay deployment of the newest missile for Air Force fighters.
Page A19.
Executive Pleads Guilty  Orin Atkins, the former chairman of Ashland Oil, admitted to criminal charges that he tried to sell company secrets to Iran.


S.E.C. Nominee Says 'Junk Bond' Market Seems Sound
LEAD: President Bush's nominee to head the Securities and Exchange Commission said today that the market for high-yield ''junk bonds'' still seemed sound despite tremors touched off by the cash binds of some debt-laden issuers, most recently the Campeau Corporation.


C. Lincoln Crane Jr., Marine Engineer, 58
LEAD: C. Lincoln Crane Jr., a marine engineer and chief of stability and control for the Davidson Laboratory at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, N.J., died at Southern Ocean County (N.J.) Hospital on Sept. 10 after a swimming accident.
He was 58 years old and lived in Basking Ridge, N.J.


N.Y.U. Offers a Boost Toward Public Service
LEAD: One-third of the new graduates of New York University Law School have decided to donate part of their income to a fund to enhance salaries of law graduates who take public service jobs.


SALVADOR REBELS REDUCE DEMANDS
LEAD: The Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrilla leaders resumed their talks here today, still bogged down on procedural matters but expressing hope that a detailed peace plan offered by the rebels could provide the basis for more substantive negotiations.


Bank Profits at Record High
LEAD: Commercial banks reported their most profitable six months ever in the first half of the year, the Government said Wednesday.


We've Been Bowling Since Peter Minuit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Poles Are Reported Beaten By Rumanian Border Troops
LEAD: The Foreign Ministry filed a protest today after 30 Polish tourists said Rumanian border soldiers dragged them off a train and beat them with rifle butts, the state press agency reported.


Homosexuals Are Targets Of Courter In New Jersey
LEAD: Homosexual rights have emerged as an issue in the race for governor of New Jersey, raised by the repeated calls of the Republican candidate, Representative Jim Courter, for limiting the rights of homosexuals to work as teachers, foster parents and camp counselors or in other jobs that put them in contact with children.


Pierce Abruptly Cancels Testimony in House
LEAD: Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. today abruptly canceled a scheduled appearance Friday before a House panel investigating mismanagement and fraud in housing programs, accusing the subcommittee of unfairness in denying his request for a delay.


New Renaissance Work
LEAD: Pomerium Musices, an early-music chamber choir conducted by Alexander Blachly, is to present the United States premiere of recently discovered plainchant works by the Renaissance composer Guillaume Dufay.
The works, which were composed in Cambrai, in 1457, were discovered and identiified by the musicologist Barbara Haggh in 1985.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  The Sound of Musics


Smith-Pleau Strategy for Rangers: Patience, Not Panic
LEAD: The matter of who's who was proving tough enough, so Larry Pleau wanted no part of the larger question of what's what.


Bronx Suspect Died From Cocaine, Not Injuries, Autopsy Report Says
LEAD: The death of a robbery suspect in the Bronx early Saturday resulted solely from cocaine intoxication, not from injuries suffered in a struggle with police officers, the Chief Medical Examiner said yesterday in his final autopsy report.


Review/Film; 'In Country,' Coping With Vietnam
LEAD: His hairline recedes, his eyelids droop and there always seems to be stubble around his Fu Manchu mustache.
During his niece's high-school graduation, the inspirational speeches and the band dressed in gold-braided uniforms set Emmett Smith's mind wandering back nearly 20 years to his time in Vietnam.


Hungary's Motive: Earning Western Good Will
LEAD: Initially embarrassed at serving as an escape hatch for East Germans fleeing to West Germany, Hungary now appears to believe that having allowed more than 13,000 citizens of an ally to flee to a country in the opposing alliance will do it more good in the West than harm in the East.


House Committee Votes 19 to 17 To Reduce Tax on Capital Gains
LEAD: A divided House Ways and Means Committee approved legislation today to cut the tax on capital gains, handing President Bush an important political victory and setting the stage for a bruising fight on the House floor later this month.


Campeau's Mounting Debt Burden
LEAD:  Nov. 2, 1986: The Allied Stores Corporation, operator of Jordan Marsh and other top retail chains, agrees to be acquired for $3.6 billion by the Campeau Corporation, led by Robert Campeau, who made his fortune in Canada developing shopping malls.
Jan. 24, 1988: Campeau begins a bid of $4.2 billion for Federated Department Stores, owner of Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and other chains.


American Western Bid Is Suspended
LEAD: The WAC Holding Corporation, a management group that had offered to acquire the American Western Corporation in a $64.4 million buyout, said it would suspend it efforts to acquire the plastic bag manufacturer.


New York Panel Will Investigate Bottle Deposits
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, frustrated for years in his attempts to have the state recover millions of unclaimed nickels on bottle and can deposits, today created a commission with subpoena powers to investigate what the beverage industry does with this money.


Retail Sales Increased 0.7% in August
LEAD: Retail sales rose a moderate seven-tenths of 1 percent in August because of strong automobile sales, but analysts foresee growing sluggishness in the remainder of the year.


Canadian Police Seize 4 Latins and Arms
LEAD: Authorities in this city on the Maine border arrested four people with Venezuelan passports and seized an arsenal of assault weapons, the police said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about public reaction to the mayoral primary in New York City misstated David N. Dinkins's share of the white vote.
Of all whites who voted in the Democratic primary, 29 percent voted for Mr.
Dinkins, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV poll.
Of all Dinkins voters, however, 34 percent were white, according to the poll.


Market Place; Value Questions In Warner Deal
LEAD: WITH the ''junk bond'' market reeling, shareholders of Warner Communications Inc. are suffering.


A Film Retrospective Looks At an Early Ingrid Bergman
LEAD: ''People think my mother was discovered as an innocent kid from Sweden and made into a star by Hollywood,'' Isabella Rossellini said last week. ''But she was a very well-known star in Sweden before she ever went to Hollywood, and now Sweden is taking pride in that and the Swedish Film Institute is restoring and subtitling her films.


A Booth-by-Booth Guide to the Book Fair
LEAD: This is a booth-by-booth browser's guide to activities at the New York Is Book Country fair.
The major displays of each booth are listed.
Author appearances are subject to change.  1.
New York Botanical Garden: Ruth Rogers Clausen, co-author of ''Perennials for American Gardens.''


Campaign Trail; Party Head Offers 'to Go All Out' for Dinkins
LEAD: David N. Dinkins introduced Ronald H. Brown as his kid brother yesterday, and it really didn't seem much of a stretch.
Both looked elegant and determined in double-breasted suits, confidently ridiculing Rudolph W. Giuliani as Ronald Reagan incarnate in New York.


Bell Atlantic Planning Cuts
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation, one of the nation's seven regional Bell telephone operating companies, said yesterday that it planned to reduce its work force by 1,000 to 1,200 managers by the end of the year to cut costs.


Bad Debt Rose Sharply at I.M.F. Last Year
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund reported Wednesday that the bad debts it holds rose sharply in the last year and now total 10 percent of its outstanding loans.


Bush to Assure Shevardnadze On Support for Arms Control
LEAD: The White House said today that President Bush would meet with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, next week and assure him that the United States wants to make headway on arms control issues.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Mon Cher Ton Ton


When the Police Guidelines Don't Help
LEAD: The New York City Police Department has developed strict guidelines for handling people suffering from cocaine intoxication, but law-enforcement experts say officers often do not know when to use the guidelines.


Reviews/Music; Red Army Ensemble Offers Proletarian Variety Show
LEAD: Fifty years ago, the American debut of the Aleksandrov Red Army Song and Dance Ensemble, as it is now called, was canceled because of the onset of World War II.
In this time of glasnost, no such cataclysm intruded.


Jewish Student Accused of Faking Anti-Semitism
LEAD: The former president of the Jewish Student Union at the State University of New York in Binghamton has been charged with painting anti-Semitic slurs near a Jewish sanctuary.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Burson-Marsteller, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam, has acquired a 49 percent stake in Omo-Delta, a Mexican public relations firm, which will be renamed Omo-Delta Burson-Marsteller.
Terms were not disclosed.


Cadillac Increases 1989 Sales Goals
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation's Cadillac division expects to sell 267,000 units in its 1989 model year, 2,200 more than initially forcast, its vice president and general manager, John O. Grettenberger, said.
Through August, Cadillac's 1989 calendar-year sales totaled 167,925 units, up about 3,700 units, or 2 percent more than in 1988, he said.


Europe to Join Colombia's Drug Fight
LEAD: Cocaine-consuming nations of Europe and Latin America are starting to join the United States in giving Colombia concrete help in its war on drug traffickers, diplomats and Government officials here say.


We've Been Bowling Since Peter Minuit; Strong Competitors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plan to Allow Building Near Swamp Is Denied
LEAD: The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection rejected plans today for a municipal sewage treatment plant that would not only clean waste water but also encourage development.


Soak the Poor! Trash the Economy!
LEAD: Misleading.
Deceptive.
Faithless.
Such was the decision yesterday by six Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committee to break rank and vote with the Republicans to lower the capital gains tax for two and a half years.
The Democratic leadership now confronts the huge task of reversing the committee's vote on the floor of the


To Our Readers
LEAD: Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays within 75 miles of New York City, and on all of Long Island, will be increased to 40 cents.
The change is prompted by rising production and distribution costs.
The newspaper's Sunday price will not change, nor will its weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


Debate Over Drug War Focuses on Financing It
LEAD: The debate between the Bush Administration and Congress over drug policy involves not only how much money to spend and where to spend it but also how to raise the money without breaking the budget agreement reached last spring.


Abba Schwartz, Refugee Expert, Dies at Age 73
LEAD: Abba P. Schwartz, a lawyer and former high-ranking State Department official, died of a heart attack Tuesday on a street in Brussels while going to the United States Embassy on business.
He was 73 years old.


Share Offering For Disney Park
LEAD: A $:600 million ($936 million) share offering for the new Euro Disneyland theme park near Paris is scheduled for mid-October in Paris and London, a spokesman for the Walt Disney Company said today.
The spokesman said the exact date and share price for the issue had not been fixed.


More Jobs for Shevack
LEAD: Partners &amp; Shevack yesterday added textile and cosmetics advertising to its growing business, winning the accounts for Flame Glo cosmetics, which are made by Del Laboratories, Farmingdale, L.I., and Forstmann &amp; Company, a wool manufacturer.
The new accounts are worth a total of $5 million, most of it from Flame Glow, an agency spokesman said.


John F. Morgan, Realty Broker, 94
LEAD: John F. Morgan, a New York real-estate broker for many decades, died Tuesday at Rex Hospital in Raleigh, N.C.
He was 94 years old and lived in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
He had lived for many years in New Jersey.


U.S. Is Backing the Wrong Horse in Cambodia; Burmese Fear and Terror
LEAD: To the Editor:


UAL BOARD CLEARS PILOT-LED BUYOUT OF UNITED AIRLINES
LEAD: The independent directors of the UAL Corporation last evening approved an offer by a group including pilots, management and British Airways P.L.C. to buy the company for $300 a share, people involved in the bidding said.


A Turning Point?
LEAD: By American standards they were small things.
In South Africa, two episodes in recent days had large implications.
They just might have marked a turning point: a moment when the white politicians who hold power in that divided society began to show concern for the feelings of the majority.


Allegheny Predicts Continued Losses
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. will probably lose money for two more years after emerging from protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, the company said.
Allegheny officials filed the projection, which they termed speculative and conditional, with the Federal Bankruptcy Court on Wednesday with its latest reorganization plan.


2 in Gambino Family Get Life
LEAD: Two men convicted of being members of a crew of killers for the Gambino crime family were sentenced yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan to life in prison plus 20 years.
Joseph Testa Jr. and Anthony Senter were sentenced for conspiring to deny the civil rights of at least two potential witnesses by participating in their killings.


Finning Purchase
LEAD: The heavy-equipment dealer Finning Ltd. said it had bought the Caterpillar Inc. equipment distributor R. Angus Alberta Ltd. for $220 million in cash plus assumed debt.
Angus has the Caterpillar dealership for Alberta and part of the Northwest Territories.
The sale is subject to confirmation of that arrangement.


Soviet-Refugee Plan Faulted; Critics Say Flow Will Dry Up
LEAD: Republican and Democratic members of Congress and religious groups today harshly criticized a Bush Administration plan to establish new procedures for screening Soviet refugees in Moscow, saying it would choke the flow of Soviet Jews and Pentecostals to the United States.


Reviews/Art: Rarities to See From Other Lands; A Visual History Of Jewish Life In Italy
LEAD: IT is not every day that a major exhibition can claim to tread wholly new ground.
But that is what can be said of ''Gardens and Ghettos: The Art of Jewish Life in Italy'' that can be seen at the Jewish Museum starting on Sunday.
The organizers say it is ''the first overall visual history of the Jews of Italy presented anywhere.


Campeau Loan Talks Continue
LEAD: Robert Campeau, chairman of the Campeau Corporation, and his closest advisers were locked into last-minute negotiations last night with their key lenders and partners in an effort to cement a $250 million loan that would infuse new working capital into the company's American retail subsidiaries.


Dining Out: Spots Near Universities
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current.
Au Grenier Diner's Journal (June 6, 1986), 2867 Broadway, at 111th Street (666-3052) - The Columbia University area abounds with restaurants catering to student tastes and budgets.


B.P. to Sell $1.3 Billion In Property
LEAD: In a $1.31 billion deal, the British Petroleum Company agreed today to sell an assortment of oil and gas properties in the North Sea and elsewhere to the Oryx Energy Company, based in Dallas.


British Jobless Rate Falls
LEAD: British unemployment dropped to its lowest level in almost nine years in August, but time lost to strikes jumped sharply in July, the Government said today.
The Department of Employment said the seasonally adjusted jobless total fell for the 37th consecutive month, by 36,200, to 1,751,000, or 6.1 percent of the work force.


Review/Film; A Student's Rise and Fall In a Hollywood of Hustlers
LEAD: ''The Big Picture,'' the first theatrical film to be directed by the talented Christopher Guest (a co-writer and a star of ''This Is Spinal Tap''), is a consistently genial, intermittently funny send-up of the current Hollywood scene as demonstrated by the rise and fall of an award-winning film student.


California Journal; No Escape In the Wild From Grip Of Society
LEAD: The idea was to get away from the fetters of big-city life in Los Angeles, away from the congestion, crime and traffic tickets.
But two backpackers far up in the Sierra Nevada, amid 20 million acres of Federal wilderness, got a ticket over the weekend for hiking on the wrong trail.


G.M. Idles Plant in Atlanta And Stirs U.A.W.'s Anger
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it was idling its Lakewood assembly plant in Atlanta, prompting an angry charge of hypocrisy by the United Automobile Workers' new executive in charge of relations with G.M.


GATT Weighs China's Entry
LEAD: The world trade body GATT decided today to resume consideration of China's request to join it.


Reviews/Art: Rarities to See From Other Lands; At the Met: Five Centuries Of China's Best
LEAD: FOR 24 Ming and Qing emperors, spanning 543 years, the Forbidden City was the seat of power.
After the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, most of this imperial palace eventually became the Palace Museum, which is now the greatest repository of Ming and Qing art.
Yet this largest museum in China, with nearly one million objects, remains something of a secret.


As Crowds Cheer, Namibia Guerrilla Chief Ends Exile
LEAD: Sam Nujoma, the leader of the South-West Africa People's Organization, came home today to a tumultuous welcome after nearly 30 years in exile.


U.S. Seeks Details On Northwest Deal
LEAD: The Transportation Department said it still had questions about the $3.65 billion acquisition of Northwest Airlines in July by the Los Angeles investor Alfred Checchi.
In late June, NWA Inc., Northwest's parent, agreed to the cash offer from a group led by Mr.
Checchi, whose partners include KLM Royal Dutch





Milken Says Government Leaked Data on Inquiry
LEAD: Lawyers for Michael R. Milken, the former head of the ''junk bond'' unit at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., have accused the Government in court papers of leaking information about the Federal investigation of the financier to several large newspapers.


No More Automatics For Kickers
LEAD: Syracuse University students did not celebrate the school's extra-point streak by chalking up 1's in the Carrier Dome, the way Met fans hang S's and K's from the upper deck for strikeouts.


Scott's 20th Stops Dodgers
LEAD: Mike Scott became a 20-game winner for the first time in his 11-year career, leading the Houston Astros over the Los Angeles Dodgers, 11-3, on a day last year's World Series champions were mathematically eliminated from the National League West race.


Bloomingdale's Apologizes
LEAD: Bloomingdale's has apologized to black New Yorkers for a recent newspaper ad it said was ''considered offensive by members of the African-American community.''


Rep. Jenkins Wins a Philosophical Victory
LEAD: Ed Jenkins, the author of the capital gains tax cut approved today by the House Ways and Means Committee, outmaneuvered the committee's chairman, Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois.
But to Mr.
Jenkins, a soft-spoken conservative Democrat from Georgia, the victory is philosophical, not personal.


Richard Selchow, 67, Game Company Head
LEAD: Richard P. Selchow, former president and chairman of the Selchow &amp; Righter Company, the Long Island game manufacturer that distributed Scrabble and Trivial Pursuit before it was acquired by Coleco, died Wednesday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived in West Bay Shore, L.I., and Brookfield,


Review/Theater; Anthropomorphic Acrobats From Japan
LEAD: Puppets served tea and performed acrobatic tricks Tuesday morning when the Japan Society offered ''Karakuri Ningyo: Ancient Festival Puppets,'' a presentation that was both unusual and delightful.


MGM/UA Accepts New Qintex Bid
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company accepted a sweetened $1.45 billion buyout offer from the Qintex Group of Australia today, thwarting a last-minute effort by Rupert Murdoch to acquire the company for $1.35 billion.


Campeau Said To Lose Control Of Retail Giant
LEAD: Robert Campeau, the Canadian developer who amassed one of the world's biggest retail empires by borrowing heavily to buy such stores as Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus, was forced yesterday to yield control to get yet another loan to keep the operation solvent, executives in Toronto and New York said.


DC-10 JETS TO GET HYDRAULIC DEVICE
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, manufacturer of the DC-10 jet, said yesterday that it would modify the plane with a simple device that could enable it to be landed safely if all hydraulic lines are severed.
The modifications, to be completed over the next 21 months, stem from the July crash of a United Airlines DC-10 in Sioux City, Iowa, that killed 112 people.


Amoco Seeks Sale Of British Assets
LEAD: Amoco (U.K.) Ltd., a subsidiary of the Amoco Corporation, retained Morgan Stanley International to explore the possible sale of the company's refining and petroleum-product marketing operations in Britain.


Wave of Protests Developing On Profits From AIDS Drug
LEAD: The prospect of huge profits from the sale of the AIDS drug AZT is bringing a wave of protests against the Burroughs Wellcome Company, the drug's manufacturer.


Producer Prices Fell 0.4% in August
LEAD: Producer prices fell four-tenths of 1 percent in August, the third straight monthly decline, the Labor Department reported today.


Bush's Drug Strategy Is Criticized As Failing to Seek Views of Cities
LEAD: Two prominent blacks criticized President Bush's drug strategy today, saying it was underfinanced, failed to take the views of affected communities into account and ignored the underlying poverty that contributes to drug use.


Di Giorgio Draws Possible Suitors
LEAD: The Di Giorgio Corporation said a number of parties had expressed interest in purchasing the company or its units.
The food and building materials company said that it would continue to explore alternatives to an unsolicited offer made last month by the DIG Acquisition Corporation.
DIG, led by a New Jersey investor,Arthur M.


Kroger to Sell 9 Food Units
LEAD: The Kroger Company, the grocery store chain operator, said it expected to reap $260 million in after-tax proceeds from the sale of nine food processing plants and two more whose sales are under negotiation.
Kroger is selling the plants as part of a $4.6 billion corporate restructuring begun last fall to stave off two unsuccessful takeover attempts.


Police Cleared in Suffocation Of a Retarded Brooklyn Man
LEAD: A Brooklyn grand jury has voted not to indict any police officers in the death of a mentally retarded man who was suffocated July 10 during a struggle with officers.


House Panel Acts to Summon H.U.D.'s Ex-Chief
LEAD: A House subcommittee moved today to subpoena Samuel R. Pierce Jr. and its chairman warned lawyers for the former Housing Secretary that ''while he may run, he may not hide'' from questions about political favoritism at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Agassi Going to Sydney
LEAD: Andre Agassi, the No. 5-ranked player in the world, will play in the Australian Open for the first time next year, tournament officials said yesterday in Sydney.
The tournament is scheduled for Jan. 15-28.
Agassi, 19, recently reached the semifinals of the United States Open, where he lost to Ivan Lendl.


Passau Journal; A Wanderlust Born of Frustration
LEAD: There were no bright lights or champagne corks popping when Kerstin Bohland crossed from Hungary into Austria by car on Monday, in the midst of a wave of East Germans heading west.
The 22-year-old waitress from East Berlin did not weep or shout for joy.


North Korea Quickly Rejects Seoul's Unification Proposal
LEAD: North Korea has rejected a South Korean proposal to create a single Korean commonwealth as an interim measure to unify the Korean nations, South Korean officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about Representative James J. Florio, the Democratic candidate for governor of New Jersey, referred incorrectly to an investment involving the Continental Bank of New Jersey.
Mr.
Florio was part of a group that bought the bank's building and land, not the bank itself.


Mr. Courter Embraces Prejudice
LEAD: Even people uncomfortable with homosexuality ought to be uncomfortable with the way Jim Courter, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey, discusses it in his campaign.


Lageman to Be Starter In His First N.F.L. Game
LEAD: Suddenly today, the Jets began to look as they did on paper when training camp started in July.


Trident II Will Help Guarantee World Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on Thursday about the Lyric Opera of Chicago misstated the date and opera for the season's opening night.
Giuseppe Giacomini is to replace Luciano Pavarotti tonight; it did not occur last night.
And the opera is ''Tosca.'' Mr.
Giacomini will also replace Mr.
Pavarotti in the first two performances of ''Aida,'' next Friday and Saturday.


Transactions
LEAD:  Football


Campaign Trail; Trying to Fling (and Duck) Catch-Phrase Labels
LEAD: It was as if Rudolph W. Giuliani had just stepped off a television screen and appeared on their sidewalk yesterday, bigger and better in living color.
That is how most of the people on White Plains Road must have seen him, for they jostled close for a handshake, shouted, ''Go get 'em Rudy,'' and more than a few women told him, ''You're so much better looking in person!


Paramount Is Buying TVX
LEAD: The Paramount Communications Corporation said Thursday that it would accelerate its purchase of Salomon Brothers' holdings in TVX Broadcast Group Inc., a television station company.


Ford Plans to Shift Truck Production
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would move production of its Cargo line of medium- and heavy-duty trucks from Brazil to its truck plant near Louisville, Ky.
The company also said it would spend three times as much on its North American heavy-truck business in the next five years than it did in the previous five years.


In Japan, Midori Is a New Yorker
LEAD: Midori, the 17-year-old violinist who has risen to stardom in the United States but is still relatively unknown in her homeland, returned to Japan this week with the New York Philharmonic to critical acclaim - and with an uneasy sense that she is somehow a visitor here.


Coping; With Backyard Wildlife
LEAD: It'time to set up the bird feeders.


U.S. VOICING FEARS THAT GORBACHEV WILL DIVIDE WEST
LEAD: In advance of new high-level Soviet-American talks, top officials of the Bush Administration are expressing concern that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policies could lead to the breakup of the Western alliance and the disintegration of the postwar European order.


122 Welfare Hotel Families Ordered Moved
LEAD: A judge, citing inhumane conditions at the Allerton Hotel in Manhattan, ordered city officials yesterday to relocate 122 welfare families as soon as possible.


PRESIDENT REPEATS OPPOSITION TO BAN ON ASSAULT RIFLES
LEAD: Despite renewed demands to curb sales of assault weapons like the one used in a shooting rampage Thursday in Louisville, Ky., President Bush today repeated his opposition to gun contol and rejected again a Federal ban on the weapons.


New Rewards Are Offered To Frequent Travelers
LEAD: Some air travelers and hotel guests are getting new rewards these days from frequent-flier and frequent-guest programs.
Those who reach designated milestones can choose something other than the traditional free flights and free rooms; now they can select items like clothing, savings bonds and discounts on a variety of products.


Record Earnings Expected By MCI
LEAD: William G. McGowan, chairman of the MCI Communications Corporation, said the telecommunications company should post record earnings in 1989.
MCI earned $1.23 a share in 1988 and has earned $1.07 a share in the first half of 1989.


Bond Prices Rise in Erratic Trading
LEAD: Treasury bond prices climbed and yields tumbled yesterday after an uncommonly wild trading session.
Dealers attributed the erratic behavior of various markets, including the fixed-income market, to a spate of unfounded rumors, including one that the President had been shot and another that a large bank had failed.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays within 75 miles of New York City, and on all of Long Island, will be increased to 40 cents.
The change is prompted by rising production and distribution costs.
The newspaper's Sunday price will not change, nor will its weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


New York Telephone Proposes Increases
LEAD: The New York Telephone Company yesterday proposed rate increases for 1990 to offset what it says is a decrease in revenues because some customers no longer pay for the telephone wires inside their homes.


Saudi Export Gain
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's petrochemical exports rose by 22 percent in the first half of 1989, to $1.38 billion, from $1.13 billion in the period a year earlier, an official statement said today.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 18.


Reviews/Music; Clarinetist in His Element: Bulgarian Music Plus Rock
LEAD: Listeners could only gape and grin as Ivo Papasov, a Bulgarian clarinetist, streaked through his early set Thursday at S.O.B.'s.
Mr.
Papasov and his five-man Wedding Band, joined by a female singer for two songs, play traditional music (primarily from their home region, Thrace) updated with rock instrumentation (electric guitar, bass and drums) and hints of American jazz and funk.


Unknowns Abound In Hormone Therapy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gold Prices Gain Strongly After Wild Rumors Arise
LEAD: Gold futures prices made strong gains yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange after being pulled back from three-year lows by unfounded rumors that President Bush had been shot and that a major United States bank was near collapse.


Joshua Ashkenazi, Exporter, 82
LEAD: Joshua Ashkenazi, an exporter and a philanthropist, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in Hewlett, L.I.
He was 82 years old.


Miss Oklahoma Hit In Boardwalk Parade
LEAD: Shortly after fans from her home state showered Miss Oklahoma with confetti during the annual Miss America Parade yesterday, someone threw a bottle that hit her in the head.
Tamara Denise Toshiko Marler, 26 years old, from Tulsa, was taken to Atlantic City Medical Center, where she was treated for a concussion and a bruise on her forehead, a hospital spokeswoman said.(


Berry Fleming, 90, Novelist of 30's and 40's, Dies
LEAD: Berry Fleming, a noted novelist of the 1930's and 40's who made a dramatic literary comeback in recent years, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Augusta, Ga.
He was 90 years old.


Bridge; Brazil holds its lead in the Bermuda Bowl; the Netherlands wins the women's team contest.
LEAD: Four teams were contending for two playoff spots in the Bermuda Bowl world championship contest here Thursday night.
Brazil moved into the lead in the ninth round of qualifying play, with France, Australia and Taiwan in pursuit.
The standings, with nine of the 14 qualifying rounds completed, were: Brazil, 171 victory points; France, 164; Australia, 159; Taiwan, 154; Egypt, 121.5; New Zealand, 120; Canada, 94; Colombia, 77.5.


To Revive Newark, State Shuffles Its Workers
LEAD: In the latest attempt to breathe more life into the heart of this city on the mend, the state is moving 2,000 of its employees from offices near Pennsylvania Station into three downtown buildings that are now either unoccupied or largely vacant.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1989
LEAD:  Companies


A New Day for United Employees
LEAD: Rank-and-file employees of United Airlines greeted today's news that they may soon own part of the company with reactions ranging from ebullience to skepticism.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD


For Sri Lankans, Terror Strikes From All Sides
LEAD: They cremated the slain vice chancellor of Moratuwa University on Thursday.
He was a strong-minded and popular academic who lived surrounded by terror and died trying to keep higher education alive in a country where it is no longer safe to be young.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
8.87
8.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.58
7.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.55
7.57
7.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.08
8.11
8.81
30-YR.


Goldsmith Wins Extension In Britain on Bid for B.A.T.
LEAD: The investor group led by Sir James Goldsmith advanced significantly today in its battle to acquire B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., when Britain's Panel of Takeovers and Mergers gave the group an indefinite extension to clear regulatory hurdles in the United States.


20,000 Apartheid Foes Allowed To March Through Johannesburg
LEAD: The South African Government allowed a mass demonstration against apartheid to proceed unimpeded again today, although such marches are illegal under the current state of emergency declaration.


Trade Cap Narrows


The Suslov Lament
LEAD: Suslov made life so easy.
Remember?
Mikhail Suslov, the grim Stalinesque presence in the dark sinister Kremlin in the good sinister dark old days.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article yesterday about a free concert of Italian music at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, misstated the date.
It is at 8 tonight; it was not last night.


Talk to China - Despite the Chill
LEAD: The Administration's decision to continue talks with Beijing about closer trade relations reflects the conviction that such talks serve both countries' long-term interests.
The violence in Tiananmen Square and the ensuing political oppression have chilled official contacts.
But the Administration calculates, correctly, that ending the trade talks would do lasting damage.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about defects in a rocket arming switch misidentified two jet fighters.
The F-15 is flown by the Air Force and the F-18 by the Navy.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an autopsy by the New York City medical examiner in the case of Henry Hughes, a Bronx man who died in a struggle with the police, misattributed a statement about a preliminary autopsy report.
It was New York City's Chief Medical


Bronco's Coach Imposes 1 A.M. Curfew
LEAD: Reacting to two recent incidents, Coach Dan Reeves of the Denver Broncos on Thursday announced a 1 A.M. team curfew and said that any Bronco player ticketed for an alcohol-or drug-related offense would be automatically suspended for at least one game without pay.


Ralston to Coach Noah
LEAD: Dennis Ralston, tennis coach at Southern Methodist for the last nine years, announced Thursday that he would leave that job to become the full-time coach of the professional player Yannick Noah.


Air France, Lufthansa Sign Cooperation Pact
LEAD: Air France and Lufthansa signed a wide-ranging cooperative agreement today that aims to make them more formidable competitors.


Patents; Courts Called Tougher on Infringement
LEAD: The case of Procter &amp; Gamble's $125 million chewy cookie is now closed.
But patent attorneys believe it offers dramatic evidence of the growing importance that Federal courts attach to patent rights.


No Bail for Suspect In Drug Foe's Death
LEAD: A convicted drug dealer charged with the murder of Maria Hernandez, a Brooklyn anti-drug crusader, was ordered held without bail yesterday despite a defense lawyer's claim that a confession had been beaten out of the suspect by the police.


BOGOTA ON ALERT AFTER EXPLOSIONS
LEAD: Three bombs exploded in Bogota today and Colombia's drug traffickers threatened a weekend of terror, prompting the Government to order the nation's soldiers and police on full alert and send military patrols into the streets of the capital.


Easy Goer Off To Woodward, Damp or Dry
LEAD: Easy Goer will bid to continue his Horse of the Year campaign in the $750,000 Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park today whether the track is wet or dry, his trainer, Shug McGaughey, said yesterday.


Mistrial Declared in Texas In Big Savings Fraud Case
LEAD: A mistrial was declared today after a Federal court jury in Lubbock, Tex., said it was unable to reach a verdict in the largest criminal case brought so far involving failed savings institutions.


Disturbed Past of Killer of 7 Is Unraveled
LEAD: The printing plant worker who used an assault rifle to kill seven people here Thursday bought the weapon legally, the police said today.


Industrial Production Posts Largest Gain in 4 Months
LEAD: Industrial production increased three-tenths of a percent in August, the biggest gain in four months, the Federal Reserve Board said today.


Off-Season Project at the Met


Motorcycle Makers Shift Tactics
LEAD: Beset by declining numbers of young men and by soaring prices, motorcycle manufacturers in this country are trying some novel marketing tactics in an effort to halt a decade-long slide in sales.


NORTHEAST GAINS SOME POPULATION
LEAD: After a decade of population decline, the industrialized Northeast and Midwest have experienced modest gains since 1985, but 87 percent of all the nation's growth in the 1980's has been in the South and West, the Census Bureau said today.


Azerbaijanis Demand That Moscow Give Up Control of Disputed Province


No Sign of Victory on Banner-Contest Night
LEAD: The man at whom the signs were aimed was somewhere in Colorado, miles and miles from the Stadium but no doubt squirming at the thought that fans were parading across the warning track and pleading for him to sell the Yankees.


Rockwell Threatens to Close Nuclear Weapons Plant
LEAD: Executives of the Rockwell International Corporation threatened yesterday to close the Rocky Flats weapons plant, where the company manufactures plutonium triggers for thermonuclear bombs, unless the Government guaranteed them immunity from criminal and civil prosecution of laws governing waste disposal.


I.N.S. to Re-Evaluate Soviet Emigre's Cases
LEAD: The Bush Administration, facing mounting pressure to permit increased Soviet immigration, has ordered Federal authorities to re-evaluate all refugee applications of Soviet emigres in Rome.


John Bright, 81, a Screen Writer
LEAD: John M. Bright, a co-author of the 1931 film ''The Public Enemy,'' which helped establish a new genre of gangster movies, died after a stroke Thursday in Kaiser Hospital in Panorama City, Calif.
He was 81 years old and lived in West Hollywood.


Charles J. Wurmfeld, Engineer, Dies at 82
LEAD: Charles J. Wurmfeld, an engineer and inventor, died Thursday at New York Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Kohl Has Prostate Operation
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany underwent an operation on his prostate gland today and was making a good recovery, a Government spokesman said.
The operation, at Mainz University Hospital, was to relieve a benign swelling of the gland.
Mr.
Kohl is expected to spend a week in the hospital.


Alaska Plans Cleanup as Exxon Work Ends
LEAD: On the day that workers ended the Exxon Corporation's efforts to erase the scar of America's oil spill here, Alaska today announced its own $21 million plan to continue the work.


Dow Gains 9.69 Points After Wide Swings
LEAD: Stock prices rose moderately yesterday while trading volume increased sharply.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Caring for Your Camera
LEAD:  Today's electronically controlled cameras demand far less attention than older mechanical models, but some rudimentary camera care is still necessary.
After a summer of hard use this is a good time to check your camera and get it ready for fall and winter.
The most crucial parts of modern cameras are the batteries; without them, the shutters won't even click.


New Work Units Delayed by I.B.M.
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation, which had been expected to introduce a new line of high-powered computer work stations as early as next month, will not introduce the models until late this year or early 1990, industry analysts in New York said.
The delay was seen as a short-term boon to I.B.M.


South Africa Oil Ban
LEAD: Singapore said today that it was banning exports of oil and petroleum products to South Africa, effective immediately.
Singapore-registered ships would be banned from carrying oil to South Africa.
It said the ban was in line with United Nations resolutions calling for an oil embargo on South Africa.


Your Money; Long-Term Plan Yields Stock Gain
LEAD: If a small investor had spent the last 20 years doing just what Wall Street professionals often say the little guy does - buying high - that person could have more than quadrupled the money invested, a new study from T. Rowe Price shows.


Pamela Weigel Becomes Bride
LEAD: The wedding of Pamela Marie Weigel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Weigel of Palisades, N.Y., and William Lawrence Brennan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Brennan of Westport, Conn., took place yesterday at the Palisades Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Laurie Ferguson officiated.


From Prose and Poetry Of Robert Penn Warren
LEAD: I got to Mason City early in the afternoon and went to the Mason City Cafe, Home-Cooked Meals for Ladies and Gents, facing the square, and sampled the mashed potatoes and fried ham and greens with pot-likker with one hand while with the other I competed with seven or eight flies for the possession of a piece of custard pie.


Jail Term for Ex-Officer of Unisys
LEAD: A former executive of the Unisys Corporation, who was described as ''a major figure'' in the Federal inquiry into Pentagon purchasing fraud, was sentenced today to 32 months in prison for bribing a Government official with money from a secret $5 million fund.


6 in the Arts Win New $100,000 Prize
LEAD: The six winners of a new $100,000 Japanese prize for lifetime achievement in the arts, the Praemium Imperiale, were announced yesterday at Rockefeller Center.


ABC Magazine Of Soap Operas
LEAD: The ABC Television Network said this week that it would start a bimonthly magazine in February that will be devoted to its own daytime soap operas.


Saturday New Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


Gorbachev Urges Baltic Compromise
LEAD: After a series of Kremlin rebukes and warnings directed at the separatist movements of the Baltic republics, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev took a more conciliatory tone in a meeting on Wednesday with Baltic Communist leaders and urged ''reasonable compromise,'' according to a Government account today of the meeting.


Tent City Jail to Stay Open
LEAD: Judge Burrell Ives Humphreys of Superior Court today told the state, which had planned to close the Tent City jail on Saturday, that he expected at least seven days' notice of a closing.
Although the judge did not order the state to keep the camp open, his remarks in a hearing on jail overcrowding had that effect.


In Battle on Pollutants, Latest Suspect Is Rugs
LEAD: The nation's top pollution fighters have been battling a toxic adversary at their own headquarters.
The suspected enemy: carpet.


Softer Soviet Tone on Baltics
LEAD: After weeks of official criticism of Baltic nationalism, President Gorbachev called for compromise with leaders of the three republics.
Page 6.


'Junk Bond' Prices Dip; Market Jitters Continue
LEAD: Prices of many ''junk bond'' securities closed lower again yesterday, as traders worried about possible defaults, selling pressure from institutional investors, weak trading liquidity and the impact of a possible credit crisis on bank earnings.


Dunston Grand Slam Puts Cubs Past Pirates
LEAD: Shawon Dunston's first career grand slam capped a five-run sixth inning today as the Chicago Cubs defeated the Pirates, 7-2, eliminating Pittsburgh from contention in the National League East.


East Berlin Cancels a Visit by West Germans
LEAD: With delicate relations between the two Germanys strained by the migration of East Germans through Hungary, East Germany today canceled a planned visit by members of West Germany's main opposition party.


Reduced Dosage Cuts Cost of AIDS Drug
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Headline
LEAD: Canadian officials have reacted with concern to the latest in a series of incidents indicating that Canada is facing an increasing challenge from South American drug-runners intent on using Canada as a backdoor to the United States.


Mets Win But Fail To Gain On Cubs
LEAD: Every now and then, the Mets savor a moment of memory.
Keith Hernandez hits a home run, as he did tonight for the first time in four months.
David Cone pitches a shutout, with an assist from the bullpen, as he did tonight.
And the Mets knock off Dennis Martinez and the Montreal Expos, 5-0, in the homestretch of another pennant race.


Daniel E. Macken, Judge, 84
LEAD: Justice Daniel E. Macken, a retired justice of New York State Supreme Court, died Sept. 7 at his home in Fairport, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.


London 'Hamlet' Loses Star to Illness
LEAD: Daniel Day-Lewis, the 32-year-old English actor, has left the National Theater production of ''Hamlet,'' in which he played the title role, because of nervous exhaustion.
The actor, who had just seven performances remaining under his contract, left the production on the advice of his doctor, a statement by the theater said.


Lawyer Is Wed To Heike Garth
LEAD: Heike Brenner Garth, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harro O. W. Brenner of Johannesburg and Durban, South Africa, was married yesterday to Louis Mangone, a son of Alfred A. Mangone of Lauderhill, Fla., and the late Ida Silvestri Mangone.
Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of State Supreme Court performed the ceremony in her chambers in New


Inflation Rises in Israel
LEAD: Consumer prices in Israel rose 1.2 percent in August, up from six-tenths of 1 percent in July and eight-tenths of a percent in August 1988, the Central Bureau of Statistics said today.
Consumer prices have now increased by 21.2 percent in the last 12 months, up from July's rate of 20.7 percent, a bureau spokesman said.


About New York; House by House: Trying to Repel Drug Invaders
LEAD: When Timothy Vance first saw the building at 1365 Findlay Avenue in the Bronx, a line of people waiting to buy crack stretched out its front door and down the block.


End the Artificial Rationing of Taxi Medallions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Steuben Day Parade, Fifth Avenue between 61st and 86th Streets will be closed today from noon to 4 P.M.


A List of Major Drugs
LEAD: Here is a list of major addictive drugs illegally sold and used in the United States.


Philip Tumulty, 78, Professor of Medicine
LEAD: Philip A. Tumulty, professor of medicine emeritus at Johns Hopkins University, died in his sleep Thursday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 78 years old.


Books of The Times; The Founding of Our Republic and Where It Stands
LEAD:  Revolt Against Destiny  An Intellectual History of the United States  By Paul A. Carter  331 pages.
Columbia University Press. $24.95.


Florida State Confronts L.S.U. in Pivotal Game
LEAD: It is too early in the year to be talking about salvaging a season, but that is what Coaches Bobby Bowden of Florida State and Mike Archer of Louisiana State were discussing yesterday as their teams prepared to meet in Baton Rouge, La., tonight.


Patents; Diet Pills Said to Curb Fat and Cholesterol
LEAD: Jackie R. See and William E. Shell, two cardiologists who founded See/ Shell Biotechnology Inc. in Los Angeles, won a patent this week for what they call ''Fat Magnets'': diet pills that prevent the body from absorbing some of the fat and cholesterol in food.


Ithaca College Honors Donor By Renaming Media School
LEAD: The new $12 million Roy H. Park School of Communications building was officially dedicated here today at Ithaca College.


Deborah Sutton Wed in Toronto To T. P. O'Brien
LEAD: Deborah Anne Sutton, the daughter of Mrs.
Oscar S. Straus 2d of Toronto and New York and Walter John Sutton of Santa Cruz, Trinidad, and Thomas Peter O'Brien, a son of Mrs.
Laura Gingras of Vancouver, British Columbia, and the late Robert Lee O'Brien, were married yesterday at the Anglican Cathedral of St.


Fear Grows Over Effects of a New Smokable Drug
LEAD: The use of smokable methamphetamine, which produces a much longer period of euphoria than crack and is followed by a more disturbing psychological reaction, has reached major proportions here and has begun to appear in several cities on the mainland as well.


Review/Film; Waiting to Be Murdered While Police Talk and Sigh
LEAD: Maybe Roy Scheider should go back to chasing sharks.
His career has taken a long, slow dive from his days as the harassed police chief in ''Jaws'' and the tortured Broadway director in ''All That Jazz.'' In fact, it seems to have hit bottom in ''Night Game.'' This time Mr.
Scheider is a minor-league baseball player turned policeman.


Reagan Leaves Hospital After Surgery


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The little space they have opened to give us a chance to demonstrate how peaceful we are has been used quite effectively.''  - The Rev.
Frank Chikane, an organizer of a protest march in Johannesburg for which the South African Government gave permission.  [ 7:1. ]


Salvadoran Foes Agree to Formal Talks
LEAD: Winding up three days of exploratory talks here, the Salvadoran Government and guerrilla leaders agreed today to begin formal negotiations aimed at ending the country's 10-year civil war ''by political means in the shortest time possible.''


Letter: On Space Exploration; The Case for Splitting NASA
LEAD: To the Editor:


Panhandle Agrees To Sell Property
LEAD: The Panhandle Eastern Corporation, which operates the largest natural gas pipeline system in the United States, agreed to sell its Houston Center real estate development to the JMB Realty Corporation for $400 million.
The company said proceeds from the sale, which should close in 90 days, would be used to pay off debt.


Import Fall Narrows Trade Gap
LEAD: A decline in imports that could signal economic softness helped the nation's trade deficit fall to $7.58 billion in July, its lowest level in four and a half years, the Commerce Department reported today.


13 Die in Hindu-Muslim Riot
LEAD: The police opened fire on rioting Hindus and Muslims in Kota, a western Indian town, and at least 13 people were killed and more than 50 injured, news reports said today.
In a separate incident, the police held Sikh extremists responsible today for an attack that killed 12 people in renewed violence in Punjab in northern India on Thursday night.


Yanks Delay Decision
LEAD: Bob Quinn, the Yankees' general manager, said yesterday that any discussion or decision regarding Manager Bucky Dent's coaching staff for 1990 will not be made until after the season ends.


Ethiopia Talks Make Progress
LEAD: Negotiators for the Ethiopian Government and a rebel group fighting for independence for the province of Eritrea have reached agreement on most of the issues needed to set up continuing peace talks, former President Jimmy Carter said today.


McEnroe Seeks Change
LEAD: John McEnroe, who reached the semifinals at Wimbledon this year before losing in the second round at the United States Open, won $232,500 Thursday for a 2-6, 6-4, 6-4 victory over Stefan Edberg in a winner-take-all exhibition match at the London Arena.
Fans paid between $15.50 and $38.75 to watch the first one-night exhibition in


Review/Dance; Scenes of Splintered Images And Split Personalities
LEAD: No one talked in the works Shapiro and Smith Dance performed Thursday night at Choreospace.
Yet if they had spoken, the dancers might have said: ''I are.
We is.'' In their collaboratively choreographed pieces, Danial Shapiro and Joanie Smith, who are husband and wife, proclaim both that everyone's psyche is filled with conflicting forces and that there are times when many people may be seized by the same passion.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Senate's approval of a smoking ban on domestic airline flights referred to Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey incorrectly at one point in some copies.
He is a Democrat.


You Think It's Easy Being Bo?
LEAD: You started out as Bobo, but now you're just a Bo.


John Yovicsin, 70; Coached Football 14 Years at Harvard
LEAD: John Yovicsin, the head football coach at Harvard University from 1957 to 1970, died of heart disease on Wednesday at Cape Cod Hospital.
He was 70 years old.


New Coach and New Hope as Columbia Opens
LEAD: Ray Tellier, Columbia's new football coach, was playing golf one day last summer with a friend who introduced him to a stranger. ''Right away this guy told me I must be crazy,'' Tellier recalled the other day. ''Why would I want to leave Rochester to coach at Columbia?''


Review/Film; Graduating to Adulthood Just Before the South Erupts
LEAD: ''Heart of Dixie'' is a clear-eyed, funny and affecting movie about the emotional awakening of a pretty, white Alabama coed in 1957, on the eve of the great racial struggles that would mark the 1960's throughout the South.


London and Dublin Cite Worry on Security Leak
LEAD: The Irish and British Governments today agreed that reports of collusion between British security forces and outlawed Protestant paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland ''raised issues of serious concern in relation to confidence in the security forces and respect for the rule of law.''


Breaking One of South Africa's Barriers
LEAD: Vernon Grigg's application for a Supreme Court clerkship was heavy with conventional credentials.
He is a student at Yale Law School.
He had an honors degree from the University of Michigan and a year at the London School of Economics.
He had also apprenticed at two top law firms, was a licensed glider pilot and had performed in a singing group called Up With People during halftime at Super Bowl X


Machinists Seen Joining UAL Talks
LEAD: Unionized machinists at United Airlines are expected to begin talks soon on joining in a newly approved buyout of the airline's parent by a group including pilots, management and British Airways P.L.C.


Assault Rifles: Despite Curb, No Shortage
LEAD: After President Bush imposed a temporary ban on imports of Chinese-made AK-47 and other semiautomatic assault rifles in March, their prices soared in the belief that such weapons would ultimately become unobtainable.


Soviet Jewish Emigres Allocated Around U.S.
LEAD: With a record number of Soviet Jewish refugees expected to come to New York City in the next several months, the resettlement system here is under great strain and hoping other cities will share the burden.


Miami Official Returns to List For School Job
LEAD: Joseph G. Fernandez, the Superintendent of the Miami-Dade County school system, said yesterday that he had changed his mind and agreed to become a candidate to be the schools chancellor in New York City.


U.S. Drops a Plan to Finance Nicaragua Opposition Leader
LEAD: Facing opposition in Congress, the Bush Administration announced today that it was abandoning a plan to support the presidential campaign of the Nicaraguan opposition candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, with money from the National Endowment for Democracy.


Marian Manning Is Married on L.I. To Marine Officer
LEAD: Marian Therese Manning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Manning of Garden City, L.I., and Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to First Lieut.
Christopher Caswell Adams, U.S.M.C., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Adams of Manhasset, L.I.
Msgr.
John J. Barry officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden


Polish Finance Minister's Tricky Mix: Hard Times and Free Markets
LEAD: Poland's new Finance Minister says he can move the country's badly limping centrally planned economy toward more capitalism only if he can impose budget austerity and create a market economy.


Reviews/Music; On a Dual Bill, Two Kinds Of Vocal Pyrotechnics
LEAD: Opening night of the singer Freddie Jackson's ''Up Close and Personal'' show, at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater on Tuesday night, featured a blast of vocal exhibitionism, the sort that doesn't let a sleeping syllable lie, the sort that embroiders any scrap of melody it can find.


Stuart P. Gassel, Financial Planner, 54
LEAD: Stuart P. Gassel, a financial planning executive with the Travelers Companies of Hartford, died of lung cancer Wednesday in Chicago.
He was 54 years old and lived in Chicago and on Chappaquiddick Island, Mass.


Deng, After Absence, Is Reported in Public
LEAD: China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, who has not been seen in public for more than three months, met this morning with a visiting American professor, the official New China News Agency reported.


Giants a Serious Challenge to Lions' Quarterback
LEAD: For most of his nine years in professional football, Bob Gagliano has been a backup quarterback.
Now he is the starter for the Detroit Lions, and on Sunday, when the Lions play the Giants at 4 P.M. at Giants Stadium, he will return to the scene of his greatest triumph.


Drought-Stricken Areas Find Relief After Rains
LEAD: They came too late to do much for this year's crops, but bountiful, soaking rains over the last few weeks have brought relief from the drought that has persisted for more than a year across much of the Farm Belt.


Irish in Caribbean Before Cromwell's Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


Night Games at a Park: Softball, Drugs and Prostitution
LEAD: DeWitt Clinton Park may be the only place in New York City that routinely has more people playing softball at 1 A.M. than at 3 P.M.


U.S. Was Investigating Mine That Exploded
LEAD: Federal mine safety officials were meeting with executives of the company that owns the Williams Station Mine when an explosion and fire there killed 10 miners, an official says.


Mother Teresa Faces a New Health Threat


No More Trips To the Bank
LEAD: It was a bad day for bank lines yesterday.
Paychecks were the problem.
There was the regular crush of people who are paid every Friday crashing into those who are paid every other Friday.
And to make things worse there were those who are paid on the business day closest to the 15th.


Drug Executive Is Sentenced
LEAD: The former president of an Indianapolis generic drug manufacturer who paid $32,000 in bribes to three officials of the Food and Drug Administration has been fined $250,000 and ordered to serve a year working for the American Cancer Society.
In addition, United States


Con Ed Removing Asbestos in Manholes
LEAD: Consolidated Edison announced yesterday that it is planning to accelerate its program of eliminating asbestos from all steam manholes in New York City.


Korean Troupe's Tour
LEAD: The '88 Seoul Art Troupe will perform on Oct. 11 at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The performance is the last in a five-city tour that opens on Oct. 1 at the Kennedy Center in Washington.
The company, a group of 28 performers featured at the Olympic Arts Festival last year, will present modern-dance dramas inspired by the traditional religion and culture of Korean farmers, folk music and acrobatic dancing.


Mcorp Claim by F.D.I.C.
LEAD: Seeking to recover part of its $2 billion rescue of Mcorp, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has filed a claim for $847 million in United States Bankruptcy Court in Houston.


Albany AIDS Panel Assails Ban on Condoms to Inmates
LEAD: A New York State AIDS panel today criticized the refusal of prison authorities to provide prisoners with condoms to prevent infection, saying the policy ''amounts to a death sentence.''


Braniff's Loss At $20 Million
LEAD: Braniff Inc. posted a $20 million loss for the three months ended July 31, mainly because of a reorganization to build an important hub at Kansas City International Airport, the company reported this week.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Nicaragua Plan Shelved  The Bush Administration announced that it had given up the widely criticized notion of supporting the Nicaraguan opposition's presidential candidate with money from the National Endowment for Democracy.
Page 3.
Salvadorans Agree to Talk  Meeting in Mexico, representatives of the Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrillas agreed to monthly meetings for negotiations to end the country's 10-year civil war.


Kissinger on CBS Board
LEAD: Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, has been elected to the board of CBS.
Mr.
Kissinger is the chairman of Kissinger Associates, a consulting firm.
CBS said the board would expand to 15 from 14 members.


Dollar Finishes Day Lower After Sharp Morning Rise
LEAD: The dollar went on a wild roller-coaster ride yesterday, reaching three-month highs in the morning because of a positve trade deficit report and then plunging in the afternoon on unfounded rumors, including one that President Bush had been shot.
There was also a round of coordinated dollar selling by the United


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL 3-8  U.S. concern over Soviet policies are being expressed by the Bush Administration.
Officials say President Gorbachev's loosening hold of Eastern Europe and the Baltic region could lead to European instability.
Page 1


3 Savings Units Taken Over
LEAD: Savings and loan associations in San Antonio, Beaumont and Laredo, Tex., were taken over Thursday by Federal regulators, while an institution in Ohio already under Federal control was placed in receivership.


U.S. Delays Sale of Atlantic Oil Leases Till '91
LEAD: Under pressure from Congress and the State of North Carolina over environmental concerns, the Interior Department announced today that it would delay the sale of oil and gas leases in the Atlantic Ocean until July 1991.


Inventories Are Up 0.6%; Sales Off 0.9%
LEAD: Business inventories climbed six-tenths of 1 percent in July, the biggest gain in three months, while business sales fell by nine-tenths of 1 percent, the Government reported today.


2 African Innovators Receive Annual Hunger-Project Prize
LEAD: The President of Botswana and a grassroots organizer from Burkina Faso have received the Hunger Project's annual leadership prize.


H.U.D. Aide's Transfer Is Now Permanent
LEAD: Geraldine McGann, the suspended New York regional administrator of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has been transferred permanently to Washington and will not return to the New York office, officials said yesterday.


Chris-Craft Acts On Time Warner
LEAD: Chris-Craft Industries said it was appealing a Delaware judge's ruling that the company, a major shareholder in Warner Communications Inc., has no power to veto the merger between Warner and Time Inc.


Robert Penn Warren, Poet and Author, Dies
LEAD: Robert Penn Warren, whose complex poetry and novels drawn from Southern life formed an intricate mirror of the human experience, died of cancer yesterday at his summer home in Stratton, Vt.
He was 84 years old and lived in Fairfield, Conn.


Georgia Gulf Stock Falls 5 1/8
LEAD: Shares of the Georgia Gulf Corporation plunged $5.125 today, to $52.125, on the New York Stock Exchange after the Dallas financier Harold C. Simmons disclosed he had sold some of his holdings of the Atlanta-based chemicals concern.


Deals Seen By Maxwell
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, chairman of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, said Thursday that his company was on the verge of acquiring a medium-sized educational publishing business and an information services business in North America.


Damaso Perez Prado Dies at 72
LEAD: Damaso Perez Prado, the band leader who helped start a North American mambo craze in the 1950's, died Thursday at his home in Mexico City after a stroke.
He was 72 years old.


49ers Sign Millen
LEAD: Matt Millen, a linebacker who spent nine seasons with the Raiders before he was cut Sept. 4, signed a one-year contract with the San Francisco 49ers on Thursday, and George Seifert, the 49ers' coach, said the former Penn State star would play tomorrow against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Tampa, Fla.


A Congressman Confronts a Hostile Art World
LEAD: Representative Dana T. Rohrabacher, a proponent of the Helms amendment to restrict art financing by the National Endowment for the Arts, came to New York Thursday night to confront a hostile art world -or at least, a hostile segment of it.
The freshman Congressman from California drew some laughter but also hisses from the audience during a lively panel discussion sparked by the current controversy over endowment financing for works by two photographers, Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano.


Tide of Dirt Is Rising To Engulf New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Channel Innovates and Moves Up
LEAD: In the two and a half years since MCA Inc. took over New York's least-watched, lowest-rated commercial television station and shipped it across the Hudson to Secaucus, N.J., WWOR-TV, Channel 9, has climbed out of sixth place in the nation's largest television market by shaking up the schedule with innovative, sometimes disputatious programs, from Morton Downey Jr.


Lefty at the Gate
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aileen Inc., a maker and retailer of women's apparel, said its board had authorized Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. to seek a buyer for the company.


In Killer's Disorder, Cycles Of Elation and Depression
LEAD: Joseph T. Wesbecker, who killed seven workers Thursday at a printing plant in Kentucky before killing himself, suffered from manic depression, relatives told the police.


Health Magazine in Spinoff
LEAD: In an unusual twist for a magazine spinoff, Hippocrates will put its name on a new publication for physicians while keeping the contents of the existing magazine under a new title, In Health.


Chrysler Increases Its Cash Rebates
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said that beginning Saturday it would increase cash rebates on certain 1988, 1989 and 1990 models to as much as $2,500.
Buyers of 1988 and 1989 Dodge Raider models will receive rebates of $2,500, up from $2,000, it said.


Look Who's Arming the Drug Cartels
LEAD: Earlier this year William Bennett, President Bush's director of drug policy, stirred controversy with calls for a ban on the military assault rifles readily available in gun shops across the country.
Now officials in Colombia add powerful weight to the case for a ban.


U.S. Regulators Sue Owners In Big Savings Unit Failure
LEAD: Federal regulators filed a civil suit today against the owners and some officers of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, accusing them of racketeering, fraud and conspiracy for their personal use of the institution's funds.


Ralston Purina to Buy Beech-Nut Baby Food
LEAD: The Ralston Purina Company signed a letter of intent yesterday to buy the scandal-ridden Beech-Nut baby food business from Nestle Enterprises Inc., an Ohio subsidiary of Nestle S.A. of Switzerland.


Gender Bias
LEAD: To the Editor:


Astoria
LEAD: To the Editor:


Digital Speakers Thrive on a Diet of Laser Beams
LEAD: Last Spring, reporting from the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, this column briefly mentioned Meridian's D600 digital loudspeaker as ''the best-sounding item in Chicago and probably anywhere else.'' Since then we have listened to it at greater length, hearing many different kinds of music in less distracting circumstances than those prevailing at a trade fair.


Review/Dance; 'The Disaster Series'
LEAD: Quite a lot happened at the Bessie Schonberg Theater on Sept. 9.
There were heartaches, lovers' quarrels, sudden deaths, car crashes, tornados, famines, avalanches and tidal waves - all because the Joe Goode Performance Group was on stage in ''The Disaster Series.''


Lucy F. Davis Marries Jeffrey Haynes
LEAD: Lucy Furman Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlisle Ragland Davis Jr. of Birmingham, Mich., and New York, and Jeffrey Norman Haynes, a son of Senator and Mrs.
Joe Mann Haynes of Nashville, were married yesterday at Kirk in the Hills, a Presbyterian church in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
The Rev.
Dr.


The Passive President
LEAD: In conscience and self-interest, the West cannot let the democratic experiment in Poland fail.
Then why has the Bush Administration decided against giving immediate, large-scale aid to Poland's collapsing economy?


Colombian 'Day of Love' Broken By a Long Night of Drug Violence
LEAD: Colombia marked its annual ''Day of Love and Friendship'' today after one of the most violent nights in the new drug war.


Oracle's Envious Ascent
LEAD: On-Line transaction processing systems have so far relied primarily on proprietary software.
Buyers of a Tandem or Stratus computer for transaction processing need programs from the same company.


Hawkins Matches Wits With Carson
LEAD: Methodically and neatly, so different from the man he replaced, Ralph Hawkins has filed away his old game plans, dusted off the old sayings, and now must leave it up to the players.


Parishioners Protest a Ban On Bare Legs
LEAD: The signs on the doors of Sacred Heart Church issue a commandment to all who enter: Thou shalt not dress immodestly or casually.


Force or Politics?
LEAD: The conflict between Israelis and Palestinians is off the front pages of our newspapers.
The drama of the uprising in the West Bank and Gaza is reduced to a few paragraphs recording another 12-year-old shot dead by Israeli soldiers, another alleged ''collaborator'' killed by fellow-Palestinians.


JUGGING UP
LEAD: REMEMBER JUG wines?
Big, fat bottles, with screw-on caps?
With a glass ring at the neck that you stuck your index finger in to get some leverage because they were so hard to pour?
Wines with easy-to-remember names like California Burgundy and California Chablis?
Whatever happened to them, anyway?


POSTINGS: 713-Acre Complex; Homes in the Adirondacks
LEAD: Hoping to capture a market among New York City and Boston residents seeking second homes in the Adirondacks, as well as professionals working in Albany, Schenectedy and Troy, developers have completed the first phase of a complex of homes and recreational facilities in Queensbury, N.Y., just south of Lake George.


Computer Stocks With Promise
LEAD: While minicomputer and mainframe sales remain soft, as more and more tasks are shifted to personal computers, analysts say one segment of the market for large computers will continue to grow.
Demand is strong for the high-performance machines that can handle a blizzard of transactions with very little risk of a crash.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Badlands
LEAD: To the Editor: In reading about the ''Good Old Days in the Badlands'' (Travel, July 30) I would like to contribute a few more details about the eccentric Marquis de Mores, the founder of Medora, N.D.


Mara L. Mullen Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Mara Louise Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Rolf Mullen of South Egremont, Mass., and Brenton Robinson Grant 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grant Jr. of Kennett Square, Pa., were married yesterday at St.
James Episcopal Church in Great Barrington, Mass.
The Rev.
Donald T. Oakes, an Episcopal priest, officiated, assisted by the Rev.


Falsely Shouting Fire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Warning on Crises Facing Migrating Birds
LEAD: EVERY autumn thousands of waterfowl flying from Canada to their winter grounds near the Gulf of Mexico stop to eat and rest in nutrient-rich wetlands in Kansas.
But in recent years, some have dried up, and that concerns Alexander Gardner of New Canaan.


Prague Tries To Cut Off All But Party Line
LEAD: The dissident Jiri Dienstbier lost his telephone number, 220-110, on Aug. 10.
The Czechoslovak authorities said they needed it ''for an important public purpose.''


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Aberdeen  $178,000  15 Overlea Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; c/a, 1-car garage, w/w carpeting; taxes $3,283.
Avon-by-the-Sea  $240,000  504 Garfield Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old colonial; sun porch, fireplace, central vacuum; taxes $2,080.


CAMPUS LIFE: Utah;
LEAD: The University of Utah has looked a gift horse in the mouth, and a large part of the university community believes it's the richer for it.


OUTER LIMITS
LEAD: HIGH IN THE HIMALAYAS lives a shaggy little goat of international distinction: Its name is Kashmir, and without it, the world would be a coarser place.


Special Today: Men's Fashions
LEAD: Magazine Part 2


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


TALKING: Title Transfer; Advantage Or Pitfall For Aged?
LEAD: AMONG the tips that elderly parents often pass along to one another is the notion that major estate-planning advantages may be gleaned by transferring the title of their homes to their children.


The Wild Gray Yonder
LEAD: Thanks to Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, a former two-pack-a-day man, millions of plane passengers may soon be breathing a lot easier.
He led the fight in the Senate to ban smoking on domestic flights, and last week he won it.


How Inflation Looks In a Real Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


Refacing Coins to Rekindle Collectors' Interest
LEAD: While investors have made coins more glamorous than they once were, only collectors, the industry says, can preserve their value over the long term by keeping demand high and coins out of circulation.
But rising prices and the advent of slabs, which prevent coins' surfaces from being handled, have soured many collectors on coins.


Italian Circus to Warm Up the Garde
LEAD: FROM Itzhak Perlman to Nipsey Russell to the Peking Acrobats, the Garde Arts Center in New London is putting together its first subscription season.


WRECK SALVAGERS RAISING TREASURE
LEAD: Salvagers who have begun raising gold bars and coins from a sunken 19th-century steamer say they expect to stay offshore until winter recovering as much as $1 billion from the ship, an expedition spokesman said.


Disturbing To Whom?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ban Rabbits From Track
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


How a Book Became Lost
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steven Mesh and Diana Juul: Lighting Designers
LEAD: Steven Mesh and Diana Juul happily combine marriage and an architectural lighting design business in Greenwich, Conn.


Shades of Uncle Joe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crack's Toll Among Babies: A Joyless View, Even of Toys
LEAD: The first follow-up studies of babies born to mothers using crack show that in early childhood they have serious difficulty relating to their world, making friends, playing like normal children and feeling love for their mothers or primary caretakers.


2 Shrimpers Die in Boat Crash
LEAD: A Norwegian tanker and a shrimp boat collided in a heavy rainstorm Thursday in the Gulf of Mexico, killing two shrimpers.
The 500-foot tanker Lavender collided with the 75-foot shrimp boat Cooter Glitter about 60 miles south of Sabine, said Don Merwin, duty officer at the Coast Guard station in Galveston.


Nassau or Suffolk? Taking Sides
LEAD: EVER since our courting days, my husband and I have been feuding like the Hatfields and the McCoys over one particularly touchy topic: which county is superior, Nassau or Suffolk.
I say Suffolk.
He says Nassau.


Bully Brokers
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Full Crock of Foot-Stomping Charm
LEAD: ''PUMP BOYS AND DINETTES,'' now at Long Island Stage in Rockville Centre, is a foot-stomping, hand-clapping, country-western pop musical.
It starts off the theater's 15th anniversary season with a crock of good ole boy charm.


OTB Takeout Uncomfortable
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:  IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT.
By Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) Flush from the runaway success of his previous book, ''All I Really Need To Know I Learned in Kindergarten,'' Robert Fulghum has come out with a second book of what are meant to be inspirational little homilies.
Mr.
Fulghum, a Unitarian minister in Seattle, specializes in taking ordinary stories from everyday life and using them to show that people are good, that life is sweet and that love endures.


In the H.U.D. Investigation, Everyone Wants Pierce Now
LEAD: SAMUEL R. PIERCE JR. has tried to portray himself as a ''hands off'' manager who was unaware of the influence-peddling during his tenure as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
And for a time he was viewed that way, while Federal investigators focused on a few senior agency officials, particularly Deborah Gore Dean, Mr.


S. R. Cordill Wed To Ms. O'Connell
LEAD: Carolyn Elizabeth O'Connell, an assistant vice president in the mutual funds and annuities department of Prudential Bache Securities in New York, and Stephen Richard Cordill, a first vice president and director of financial services for the same company, were married yesterday at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Columbus Avenue Festival, Columbus Avenue between 66th and 90th Streets will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The avenue between 90th and 96th streets will be closed from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Muscular Dystrophy Bed Race.


Lord Trafford, British Health Minister, 57
LEAD: Lord Trafford, minister of state for health, died today of lung cancer, the Government announced.
He was 57.


Where Can a Black Win? The List Is Getting Longer
LEAD: WASHINGTON


In Yonkers, Voters Now Face a Clear-Cut Choice
LEAD: MAYOR Nicholas C. Wasicsko's decisive victory in the Yonkers Democratic primary last week sets the stage for what has been anticipated as a general-election ''referendum'' on a court-ordered housing-desegregation plan, pitting the one-term Mayor, who favors compliance, against Henry Spallone, who opposes the plan.


Freedom of Speech, II
LEAD: Wildflowers do not blossom in the carefully tended Rose Garden at the White House, or at the carefully scripted ceremonies there.
But last week, Chantee Charles, a 13-year-old from Arlington, Va., used a Rose Garden ceremony honoring an anti-drug program to lecture against the death penalty as President Bush, who supports it, looked on a bit nonplused.


A Actress In Love With Risk
LEAD: Karel Reisz has a favorite story about Vanessa Redgrave when she was on location for his 1969 film ''Isadora.'' The still photographer had asked her to run along a castle parapet above a sheer drop of hundreds of feet.
It wasn't an important or urgent request; but no sooner was it made than she was up there in her Isadora Duncan costume, frolicking and defying fate.


ONE WOMAN AGAINST THE ODDS
LEAD:  AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN  By Tracy Kidder.  340 pp.
Boston:  A Richard Todd Book/  Houghton Mifflin Company.


F. C. Trump 3d, Realty Manager, Weds Ms. Lorant
LEAD: Lisa Beth Lorant, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald J. Lorant of Princeton, N.J., was married last evening to Frederick Crist Trump 3d, the son of Linda Trump of Jamaica, Queens, and the late Mr.
Trump Jr.
Rabbi Albert Ginsburgh performed the interfaith ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Daphne Hawkes, a Presbyterian minister, at Temple Micah in Lawrenceville, N


A Boom Down Under
LEAD: Visiting Australia and New Zealand for the first time this summer, I was impressed by not only mountains, fjords and sophisticated cities but by the number of flourishing dance groups, some of them unfamiliar to audiences above the equator.


Michael W. Dush Weds Miss Myers
LEAD: Susan Deaver Myers was married to Michael William Dush yesterday by the Rev.
Compton Allyn, an Episcopal priest, in the Chapel at Watch Hill, R.I.
The bride is the daughter of Paul D. Myers of Watch Hill and Cincinnati and the late Mary Coombe Myers.
Mr.
Dush is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Henry Dush of Misquamicut, R


DEATH ON THE MOUND
LEAD:  THE PITCH THAT KILLED  By Mike Sowell.
Illustrated. 330 pp.
New York:  Macmillan. $17.95.


Redus's 3-Run Homer Helps Pirates Halt Mets
LEAD: Gary Redus hit a three-run homer and Mike LaValliere and Jose Lind had consecutive run-scoring doubles to give Pittsburgh the lead in the fourth inning today as the Pirates beat Chicago, 8-6, to end the Cubs' winning streak at six games.


Colorado Big Plays Bury Illinois, 38-7
LEAD: The tailback Eric Bieniemy ran for two touchdowns and threw a 48-yard pass on the halfback option for another today as Colorado powered past Illinois, 38-7.


U.S.-Soviet Issues Are Overshadowed
LEAD: THERE is something accidentally symbolic about the fact that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, will hold their ministerial meeting this week in a mountaintop lodge in Jackson Hole, Wyo.
While this is not the first important diplomatic meeting to be held in an out-of-the-way place, this time the relative obscurity somehow befits the state of United States


Thomas Wolfe's Editor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leslie Ann Davis Wed in Bronxville To W. R. Dahl Jr.
LEAD: Leslie Ann Davis, an associate in structured finance at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, and W. Robert Dahl Jr., a vice president in investment banking at the First Boston Corporation in New York, were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Christopher Webber officiated.


The Demon Seesaw Actors Ride
LEAD: His hands were trembling so much I thought he was going to break into a hundred pieces like a Tom and Jerry cartoon character.
He had been sitting at a nearby table in an L.A. actors' hangout and as he got up to leave, he threw me a ''We've never met, but I know you'' wave.
I waved back and asked him to join my table.


Keeping the Pitch Where It Should Be
LEAD: The Lubo Opera Company is to be commended for its efforts to standardize the pitch to which orchestras tune (''As Pitch in Opera Rises, So Does Debate,'' Aug. 13).
The relentlessly upward wavering of the ''concert A'' is a deception that jades our perception of performance.
It is as unworthy a practice as grade inflation is in the classroom or as anabolic steroids are on the playing field.


Harvard Defeats Lions
LEAD: For the last five seasons, officials at Columbia University have struggled to find a rationale for continued support of a football program that gained national attention for its inability to win games.


Expos Hammer The Mets
LEAD: The Mets had a great chance to gain in the homestretch again tonight but squandered it when the Montreal Expos rose up from the misery of a five-game losing streak, chased Sid Fernandez inside three innings and hammered the Mets, 10-1.


Creations From the Iberian Peninsula
LEAD: THOSE on the cutting edge of culinary trends are calling Spanish food the latest fashionable cuisine.
Hitching a ride on the current popularity wave of light Mediterranean dishes (largely from Italy), Spanish creations are coming into their own.


Staten Island to Continue as Powerhouse
LEAD: While the Island of Manhattan may have more size, wealth, population and prestige when it comes to high school football in New York City, it's Staten Island that has the power, and it looks as if it will be that way again this year.


Chinese Leader Ends Seclusion


Hurricane Imperils Eastern Caribbean; Warnings Are Issued
LEAD: Residents of the eastern Caribbean boarded up homes and stockpiled supplies today as a hurricane churned toward the popular resort islands with winds of up to 140 miles per hour.


Jeanne L. Clendenin, Legislative Aide, Is Wed to Daniel C. Sweeney, Lawyer
LEAD: Jeanne Louise Clendenin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Clendenin of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Charles Sweeney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh O. Sweeney of Maplewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Horace Grinnell officiated at St.
Charles Borromeo Roman Catholic Church in Arlington, Va.


LIFE IN REVERSE
LEAD:  AND AGAIN?
By Sean O'Faolain.  287 pp.
Birch Lane Press/  Carol Publishing Group,  120 Enterprise Avenue,  Secaucus, N.J. 07094.


Neil Young, Dinosaur Extraordinaire
LEAD: Of all the dinosaur rockers lumbering across our musical landscape, Neil Young counts as the liveliest, the one least likely to be headed toward creative extinction.
It's possible for any old rock act to reproduce ancient hits for decades, and even to crank out new songs that vaguely recall those hits.


Baseball Tied to Gay Rights In a San Francisco Coalition
LEAD: Aides and supporters of Mayor Art Agnos are dressing these days in a mismatched wardrobe of coalition: lavender shirts and ties with orange and black baseball jackets.


Letting Feelings Bloom
LEAD: THE days of summer gradually shorten and I look back and say, ''Where has the time gone?'' The feeling that keeps emerging is frustration.
I don't seem to have done very much.
Or have I?


Late Summer Vegetables, Decorative and Abundant
LEAD: LATE summer vegetables, which are still in abundance through early fall, make particularly decorative sauces for pasta.
For a dish that is immediately satisfying, both to the eye and the palate, take some juicy sun-ripened tomatoes, chop them up and mix them with basil and a green olive oil and serve them on hot spaghetti.


Amy Laurie Wed To Allen Kovac
LEAD: Amy Rose Laurie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Laurie of Westfield, N.J., and Claverack, N.Y., was married last evening at the Carlyle in New York to Allen Kovac, a son of Helga Kovac of Eugene, Ore., and the late Andrew Kovac.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Joel Gore.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: I can appreciate the premise of Anthony Walton's article and his compelling reason for writing it.


Robert Kessler: Music Producer
LEAD: Flash back 25 years.
Ten-year-old Robert Kessler, of Chevy Chase, Md., is listening to radio dramas.
His favorite: ''Heartbeat Theater.''


NO MORE SCRAMBLING?
LEAD: The Washington Redskins aren't buying it, but Randall Cunningham, quarterback for the Philadelphia Eagles, says he's giving up scrambling.


Second 'Wood Chipper Murder' Trial Begins
LEAD: The long-awaited replay of last year's trial of an airline pilot charged with killing his wife and feeding parts of her body through a wood chipper has begun here in Superior Court.


CARPETS AND COOKIES
LEAD: Discussing what he calls ''the impulse to be emphatic'' in matters linguistic, Jack Rosenthal notes that the word not is really a contraction of the Old English negative na plus wiht (meaning ''thing'').


Parties Evolve For Many Species
LEAD: Snips and snails and puppy dog's tails, preening swans and diving sea lions showed up at parties last week.
On Tuesday, the exhibition ''Strange Attractors: Signs of Chaos,'' opened at the New Museum in SoHo.
While the guests dined, a vitrine of snails munched on two cabbages as part of one exhibit, ''Palimpsest.


Putting an Oar In
LEAD: In an effort to promote rowing in the United States, Oxford and Cambridge universities in England, which usually oppose each other on the Thames in London in March, brought their 160-year-old rivalry to the Chicago River yesterday for their first race in this country.
Oxford won by less than half a length.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about a state program that allows sentences mainly outside prison for people convicted of nonviolent crimes misidentified the program.
It is the Intensive Supervision Program, not the Intermediate Sentencing Program.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a marble-topped coffee table that I recently tried to polish, using some old, dried-out marble polish.
The surface now looks partly coated and streaked, and I have been unable to remove this with a new application of polish, even after considerable rubbing with a clean cloth.
I also tried using warm water and soap.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about a judge's order to move welfare families out of the Allerton Hotel in Manhattan misstated the name of the judge in one reference.
She was Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


POSTINGS: Factory Renovation; Ping Pong Apartments
LEAD: Blending a soupcon of whimsy with a touch of history and big hopes for profits, an architect-turned-developer who bought an abandoned commercial loft in the Clinton Hill neighborhood of Brooklyn has renamed it the Ping Pong Building and is cutting it into 33 cooperative apartments.


Design Preview; Milano Nuovo
LEAD: JUST AS FASHION MAVENS look to the seasonal Paris shows for new directions in clothes, every September the design world turns to the Salone del Mobile di Milano.
Indeed, nearly 150,000 people - furniture dealers, store buyers, designers, architects and journalists - annually flock to Milan to see innovative objects and new talents.


PASTIMES: Numismatics
LEAD: Cyprus canteen chits are one of the most multinational currencies ever printed.
Issued by an American-supported agency and printed in Jerusalem, they were used in Cyprus in camps run by Britain and spent by Jewish refugees.


Dinosaur Display Can Be Scary
LEAD: You recently had a number of articles devoted to the dinosaur exhibition at the Sands Point Preserve.


Late Summer Vegetables, Decorative and Abundant
LEAD: LATE summer vegetables, which are still in abundance through early fall, make particularly decorative sauces for pasta.
For a dish that is immediately satisfying, both to the eye and the palate, take some juicy sun-ripened tomatoes, chop them up and mix them with basil and a green olive oil and serve them on hot spaghetti.


Breathing New Life Into Old Houses
LEAD: WILLIAM C. NORTON remembers the moment as if it were yesterday.
It was 1965, and the 23-year-old Berlin resident, just out of the Army Reserve, was working as an automobile mechanic, and he was bored.
As he drove home one evening, he switched on the Paul Harvey radio show.


Clean Air Bill: The Question Is, Who Is Picking Up the Check?
LEAD: Everyone wants clean air. But who should pay for it?


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Visiting Beijing: Fewer Tourists, Some Bargains


Freshman-Year Surprises for Mom and Dad
LEAD: ''THERE won't be any ninth graders on the bus,'' my son announced before the first day of school. ''Cool kids don't take the bus.''


Lyric Operetta Gaining an Audience
LEAD: WITH the timing of a seasoned businessman, William Edgerton of Darien turned a hobby into an operetta company that has doubled its subscriptions in less than five seasons.


About Men; No Longer My Brother's Keeper
LEAD: I AM IN THE EMER-gency room of a Veterans Administration hospital in West Los Angeles, sweating.
Across from me, a young bearded doctor is inserting an IV device into the forearm of a 40-year-old alcoholic whose profuse vomiting has left him dehydrated.
As I watch this doctor puncture the patient's vein, I am aware of my own heartbeat - I am speeded up, on edge.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: If all of space is too broad a subject for a hobbyist starting a topical collection, one natural sub-topic is manned space exploration.


Cheap Air Seats: Gone Today and Here Tomorrow
LEAD: WHEN American Airlines flight 218 left Seattle for Chicago on Aug. 23, just past midnight, the 12 first-class seats were filled and so were all but one of the 130 coach seats.


2d Suspect Named in Killing of Drug Fighter
LEAD: A man described by the police as a middle-level heroin dealer has been identified as a second suspect in the slaying of Maria Hernandez, a Brooklyn woman who along with her husband fought to rid her block of drugs, the police said yesterday.


Hot Giants Tickets
LEAD: When the Giants are playing at Giants Stadium, there is no such thing as a general admission ticket.
The team has been so popular for so long that season tickets are handed down from generation to generation and the waiting list is measured in decades. ''We're sold out on a season basis,'' is the way Ed Croke, the team's spokesman put it the other day.


Reviews/Music; Cosmopolitan Quality Of the Polish Art Song
LEAD: For most listeners, the art song is primarily the province of Western European and, in this century, American composers.
But the literature extends in other geographical directions, too.
On Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, Juliana Gondek - an American soprano of Polish descent - offered the first of two concerts devoted to the Polish song literature.


Karen H. Greve Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Karen Helene Greve, an assistant commissioner with the New York City Department of Investigation, and Dennis Edward Milton, the chief deputy county attorney in the Suffolk County Attorney's Office in Hauppauge, L.I., were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.


Hanna Hymans Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Hanna Hymans, a daughter of Kathy Nakajima Hymans of New York and Osaka, Japan, and the late Murray Hymans, was married last evening to Greg Ostroff, a son of Mrs.
Jack Ostroff of Cherry Hill, N.J., and the late Mr.
Ostroff.
Rabbi Henry Weiner officiated at Windows on the World in New York.


THE NARRATOR HAS ALZHEIMER'S
LEAD:  OUT OF MIND  By J. Bernlef.
Translated by Adrienne Dixon.  150 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $17.95.


Power Is Short-Circuiting Tennis's Appeal
LEAD: A three-of-five-set men's singles match certainly gives you time to reflect upon trends in tennis today.


Snapshots of Hope and Hopelessness
LEAD: WHEN NEW YORK City Schools Chancellor Richard Green died abruptly of a heart attack last May, more than 5,000 mourners thronged the memorial service and lined the streets leading to the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Clearly they were grieving not only for the man, who had only been in office 14 months and was not a native New Yorker, but for the city's public school system.


Reviews/Dance; Dance World's Bessies Honor Some Achievers
LEAD: Dance Theater Workshop presented its sixth annual New York Dance and Performance Awards Wednesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Familiarly known as the Bessies, the awards are named after Bessie Schonberg, chairman emeritus of the dance department of Sarah Lawrence College and a noted teacher of dance composition.


Miss Nougue-Sans, Corporate Lawyer, And Frederick J. Iseman Are Married
LEAD: Marguerite Nougue-Sans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Nougue-Sans of Paris and Assat, France, was married last evening to Frederick J. Iseman, a son of Marjorie F. Iseman of New York and Joseph S. Iseman of Paris and Rye, N.Y.
Judge John C. Carey of Westchester County Criminal Court performed the ceremony at the Knickerbocker Club in New


NONFICTION
LEAD:  LEGENDS: Conversations With Baseball Greats.
By Art Rust Jr. with Michael Marley. (McGraw-Hill, $17.95.) ''I have always been a sports fan, but baseball is my great love,'' writes Art Rust Jr., the host of a New York City radio sports talk show.
The short narratives in ''Legends'' and his warm, passionate dialogue with past and current superstars - including Joe DiMaggio, Stan Musial, Mickey Mantle, Don Mattingly, Bob Feller and Rod Carew - amplify his claim.


Indy Fisher, Surfing Champion, Weds
LEAD: Melinda Grace Fisher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Fisher of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Kimogenor Point, New Suffolk, L.I., and Tyler Stokes Callaway, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Trowbridge Callaway Jr. of Delray Beach, Fla., and Quogue, L.I., were married yesterday in Southold, L.I.
The Rev.
Roy Brewer officiated at the First Presbyterian


Proud Tina Keeps On Burnin'
LEAD: Tina Turner's new album ''Foreign Affair'' (Capitol 91873; all three formats) adds some grit to the formulas that made Ms.
Turner one of the most gratifying comeback stories of the 1980's.


Savimbi Says He Is Halting Angolan Peace Talks
LEAD: The Angolan guerrilla leader, Jonas Savimbi, said tonight that he was suspending negotiations to end his country's long civil war because the two sides remain too far apart to have meaningful talks.


Houston Journal; Grand Jury Disruption: 5 Lawyers And a Feud
LEAD: A state district judge chose an unusual grand jury last month, and the legal system here has been tied up in knots ever since.


American Indian Dancers Rekindle Their Heritage
LEAD: Most Americans have grown up with the image of American Indian culture as a thing of war whoops and tom-tom beats.
And that image has been perpetuated among young children, according to Arlie Neskahi, a Navaho drummer and singer, and Wade Baker, a Hidatsa-Cree dancer and singer.
Both are members of the American Indian Dance Theater, which makes its New York City debut with a two-week engagement that begins on Tuesday at the Joyce


Ms. Booker Weds Richard Snowdon
LEAD: At St.
Luke's United Methodist Church in St.
Michaels, Md., Catharine Evans Booker, an independent estate trustee in Washington, was married yesterday to Richard Ward Snowdon 3d, a partner in the Washington law firm of Trainum, Snowdon, Holland, Hyland &amp; Deane.
The Rev.
Raymond T. Hopkins 3d officiated.


Deals on Wheels
LEAD: ''I VISITED NICARAGUA IN 1980, at the suggestion of a friend who had seen a lot of people there in broken wheelchairs,'' Ralf Hotchkiss says, ''and I met some skilled mechanics who were new wheelchair riders.
I was riding a homemade chair, and they said, 'We can do that.
Maybe we can even make a better one.


Ismail Leads Notre Dame Past Michigan
LEAD: They speak in the complex football language of the late 1980's at places like Notre Dame.
They prepare for months for days such as this one, the first of several decisive meetings to determine the New Year's Day matchups and define the final outcome of the national college polls.


Man Hurt in Fall Down Shaft
LEAD: A 26-year-old Manhattan man fell two stories down an elevator shaft yesterday after the doors apparently malfunctioned and he stepped into the chasm without looking, the police said.
The man, Yaron Kaplan, was taken to St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, where he was in critical condition last night, a hospital spokeswoman said.


On Education, Washington Is Looking Hard for Bargains
LEAD: THE House of Representatives voted last week to create federally financed scholarships in math and science and to establish tuition awards for students who would agree to teach in elementary or secondary schools.
But the move was hardly noted, and perhaps that is not surprising.


Divvying Up Defendants So Judges Get a Fair Share
LEAD: Watch out Judge Rothwax.
Get busy Judge Leff.
Here come Hugh Tingling and his court efficiency experts.


Transactions
LEAD:  Hockey


A Half-Century of Remodeling New York
LEAD: NO New Yorker who has turned 50 - and there are others who would set the mark at 20 - has gained maturity in quite the same city that the native knew as a youngster.
There has been no era in its history that some chronicler or another has not recalled, sometimes wistfully, sometimes exuberantly, a New York that was a gentler, somehow more intimately scaled city.


1,367-Pipe Organ Is Dedicated at Ossining Church
LEAD: THE parish of St.
Augustine was founded in Ossining in 1853, and remained at its original site for more than 125 years.
Then the widening of Route 9 forced the parish to relocate about a mile north, where it took over the former Mary Immaculate School.
Those makeshift quarters were adequate, though hardly inspirational, and for the next eight years the congregation worked to raise enough funds to build a new church.


There's a Crime Wave, Or a Perception Wave, In the Soviet Union
LEAD: CRIME and punishment has always been an exotic subject in this vast stew of a nation.
Nowadays in the Soviet Union, one of the darker boons of a more open society is that mayhem buffs can flit from articles about the 14-year-old boy who strangled his mother, to the ''Wild East'' train robbers who specialize in halting freight runs of desperately needed food and furniture out in


There's Something Old, Something New, and a Lot of Both
LEAD: The flood of classical recordings will continue this season, driven, as in recent seasons, by the compact-disk boom.
Releases scheduled over the next months include newly unearthed rarities, warhorses, new artists, old artists, old labels rejuvenated and new labels, which are popping up constantly.


DVORAK YES, BEETHOVEN NO
LEAD:  JANACEK'S UNCOLLECTED ESSAYS ON MUSIC  By Leos Janacek.
Edited and translated by Mirka Zemanova.
Preface by John Tyrrell.  234 pp.
New York:  Marion Boyars Publishers.


Carol Bergren Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Carol Marie Bergren, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Bergren of Easton, Pa., to John D. Santoleri, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert L. Santoleri of Havertown, Pa., took place yesterday at the College Hill Presbyterian Church in Easton.
The Rev.
Thomas Yorty, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a production error, some copies of the Business section last Sunday omitted page 14, which included the continuation of an article about Mylan Laboratories Inc.
Readers wishing copies may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Cable TV Provokes Dispute in Somers
LEAD: JACOB L. TROBE is not a fanatic follower of sports, movies or ballet, but he wants to be able to flip his cable television dial and bring the Sports Channel, Home Box Office and the Arts and Entertainment Channel into his Somers home.
His neighbors in town have that option, but Mr.
Trobe, a 77-year-old cable television producer, does not.


Yankee Fan Urges a Boycott
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:  BACK THERE WHERE THE PAST WAS: A Small-Town Boyhood.
By Charles Champlin. (Syracuse University, $18.95.) Charles Champlin, who left his hometown of Hammondsport, N.Y., in 1942 at the age of 16, still considers himself on ''temporary assignment from Hammondsport to the larger world.'' In ''Back There Where the Past Was,'' compiled from columns he wrote for The Los Angeles Times, he enshrines the small-town American life of his boyhood.


After Four Terms, Us Versus Them Still Plays in Detroit
LEAD: AT a time when a new class of crossover black politicians is reaching out to whites, Coleman A. Young, the cantankerous, tart-tongued Mayor of Detroit, continues to confound the experts with his popularity.


Jane A. Margolis Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jane Ann Margolis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Margolis of New York, was married there last evening to Aaron Leslie Saperstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Saperstein of Danbury, Conn.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Plaza, assisted by Rabbi Jerome R. Malino.


Umpire Troubles In New League?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A picture of two Bronte sisters on Aug. 20 was published in error.
It showed Anne (at left) and Emily, not Charlotte and Emily.


With Asbestos, the Law Never Anticipated the Worst
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY officials have long prided themselves on the city's asbestos regulations, acknowledged to be among the most stringent in the nation.


In 'Black Rain,' East Meets West With a Bang! Bang!
LEAD: After four grueling months that included location work in Japan and New York, the director Ridley Scott is completing ''Black Rain'' at Paramount Studios, on a hi-tech-with-Deco-accents hostess-bar set that is supposed to be in Osaka.
Two scenes, filmed on successive days, seem to underscore the theme of the conflict-of-two-cultures thriller, which opens Friday at Loews Astor Plaza and 34th Street Showplace and casts Michael Douglas and Andy Garcia as New York cops pursuing a capo in the yakuza - or Japanese Mafia - in an uneasy collaboration with the


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-29


Skipper's Sentencing in Spill Off Rhode Island Is Delayed
LEAD: A Federal district judge has refused to sentence the captain and the owner of a tanker that spilled nearly 300,000 gallons of heating oil off Newport in spring until he knows more about their records and willingness to pay damages.


Repairing a Dripping Faucet
LEAD: AS a rule, fixing a dripping faucet is easy.
This article describes repairing compression faucets (pictured), the most common kind.


Brazil Sure to Qualify In World Bridge Play
LEAD: The qualifying stage of the world team championships drew to a close here tonight with the qualifiers in doubt in both series.


1. How to Wear a Navy Suit
LEAD: A double-breasted navy suit can go almost anywhere with the right accessories.
Pack four shirts and three ties, and get a world of wardrobe options.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Sept. 9  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $370,000  1230 Park Avenue (96th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, large kitchen; maintenance $953, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)


Ed Koch's New York
LEAD: As he flew in from Washington one evening during his second term, a contented Edward Koch looked out at the glittering New York skyline and smiled. ''Mine, all mine,'' he said, figuratively, of course, but with unfeigned warmth.


No One Yet Has Immunity From Racial Conflict
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Black Network Makes Its Move
LEAD: Being the head of one of the smallest cable television networks does not keep Robert L. Johnson from thinking big.


A College Takes Steps To Combat Racism on Campus
LEAD: AS a teen-ager growing up in Hartford, Terrell E. Davis had the grades to get into Trinity College but almost did not apply. ''Trinity has had a reputation of being a white, elitist, racist institution,'' said Mr.
Davis, who is now a student there and the vice president of the Pan-African Alliance, an organization representing black students at the Hartford college.


SOVIET MINERS SEEK CONTROL OF UNION
LEAD: Two months after they led the largest industrial walkout this country has seen since the 1920's, independent coal miners this week took the first steps in a campaign to seize control of the official coal workers union.


Correction
LEAD: In an article last Sunday about television programs produced by David L. Wolper, the candidate who ran against Barry Goldwater in the 1964 Presidential race was misidentified.
He was Lyndon B. Johnson.


Commitment to Drug Treatment Is the Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


STREETSCAPES: 66 Third Avenue; A 'Costly Looking Barn' for the Charities Agency
LEAD: AS long as anyone can remember, it has been an architectural conundrum, an oddly proportioned, one-story structure at the northwest corner of 11th Street and Third Avenue. ''I've always been curious about it,'' said Robert L. Bien, an architect who lives nearby. ''It's so ornate - but it was just a garage.


Giving the Voters A Say on Shoreham
LEAD: The article ''L.I.
Power Authority Weighs Alternate Plans for Shoreham,'' Sept. 3, did not consider the alternative plan suggested to President Bush, Governor Cuomo, and Energy Secretary Watkins by the Association for a Better Long Island.
I would like to review that proposal.


This 'Treasure' Was Flawed
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAMPUS LIFE: Baylor; Suit Attacks a Ban On Single Students Who Are Pregnant
LEAD: An unwritten policy barring pregnant unmarried students from classes is being challenged for the first time in the 144-year history of Baylor University.


FLY BUYS
LEAD: TWO YEARS ago, Clint Rodenberg made a discovery at Linate Airport in Milan that he still recalls with pleasure.
There, in a men's shop, was a wide array of Hermes neckties selling for the equivalent of $48 apiece.
That may not sound like a bargain, but to an aficionado of the silk ties, which then went for about $75 each at Hermes's New


Arbour Finds Bright Spot As Flyers Beat Islanders
LEAD: The outcome was negative, but the signs were mostly positive as the Islanders opened their National Hockey League exhibition schedule today by losing, 3-2, to the Philadelphia Flyers at the Spectrum.


At the Trial of Bakker, Sensation on the Wane
LEAD: The sensationalism that marked the downfall of the television evangelist Jim Bakker has not been entirely absent from his fraud and conspiracy trial here.


Disarm, Don't Disengage
LEAD: Military people all over are getting the jitters as East and West come to grips for the first time with the idea of really cutting armed forces.
Norway is no exception, although there are political advantages.


GIVING UP GUNS
LEAD: I fully support Dennis Graham's decision not to own a gun (About Men: ''Giving Up Guns,'' Aug. 20).
I also share his outrage regarding the schoolyard carnage in Stockton, Calif., and the continuing slaughter in our nation's capital.


If You're Thinking of Living in: New City
LEAD: HARDLY new and never more than a hamlet, New City is an unlikely county seat.
Its center is not on the Palisades Interstate Parkway, the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway or Route 9W, the three major highways that connect nearly every other hamlet, village and town in Rockland County with New York City and New Jersey.


Beware Those Network Failures
LEAD: The number of companies that have tied their personal computers into local area networks, or LAN's, is growing rapidly, and a new study has found that the networks function properly 94 percent of the time.
But what about that other 6 percent - those times when the network fails?
The study, released at the Networld trade show here last week, found that the LAN failures are a bigger problem than many people think.


Soviet Jews Finding Israel Short of Jobs and Housing
LEAD: Tanya Rosenweig, a Jew from Leningrad, could hardly restrain her eagerness to become an Israeli.


Review/Music; 19th-Century Songfest Of Protest and Reform
LEAD: Voices of Change, a series at Merkin Concert Hall devoted to political songs, got started Monday evening with a program that looked back to the 19th century.
The concert opened with the Hutchinson Family Singers, a quintet from Minnesota that re-creates the repertory of the original Hutchinsons, who started performing as a group of siblings in 1840 and continued through three generations, until the death of their founder, John


Megan Crowley, Producer, Weds
LEAD: Margaret Anne Crowley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Crowley of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Keith Alexander McAllister, the son of Joan S. McAllister of New York and the late John T. McAllister.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Sullivan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the chapel of the Convent of the Sacred


As Trading and Con Games Increase, So Does 'Slabbing'
LEAD: A small California company is transforming the rare coins trade.
Formed three years ago, Professional Coin Grading Service Inc. in Newport Beach has developed a system for grading high-quality coins that has since become the industry standard.
While other companies offer grading services, none have matched Professional Coin's acceptance among dealers.


Q and A
LEAD:  A Problem With Asbestos


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:  CLASSICAL  'Slavonic Opera Arias'  Lucia Popp, soprano; Munich Radio Orchestra conducted by Stefan Soltesz.
Angel CDC7 49319 2; CD only.
This is a welcome exception to the usual run of opera star recitals.
Here is important, rewarding repertory that, while it has by no means gone unappreciated, has not always attracted voices of Ms.


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Aug. 20 with an article about Kentucky mislabeled the state north of Louisville.
It is Indiana.


Kathleen E. Dougherty Has Wedding
LEAD: Kathleen Elizabeth Dougherty, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James F. Dougherty of Sea Girt, N.J., and Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
James Aloysius Boozan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Boozan of Elizabeth, N.J., and Sea Girt.
The bride's uncle, the Rev.
Edward J. Dougherty, performed the ceremony at St.


Rutgers a Winner on a Kick
LEAD: A blocked punt that led to a third field goal by Doug Giesler with nine seconds to play lifted Rutgers to a 9-7 victory over Boston College today at Giants Stadium.


Poles Denounce '39 Soviet Entry As Criminal Act
LEAD: The Polish Communist Party newspaper accused the Soviet Union today of perpetrating large-scale crimes when it invaded Poland in concert with Hitler's army at the start of World War II.


It Will Be Hard to Make Money
LEAD: The high-definition television picture could use some clarification with regard to its likely roll-out schedule and its prospects for strengthening American-owned consumer electronics manufacturers.
My view is that HDTV will take longer to become widely available than most people think and that it will not alter the decline of the American consumer electronics industry.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Kyoto
LEAD: Kyoto these days lives in eager anticipation - and more than a little fear - of next year.


Monique Richards Weds
LEAD: Monique R. Richards, a daughter of Mrs.
Joel H. Freis of Los Angeles, and David O. Zenker Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Zenker of Morristown, N.J., were married yesterday at the Lamington Presbyterian Church in Bedminster, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Chorba, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


SO, HOW DO YOU LIKE AMERICA?
LEAD:  THE LOST CONTINENT  Travels in Small-Town America.
By Bill Bryson.  314 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Alfred Hurley Jr. Weds Denise E. Lee
LEAD: Denise Elizabeth Lee, a daughter of Bernice A. Lee of Huntington, L.I., and Joseph O. Lee of Drums, Pa., and Alfred Francis Hurley Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hurley of Denton, Tex., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The Rev.
Gerard Reedy, the dean of Fordham


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the Selective Guide to Photography last Sunday in The New Season, part 2 of The Times Magazine, gave an incorrect location for the show by Ellen Garvens and Holly Roberts, opening in Manhattan on Dec. 7.
It will be at the Jayne H. Baum Gallery, 588 Broadway (219-9854).


Nebraska Rolls Past Utah
LEAD: Ken Clark ran for 130 yards and two touchdowns and the quarterback Gerry Gdowski had three scoring runs today to lead Nebraska past Utah, 42-30.


Gunmen Kill 82 Sinhalese in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Gunmen rampaged through three villages in central Sri Lanka, burning and shooting to death at least 82 unarmed Sinhalese civilians in repeated night raids, residents and military officials said today.


Palaces of the Yi Kings
LEAD: THE ghosts of the Yi dynasty, whose kings ruled Korea from 1392 to 1910, still haunt the palaces of Seoul,those oases of serenity amid the incessant motion and noise of this vibrant city.
But the tranquil halls and exquisite gardens, a refuge from the Hyundai cars and the purple and white buses that rumble like elephants through the streets, mask a past rife with court intrigue, betrayal and war.


Rightists Under Suspicion In New Guatemala Violence
LEAD: The authorities arrested two men and began a search for a third, a right-wing former presidential candidate, in an investigation of a wave of violence in which at least 34 people have been killed and 7 students have disappeared.


SOVIET ARMS PLAN GAINING U.S. FAVOR
LEAD: Administration officials said today that the United States had decided to accept a basic element of a Soviet plan for monitoring the size of underground nuclear blasts.


Review/Dance; 2 Visiting Companies
LEAD: Anne Bluethenthal and Dancers, a troupe from San Francisco, and the Van Pelt Dance Ensemble of Columbus, Ohio, shared a program Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
Both groups had competent dancers, but too many of their offerings included dull choreographic ideas.


Robin C. Comizio Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Robin Carol Comizio, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Joseph Comizio of Franklin Lakes, N.J., and Douglas Andrew Goodman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome David Goodman of Saddle River, N.J., were married yesterday at the Most Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in Franklin Lakes.
The Rev.
Carl Hindrichson performed the ceremony.


Miss Curtis Weds Robert Goodman
LEAD: Diane Hart Curtis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Peck Curtis Jr. of Rochester, and Robert Michael Goodman, a son of Donald Franklin Goodman of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Marie Tscherne Goodman, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert M. Wainwright officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Rochester.


NABOKOV'S LETTERS: 'LET ME EXPLAIN A FEW THINGS'
LEAD: Vladimir Nabokov (1899-1977) belonged to a generation that still wrote letters, and he wrote them with tremendous zeal and artistry.
Today his correspondence, stacked on shelves in cardboard filing boxes, covers an entire wall of the study in the suite of his wife, Vera Nabokov, at the Palace Hotel in Montreux, Switzerland.


U.S. Trade Official 'More Positive' on Europe
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today that she was ''in a more positive frame of mind'' about threats of restrictions on American imports than she was a week ago when she began a round of talks with European trade officials.


K.G.B. DEFECTOR GUNDAREV IT'S COLD COMING OUT
LEAD: AT DUSK ON AN evening in January 1986, two men from different worlds strolled together down the street of an Athens suburb.
The taller of the two, a solidly built man with receding red hair and broad features, spoke good but heavily accented English.
His name was Victor Gundarev.
He was a full colonel in the K.G.B.


Q and A
LEAD:  Kenya Cautions


Smooth Sailing Along the Banks Of Kensico Dam
LEAD: FEW sights seem more suited to the reflecting pool at Kensico Dam Plaza than a white boat sailing serenely by.
A model boat, that is, assembled from a kit with the meticulous care of a hobbyist.


'I Love My Wife' At Cabaret in Bridgeport
LEAD: SEXUAL permissiveness, with a bit of drug taking on the side, may have been a fashionable pastime of the 60's and 70's, but it is an acknowledged taboo of the 80's.
Recording it for posterity requires the perspective of social satire or the purposefulness of a sociological statement.
Otherwise, the subject is passe, if not objectionable.


BIG BUCKS, TOUGH TACTICS
LEAD: THIS MAY BE THE MOST TROUBLE ROGER KING HAS ever had getting a program on television.
The burly 45-year-old chairman of King World Productions, the first syndicator in broadcast history to have three simultaneous top-rated hits - ''Wheel of Fortune,'' ''Jeopardy'' and ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' - is standing before a wall unit in his Manhattan office, fumbling with a video cassette player.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: It is impossible to overstate the importance of having enough breadth in your repertoire to be able to choose both kingside and queenside openings.
Yet many players try to avoid all the work that entails by specializing in one or the other.


THE FACES BEHIND THE MASKS
LEAD:  IN THE SHADOW OF THE SACRED GROVE  By Carol Spindel.  318 pp.
New York:  Vintage Books.
Paper, $8.95.


Food; Coming Home to Roast
LEAD: SOMETIMES, I WOULD GLADLY GIVE UP dinner at a starred restaurant for real home-cooked food; at other times, I crave the excitement and sophistication of a great restaurant.
Although a French saying asserts that ''On ne mange bien que chez soi'' - ''we eat well only at home'' - travel guides like the


PASTIMES: Gardening; Amaryllis: Follow the Rules
LEAD: Everything about amaryllis is superlative.
The trumpet-shaped flowers are spectacular, anywhere from six to 10 inches across.
Their petals can be seen in many colors ranging from red, pink and white to bicolors, especially red and white or pink and white.
The bulbs are huge - as big as a man's fist.


Seoul at Night
LEAD: EVENING is descending on Pagoda Park, a meditative oasis along one of Seoul's fiendishly thriving boulevards.
The homespun-clad elders - men in stringy gray beards to match their Korean-white balloon pants and slippers, women with faces creased into a permanent cheery grimace - beckon me to join their circle.


Building Housing to Keep Staff
LEAD: IN an area burdened by high housing costs and labor shortages, Manhattanville College in Purchase is one of a growing group of employers nationwide taking matters into its own hands.
With help from a Washington-based development consulting firm, the college is putting the finishing touches on plans for a $5 million town-house apartment complex that could accommodate as many as 48 members of the school's staff, plus their families.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a marble-topped coffee table that I recently tried to polish, using some old, dried-out marble polish.
The surface now looks partly coated and streaked, and I have been unable to remove this with a new application of polish, even after considerable rubbing with a clean cloth.
I also tried using warm water and soap.


Correction$61;#NOF#
LEAD: Because of a scheduling change, a radio listing on page 47 of the Arts and Leisure section today is outdated.
The McGraw-Hill Young Artists


Miss Jones Wed To Joseph Valis
LEAD: Roselynd Kimberly Jones, a daughter of Mrs.
R.
Wood Jones of O'ermead Farm in West Chester, Pa., and Robert H. Jones, also of West Chester, was married yesterday at the Westtown (Pa.) Friends Meeting House to Joseph William Valis, a son of Mrs.
Joseph Valis of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Valis.


Art of Bunting Is Sacrificed
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Child's Game of Hide and Seek Induces Panic
LEAD: IT happened suddenly.
One minute my 2-year-old daughter was standing next to me at the children's counter in a large department store and the next minute she was gone.
I had momentarily turned my head to tell my older daughter Jamie not to pull tags off the clothes and Jenny had vanished.
I called her name.


Gubernatorial Candidates Hone Images
LEAD: AS the campaign for governor enters its final six-week run Representative James J. Florio, the Democratic candidate, and Representative Jim Courter, the Republican challenger, are sharpening their efforts to form the images voters will take with them into the voting booth.


Beauty/Fashion; The Image Makers
LEAD: MAKEOVERS ARE NO LONGER CASUAL ACTIVI-ties, a teen-age diversion on a slow Saturday night.


Language Schools Are Talking Business
LEAD: AN executive at a Manhattan telecommunications company lives in Peekskill and travels back and forth to Japan on business three times a year.
A young psychiatrist in Scarsdale is treating a number of Japanese patients.
An accounting firm in Hartsdale has a growing list of clients in West Germany.


CAMPUS LIFE: Maryland; Students Charge Rights Violation In Suit on Voting
LEAD: Four University of Maryland students have gone to court on behalf of more than 300 students who, they maintain, were stripped of their right to vote in the city in the November election.


Radical Assamese Separatists Gaining in India
LEAD: Radical militants appear to be taking control of a separatist movement in the northeastern Indian state of Assam, nudging aside the separatist leaders who signed a truce with the state and national governments last month.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; A Tasty Team for Fall
LEAD: Apples go with pork as naturally as peas go with carrots.
The combination is a sure sign of cooler weather; the recipe here is an updated version of an old familiar.


GREAT LEADER TO DEAR LEADER
LEAD: In attempting to describe a nation whose ''perception of the world is so different from ours . . . that reality and unreality seem to blend and blur,'' Nicholas D. Kristof seems to assume that his own sense of what is real is normal and that of the Koreans is in some essential way abnormal, or distorted (''Great Leader to Dear Leader,'' Aug.


GREENING THE WHITE HOUSE
LEAD: If Richard G. Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, had his way, President Bush would write off the environment on political grounds, foregoing clean-up programs because they are too costly to industry.
And besides, ''nature lovers'' never have made good Republican constituents.


A CRITIC AT THE TOP OF HIS VOICE
LEAD:  HARLAN ELLISON'S WATCHING  By Harlan Ellison.  514 pp.
Los Angeles:  Underwood-Miller. $29.95.


Plane Carrying 22 Is Missing Over the Jungles of Indonesia
LEAD: A plane carrying 22 people disappeared over the jungles of the eastern Indonesian province of Irian Jaya, the official Antara news agency reported today.


Astoria
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; Campus Rapes Lead to Formation Of a Task Force
LEAD: Two rapes of undergraduate women at Syracuse University in the first week of school, as many as had been reported in the previous two years, have led to protests on campus and the formation of a task force to work on the problem.
Students have held a demonstration, accused the administration of insensitivity to the victims and called for more and better protection.


Tentative Agreement on Rocky Flats Cleanup
LEAD: Federal and state negotiators have reached a tentative agreement that would limit Federal officials' liability for their handling of hazardous waste at the Government's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant in Colorado, an official involved in the talks said yesterday.


Oil Spill Shuts Part of Hudson
LEAD: A 30-mile stretch of the Hudson River south of Albany was closed to water traffic yesterday after more than 1,000 gallons of oil spilled into the river, the Coast Guard said.


LIFE IN A DOOMED HOUSE
LEAD:  QUEEN LEAR  By Molly Keane.  233 pp. New York:  Obelisk/E. P. Dutton. $17.95.


U.S. Champion Wants More
LEAD: Charles Marks, the first black to compete in the top ranks of offshore powerboat racing, has won the national title on accumulated points.
He isn't required to compete Saturday in the final race of the circuit, but he has reason to be there, anyway.


Price of Vaccines For Measles Criticized
LEAD: As a mother and a registered nurse, I am outraged and dismayed that ''private doctors charge an average of $75 for the booster to reimmunize our teen-agers against measles and/or measles, mumps and rubella.'' (''Measles Directive Puzzling Parents,'' Aug. 13).


FICTION
LEAD:  GREEN BANANAS.
By Michael Drinkard. (Knopf, $17.95.) The question is: How will Sylvan, the hero of Michael Drinkard's spirited but callow first novel, get 29-year-old Phyllis pregnant?
His way or hers?
Sylvan, a college senior employed at Phyllis's day-care center, views her in a brazenly hormonal fashion.


Getting Close To Nature in Japan's Alps
LEAD: THE usual tourist route in Japan is to go from crowd to crowd at museums, shrines, commercial centers and restaurants.
Surely one essence of Japan lies in the nature of its humanity packed into tiny spaces, so much so that one can forget that about three-quarters of the country is hilly or mountainous terrain, much of it heavily forested, relatively unpopulated - and spectacularly beautiful.


With Striking Fashions, Gigli Reaches New Heights
LEAD: Romeo Gigli worked his fans into a frenzy at his first major New York show Thursday, re-creating the hysteria that greeted his first Paris show last March.
The designer from Milan, Italy, has widened his circle: his earlier presentation was for retailers and the press; this one was for the women who would wear the clothes.


Legislatures Face a Barrage Of Measures Banning Guns
LEAD: The killing of seven people in Louisville, Ky., by a deranged man firing an AK-47 semiautomatic rifle has spurred new momentum among state legislators around the country to ban such weapons, gun-control experts and advocates say.


SOMETHING VENGEFUL AND ANCIENT
LEAD:  FIRST LIGHT  By Peter Ackroyd.  328 pp. New York:  Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Sports of The Times; The New Commissioner Brings Up the Name Joe Page
LEAD: The Joe DiMaggio of sports columnists, Mr.
W.
W. (Red) Smith, once tried to pull a swifty on a new baseball commissioner.
Not only that, but he did it while the commissioner was buying.


Reviews/Music; Fine Young Cannibals Pilfer the Past
LEAD: Pop music continually recycles itself, building new hits around familiar hooks.
The Fine Young Cannibals, the British band that opened a sold-out two-night stand at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday, do not bother to disguise their pilferage.
They ransack Top 40 songs from the 1960's through the 1980's, with special (and obvious) attention to Motown songs.


POSTINGS: Atlantic City Convention; Art in Architecture
LEAD: People who are thinking of building a home and are looking for examples of the latest work of architects and artists to help them find just the right design might meander down to Atlantic City on Thursday for the start of the 89th annual meeting of the New Jersey Society of Architects.
More than 2,000 architects, designers and developers will offer more than 250 exhibits of their professional efforts at the Atlantic City Convention Center Thursday, Friday and Saturday.


Review/Theater; An Exploration of Cultural Confusion
LEAD: Mixed media in the theater can be a mixed blessing.
In ''Anulah, Let Them Eat Cake'' at the Theater for the New City, the music of Tonny Prabowo and Mickele Navazio is as light and loony as most of the dialogue, giving this little play the air of comic opera.
But symbolic film and video sequences running throughout the performance mostly add further confusion to a mystifying story.


Social Events
LEAD:  African-American Auction


How Schools Can Win Votes At the Polls
LEAD: I WAS distressed to read recently that the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education was planning to deal with the rejection of school budgets this year in about half of the state's public school districts by running workshops and conferences with such titles as ''Passing the Budget'' and ''Winning at the Polls.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Hudson Square; Offices in a Former Industrial Area
LEAD: WHEN owners of the industrial buildings on the lower west side of Manhattan just north of the Holland Tunnel started carving office space out of former printing plants and warehouses a few years ago, the idea was to exploit the area's proximity to the financial district and offer an alternative to high rents there.


Rights Groups Fault General for Haiti Abuses
LEAD: In a review of Haiti's political situation after one year of rule by Lieut.
Gen.
Prosper Avril, two United States-based human-rights groups have criticized the Haitian Government for failing to stop widespread political violence and for slow progress toward promised democratic elections.


Remember O'Malley?
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Freedom of Speech, I
LEAD: Not long ago, a visiting Soviet politician who said things like Boris N. Yeltsin said last week would have to have been planning to stay here.
During an eight-day visit, Mr.
Yeltsin maintained a steady stream of the sort of criticism of Mikhail S. Gorbachev that got him booted out of the Politburo two years ago.


Two Who Made A Revolution
LEAD: Next Sunday, an exhibition that we have long been waiting for and sometimes despaired of ever seeing will open to the public at the Museum of Modern Art. ''Picasso and Braque: Pioneering Cubism'' deals at first hand and in detail (much of it quite new) with one of the most celebrated partnerships in the history of


In From the Cold, but Cold
LEAD: Though Soviet defectors have been an invaluable weapon for the C.I.A., they have often been cast aside once their usefulness is over.
One became a dishwasher in a New York noodle shop, another a bellhop.


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: The Met manager should:


CARPETS AND COOKIES
LEAD: Dialing may be a somewhat slower process than pushing buttons, but it is also a less expensive one.


Live Music Dying Out in Casinos
LEAD: AFTER a year without work, George Hernandez has given up trying to make a living in Atlantic City.
He has sold his house, packed up his belongings and bought a one-way plane ticket to Los Angeles, where, at the ag of 58, he hopes to start a new life.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Eaters With Consciences


Clocks and Jewels From the Golden Age of Cartier
LEAD: Glorious glitter, classical styling and Oriental flourishes are the hallmarks of the House of Cartier's early-20th-century designs, as can be seen in an exhibition here at the Walters Art Gallery.
The show of 70 precious objects - jewelry, clocks, handbags, picture frames, desk accessories and potted hard-stone flowers - is the first public presentation of one of the finest private collections of Cartier in the United


FASHION: On the Street; In Jodhpurs, Standing Out From The Herd
LEAD: Though horses are almost as rare in midtown Manhattan as free cabs, jodhpurs aren't.
They can be seen on women striding down Madison or Fifth Avenues and looking jaunty, purposeful and comfortable.


Japanese Variations On the Pancake Theme
LEAD: IN Japan, American-style pancakes, with butter and syrup, are readily found in coffee shops, where they are called hotto keki, the Japanese pronunciation of hot cakes.
Their indigenous cousins, however, are much more interesting, filled with sweetened, mashed beans (tai-yaki, dora-yaki and ningyo-yaki); chopped cabbage, seafood, meat, and even noodles (okonomi-yaki) and bits of cooked octopus (tako-yaki).


Toward the 18th Hole With Baby Boomers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: The Mets should:


Apple Growers Hurt by Loss of Alar
LEAD: Standing beside his packing house, Ted Wright watched a forklift operator pick up a large box filled with McIntosh apples and load it into a trailer truck.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a marble-topped coffee table that I recently tried to polish, using some old, dried-out marble polish.
The surface now looks partly coated and streaked, and I have been unable to remove this with a new application of polish, even after considerable rubbing with a clean cloth.
I also tried using warm water and soap.


South African Leader Appoints New Cabinet
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk appointed a Cabinet today that reflected a desire for stability as well as his expressed intention to pursue negotiations with the country's black majority.


Puerto Rican Group Protests in Brooklyn


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Armonk, N.Y.  $470,000  3 Maple Way  4-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath, 25-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, deck, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $6,068.
Bronxville, N.Y.  $825,000  308 Pondfield Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 76-year-old Dutch colonial; study, fireplace, sun room, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $10,980.


MOSCOW
LEAD: Correspondents on assignment around the world discuss the influence of local fashion on their own attire.


Margaret Garrett Weds
LEAD: Margaret J. Garrett, a ballet dancer and actress, and Bruce Wolosoff, a concert pianist and composer, were married yesterday at the New York Academy of Art by Chief Judge Sol Wachtler of the New York State Court of Appeals.
Ms.
Garrett, 24 years old, will keep her name.
The bride is a daughter of Dr.


A Rush of Investors Cause Hobbyists to Flee
LEAD: When George B. Berk opened a rare coin shop in Canton, Ohio, in 1979, the necessary skills for his job included a horse trader's bent for negotiating, an encyclopedic knowledge of coinage and an artist's eye for appraising a coin's quality and esthetic appeal.


The Findings Clarified
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Influx of Big Brokerages Stokes Price Volatility
LEAD: Individual investors are not the only ones to stampede into coins.
The healthy returns, the pervasiveness of standardized grading and the computerized trading exchange have also made coins attractive to big league investors.


On the Plan to Revise Special Education
LEAD: As a former member of the New Jersey Special Education Study Commission, which drafted the Plan to Revise Special Education in New Jersey, I would like to call attention to erroneous allegations in the article ''Plan to Revamp Special Education Draws Criticism'' (Aug. 6).


No One Yet Has Immunity From Racial Conflict; Leadership Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sara Fowler Is a Bride
LEAD: Sara Fowler, an associate editor of Mad Magazine in New York, and Brian Friedman, an editor on the foreign desk of The Associated Press in New York, were married on Sept. 9 at the Garrettson Memorial United Methodist Church in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gregory Friedman, a Roman Catholic priest and a brother of the bridegroom, officiated; he was assisted by the Rev.


Repairing a Dripping Faucet
LEAD: AS a rule, fixing a dripping faucet is easy.
This article describes repairing compression faucets (pictured), the most common kind.


Marshals Shield Suspects and Judges Against Terror Attack in Drug Cases
LEAD: In a vast walnut-paneled room barely two blocks from the Capitol, 24-year-old Rayful Edmond 3d is receiving the sort of Federal protection usually reserved for potentates: bulletproof shields, television surveillance, metal detectors, even hidden sharpshooters.


Late Summer Vegetables, Decorative and Abundant
LEAD: LATE summer vegetables, which are still in abundance through early fall, make particularly decorative sauces for pasta.
For a dish that is immediately satisfying, both to the eye and the palate, take some juicy sun-ripened tomatoes, chop them up and mix them with basil and a green olive oil and serve them on hot spaghetti.


Julie Beth Meer Marries
LEAD: Julie Beth Meer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse R. Meer of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Robert Michael Harnick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jason Harnick of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi William Kloner performed the ceremony at the Palm House in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Harnick, 24 years old, is the assistant to the treasurer at the Museum of Broadcasting in New York.


Photographs Aspire to Be More
LEAD: ANIMAL and baby pictures may ''sell'' a newspaper, but they are seldom the stuff of its art columns.
Even Andy Warhol, whose genius was for transforming the banal into art, ignored (or overlooked) them.


Dr. Lisa Wojan Becomes Bride
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa Denise Wojan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Alexander Wojan of Cornwall Bridge, Conn., was married in Amherst, Mass., yesterday to Dr.
Joseph Edward Struckus, a son of Terri Priest of Worcester, Mass., and the late Edward Joseph Struckus.
The Rev.
Dr.
Deene D. Clark, an Episcopal minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony in the Johnson Chapel of Amherst


Rehnquist Denies Breaking Word to Powell
LEAD: An angry Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist says a new book about Robert H. Bork's ill-fated Supreme Court nomination incorrectly states that the Chief Justice broke a promise to keep Justice Lewis F. Powell's impending retirement a secret.


2 Israeli Soldiers Hurt In Attack Near Jordan
LEAD: An assailant thought to be a Jordanian soldier opened fire on an Israeli Army patrol across the border this morning and slightly wounded two Israeli soldiers.
Jordan said one of its soldiers was wounded by Israeli fire in the incident.


World Cup Hunt Resumes for U.S.
LEAD: The United States national soccer team continues its pursuit of a spot in the 1990 World Cup on Sunday against El Salvador.


Rhona Chalson Has a Wedding
LEAD: Rhona E. Chalson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Chalson of Forest Hills, Queens, was married in New York last evening to Richard A. Weiss, the son of Hans Weiss of New York and the late Mary Weiss.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony at the Loft.


Lisa McCowan Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Grace Elizabeth McCowan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace D. McCowan of Richmond, and Thomas Coleman Foley, a son of Gifford P. Foley of Winnetka, Ill., and the late Catherine Coleman Foley, were married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Chapel at the Kent (Conn.) School.
The Rev.
Richardson Schell, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Bridgton, Me.; Condos Rising On Site of Inn
LEAD: A LAKESIDE condominium project is being developed on the site of a former inn in this little town in Maine's western mountains.
The complex, Moose Pond Village, nestled behind birches and evergreens on nine acres on Moose Pond, will include 19 units of 2,700 square feet priced at $275,000.


Westchester Puts Homeless In Troubled Midtown Hotel
LEAD: Just as New York has begun moving its homeless out of sometimes-wretched Manhattan hotels, Westchester County has placed 34 homeless adults and children in the Bryant Hotel in midtown.


Compromises Made By Working Parents
LEAD: I know I'm not the only self-employed parent who had a grim laugh at the Aug. 27 Page 1 photograph of mom, child and computer at home.


How the Disabled Sold Congress on a New Bill of Rights
LEAD: WHEN Judith Heumann was 5 years old, her mother proudly pushed her wheelchair to the local public school, only to be told that the eager kindergartner could not be admitted because she was a fire hazard.
When she was 21, she was denied an elementary school teaching credential because her lower limbs were paralyzed from polio.


UNNERVING ART
LEAD: Twice in his article on Francis Bacon, described as ''perhaps the greatest living figure painter,'' Michael Kimmelman reports that Bacon ''details his fondness for men,'' apparently with some degree of pleasure and pride, yet no amplification of these observations made it into print, even in euphemistic form (''Unnerving Art,'' Aug.


1989 Murder Rate Nearly Identical to 1988's
LEAD: Murders in New York City are occurring at a rate almost identical to that of last year, when a record 1,896 were reported, according to Police Department statistics.


Linda Miles Wed In Pennsylvania
LEAD: Linda Helen Miles, a daughter of Mrs.
David Adams 4th of Bethlehem, Pa., and the late Frederick W. Miles, was married yesterday to Louis Charles Murray Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray of Orlando, Fla., at the Roman Catholic Church of the Good Shepherd in Blooming Grove, Pa.
The Rev.
John Lipinski officiated.


Pocono Cancels Race
LEAD: As expected, officials of the Pocono International Raceway in Long Pond, Pa., have canceled next year's Indy-car 500-mile race, but the reason, according to Pocono's chief executive officer, has less to do with the unsafe condition of the 2.5-mile oval track than with the financial condition of the race.


Emergency Room Gridlock: On the Verge of Crisis
LEAD: People seeking treatment in emergency rooms in many parts of the country are finding a medical gridlock that keeps patients waiting for hours, even days, for hospital beds, emergency room physicians say.


Body and Mind; DIFFERENT BUT DEADLY
LEAD: FIVE YEARS AGO, AT the bedside of a patient in a cardiac intensive-care unit, a senior cardiologist remarked to me that he hoped I never needed to be on a balloon pump.
Intra-aortic balloon pumps are ingenious sausage-shaped devices that sit deep in the aorta and temporarily assist the failing hearts of patients who are awaiting open-heart surgery.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  FIDDLING AROUND


ICE BREAKS BEFORE IT MELTS
LEAD:  AFFLICTION  By Russell Banks.  355 pp. New York:.  Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Black Agony Pierces the Heart Of an Afrikaner
LEAD: Midway through ''A Dry White Season,'' Euzhan Palcy's new film about South Africa, an Afrikaner teacher named Ben Du Toit ventures for the first time from his suburban Johannesburg home into the teeming black township of Soweto.
With the company and protection of a black cabbie, Du Toit is bound for a funeral home, there to mourn over the body of an aquaintance, who died in security police detention.


Florida State Finally Wins
LEAD: Peter Tom Willis hit Terry Anthony with a 32-yard touchdown pass in the third quarter and ran 7 yards for a touchdown in the fourth period tonight to lead Florida State to a 31-21 victory over Louisiana State.


Seidelman's Heroines Rebel in the Highest Style
LEAD: First, the heroine of ''Cookie'' takes her best friend's last $10 and buys herself a pink plastic camera; then she jumps over a subway turnstile.
But the misguided title character of Susan Seidelman's new film finds her true calling soon enough.
She doesn't exactly straighten out; Cookie gets more crooked.


Short Shrift For U.S. Open
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


The Law in Vermont
LEAD: To the Editor:


Come Up With an Agenda, Cuomo Tells Party
LEAD: Add Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to the list of prominent Democrats searching for a message to carry the party through three more years of Republican Presidential rule.


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: Get out their golf clubs.  MICHAEL SMOLENS  Great Neck, L.I.


DATA UPDATE: September 17, 1989
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
July 89
July 88
Change
Starts
1,430
1,478
-3.2%
Completions
1,369
1,528
x-10.04
Sales
739
701
+5.4%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Pipe Organs
LEAD: To the Editor: As a collector of organ recordings of instruments I have heard in Europe and America, Craig Whitney's article on ''Perusing Pipe Organs'' (Travel Section, Aug. 13) was particularly appealing to me.
The more so since I have always read his foreign dispatches with great admiration.


HOW MEN SEE THE WORLD
LEAD: As William E. Connor was preparing for a business meeting in Seoul, South Korea, he realized that he was missing something terribly important: his pants.
Part of a dark suit, they had not come back from the dry cleaner.
Connor, the representive director of William E. Connor Inc., a Tokyo-based trading and sourcing company, had no alternative but to borrow from a Korean colleague - a simple solution, except that his sartorial


Votes in Congress
LEAD: Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate  1.
Gregg Nomination: Vote to confirm Donald P. Gregg to be Ambassador to South Korea.
Approved 66 to 33, Sept. 12.  2.
FSX Fighter: Vote to override President Bush's veto of Congressional restrictions on the co-production of a jet fighter with Japan.


Cheer of Flying
LEAD: WE were somewhere above Manitoba, my bride and I, when I lifted my plastic cup in praise of long airplane flights. ''That's just because of the free champagne,'' she answered.
Much as I hate to replace emotion with reason, I had to admit that my judgment might have been swayed by the chilled bottle of Domaine Chandon before us, secreted out of the first-class cabin by a flight attendant determined to see our honeymoon begin happily besotted.


When Neighbors Lend Their Hands
LEAD: THOUSANDS who suffered from July's devastating tornadoes have begun the long process of rebuilding their homes, their businesses and their lives, with the help of millions in Federal funds.


Where Is the Invective Of Yesteryear in Opera?
LEAD: It is really too early to be concerned.
After all, the season is not yet in gear.
Still, connoisseurs of operatic controversy must have been a little disappointed at the lack of acrimony and passion that marked the recent disagreement between Luciano Pavarotti and Lyric Opera of Chicago.
Has it come to this: constrained civility between famous singers and impresarios?


HONG KONG
LEAD: Correspondents on assignment around the world discuss the influence of local fashion on their own attire.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Togetherness is having a pretty hard time these days.
The ''me syndrome'' has reached the point where it is transcending generations.
And the demand for space in relationships is increasingly vocalized.
So what hope is there for the couple who not only live together but work together, in the same room or the same house?


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: Anthony Walton's article ''Willie Horton and Me'' (Aug. 20) touched me on several levels.
There is often isolation, in this between-and-betwixt world black professionals occupy.


A Supermarket Of Jade: Both Cheap and Choice
LEAD: UNDERNEATH the Gascoigne Road overpass in Kowloon, in the triangle formed by Kansu, Reclamation and Battery Streets, an unprepossessing piece of ground enclosed by a chain link fence acquires a luminescence each morning as tables are set up for the Hong Kong Jade Market.
On one table is set water drops of emerald green translucence.


CAMPUS LIFE: California; Fraternities Phase Out 'Little Sister' Groups
LEAD: Fraternities across the nation are disbanding their ''Little Sister'' programs, under which women become associated with the men's groups, often paying small-scale dues.
Little Sisters serve as hostesses for parties and help with service projects.


OLD TROOPERS TO THE RESCUE
LEAD:  ARMY BLUE  By Lucian K. Truscott 4th.  436 pp. New York:  Crown Publishers.


In a First for Nardin Gallery, Five Photographers Exhibit
LEAD: CROSS RIVER


Palladio
LEAD: To the Editor: I would like to add one bit of advice to Susan Lumsden's excellent article on Palladio's works in Vicenza (Aug. 13).
There is a book, ''The Palladio Guide'' by Caroline Constant (Princeton Architectural Press), which takes Palladio fans to and through all the extant buildings he designed, both in Vicenza and elsewhere in the area around Venice.


Budapest Says It Will Keep Frontier to the West Open
LEAD: Hungary will keep its border to the West open indefinitely after the migration of East Germans this week, Prime Minister Miklos Nemeth said in a commentary written for a West German newspaper and made public today.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: My father is the proud owner of a new auto-focusing, single-lens-reflex camera.
It isn't his first SLR, but it's the first he has owned that does the focusing for him.
And thereby hangs a tale.


R. P. Kelling Jr. and Miss White Wed in Illinois
LEAD: Paisley Addams White, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene E. White of Kenilworth, Ill., was married yesterday to Robert Paul Kelling Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kelling of Haddonfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gilbert W. Bowen, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the interdenominational Kenilworth Union


Food Aid to Sudan Seen as Averting Famine
LEAD: Enough food, medical and other relief supplies are now reaching the strife-torn southern half of the Sudan to prevent a recurrence of the widespread famine that devastated the area last year, a senior United Nations relief official says.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tufts; Students Protest Policy to Limit Speech Practices
LEAD: Protesting a new university policy that they say limits freedom of speech in some campus areas, a group of Tufts students got up in the middle of the night last week to draw chalk lines dividing the campus into free speech zones and posted signs mocking the new rule.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''The hot-money takeover game is over. The whole network is being disassembled.''
Michael Metz,
chief investment strategist,
Oppenheimer &amp; Company,
on the junk bond turmoil.


Kickback Accusations Have Gandhi on Defensive
LEAD: Allegations that Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi stifled efforts to reveal Indian recipients of bribes paid in an arms deal have put his Government on the defensive as a national election approaches.


RIO DE JANIERO
LEAD: Correspondents on assignment around the world discuss the influence of local fashion on their own attire.


Miss Yellin Weds Lucius T. Hill 3d
LEAD: Wendy Lorraine Yellin, who is to join the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy next month as an associate, and Lucius Tuttle Hill 3d, a vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Bernard Bloomstone officiated at the Tumble Brook Country Club in Bloomfield,


BARD-WATCHING
LEAD:  REINVENTING SHAKESPEARE  A Cultural History,  From the Restoration to the Present.
By Gary Taylor.
Illustrated. 461 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $29.95.


Carla Jean Edwards to Wed in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence J. Edwards of Jersey City have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Carla Jean Edwards and Herve Gouraige, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franz Gouraige of Rowland Heights, Calif.


Police Check Whether Body Is That of a Missing Teacher
LEAD: A woman's body was found yesterday in a car in Uniondale, L.I., and the Nassau County Police were investigating whether the body was that of a missing Brooklyn teacher.


Jan DeGaetani, 56, Singer of Avant-Garde Works
LEAD: Jan DeGaetani, an American mezzo-soprano who became a champion of avant-garde music, died of leukemia Friday night in Genesee Hospital in Rochester.
She was 56 years old and a resident of Rochester.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Of all the national parks, it is the one closest to extinction.
We ditched, diked and drained


Violence Flares Again in Azerbaijan Republic
LEAD: Three people were killed in a bus explosion in Azerbaijan today as the authorities reported a heightening of ethnic tensions and further disruption of vital services in the Soviet Transcaucasus.


Amy Grenen Wed to Donald Levantin
LEAD: The marriage of Amy Sann Grenen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl M. Grenen of Radnor, Pa., to Donald Adam Levantin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen M. Levantin of Philadelphia, took place last evening at Congregation Rodeph Shalom in Philadelphia.
Rabbi Elliot Holin and Rabbi Richard Steinbrink co-officiated.


Noriega Critic Arrested
LEAD: More than a dozen armed plainclothes officers broke into a law office on Friday and arrested Jaime Padilla Beliz, the owner of an opposition newspaper shut down two years ago, one of his associates said.
The incident occured at the office of the firm Padilla y Asociados, where Mr.
Padilla is a senior partner, said Venus Cardenas, a lawyer in the firm.


U.S. FOUND PAN AM LAX ON SECURITY SOON AFTER BLAST
LEAD: Federal investigators found a number of security violations by Pan American World Airways in a special inspection conducted after the bombing of a Pan Am jet over Scotland, people familiar with the inquiry say.


Allison D. Barrall Wed in Rhode I.
LEAD: Allison Davies Barrall, a financial analyst for the SEI Corporation in San Francisco, and Scott Wyllis Christopher, an investment banker at Shearson Lehman Hutton there, were married yesterday at St.
Matthews Episcopal Church in Jamestown, R.I.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Betsy A. Burnham Marries
LEAD: Betsy Alison Burnham, the daughter of Dr.
Bernard A. Burnham and Mary C. Burnham, both of Watertown, Conn., was married last evening to Mark Andrew Stern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Stern of New York.
Rabbi Stephen Pierce performed the ceremony at the Lake Waramaug Country Club in New Preston, Conn.


How Gypsy Moth Met Its Match
LEAD: THEODORE ANDREADIS leaned back in his chair, laced his fingers behind his head and thought a moment. ''What was it like around here the day we discovered the gypsy moth fungus?'' he said, beaming as he repeated the question. ''It was an exciting day.
A very exciting day.''


Couple Enter House Market, But With a Trade in Mind
LEAD: FRANK FABIANO has spent nine years renovating a 50-year-old log cabin here on Lake Mohawk into a comfortable recreational environment for his wife, Cindy, and daughters, Stacy, 19 years old, and Jessica, 14.


Southwestern Food With a Twist
LEAD: FORGET all the Tex-Mex restaurants with their tasteless refried beans, stale tortilla chips, canned salsa and cheese-over-everything combination platters and head for Arizona Flats in Bridgeport.


Merchant Marine Wins
LEAD: The Merchant Marine Academy turned four turnovers into four field goals by Rich Egal to gain a 12-10 Liberty Conference victory over C. W. Post in a steady rain yesterday at Kings Point, L.I.


For Mets and Expos, Big Question About the Big Deals
LEAD: Look at it this way: by not winning the National League East championship and thus losing a chance to reach the World Series, the Mets will save $550,000.


The Trashing of New Jersey
LEAD: JUDGING from the amount of litter that covers our highways and byways, streets, parks and public areas, New Jerseyans seem to be trashing their state with abandon.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.36
7.33
7.57
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.61
8.58
7.66
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.44
6.45
6.00
Bank Rate Monitor


Pollution Poses Growing Threat To Everglades
LEAD: The Everglades, 10,000 square miles of delicate marshland that is home to some of the country's rarest birds and other animals, are caught in a worsening environmental crisis, with thousands of acres already unable to sustain wildlife.


Mr. D'Amato's Double Vision
LEAD: Dear Senator D'Amato:  Your distaste for the Andres Serrano photograph of a crucifix immersed in urine seemed clear when you ripped up the catalogue of a show that included the photo and threw the shreds on the Senate floor.
But your correspondence with a constituent who disagrees with you raises a nagging question.


No One Yet Has Immunity From Racial Conflict; Not Johannesburg
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Conductor Must Help to Shape Public Taste
LEAD: The only significant body of work that has been added to our orchestras' standard symphonic literature in the last 30 years is the music of Gustav Mahler - a telling example of how orchestral repertory has been shrinking.
But even that acceptance was a long time in coming.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Track and Field  Kingdom Wins Hurdles in Tokyo: Roger Kingdom, the two-time Olympic champion, won the men's 110-meter high hurdles in the Tokyo International Super meet yesterday, but failed to lower his world record.
Kingdom led from the start in winning in 13.28 seconds.
His world record of 12.92 was set at Zurich on Aug.


Telltale Tomato And the Turn Of Seasons
LEAD: IT'S coming to an end.
Yesterday was the turning point, evident in the different quality of the sunlight slanting over my shoulder as I weeded the now tall leafy tomato plants.
Wait a minute!
These plants were just seedlings, bravely waving their tiny leaves in a barren garden.
Now they are heavy with fruit, vying for space among the bushy marigolds and encroaching green pepper plants.


Rose Linked to a 2d Wager Scheme
LEAD: Pete Rose, whose denial of owning a winning race-track ticket was disputed by witnesses and the defendant at the recent trial of Thomas Gioiosa in Cincinnati, has been linked to another winning Pik Six ticket that he allegedly had someone else cash for him.


Home Sellers Trimming Brokers' Fees
LEAD: MICHELLE KANE is looking for a house with more room for her private psychotherapy practice, so her current home, a dramatic four-bedroom contemporary in Great Neck, L.I., is up for sale.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: It seems that every third thriller these days has to do with flying, and here are two ambitious specimens of the genre by Dale Brown and Mark Berent.
Both men were flying officers in the United States Air Force, so when they write about flying they are to be read with respect.
Whatever their abilities as writers - and it should be said that each author can manage a word processor in a professional manner -they know everything about advanced fighter aircraft and the physical and emotional problems that go into flying them.


Dr. Julie Fudge Weds
LEAD: Dr.
Julie L. Fudge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Smith Fudge of Horseheads, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard L. Barbano, a son of Anita C. Barbano of Brooklyn and the late Frank A. Barbano 2d.
The Rev.
Stephen Parr, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Lawrence Chapel in Odessa, N.Y.


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: The Mets organization should stop reading their preseason notices, play like a hungry team, get consistent, go back to basics, practice trying, and maybe next year will be better.
CAROL WELLMAN  Wilton, Conn.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing; For Fun Over, On And Under The Earth
LEAD: Weekend afternoons are calm in Kutztown, a country town set amid rolling cornfields and wheat fields about 25 miles west of Allentown in Pennsylvania Dutch country.
The town, just inside the eastern boundary of Berks County, has retained the character of a quiet rural center since its founding in 1780.


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Vacation time is over for house plants; before moving them back indoors, turn pots on their sides and hose off the plants to remove spiders, mealybugs, yellowed leaves and dead twigs.
If roots are pushing out the drain holes, plants have outgrown their pots.
Repot them in clean pots that are at least one size larger than the ones in which they were growing.


Hand-Knitted at Home, in High Style
LEAD: The popularity of hand-knitted oversize sweaters and classic tailored knit suits in this season's designer ready-to-wear collections has spurred an upswing in home knitting.


DATA BANK: Sept.17, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.7
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'89
IV Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$171.6
$173.9
$146.4


RJR's Brave New World
LEAD: Last week was not a happy one in the ''junk bond'' market.
As the Campeau Corporation's highly leveraged empire started to crumble, fears - some might even say panic - about the fate of other companies that had gone private through junk bond-financed leveraged buyouts swept Wall Street.
Junk bond prices plummeted, dragging down even bonds that analysts had thought safe.


Text by Goethe, Subtext by Freud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Now It's Bob Horton's Turn at B.P.
LEAD: Listen to Bob Horton talk and you might easily mistake him for a Wall Street trader or a corporate bust-up artist.
His eyes light up as he confesses his love for ''active asset trading'' and ''swaps.'' There is joy in his voice as he discusses ''doing an arbitrage'' and ''making money by betting on the difference between your view and somebody else's.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Islip  $400,000  17 Chanticleer Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old waterfront ranch; 102-foot bulkhead, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $6,700.
Massapequa Park  $178,000  462 Atlantic Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old split level; den, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,100.


Colgate Holds Off Penn for an Upset
LEAD: Dave Goodwin threw two touchdown passes and ran for another today as Colgate upset Pennsylvania, a defending Ivy League co-champion, by 21-14.
The Red Raiders (2-1) opened up a 14-0 lead in the first quarter and held off two Penn rallies in the Quakers' season opener.


India Tries to Quit Sri Lanka's Despair
LEAD: AS Sri Lanka and India edge toward an agreement that will send 40,000 Indian peacekeeping troops home, people on both sides of the straits that separate the two countries are counting the political costs of New Delhi's ill-fated foray into a foreign war.
The conflict the Indians came to end is not over.


Hungary's Defiance And Europe's Future: Journey Without Maps
LEAD: IN May, when the Hungarians snipped the first strand of barbed wire along the Austrian border, they intended the act as a proud demonstration of their new Western posture.
They also had no real need for the wire anymore.
Several months earlier, the Government had lifted travel restrictions, opening a lively two-way traffic of Hungarian black marketeers and


Who Pays for the Windfalls of Others?
LEAD: THERE is something wild going on about money nowadays, which has me worried.
I'm referring to the outlandish amounts paid to certain segments of our society.


On Life's Beach, Sands of Time
LEAD: IF you have spent summer days at the beach, as I have, you can look about you and see your life unfold from blanket to blanket.


Miss Greene Wed To Robert R. Isen
LEAD: At the Union League Club in New York, Patricia Greene and Robert Rand Isen were married last evening by Rabbi Richard Chapin.
The bride is the daughter of Betsy S. Green of New York and Roy Greene of Atlanta.
Her husband is the son of Reva Robinson of Valley Forge, Pa., and Harold Isen of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.


Convicted Officer Issues Warning on Corruption
LEAD: A convicted ringleader of a gang of crooked New York City police officers has made a dramatic videotape aimed at warning officers of the the perils of police corruption.


No One Yet Has Immunity From Racial Conflict; We Are All Victims
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Turkey Louis Quinze


Barbara Dugan Marries on L.I.
LEAD: Barbara Mary Dugan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Donald Dugan of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Peter Beuerlein, a son of Mrs.
Robert Wylie of Whiting, N.J., and the late William Beuerlein.
The Rev.
Peter Kelley performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Old First Church in Huntington, L


FROM THE PARIS SEWERS TO VIETNAM'S STREETS
LEAD: On his hands and knees, Cameron Mackintosh was scrounging around under the antique coffee table the other day in his Bedford Square office.
The British musical theater producer - ''Phantom of the Opera,'' ''Les Miserables,'' ''Cats'' - was looking for some black-and-white glossies of his latest stage extravaganza, ''Miss Saigon.


Nepal, Nashville
LEAD: To the Editor: Your section has sent us off well prepared to many exotic places.
In fact, ''What's Doing in Katmandu'' (Travel, Jan. 15) arrived as we were ready to leave for the airport on a trip to Nepal, and it was very helpful.


Italy's Treasures
LEAD: To the Editor: Paul Hofmann was right in his article on ''Italy's Endangered Treasures'' (Travel, July 30).
However, I am pleased to report that the first floor of the Borghese gallery was not closed on a recent weekend.
Contrary to published listings and the firm belief of the clerk at our hotel, the lowest level of the Villa Borghese museum was open to the public on July 29 and, wonder of wonders, in the afternoon and at no charge.


THE PLAYWRIGHT AS TERRORIST
LEAD:  BERNARD SHAW  Volume Two: 1898-1918.
The Pursuit of Power.
By Michael Holroyd.
Illustrated. 421 pp.
New York:  Random House. $24.95.


Japan on $100 a Day - or Less
LEAD: WHEN you tell people you are going to Japan, they are likely to say they know someone who paid $6 for a cup of coffee there and wonder how you can subject yourself to such an economy.
The language and culture are so forbidding, so strange - and those prices are somehow openly hostile.
But if you go, you will discover that traveling on a budget in


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: The Mets need to hire a motivational psychologist to light a spark, move Dave Magadan to the second slot in the order, and move Keith Miller to center.
He can at least bunt and make contact.
Samuel has not done the job at bat, nor in the field.
Someone needs to persuade Straw to look the bat on to the ball; he is pulling his eyes away before he makes contact.


TOKYO
LEAD: Correspondents on assignment around the world discuss the influence of local fashion on their own attire.


Jays Beat Indians on an Error in 11th
LEAD: Luis Aguayo, the Cleveland shortstop, bobbled Tony Fernandez's grounder with the bases loaded in the 11th inning today and allowed the winning run to score as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Indians, 3-2.


M.T.A. INSISTS GOLF WAS REALLY HOOKY
LEAD: The Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority will send evidence to the Bronx District Attorney this week showing that 19 Transit Authority workers regularly played golf on the authority's time, a spokesman for the Inspector General said yesterday.


Easy Goer Proves He's No. 1
LEAD: If Easy Goer were only an ordinary horse, or even just a very good one, he would have probably lost the $809,000 Woodward Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.
But the truly special ones find a way to win, and Easy Goer finally found one at the top of the stretch.


Egypt Would Be Host to Israeli-Palestinian Talks
LEAD: Egypt indicated readiness today to be host to negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis on a phased and comprehensive settlement of the political deadlock surrounding the 22-month Palestinian uprising in Israeli-occupied territories.


LONDON
LEAD: Correspondents on assignment around the world discuss the influence of local fashion on their own attire.


L. A. Giroux Wed To Miss Halliday
LEAD: Stephanie J. Halliday, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Halliday of Columbus, Ohio, was married last evening to Leigh A. Giroux, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Giroux of New York.
The Rev.
Thomas York performed the ceremony at the Broad Street Presbyterian Church in Columbus.


New Jewish Group Formed for Interfaith Ties
LEAD: Three major American Jewish organizations have formed a new group to represent them in international discussions with the Vatican and other Christian bodies.
The action reflects divergent approaches by Jewish groups to interreligious dialogue and to issues like the dispute over a Roman Catholic convent at Auschwitz.


Gender Bias
LEAD: To the Editor:


GETTING TO THE HEART OF DIXIE
LEAD:  ENCYCLOPEDIA OF SOUTHERN CULTURE  Edited by Charles Reagan Wilson and William Ferris.
Associate editors, Ann J. Abadie and Mary L. Hart.
Illustrated. 1,634 pp.
Chapel Hill:  The University of North Carolina Press.


Unesco Chief About to Face A Showdown
LEAD: The man who hopes to coax America back into an international organization it left five years ago will soon face his moment of truth.


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: When the bridge players of Australia undertook hosting of the 1989 world team championships now approaching their midpoint in Perth, they knew that the effort would be expensive.
The financial burden became even greater when a major sponsor withdrew following the 1987 stock market crash and every tournament player in the country paid a contribution.


Ms. Albern Marries Dr. John Sheffield
LEAD: Audrey Lee Albern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Albern of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Van Loon Sheffield, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Sheffield of Webster Groves, Mo.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville,


Survivors of Shooting and Gunman's Relatives Ponder Sad Riddles
LEAD: The first funerals were held today for victims of the gunman who shot up a printing plant here, while his family and co-workers searched their memories for any clues that might somehow explain the rampage.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Poland on Soviet Invasion


Designers Vie to Honor Stalin Victims
LEAD: What is the proper way to remember the victims of Stalin?


Eliot H. Harris Wed in Capital
LEAD: Eliot Halsey Harris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Harris Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to William Christopher Edgar, a son of Katharine Edgar Cobey of Washington and Cushing, Me., and William H. Edgar of Paris.
The Rev.
Dr.
Francis H. Wade officiated at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in


Repairing a Dripping Faucet
LEAD: AS a rule, fixing a dripping faucet is easy.
This article describes repairing compression faucets (pictured), the most common kind.


On Language; The Legislative Mangle
LEAD: LEGISLATIVE LAN-guage is governed by a law of etymology that is also the ancient code of the bureaucracy: It doesn't have to be right, it just has to be close enough for government work.
If they understand what you mean, it doesn't matter what you say or how you say it.
In most legislatures, punctilious attention to correct usage is considered elitist.


Ms. Adams Weds Michael S. Baldock
LEAD: Jennifer Lynn Adams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Adams of Gwynedd Valley, Pa., and Bay Head, N.J., and Michael Shaun Baldock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Lawrence Qualman of Coos Bay, Ore., were married yesterday at All Saints Episcopal Church in Bay Head.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. officiated.


Hitler's Berlin Is Seen Through Shirer's Dairies
LEAD: When Jerry Rafshoon approached Ted Turner in the summer of 1988 about making a mini-series based on ''The Nightmare Years,'' William Shirer's memoir of his reporting from Germany during Hitler's rise, Mr.
Turner asked skeptically, ''Is this another Nazi story?''


Wildflowers Spruce Up the Highways
LEAD: THOUGH only in the initial stages, we've already witnessed some promising results of the State Transportation Department's attempts to beautify the highway along Interstate 95.


3. Simple Ways to Mix Color
LEAD: Start with a clean, monochromatic look in earth tones.
For a wedge of color, add a shirt in neon orange or blue.


Driving Down The Dollar
LEAD: These days, it seems that nothing can stop the mighty dollar.
A combination of relatively high interest rates, a desire by foreigners to invest in American assets and concerns over political instability elsewhere has turned the dollar into the darling of the currency markets.
Last May, a dollar bought 130 yen; today it buys 144 yen.


For the Western Serial, Time to Saddle Up Again
LEAD: The script for the opening scene in one of the initial episodes of ABC's new series ''The Young Riders'' calls for the Pony Express rider, a youthful Bullalo Bill Cody - played by Stephen Baldwin - to gallop up to the relay station in a cloud of dust.
Somebody forgets to tell Mother Nature.
The capricious old girl strips the bottom off a monster thunderhead that has been building all morning above ''Morganville,'' part of the western location set in the high Sonoran desert and mountain country 30 miles southeast of Tucson, and the grand champion of all gullywashers turns the last leg of


Reviews/Music; Mel Torme Improvisations In Easy-Listening Disguise
LEAD: Jazz singers have often served as intermediaries, bringing jazz instrumentalist ideas to an audience that would not go near a jazz club.
So it was at Michael's Pub on Wednesday night, when Mel Torme slyly included themes by Charlie Parker, Tiny Kahn and other jazz musicians in an arrangement that cloaked his rapturous, risky improvisations in the guise of entertainment.


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: If they're still in it by this time (doubtful), the Mets will have to play with an intensity they haven't been able to muster all year.
They'll also have to go with Magadan and Barry Lyons, and keep the once-great Hernandez and Carter out of the lineup, and harm's way.


FICTION
LEAD:  MURDER AT THE KENNEDY CENTER.
By Margaret Truman. (Random House, $17.95.) Margaret Truman's ninth Washington-based whodunit is a bewildering clutch of characters, last-minute confessions, secret files, eavesdroppers and ethnic types who walk with, and without, limps.
By the middle of the novel, we are as confused as the gracefully aging Mackensie Smith, a George Washington University law professor who reluctantly abandons his classroom to make sense of a scandal that begins when a lascivious female aide of Senator Ken Ewald is gunned down on the grounds of the Kennedy Center.


Nicaragua: Howard Fast's Version
LEAD: To the Editor:


George Adams
LEAD: George Adams, a saxophonist, leads a quartet tonight at the Village Vanguard, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street (255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M.; there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a marble-topped coffee table that I recently tried to polish, using some old, dried-out marble polish.
The surface now looks partly coated and streaked, and I have been unable to remove this with a new application of polish, even after considerable rubbing with a clean cloth.
I also tried using warm water and soap.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Do College Football Polls Mean Anything?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE CHASE.
By Alejo Carpentier.
Translated by Alfred Mac Adam. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $16.95.) We are, Alejo Carpentier once wrote, ''lost in a labyrinth of false notions.'' And picking through that labyrinth in search of occasional flecks of truth is what drives this brief novel.
The Cuban writer, composer and diplomat, known for the architectural complexity of his plots, here adopts the equally dense structure of Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Symphony to trace the intertwined days and nights of two young men who have come to Batista-era Havana to carve their destinies.


All the Trimmings for a Stylish Fall
LEAD: Handbags are getting pouchier.
Belts are taking on all manner of ornamentation.
Necklaces and earrings are longer.
Scarves are bigger.
Tassels and fringes are sprouting everywhere, and animal patterns are going wild.
Welcome to the world of accessories for fall 1989.


Slovenia Defies a Warning From Belgrade
LEAD: The Yugoslav republic of Slovenia has ignored a federal warning by adopting amendments to its constitution that proclaim a right to secede from the country.


The Riches of Brunei
LEAD: IT isn't quite Wonderland, but Brunei has qualities that would delight Lewis Carroll.
It also has Western-style comforts that can be welcome to a traveler ranging around Southeast Asia or the South Pacific who is tired of going native.
There is an air of unreality about this tiny kingdom rooted like a molar on the north shore of the island of Borneo.


Rain Brings Early Curtain on Yankee Victory
LEAD: There was something merciful about the rain that fell last night at the Stadium.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner; Gardens and Terraces Invite Diners Outdoors
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Arcobaleno


WHO'S AFRAID OF THE BERLIN WALL?
LEAD:  GERMANY, AMERICA, EUROPE  Forty Years of German Foreign Policy.
By Wolfram F. Hanrieder.  509 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $29.95  THE TWO GERMAN STATES AND EUROPEAN SECURITY.
Edited by F. Stephen Larrabee.  330 pp.
New York:  Institute for  East-West Security Studies/St.
Martin's Press.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  HOW PIZZA CAME TO QUEENS  Written and illustrated by Dayal Kaur Khalsa.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarkson N. Potter. $13.95.  (Ages 6 to 9)


Susan S. Foster Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Susan Sheree Foster, a daughter of Gertrude Schotter of Green Pond, N.J., and the late Ralph Schotter, was married yesterday to Dr.
Alvan Grayson Walker 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walker Jr. of Melbourne, Fla.
The Rev.
John Allen, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, performed the ceremony in Flanders, N.J., at the home of Mr.


THE NATION: David N. Dinkins; An Even Temper In the Tempest of Mayoral Politics
LEAD: IT took David N. Dinkins a long time to get to where he is today, replacing the once-indomitable Edward I. Koch at the top of New York City's Democratic ticket.
Yet probably the most delicate step in Mr.
Dinkins's slow, cautious career will be his next one: in seeking to become mayor, he must convince the voters that he can lead a changing city.


Catholics and Jews Exchange Hope and Misunderstanding
LEAD: FOR a quarter century, Roman Catholic and Jewish representatives have examined their traditions and tried to root out sources of prejudice and misunderstanding.
Yet today, relations between Catholic and Jewish leaders have fallen into exceptional disarray.


Deng Is Silent, And the Chinese Can't Tell Where The Power Is
LEAD: IN the last few years, Deng Xiaoping has played the Great Balancer, steering China into new directions but almost always positioning himself in the center of competing factions.
These days the balancing act is wobbly, creating new uncertainties about China's political and economic future.


Putting Together a Defensive Portfolio
LEAD: Pity the small investor.
As the stock market leaps to record highs and then pulls back, these investors are racked with a conflicting mixture of fear and greed.
If they have been cringing on the sidelines since the October 1987 crash, is now the time to jump in again to snare some fast profits?
If, on the other hand, they got into the market before the recent gains, is it time to cash in their winnings or should they dig in and not miss out on the chance for further gains?


A Suitable Home For Steamrollers
LEAD: ARMED with oil cans and wrenches, several men approached a 1904 steam engine that once ran an entire woodworking factory. ''I hope this works,'' Robert Hungerford said. ''We put a lot of hours into this.''


POSTINGS: 555 Broadway; 3 Sisters Renovate
LEAD: People grow and change and so do neighborhoods, and in NoHo the idea of new departures has been joined at 555 Broadway.
There, an ornate, century-old mercantile building is starting a new life as an office center and the developers are three professional women who formed a real estate troika to do the project.


Both Sides, Please
LEAD: To the Editor:


Time of Reckoning For 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: ''Junk bond'' prices plunged amid increasing worrries about the financial health of some large issuers of the high-yielding low-rated debt.
The focus of attention last week was the Campeau Corporation, the Canadian real estate and retailing concern that took on heavy debt in an aggressive acquisition campaign.


Maryland Crabs
LEAD: To the Editor: With regard to the ''sweet, succulent'' pieces of meat in the ''inner chambers'' of Maryland's crabs (Fare of the Country, July 16), I say, balderdash! - never have I encountered such a disgusting mess of maritime gore as at a crab feed aboard a Baltimore harbor cruise in June.
The largest piece was the size of a pencil eraser, and it all had a faintly noxious aroma.


Arab League Begins New Beirut Peace Effort
LEAD: The Arab League began a new effort today to end the fighting in Lebanon with a peace plan welcomed by Syria but offering no public concession to the main demand of the country's Christian commander.


Voter Friendly
LEAD: The countless voters who carried a red-white-and-blue booklet to the polls in last week's primary election in New York City attest to the popularity of the city's first official Voter Guide.


GREENING THE WHITE HOUSE
LEAD: While it is heartening to hear of President Bush's ''greening'' and of his sympathetic relationship with the Environmental Protection Agency's William K. Reilly -especially after eight disastrous years - neither Mr.
Bush nor Mr.
Reilly is actually a member of the Greens (''Greening the White House,'' by Trip Gabriel, Aug.


On the Plan to Revise Special Education
LEAD: I would like to offer my reactions on the Plan to Revise Special Education as a principal of a pilot high school.
The Bergen County Vocational-Technical Schools district was one of 10 districts selected to pilot new special-education initiatives.
Of the 650 students in the high school, probably 20 to 25 percent have a classification in the perceptually impaired and neurologically impaired range.


Blacks Started Dinkin's Bid In a Symbolic River-Crossing
LEAD: One day last November, four black Brooklyn politicians strode into the Manhattan office of Borough President David N. Dinkins.
Over coffee, for the next 60 minutes, they urged the gray-haired official to run for mayor.


Badlands
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with great interest ''The Good Old Days in the Badlands''.
Those interested in more information on the Marquis de Mores should look to the book ''The Marquis de Mores: Emperor of the Bad Lands.'' It was written by my late father, Donald Dresden, who was born in Larimore, N.D., in 1910.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  INTERNMENT ART  ''From Bleakness...'' is the title of an art exhibition and series of programs based on the experiences of Japanese-Americans sent to American internment camps during World War II.


Another Disease Found Borne by Deer Tick
LEAD: AT least five people in southeastern Connecticut this year have contracted what state health officials say is another disease borne by the tiny deer tick.


Sputtering Syracuse Wins
LEAD: Army gave Syracuse a battle today.
The Cadets held on to a 7-0 lead until late in the third period, but at the end, the Orange, stronger although hardly better, had prevailed and won by 10-7.


Pamela Phillips, Lawyer, Is a Bride
LEAD: Pamela Kim Phillips, the daughter of Nancy Phillips of Jacksonville, Fla., and John Phillips of Charleston, S.C., and R. Richard Zanghetti, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mario Zanghetti of Fishers Island, N.Y., were married yesterday at Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic Church on Fishers Island.
The Rev.
Edward


WHAT IF...?
LEAD: The FANTASY IS AS OLD AS ''CINDERELLA'' and as new as ''Working Girl.'' A little makeup, a new hairstyle, some expensive clothes and a good pair of shoes magically transform a woman from scullery maid/secretary into princess/executive.


End of a Yard Sale: Sore Feet, Rejected Dolls
LEAD: I HELD a yard sale last week.
I knew it would be a smashing success.
I would dispose of memorabilia accumulated since college, the first years of marriage and my daughter's infancy and make room for the trappings of middle age and preadolescence.
And, I would earn a lot of money.


Deng Reappears, Saying China Will Seek Change
LEAD: Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, reappeared today after three months of seclusion to declare that China would continue its reform policies, but he suggested that the country would from here on pay more attention to ideology.


Child Care: A Need That Keeps On Growing
LEAD: AS the number of working mothers increases daily, so does the need for child care.


CAMPUS LIFE: Grinnell; Campus Housing For Gay Students Being Considered
LEAD: The president of Grinnell College said last week that the college was seriously considering including lesbian and gay couples in residences that would be established for married students.


Sports of The Times; The Mad Monk's Banned Banner
LEAD: Knowing that radio station WHTZ-FM had already stirred Yankee fans to bring signs and banners to Friday night's game, knowing that the American Civil Liberties Union had protested his security officer's strongarm tactics in banning signs critical of him two weeks ago, baseball's most tiresome proof of free speech, George Steinbrenner, upheld the Constitution with all the democracy he could muster.


The Ear In the Mirror
LEAD: To the Editor:


Disposable Society Jettisons Values Too
LEAD: IN a recent newspaper interview, one of New York's trend-spotters and consultants summed up a troublesome syndrome that has overtaken society in the disposable 80's.


Photocopying Centers: A New Slice of Life In the Wee Still Hours
LEAD: The paper sign - soggy and forlorn - was taped to a lamppost at Eighth Street and Broadway.
The photocopied message said:


CARPETS AND COOKIES
LEAD: It was awfully nice of Jack Rosenthal to take me back to my childhood in Boston by mentioning an old Boston radio jingle. (On Language: ''Diluting the Awe by Some,'' Aug. 20).
However, the jingle was not an advertisement for an all-night drugstore, but, rather, for a carpet-cleaning company called Adams &amp; Swett, which is still located in Boston.


Some Fear U.S. Rocket Industry Will Fizzle Out
LEAD: The nation's fledgling private rocket industry could fail in the next few years unless extraordinary steps are taken to insure its survival, aerospace experts say.


THE BUZZARDS ABOVE, THE CANE BELOW
LEAD: BIG SUGAR Seasons in the Cane Fields of Florida.
By Alec Wilkinson. 263 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.
By Richard J. Margolis IN 1951, President Harry S. Truman's Commission on Migratory Labor examined farm worker conditions nationwide and concluded that what held the system together was human misfortune.


New Barriers to Homeless at Station
LEAD: Although the stately marble waiting room of Grand Central Terminal has been sealed off behind a plywood wall since early this month, the half-million people who dash through the station each day have hardly been inconvenienced.


Susan A. Johnston, Lawyer, Is Wed To William F. Lattimer in Maryland
LEAD: At Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Bethesda, Md., Susan Alice Johnston, a daughter of Ernest S. Johnston Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Anne M. Johnston, was married yesterday to William Franklin Lattimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Preston D. Lattimer of Danville, Calif.
The Rev.
Leonard Bachmann performed the ceremony.


Deborah J. Savin Marries
LEAD: Deborah J. Savin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Savin of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married in New York last evening to Steven L. Scoggan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lowell Scoggan of Boulder, Colo., by Cantor Robert Abelson at the Hotel Pierre.
The couple own and operate ''Z'' Place, a private club in Park City, Utah.


Linda Cornelius Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Linda Louise Cornelius, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adam Edward Cornelius Jr. of Buffalo, was married in New York yesterday to Andrew Arthur Neisser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Neisser of Newport Beach, Calif.
Acting Justice Richard L. Price of State Supreme Court in the Bronx officiated at Loeb Boathouse in Central


Late Summer Vegetables, Decorative and Abundant
LEAD: LATE summer vegetables, which are still in abundance through early fall, make particularly decorative sauces for pasta.
For a dish that is immediately satisfying, both to the eye and the palate, take some juicy sun-ripened tomatoes, chop them up and mix them with basil and a green olive oil and serve them on hot spaghetti.


Repairing a Dripping Faucet
LEAD: AS a rule, fixing a dripping faucet is easy.
This article describes repairing compression faucets (pictured), the most common kind.


Miss Macdonald Weds B. C. Twomey
LEAD: Melinda Macdonald, a vice president in the investment banking division of Shearson Lehman Hutton in New York, and Barry Cornelius Twomey, a vice president with AMEV Venture Management, a venture capital company in New York, were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Englewood, N.J.


Athletes Make Leap to New Life
LEAD: On Willie Davis Day in Green Bay, Wis., the guest of honor stood on Lambeau Field, where he had played for 12 years, and cried because he recognized that this would be the last time people would cheer for him as a football player.


Robina Ramsay Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Robina Kate Evelyn Ramsay, the daughter of Donna Cook Hazen of Brooklyn and Robin Ramsay of Sydney, Australia, was married yesterday to Nathaniel Joseph Litwak, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Eugene Litwak of Scarsdale, N.Y., at the Esterwood Mansion at the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Judge Louise Gruner-Gans of New York City Civil


McCoy Tyner
LEAD: McCoy Tyner, a pianist, is leading a trio tonight at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street (242-1785).
Sets begin at 10 P.M. and midnight; there is a $15 cover tonight and tomorrow, $12 on Sunday, with a $6 minimum.


GIVING UP GUNS
LEAD: I have no quarrel with Dennis Graham's motives for giving up owning or using firearms; that's his right.
I personally advocate the National Rifle Association's position in regards to the private ownership of firearms as guaranteed by the Second Amendment.


Freedom of Love
LEAD: Storybook romance?
Well, they did meet at a bookstore and the Prince proposed a year later while walking her home from the university where she was studying.
Last week, the ''love marriage'' - as opposed to an arranged marriage - between Prince Aya, the 23-year-old second son of the Emperor and Empress of Japan, and Kiko Kawashima, a commoner, also 23, was formally approved by the Imperial Household Council, a 10-member body headed by Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  THE ROAD TO JOY: The Letters of Thomas Merton to New and Old Friends.
Edited by Robert E. Daggy. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.95.) Thomas Merton was, in his mind, at all times a monk.
His other vocation, the writing of poetry and books, was secondary.
He treated his writing, which was influential in the secular and spiritual worlds, as an ''addiction'' that sometimes needed curbing.


Scotch's New International Status
LEAD: To Alastair Robertson, manager of the Glenkinchie Distillery here, the pleasing perfume of Scotch whisky breathing in oak casks as it ages for 10 years is the sharp, sweet smell of success.


Giants' Defense Set For Run and Shoot
LEAD: It's wide open. It's alive. It's different. It's dangerous.


Janet Jackson Adopts a New Attitude: Concern
LEAD: Janet Jackson's older brother Michael staked out the world as his pop territory when his ''Thriller'' created a new order of magnitude for a best-selling recording.
She got a taste of mass pop success with her 1986 album, ''Control,'' which sold five million copies in the United States.
Its sequel, ''Janet Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814'' (A&amp;M SP 3920, LP, cassette and


Tourist Grabs Mugger on IRT and Is Slashed
LEAD: A 32-year-old Swiss tourist was stabbed in the face yesterday after he grabbed one of four men who had robbed him and three other tourists on a downtown No. 1 subway train, the transit police said.


Question Of the Week; What Must Mets Do In Stretch Drive?
LEAD: To win, the Mets must bench Darryl Strawberry, play Keith Hernandez and learn how to score runs from third base on outs.
LARRY LEVINSON  New York


On the Plan to Revise Special Education
LEAD: As teachers implementing the Plan to Revise Special Education in New Jersey, we wish to clarify some of the information in ''Plan to Revamp Special Education Draws Criticism.''


Maine Lobsters
LEAD: To the Editor: It is doubtful if Cynthia Hacinli caught ''a glimpse of trawlers, their nets full of hundreds of lobsters'' coming into Five Islands (''No-Frill Lobster on Maine's Coast,'' Travel, Aug. 13).
It is illegal to catch lobsters in nets.


Review/ Opera; Drama On and Off Stage For a Catalani Rarity
LEAD: During the grand procession of the Festa del Volto Santo, or the Feast of the Moving Saint, on Wednesday evening -after which Lucca's opera season traditionally begins - the management of the Teatro del Giglio must have offered its own set of prayers.


Rain and Fines, but Mostly Rain, Slow Burning of Amazon Forest in Brazil
LEAD: Plumes of gray smoke are once again rising over the green sea of Amazonian rain forest surrounding this city.
But preliminary survey figures from this year's dry season point to a new trend: a marked drop in burning.


Geralyn Geany Becomes Bride
LEAD: Geralyn Mary Geany, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph Geany of Vero Beach, Fla., and Osterville, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Michael Heffernan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heffernan, of Worcester and Harwich, Mass.
The Rev.
Francis C. Mackin performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius of Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill,


At Least 15 Killed in Philippine Landslide


Martha Monserrate, Consultant, Weds
LEAD: Martha Lee Monserrate, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Patrick Monserrate of Binghamton, N.Y., was married yesterday to Herbert Hardinge McDade 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McDade Jr. of Scarborough, N.Y., and Denver.
The Rev.
William Bradley officiated at Our Lady of Mercy Roman Catholic Church in Port Chester, N


Would-Be Geniuses
LEAD: To the Editor:


CATCHES OF THE DAY: SOME CURIOSITIES
LEAD: There is nothing as elemental to the sport of angling as the fish hook.
Whether the hooks are great, heavy-gauged models for billfish or tiny, fine-wired versions for trout, they excel at their express purpose: to connect fishermen with fish.


MEN OF THE WORLD
LEAD: THEY live on planes, shop in airports, trade in foreign capitals, feel at home on seven continents.
In the language of fashion, their vocabulary is concise: one suit, one suitcase, a 48-hour watch.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  THE BREAKTHROUGH: The Race for the Superconductor, by Robert M. Hazen. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A scientist gives an inside account of the race to discover and patent higher-temperature superconductors. ''The result is both dramatic and fair-minded,'' Christopher Lehmann-Haupt said in The Times last year.


Happy Hour Begins On the L.I.R.R. 5:47
LEAD: SWAPPING their briefcases for fishing poles, about 35 commuters on the Long Island Rail Road's 5:47 P.M. train to Huntington embarked on an all-day fishing trip from Captree State Park earlier this summer.


A Year of Years for the High Priest of Modernism
LEAD: In April, it was the glass pyramid of the Louvre, a structure that has become the virtual symbol of the remaking of Paris.
Then just a little more than a week ago in Dallas came the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, the most expensive and elaborate concert hall in a generation, and later this year it will be the new 70-story skyscraper headquarters of the Bank of China, already a landmark on the skyline of Hong Kong - three buildings that have little in common except the fact that each has won headlines around the world, and each is a design of I.M.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on June 11 misidentified a new development on Nantucket, and its location.
A reader has recently written to point out that it was the Cliffside Beach Club, overlooking Jetties Beach.


Vichy Aide Accused in Jewish Children's Deaths
LEAD: An association of children of Jews deported during World War II has filed a complaint accusing Rene Bousquet, a former police chief in France's Vichy Government, of crimes against humanity.


Rep. Frank Says He May Consider Retiring
LEAD: Representative Barney Frank says he would consider retiring at the end of his term if the investigation of his relations with a male prostitute damages the causes he considers important.


Penn State Routs Temple, 42-3
LEAD: Blair Thomas rushed for 138 yards and two touchdowns and Tom Bill passed for 192 yards and two scores today as Penn State defeated Temple, 42-3.


DENG IS REPORTED TO NAME HIS HEIR, THE PARTY CHIEF
LEAD: Deng Xiaoping has proposed that the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, be his heir as China's paramount leader, according to a confidential report of two ''informal talks'' between Mr.
Deng and other senior officials.


INSIDE
LEAD:  2 Fronts of the Drug War:


Tax Watch; Acountants Laud Ways and Means
LEAD: OPTIMISTIC that the cut in capital gains taxes and other tax-law changes sought by business would pass the House of Representatives, tax professionals late last week applauded the action of the House Ways and Means Committee in overcoming the Democratic leaders to advance such a bill.


Win Ugly, Live Ugly
LEAD: In sports, they call it ''winning ugly,'' a celebration of the sneak punch, the bent rule, the shredded spirit of the game that makes losers of us all.
It's no different, only more dangerous, in the real game.
In politics this season in New York City, nobody will win unless two basically decent men can control their teams' impulse to believe the prize more important than the struggle.


Ismail Stymies Michigan Drive
LEAD: The defensive linemen and the linebackers in the Notre Dame defense, two questionable areas after the loss of three starters before the start of the season, were in the process of holding Michigan to its lowest total of rushing yardage since the 1987 Rose Bowl.


Roadway Motor Plazas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Motor Plazas Inc.
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
29,648,667
27,466,002
Net inc
216,720
428,172
Share earns
.04
.08


Hudson Spill Cleanup Could Take Two Weeks
LEAD: It could take weeks to mop up a dense oil spill that closed the Hudson River for 11 hours Saturday, officials said.


Xeta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xeta Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
765,000
1,921,000
Net inc
343,000
151,000
Share earns
.17
.08
9mo sales
4,078,000
4,003,000
Net loss
120,000
b81,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


New Bank to Emphasize Aid to Small Borrowers
LEAD: When Lyndon B. Comstock was trying to raise money in the 1970's for a low- and middle-income housing cooperative in Berkeley, Calif., he was so disheartened by bankers' refusal to lend money that he resolved to start his own bank.


New Worries May Emerge On Inflation
LEAD: After receding for much of the summer, worries about inflation could well re-emerge this fall, credit market analysts said.


Dolphins Top Patriots, 24-10
LEAD: Dan Marino, who had struggled against New England for most of his career, threw three first-half touchdown passes, and the Miami Dolphins capitalized on botched punt plays on the Patriots' first two possessions for a 24-10 victory today.


Cascade Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cascade Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
39,225,000
34,570,000
Net inc
2,975,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.50
.47
6mo sales
79,520,000
69,715,000
Net inc
5,705,000
5,805,000
Share earns
.95
.97


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  Deng Xiaoping has named his heir as China's paramount leader, according to a confidential report.
The heir is the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin.
Page A1


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HRE Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,233,000
c1,534,000
Share earns
.37
.26
9mo net inc
b4,819,000
c5,092,000
Share earns
.80
.86
b-After capital gains of $1,320,000, or 22 cents a share, for the quarter and $1,562,000, or 26 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Ms. Benou Weds Real-Estate Broker
LEAD: Denise Rachele Benou, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Benou of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Todd Abram Stires, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Stires of Somerville and Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
Timothy Mulder performed the ceremony at the Bedminster (N.J.) Reformed Church.


National League; Pirates and Drabek Beat Cubs
LEAD: Doug Drabek, who has been a good pitcher for a bad team, seems to save his best for the National League's best teams, especially the Cubs.


Citicorp Merger Expert Joins Commodity Trader
LEAD: Gordon F. Wolf, a top merger and acquisition executive, has left Citicorp to join the Golodetz Group, a privately held New York commodity trading firm that is expanding its leveraged buyout business.


Concord Camera Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Camera Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,889,650
3,990,187
Net inc
304,312
821,483
Share earns
.07
.27
Shares outst
4,147,334
3,000,400
Yr sales
24,774,678
19,296,411
Net inc
2,537,590
2,639,102
Share earns
.62
.88
Shares outst
4,103,590
3,000,400


Question Box
LEAD:  Always on Base  Q. Did any major leaguer ever have a season with at least 400 times at bat in which he reached base more than half the times he batted?
A.
You can count on one hand the number of players who have done it since 1900.
On the other hand, only two players really matter - Babe Ruth and Ted Williams - because they dominated this particular aspect of batting, doing it seven of the nine times it was accomplished.


Docugraphix Inc reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Docugraphix Inc
Year to April 30
1989
1988
Revenue
448,547
237,895
Net loss
983,661
1,870,011


Latest in Tennis Shoes
LEAD: A tennis shoe manufacturer has become the first footwear company to make use of CoolMax, a Du Pont fiber designed to draw moisture from the skin and dry faster than conventional materials.


Effect of I.R.A.'s on Savings
LEAD: A Congressional study indicates that the nation's savings rate fell sharply after Congress slashed tax deductions for most individual retirement accounts in 1986.


Union Official Views G.M. Efforts Warily
LEAD: A slight but perceptible chill has settled on the strained relations between the United Automobile Workers union and the General Motors Corporation, arriving in Stephen P. Yokich, the union's new vice president for G.M. affairs.


50-Off Stores Inc reports earnings for 13wk to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 50-Off Stores Inc
13wk to Aug 4
1989
1988
Sales
11,905,000
8,599,000
Net inc
b108,000
c89,000
Share earns
.01
-
26wk sales
24,665,347
16,595,616
Net inc
b758,849
c183,479
Share earns
.26
.02
b-After extraordinary tax benefits of $37,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $258,000, or 11 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Distributed Logic reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Distributed Logic (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,780,664
12,893,908
Net inc
7,229
b175,863
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
37,923,381
39,846,862
Net inc
34,315
b320,944
Share earns
.03
-
b


Sports of The Times; L.T., as in 'Leadership Thing'
LEAD: IN other years, Lawrence Taylor often was the last Giants player to arrive at a team meeting.
After he finally wandered in, he sometimes fell asleep instead of watching films and listening to the coaches.
But when the Giants' defensive unit was scheduled to meet before last Friday's practice, the linebacker known as L.T.


Savings Bond Sales Up
LEAD: Sales of United States savings bonds rose $622 million in August, pushing the value of savings bonds held by Americans past $115 billion for the first time, the Treasury Department reported Friday.
The August sales were 2.5 percent higher than July's sales of $607 million and brought total purchases for the first 11 months of the 1989 fiscal year to $7.2 billion, up 7 percent from the corresponding period a year earlier.


Judge Bars Destruction Of Iran-Contra Records
LEAD: A Federal judge refused Friday to dismiss a lawsuit seeking to prohibit the Government from destroying material generated on National Security Council computers in the Reagan Administration.


GATT Sees Trade Gains
LEAD: The volume of world merchandise trade is expected to increase by about 7 percent in 1989, and growth will probably remain strong in the next few years, the international trade body GATT said Friday.


Queens Teamster Seeks Union's Top Office
LEAD: The president of a New York City teamsters local who has sometimes challenged the parent organization's officers announced his candidacy yesterday for international president in the union's first direct election that will use secret ballots.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Campeau Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campeau Corp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,256,000,000
2,208,000,000
Net loss
b124,000,000
d109,000,000
6mo rev
4,486,000,000
2,953,000,000
Net loss
c191,000,000
e64,000,000
Share earns
-
1.33
b-After a pretax gain of $24 million on the sale of assets.


Police Shoot Robbery Suspect
LEAD: A police officer shot a robbery suspect in the arm last night in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, the police said.
Two armed men were holding up the Pioneer Supermarket at 602 West 185th Street, and one pointed a gun at officers who had been called, a police spokesman said.
The wounded man, who was not identified, was taken to the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


For Yale's Offense, The Wishbone Fits
LEAD: In Ivy League football, a coach fits his system to whatever material comes through the admissions office, and Carm Cozza has fit the wishbone to the Yale team this year.


BBC Finds America Is a Cable-Ready Market
LEAD: The British Broadcasting Corporation, the largest television production company in the world, has always been a minor merchant in the largest television market in the world, the United States.


Campeau Loan Pact Called Final
LEAD: With many suppliers delaying, reducing or canceling shipments of merchandise to stores operated by its Federated and Allied groups, the Campeau Corporation has reportedly reached a final agreement with its lenders on a $250 million loan.


Tie Long-Term Care To Social Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sandata Inc reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandata Inc (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,443,968
8,531,847
Net inc
216,436
170,456
Share earns
.09
.07


Jim Wright As Speaker For Texans
LEAD: Jim Wright, former Speaker of the House, was greeted as a beloved elder by about 3,000 Democrats who ate barbecue and danced the two-step last weekend at a fund-raising party on a ranch outside Austin.


Audio-Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audio-Video Affiliates (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
34,003,000
46,172,000
Net loss
1,198,000
c980,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
6,231,000
11,405,000
6mo sales
65,723,000
86,715,000
Net loss
b1,627,000
c1,044,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
8,056,000
11,505,000


Body of Teacher Is Found in Car On an L.I. Street
LEAD: The body of a Bensonhurst high school teacher who disappeared 12 days ago was found Saturday in a car in Uniondale, L.I.


Vaughn Communications reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vaughn Communications
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,781,000
6,322,000
Net loss
846,000
935,000
6mo rev
13,070,000
12,009,000
Net loss
913,000
1,056,000


New Jersey Symphony Rejects Contract
LEAD: The musicians of the New Jersey Symphony voted Friday afternoon to reject the latest contract offered them by the orchestra's management.
In a vote of 40 to 14, however, the players ratified an agreement to continue working under the terms of their old contract - which expired Friday - while the negotiations for a new one continue.


Drug Witness Resurfaces in Spokane and in Trouble
LEAD: A man whose battle with crack dealers on his Queens street made him a hero to some and led to the fatal shooting of Police Officer Edward Byrne, has blown his cover in the Federal Witness Protection Program after a dispute with the police in his new home, Spokane, Wash., the authorities said yesterday.


Southern Electronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Electronics Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
23,048,000
16,615,000
Net inc
b851,000
251,000
Share earns
.30
.08
Shares outst
2,784,000
2,771,000
Yr sales
91,233,000
56,085,000
Net inc
b2,649,000
983,000
Share earns
.91
.32
Shares outst
2,782,000
2,718,000


Applied Research Corp reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Research Corp
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,328,654
5,873,702
Net inc
80,546
b36,622
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss  Revenue represented contract revenue.


Luria (L.) &amp; Son Inc(A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luria (L.) &amp; Son Inc(A)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,934,000
43,928,000
Net inc
52,000
386,000
Share earns
.01
.07
6mo rev
87,526,000
86,336,000
Net inc
b236,000
c1,043,000
Share earns
.04
.19


Taiwan Weighs Labor Imports
LEAD: Taiwan may admit up to 6,000 workers from abroad next year to help build important Government projects stalled by a severe labor shortage, a senior official said on Friday.


Yesterday, At Least, New York Was Book Country


Benji Makovitzky Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Benji Ann Makovitzky, a daughter of Mimi L. Feinstein of Valley Stream, L.I., and Jacob Makovitzky of New York, was married yesterday to Arthur David Baer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Baer of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.


Friendships and Fear Undermine A Will to Fight Drugs in Brooklyn
LEAD: George Rivera says he knows better than most young men that he took the right path in life.


Elizabeth Huber Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Alton Huber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Clark Huber of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jason Lee Port, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Port of Whitestone, Queens.
Walter Lawton, leader emeritus of the Westchester Ethical Culture Society in White Plains, performed the ceremony at the Siwanoy Country Club in Bronxville.


Waters Instruments Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waters Instruments Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,757,000
3,222,000
Net inc
102,000
19,000
Share earns
.07
.01
6mo sales
6,873,000
6,159,000
Net inc
184,000
b26,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


Tremor in Southern Mexico
LEAD: A tremor shook southern Mexico on Saturday, but no damage or injuries were reported, the National Seismological Service said.
A tremor registering 5.2 on the Richter scale, a quake capable of considerable damage, occurred at 5:21 P.M. in the southern state of Oaxaca.
It lasted 15 seconds and was felt in Mexico City, 310 miles away.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Anti-Fashion Statement For Fashions
LEAD: LIKE a roundhouse punch, the word ''Everlast'' has charged out of magazines of late, its enormous black letters as distinct from the elegant photographs of designer suits as Mike Tyson is from Tom Wolfe.
With it, a company known better inside gyms than to the outside world served graphic notice on


Israel Is Sending Rabin to Cairo On Voting Plan
LEAD: The Israeli Cabinet agreed today to send Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin to Cairo on Monday to begin discussions of the 10-point proposal by the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, for holding Palestinian elections in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


Diversified Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Foods
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,543,578
35,704,566
Net loss
1,482,816
b151,955
Share earns
-
.40
6mo rev
42,445,536
69,911,107
Net loss
2,586,556
b208,587
Share earns
-
.62


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Aug. 17 about Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company referred incompletely to the firm's own investment in RJR Nabisco Inc.
In addition to its $56 million share in the Kohlberg, Kravis investment pool that won control of RJR, Kohlberg, Kravis has invested $80 million in RJR directly.


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
43,494,000
49,473,000
Net inc
390,000
c487,000
Share earns
.08
.10
9mo sales
170,076,000
174,470,000
Net inc
b1,270,000
c1,161,000
Share earns
.27
.24


Dataphaz Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataphaz Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
29,702,000
25,923,000
Net loss
309,000
638,000
6mo rev
54,271,000
40,862,000
Net loss
868,000
577,000


Bid for First Pennsylvania
LEAD: Meridian Bancorp Inc. said it would raise its estimated $704 million bid for the First Pennsylvania Corporation to surpass an offer made by the Corestates Financial Corporation.


American League; Blue Jays Win, 2-1, On Hit by McGriff
LEAD: Fred McGriff took advantage of an open left field, lofting a run-scoring single in the 10th inning as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Cleveland Indians, 2-1, today for a three-game sweep.


A Science and Math Teaching Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Club Med Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Club Med Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
99,551,000
88,894,000
Net loss
2,687,000
5,208,000
9mo rev
368,657,000
321,339,000
Net inc
20,323,000
10,367,000
Share earns
1.44
.73


Cenvill Development reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvill Development (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,461,000
34,785,000
Net inc
119,000
1,371,000
Share earns
.01
.10
9mo rev
92,344,000
113,361,000
Net inc
3,085,000
4,750,000
Share earns
.21
.33


Drug Violence Prompts U.S. To Protect Bush's Children
LEAD: The White House said tonight that each of President Bush's five children had been placed under ''light'' surveillance for the first time as a precaution brought about by concern over Colombian drug violence.


Political Memo; The Drug War Becomes a Budget War
LEAD: President Bush's drug policy has become the latest battlefield in the budget wars between Congressional Democrats and the Administration, exposing the frustrations, suspicions and outright hostilities that now surround the Federal budget.


Dr. Gale Wernick Marries a Lawyer
LEAD: Dr.
Gale H. Wernick, a dentist in New York, and Charles T. Theofan of the Mineola, L.I., law firm of Levin, Theofan &amp; Carra, were married in New York yesterday at the Water Club.
Justice Helen Freedman of State Supreme Court in New York officiated.


Flexwatt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexwatt Corp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
464,136
297,255
Net loss
119,204
262,254
6mo rev
747,055
354,178
Net loss
413,730
758,711


Homeless at Melodrama Add a Dickensian Touch
LEAD: When she bought her permit to stage a play in the 79th Street boat basin, Leslie Sara Carroll was assured by the Parks Department that the homeless who have been living there would be removed before she rang up whatever passed for a curtain - the stage being in the middle of a dry fountain.


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worthington Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
228,049,000
226,530,000
Net inc
11,135,000
12,861,000
Share earns
.28
.32
Shares outst
40,085,000
40,651,000


For Developing Countries, Debt Payments Outstrip Aid
LEAD: Despite record foreign aid disbursements by the World Bank and large donor countries like Japan, developing countries were so encumbered by debt obligations last year that they paid $50 billion more to creditors than they received in new aid, the World Bank reported today.


Eaton Vance Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Vance Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,524,000
3,307,000
Share earns
.95
.88
9mo net inc
6,508,000
8,974,000
Share earns
1.75
2.25
The company did not release revenue information.


Third World Shifts Focus of Chemical-Arms Talks
LEAD: More than 60 nations will gather in Australia on Monday to discuss the problem of chemical weapons.
But the conference is already headed in a different direction from that originally planned by the Bush Administration.


Lord Trafford, 57, Britain's Health Minister
LEAD: Lord Trafford, Minister of State for Health, died on Saturday of lung cancer, the Government announced.
He was 57 years old.


Thibaudeau Shines As Islanders Win
LEAD: In defeating the Rangers, 5-2, in an exhibition game at Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Islanders got an impressive performance from a free agent with remarkable offensive attributes.


Yeltsin Leaves for Moscow
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the Soviet politician, left the United States for Moscow today, moments after placing an order for $100,000 worth of disposable hypodermic needles to help the fight against AIDS in the Soviet Union.
Earlier today, before winding up an eight-day tour of the country, Mr.
Yeltsin told guests at his last official function here that his nation would one day be as democratic as the United States.


U.S. Defeats El Salvador
LEAD: Hugo Perez, a Salvadoran-born midfielder with American citizenship, scored 16 minutes into the second half today to give the United States a 1-0 victory over El Salvador in a World Cup qualifying game.


Review/Television; 'The Famous Teddy Z,'' Mailroom to Press Agent
LEAD: Having just spent time drifting in military service and resisting his Greek grandmother's entreaties to work in the family bakery, 23-year-old Teddy Zakalokis takes a job in the mailroom of Hollywood's Unlimited Talent Agency.
Scrawny, earnest, boyish Teddy, a sort of Henry Aldrich for our times, is not terribly ambitious, but within days, he finds himself being made a press agent at a salary of $50,000.


An Electoral Example for the Country
LEAD: Last week's primary election ended the first practical test of New York City's new public campaign financing system.
The campaign exposed a number of flaws, but the system worked remarkably well to curb the influence of wealthy favor-seekers.
The experience offers several live lessons for the country.


Felicia R. Miller Weds Physician
LEAD: Felicia Robin Miller, the daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Amos W. Miller of Lido Beach, L.I., and Dr.
Benjamin Judah Leeman, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Albert J. Leeman of Riverdale, the Bronx, were married yesterday at Congregation Beth Sholom in Long Beach, L.I.
The bride's father and the bridegroom's father jointly performed the ceremony.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Virco Manufacturing (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
52,333,000
46,014,000
Net inc
668,000
705,000
Share earns
.22
.23
6mo sales
87,736,000
87,177,000
Net inc
74,000
247,000
Share earns
.02
.08


Mother Teresa in Discomfort
LEAD: Mother Teresa developed mild chest pains today, but doctors treating the Nobel laureate said her condition was stable.
Doctors said that the 79-year-old Roman Catholic nun had contracted a malaria parasite but that the parasite was not the cause of a recurring fever.
A statement from the Woodlands Nursing Home, where she is recovering from a heart attack, said her condition did not change during the day.


Drums Herald the Harvest


Books of The Times; A Portrait of Jerusalem, in Its Many Excesses
LEAD:  Jerusalem  City of Mirrors  By Amos Elon  With maps. 286 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


The Editorial Notebook; Destiny in Lebanon
LEAD: A vital but forgotten bit of history helps make sense out of the tragic chaos in Lebanon.
The key year was 1920, when Lebanon's Maronite Christian community prevailed on France to draw boundaries that doubled the size of the Ottoman province of Gran Liban.
This meant that predominantly Muslim areas, including the Bekaa Valley, were incorporated into what became the Republic of Lebanon, with a Western-style


Judith E. Mizrahi Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Stony Hill Inn in Hackensack, N.J., Judith Elana Mizrahi, a freelance photographer, was married yesterday to Joel Nathaniel Barkow, a freelance television and film property assistant.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Mordechai Goldstein.


International Barrier Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Barrier Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
169,000
-
Net loss
428,000
114,000
Shares outst
1,537,000
536,000
9mo rev
1,086,000
2,033,000
Net loss
1,001,000
69,000
Shares outst
1,368,000
536,000


Spec's Music Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spec's Music Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,087,000
8,629,000
Net inc
425,000
470,000
Share earns
.08
.09
Yr rev
40,152,000
32,531,000
Net inc
2,437,000
1,815,000
Share earns
.45
.34


Amre Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amre Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
62,221,000
40,051,000
Net inc
b2,121,000
c2,370,000
Share earns
.15
.18
Shares outst
14,148,000
13,067,000
b-After income of $203,000, or 1 cent a share, from discontinued operations.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,934,640,000
1,816,083,000
Net inc
278,075,000
304,505,000
Share earns
3.10
3.50


Inmac Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inmac Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
59,757,000
54,434,000
Net loss
b9,179,000
c2,419,000
Share earns
-
.25
Yr sales
249,515,000
222,827,000
Net loss
b6,414,000
c9,712,000
Share earns
-
1.02


Vallen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vallen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
25,319,000
22,557,000
Net inc
1,074,000
1,025,000
Share earns
.74
.71


Ideology Dominated The Fortas Battle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hurricane Pummels Resort Islands of Caribbean
LEAD: A hurricane with winds of up to 150 miles per hour churned over the small islands of the eastern Caribbean today, leaving at least nine people dead and thousands homeless, then roared into the Virgin Islands.


The Color of Money Can Stop Drugs
LEAD: The Bush plan for dealing with drugs is good and should be tried.


Tradition Brings Controversy
LEAD: When it comes to Southern chauvinism, Confederate style, few institutions can claim as dedicated a record as the Citadel, the military College of South Carolina in Charleston.


Moscow Journal; Where to Put Lenin, Not to Mention His Pedestal
LEAD: For decades, Lenin's mysterious power in stone and bronze has gripped this nation -his sculpted glare beaming condor-like from every hamlet pedestal, his granite hand held in visionary gesture even as Communism's future clouded over.


Domestic Coaching
LEAD: Since the arrival of Vyacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov, the two Soviet defensemen, Dimitri Lopuchin has been arguably the most important member of the Devils' organization.
He has also been the busiest.


First Family Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Family Group (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,300,000
16,600,000
Net inc
138,000
12,000
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
35,000,000
30,200,000
Net loss
172,000
590,000


Braniff Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Braniff Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
153,059,000
132,631,000
Net loss
19,997,000
b4,512,000
Share earns
-
.33
6mo rev
293,002,000
226,487,000
Net loss
42,777,000
3,633,000
b-Net income


Durkin Hayes Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durkin Hayes Publishing
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,113,239
-
Net inc
73,224
-
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
2,226,597
-
Net inc
114,300
-
Share earns
.02
-
The company has changed its fiscal year-end to Dec.


Mets Again Fail To Gain Ground
LEAD: The Mets headed for Chicago tonight and they were straggling not swaggering, beaten not bold.
And they were second, not first, and still five and a half games behind the Cubs with only 14 left to play.


Use of Extinct Name Rattles Dinosaur Lobby
LEAD: The United States Postal Service, which will issue four stamps on Oct. 1 to celebrate dinosaurs, is using an extinct name for one of them, and the paleontological lobby is annoyed.


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carrington Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,683,000
1,734,000
Net loss
383,000
885,000
9mo sales
7,621,000
5,624,000
Net loss
1,299,000
2,751,000
Carrington said it received $677,000 in this year's third quarter from the exercise of stock options and warrants, primarily by employees.


10,000 Attend Rap Concert To Call Attention to Racism
LEAD: About 10,000 people attended a rally and concert in Harlem yesterday in memory of Yusuf K. Hawkins, a black youth who was killed last month in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn in what the police say was a racially motivated attack.


Cut Is Urged In Oil Award
LEAD: A retired Federal judge has decreased the amount of damages recommended for French oyster growers who lost shellfish in the 1978 oil spill from the supertanker Amoco Cadiz, lawyers said last week.


Hispanic Citizens Sworn In
LEAD: Nearly 4,000 Hispanic people were sworn in as United States citizens on Saturday in a ceremony at the Weingart Stadium that coincided with celebrations of Mexico's Independence Day.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Aventek Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., an industrial products manufacturer, said Gary G. Harmon was resigning as chief financial officer and secretary to pursue other business opportunities.


2 Die as Casino Train Runs Into Stalled Car
LEAD: On the first day of N.J.
Transit's commuter service to Atlantic City, a casino-bound train collided with a car in a suburb of Camden yesterday, killing the car's two occupants and injuring 10 people on the train.


Karen Strauss Weds Stephen Filler
LEAD: Karen Randy Strauss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Strauss of North Woodmere, L.I., and Highland Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Stephen Charles Filler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Filler of Toronto.
Rabbi Morris Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere.


Optical Radiation Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optical Radiation Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
30,183,000
26,059,000
Net loss
b270,000
cd2,216,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
6,491,000
7,140,000
Yr sales
109,567,000
100,316,000
Net inc
b4,453,000
c8,588,000
Share earns
.66
1.13
Shares outst
6,692,000
7,606,000


Corrections
LEAD: A report last Monday about the marriage of Andrea Jane Raisfeld and William Charles Abranowicz 3d misidentified the bride's father.
He was the late Arthur Raisfeld.
It also referred incorrectly to Harold Hiltzik.
He is the bride's stepfather, and he is not ''the late.''


Bethel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethel Bancorp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
230,799
264,686
Per share
.44
.50


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Bayly Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bayly Corp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,900,000
25,893,000
Net loss
974,000
4,369,000
9mo sales
63,395,000
90,771,000
Net loss
2,560,000
7,243,000


Youth Is Shot to Death At L.I. Birthday Party
LEAD: A 16-year-old high school student was fatally shot Saturday night by a retired New York City corrections officer when the youth refused to leave a birthday party here for the man's 13-year-old daughter, the police said.


United Education &amp; Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Education &amp; Software Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
17,487,000
20,135,000
Net loss
b4,961,000
c1,175,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo rev
38,113,000
42,280,000
Net loss
4,937,000
c2,273,000
Share earns
-
.39


Brooklyn Catholics to Get a New Bishop
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, liberal and independent under the leadership of Bishop Francis J. Mugavero for the last 21 years, will soon be getting a new - and probably more conservative - bishop.
Pope John Paul II is expected to name a replacement for the retiring Bishop Mugavero before the end of the year.


TCA Cable TV Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCA Cable TV Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,246,000
17,690,000
Net inc
2,747,000
2,340,000
Share earns
.11
.10
9mo rev
56,501,000
50,795,000
Net inc
8,544,000
6,269,000
Share earns
.35
.26


For Sellers, Magazines Generate Big Profits
LEAD: The giants who strode through the communications industry in the 1980's, buying every type of publication conceivable, created empires worth billions of dollars.
In the process they sprinkled fortune through much of the kingdom, making many former subjects wealthy and often eager to re-enter the game with new publications.


Ellen Lebetkin Wed to Michael Jahn
LEAD: Ellen Lebetkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Lebetkin of Bay Terrace, Queens, and Michael Jahn, the son of Mrs.
Joseph C. Jahn of Sayville, L.I., and the late Mr.
Jahn, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbi Raymond Singer performed the ceremony.


American Building Mainteance Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Building Mainteance Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
164,045,000
147,922,000
Net inc
2,473,000
1,925,000
Share earns
.63
.50
9mo rev
472,485,000
428,133,000
Net inc
5,885,000
4,657,000
Share earns
1.52
1.21


Schneider Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 5
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schneider Corp
Qtr to Aug 5
1989
1988
Sales
154,846,000
155,851,000
Net inc
311,000
1,961,000
Share earns
.12
.74
9mo sales
471,697,000
484,928,000
Net inc
1,420,000
5,114,000
Share earns
.54
1.93


Ukraine Catholics Hold Huge Mass to Press Soviets
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Ukrainian Catholics joined today in their church's biggest service since World War II to demand that the Kremlin restore the church's legal status and end decades of repression.


DWG Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DWG Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
302,370,000
286,470,000
Net loss
3,335,000
b6,638,000
Share earns
-
.30
Shares outst
24,264,000
21,541,000
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $370,000, or 2 cents a share.


Maybe Not the Best, But Still Winners
LEAD: Senor Pete and Dance Colony are probably not the best 2-year-old colt and filly in New York this year, but both proved to be clearly better than the fields they faced yesterday at Belmont Park.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; A Rush Into the Season of Peak Book Sales
LEAD: SUMMER does not officially end until later this week, but book publishers are already well into their most important season - fall.


Teen-Age Childbearing Must Be Reduced
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Newsday and New York Newsday, to Margeotes, Fertitta &amp; Weiss, with a budget of $5 million.


Senate-House Deadlock May Slow Arms Talks
LEAD: American and Soviet arms control officials will gather at the State Department on Monday morning to discuss their latest ideas.
But as the Bush Administration knows only too well, that is not the only negotiation in town.


MANAGERS FAULTED IN F.A.A. DISMISSALS
LEAD: A House panel's report accuses Federal aviation officials of lying about payroll records and falsifying time sheets to justify dismissing more than 400 air traffic controllers in Chicago in the controllers' strike of 1981.


Voters Facing Stark Choice In New Jersey
LEAD: Seven weeks before New Jersey elects a new governor, voters are being confronted with a stark choice on whom they wish to succeed Gov.
Thomas H. Kean in a state that was once solidly Democratic but whose heart was won over by Republicans during the Reagan revolution in the 1980's.


Mortgage Rates Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages averaged 10.05 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
That was down from 10.17 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders asked an average initial rate of 8.68 percent this week, down from 8.71 percent, Freddie Mac said.


Very Big Spill, Too Little Will
LEAD: Six months after one of its tankers piled into a reef and fouled an Alaskan bay with 11 million gallons of oil, Exxon has declared victory and is heading home.
The company says it has already spent a billion dollars to clean the waters and shorelines of Alaska's Prince William Sound and, with bad weather looming, can do no more until spring.


Softech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Softech Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
10,612,000
10,703,000
Net inc
363,000
401,000
Share earns
.10
.11


U.S. Enters Fairchild Suit
LEAD: The Justice Department has joined a lawsuit that contends Fairchild Industries defrauded the military by selling faulty jet equipment to the Air Force.


Eagles Shock Redskins on Late Rally
LEAD: Wes Hopkins ran 77 yards with a lateral after a fumble recovery, setting up Randall Cunningham's last-minute touchdown pass to Keith Jackson, and the Philadelphia Eagles rallied for a 42-37 victory over the Washington Redskins today.


Biotechnology's Harvest: Plants That Stay Healthy
LEAD: First the tomato.
Then the potato.
And now the cucumber is being manipulated with the tools of genetic engineering.


Campaign Matters; Victory Recipe: Labor, Resolve And a Rainbow
LEAD: Are New Yorkers better off now than when Edward I. Koch was first elected Mayor?


Free Concerts at Weill and Carnegie
LEAD: Two free concerts celebrating American music and featuring past winners of the Carnegie Hall International American Music Competition are to be presented at Weill Recital Hall this week in conjunction with the semifinals and finals of this year's violin contest, which are also open to the public and free.


Ph.D. Is the Intellectual's Moment of Truth; No More Dissertations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Del Monte Deal Seen As Stalled
LEAD: Significant obstacles have developed in RJR Nabisco Inc.'s efforts to sell portions of its Del Monte subsidiary to Citicorp Venture Capital, people familiar with the talks said yesterday.


Harald Thelander, Translator, 80
LEAD: Harald Thelander, a former translator at the United Nations, died of cancer yesterday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 80 years old and lived in Jersey City.


Seeking Relief, Sri Lanka Turns to the Land
LEAD: In an effort to compensate for a shattered tourist industry, underworked factories and a generally worsening economy because of guerrilla violence, the Sri Lankan Government has announced a bold plan to revolutionize the neglected sector: agriculture.


Direct Action Marketing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Direct Action Marketing Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,684,713
9,563,510
Net loss
168,521
bc168,844
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
1,334,804
1,600,230
6mo sales
21,304,755
19,795,264
Net inc
25,402
c447,915
Share earns
.02
.28
Shares outst
1,334,513
1,600,230


As Lebanese Battles Worsen, War Refugees Swamp Cyprus
LEAD: Adolf Debbs recalls losing his eyeglasses and being pushed far beneath the surface of the water by tumbling suitcases when a Syrian shell hit the boat taking him out of the Lebanon a few weeks ago.


Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net inc
748,000
b512,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


Fight on Indian Remains Near End But Questions Linger on the Effect
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution's decision to return the skeletal remains of American Indians when it is requested by tribal descendants is seen by many museum directors and anthropologists as the turning point in a decade-old struggle between Indians and scientists.


Physician Is Wed To Ms. DiBartolo
LEAD: Lorraine Anne DiBartolo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony E. DiBartolo of Todt Hill, S.I., was married in New York yesterday to Dr.
Mark James Flood, a son of John Henry Flood of Mountainside, N.J., and the late Dolly Flood.
The Rev.
James White officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


Missouri Veterinary Student Crowned Miss America 1990
LEAD: Miss Missouri, Debbye Turner, a 23-year-old marimba-playing veterinary student, was crowned Miss America 1990 Saturday night.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 17, 1989:  MONDAY  Bunker Hill Income Secs  Manor Care Inc  NBD Bancorp Inc  Rochester Tel Corp  TUESDAY  Brunswick Corp  Federal Paper Brd Inc  Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos  MONY Real Estate Invs  Upjohn Co


Vocally, Poles Commemorate the Soviet Invasion
LEAD: In religious observances, private visits to cemeteries and in official newspapers, Poland today marked the 50th anniversary of the day when Soviet troops seized eastern sections of Poland, two weeks after the Nazis had invaded from the west to begin World War II.


Russ Togs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russ Togs Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
62,817,000
61,180,000
Net inc
1,781,000
b202,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
119,799,000
122,492,000
Net inc
2,547,000
1,295,000
Share earns
.12
.49


Clabir Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clabir Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
58,194,000
54,392,000
Net loss
6,057,000
3,170,000
6mo sales
93,922,000
94,373,000
Net loss
9,007,000
b1,234,000
Shares outst
17,107,000
10,682,000
b-Net income and after a loss of $299,000 from discontinued operations.


Charleston Journal; Corruption Cases Leave State in Search of Ethics
LEAD: Government corruption was not invented in the state of West Virginia.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Thursday about reactions in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, to David N. Dinkins's victory in the mayoral primary misidentified the street where two residents sat.
It was Bay Ridge Parkway at 20th Avenue.


Peru Oil Deal With Mobil
LEAD: Peru's Government and the Mobil Oil Corporation signed a contract Friday to open for oil exploration much of Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, a region largely under control of leftist rebels and a focus of President Bush's anti-drug strategy.


Admar Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Admar Group
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,601,000
2,826,000
Net inc
50,000
136,000
6mo rev
5,219,000
5,619,000
Net inc
119,000
208,000
Share earns
-
.01


Former Captive of Molester Is Killed in a Hit-Run Crash
LEAD: Steven Stayner, who was kidnapped at the age of 7 and sexually and psychlogically abused until he escaped more than seven years later, was killed Saturday in a hit-and-run traffic accident about 70 miles east of San Francisco.
He was 24 years old.
Mr.
Stayner had been the subject of an NBC miniseries, ''I Know My First Name Is Steven.


AM International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AM International (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
229,304,000
221,106,000
Net inc
13,448,000
b25,942,000
Share earns
.23
-
Yr rev
850,578,000
820,709,000
Net inc
31,008,000
b20,370,000
Share earns
.47
-


Channel One Gets Sponsors
LEAD: Whittle Communications announced yesterday that it had secured $51 million in first-year advertising for Channel One, its commercial newscast for junior and senior high school students.


Driver Is Killed
LEAD: Don Pratt was killed today when his modified stock car crashed into a wall at Pocono International Raceway in the 39th annual Nascar Race of Champions, race officials said.


Opening Up at the Royal National
LEAD: On Sept. 1, 1988, the day Richard Eyre took over as the artistic director of the Royal National Theater, he said that in his nightmares he thought of the National as ''the Chateau d'If on the South Bank'' of the Thames.
The reference, of course, was to ''The Count of Monte Cristo,'' in which the count was imprisoned and tortured in the


Fifty Rattling Cups
LEAD: Theodore Roosevelt convened the nation's governors on the challenge of conservation; Franklin Roosevelt assembled them to help cope with the Great Depression; George Bush has called them together nine days from now - for only the third time in our history - and this time the subject is education.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about the merger of the cellular telephone units of the BellSouth Corporation and the Lin Broadcasting Corporation misidentified a source for data on the largest cellular companies.
It was the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation.


Precision Aerotech reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Aerotech (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
16,759,000
8,798,000
Net loss
b227,000
bc234,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $371,000 for the latest quarter and income from discontinued operations of $267,000, or 8 cents a share, for the year-ago period.


Score Board reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Score Board
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,945,720
1,276,886
Net inc
230,550
c96,600
Share earns
.09
.04
6mo sales
7,305,108
2,712,493
Net inc
b395,112
c313,971
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
2,679,646
2,581,482


Review/Music; American Music of Protest, Politics and Persuasion
LEAD: The Voices of Change series presented by the Hebrew Arts School at its Merkin Concert Hall offers an invigorating panoply of music, even if one might argue that its subtitle -American Music of Protest, Politics and Persuasion - is rather broad.


Canadian Inquiry May Be a First Step
LEAD: A Federal commission's exhaustive investigation into the seamy underside of international sports has given outsiders their first look into a world they had only known through rumor, gossip, innuendo and speculation.


Giants Struggle But Win
LEAD: For the first 35 minutes of today's game, the Detroit Lions' revolutionary run-and-shoot offense had the Giants' defense groping.


RCM Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RCM Technologies
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,059,769
4,379,740
Net loss
149,913
112,446
9mo sales
16,334,905
13,227,227
Net loss
574,741
640,291


General Instrument Corp reports earnings for 13wk to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Instrument Corp (NYSE)
13wk to Aug 27
1989
1988
Revenue
339,975,000
303,771,000
Net inc
23,001,000
21,661,000
Share earns
.72
.65
Shares outst
31,986,000
33,550,000
26wk rev
685,594,000
616,647,000
Net inc
b55,457,000
43,025,000
Share earns
1.69
1.29
Shares outst
32,850,000
33,458,000


Steel Imports Off in July
LEAD: Steel imports fell 5.9 percent, to 1.46 million tons, in July from the previous month and represented 19.3 percent of the domestic supply, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported Friday.
Steel imports for the first seven months of 1989 were 10.2 million tons, down 19.7 percent from the corresponding period last year.


Paul Harvey Named Personality of Year
LEAD: WLS-AM in Chicago was named ''Legendary Station'' and the ABC news commentator Paul Harvey won the personality-of-the-year award in the first Marconi Radio Awards.


Ph.D. Is the Intellectual's Moment of Truth; The Joy of Scholarship
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Graf Campaign For Swissair
LEAD: A new advertising campaign for Swissair depicts neither Switzerland nor airplanes - all part of a strategy to emphasize that the airline flies to European destinations other than Zurich and Geneva.


Foreign Car Dealers' PAC Is Given a Clean Bill
LEAD: The Justice Department has notified a political action committee representing American dealers of foreign cars that it has found no evidence that the group is a foreign agent.


San Juan Racing Association Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* San Juan Racing Association Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,847,939
8,669,016
Net inc
b1,107,319
1,200,260
Share earns
.26
.28
b-Included a loss on sale of investment securities of $12,372.
The latest quarter included interest income of $192,277, compared with $240,235 for year-ago period.


Barfield Near Contract as Season Wanes
LEAD: The sun did not break through until the ninth inning, but by then it was already too late.
Jesse Barfield had swung and missed at a third strike, then returned to the dugout and quietly watched the final moments of another meaningless game at the Stadium.


Bridge
LEAD: The semifinal stage of the Bermuda Bowl world championship for open teams will begin here Monday with Brazil opposing Poland in one match and the United States facing Australia in the other.


'Tragedy of Errors' Engulfs the Corcoran
LEAD: ''We were in the middle and we tried to get out of the middle and we should have faced the fact we were in the middle,'' Dr.
Christina Orr-Cahall said in an interview the other day.


ESPN's 10-Year Journey to the Top
LEAD: It began 10 years ago with a slo-pitch softball game, the Kentucky Brewers versus the Milwaukee Schlitzes.
Now, ESPN's 24-hour, year-round fare on cable television includes the National Football League and the N.C.A.A. basketball playoffs and will add Major League baseball starting next year.


Oil Cleanup Brings Sad Prosperity to Village
LEAD: Instead of hanging salmon to dry this month, as Aleut natives have done for centuries here on the toe of the Kenai Peninsula, John Kvasnikoff was putting up a $3,000 television satellite dish on the bluff next to his home above the sea.


Thor Energy Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thor Energy Resources Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,062,000
525,000
Net inc
266,000
161,000
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
5,930,400
6,350,000
6mo rev
2,134,000
910,000
Net inc
635,000
225,000
Share earns
.11
.04
Shares outst
5,930,400
6,350,000


Outdoors: A Paradise Found in the Minnesota Wilderness
LEAD: OVER the years, I have learned the hard way that, from the standpoint of the fly fisherman, not all wilderness outfitters are created equal.
So when I got ready for a long-anticipated trip into the Quetico-Superior wilderness, I took some care in choosing among the firms located in the town of Ely, Minn., (pop.


Alan R. Wormser Wed to Iris Segall
LEAD: Iris Anne Segall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Segall of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Alan Robert Wormser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen P. Wormser of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Alvin Kass performed the ceremony at the Inn at Longshore in Westport, Conn.


Ambrit Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ambrit Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
58,194,000
54,392,000
Net inc
1,057,000
813,000
Share earns
.06
.05
6mo sales
93,922,000
94,373,000
Net inc
80,000
b4,238,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-After a loss of $299,000 from discontinued operations.


Beauticontrol Cosmetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beauticontrol Cosmetics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,688,835
8,838,399
Net inc
1,424,255
1,114,590
Share earns
.28
.20
9mo sales
32,923,910
23,909,757
Net inc
3,658,967
2,887,710
Share earns
.71
.52


War Report From Colombia: Fight Will Be Long
LEAD: One month after the murder of a presidential candidate here unleashed Colombia's attack on cocaine cartels, President Virgilio Barco Vargas appears to be preparing for a long war against the major drug traffickers.


202 Data Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 202 Data Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
173,731
341,920
Net inc
60,284
b1,358,519
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
3,368,443
3,352,431
9mo rev
400,080
1,266,950
Net inc
175,547
b1,347,195
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
3,368,443
3,351,946


Review/Theater; On the Parallel Pitfalls of Politics and Religion
LEAD: If there are still any innocents who fantasize that movie actors make up their own dialogue, they will quickly be disabused of the notion at ''Carnage, a Comedy,'' the new play at the Public Theater.
The co-author (with Adam Simon) and director of ''Carnage'' is the gifted actor Tim Robbins, who was in every way the winning pitcher in the jazzily written baseball movie ''Bull Durham.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Monday about a dispute among descendants of Jane Austen's brother over Chawton House, his Hampshire estate, misstated the date of his adoption.
It was in 1770, not 1870.


Bonneville Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bonneville Pacific (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,954,000
6,610,000
Net loss
1,306,000
b906,000
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Market Place; Wall St. Invents Painless Mergers
LEAD: WALL STREET has found a new way to merge two companies without penalizing earnings.
It has yet to come up with a fancy name for the idea, now known as ''a nonmonetary exchange of assets for stock in a new company.''


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.


Intolerance Will Be Topic For Students
LEAD: Andrea Ambris, a 13-year-old student at Intermediate School 166 in the East New York section of Brooklyn, was worried about David N. Dinkins's safety.


Felice Berkowitz Wed to Eric Schmitt
LEAD: Felice Sara Berkowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman H. Berkowitz of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and Eric Paul Schmitt, a son of Anne G. Briggin of Belvedere, Calif., and Paul F. Schmitt of Novato, Calif., were married yesterday at the Hammond Museum in North Salem, N.Y.
Justice Helen E. Freedman of State Supreme Court in


One-Year Treasuries to Be Sold This Week
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues for this week is confined to today's auction of new three-month and six-month Treasury bills and Thursday's auction of a new one-year issue.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The trauma is that there is no prospect for hope.
I stopped believing in miracles.''  -Saba Saba, who fled Beirut for Cyprus.  [ A13:1. ]


Police Reach Out to Wary Minorities in New Jersey
LEAD: Three New Jersey communities have taken steps to broaden communications between their police departments and their black and Hispanic residents after being rocked by racial violence and protests that came after fatal confrontations between the police and minority residents in the last 15 months.


Alpine Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpine Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,057,000
4,094,000
Net loss
b126,000
c1,219,000
Shares outst
4,294,911
3,919,745
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $208,000, or 5 cents a share, and after an extraordinary credit of $406,000, or 9 cents a share.


In Women's Biathlon, Participation Is No. 1
LEAD: THE Ultratech Orlon Women's Biathlon in Central Park on Saturday was for women only, but the race's homogeneity ended there.
The run-bike-run event drew athletes of all ages, from 18 to over 60, and seemingly every level of intensity, ability and aspiration.
The winner, Claudia Kretschman, was highly trained in the two-sport discipline, but an estimated one-third of the 210 participants were combining running and biking in competition for the first time.


Ph.D. Is the Intellectual's Moment of Truth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Kaplan Weds Fellow Physician
LEAD: The marriage of Dr.
Beth Carol Kaplan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving I. Kaplan of Baltimore, to Dr.
Michael Joshua Ostacher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Ostacher of New York, took place yesterday at Grey Rock Mansion in Baltimore.
Rabbi Gustav Buchdahl officiated.


Salvador Rebel Chief Offers Truce if U.S. Halts Aid to Rightist Government
LEAD: The senior military commander of El Salvador's insurgency said in an interview today that his forces would be willing to ''cease hostilities'' if the United States halted military aid to the country's rightist Government.


Browns Top Jets By 38-24
LEAD: The Jets found many ways to lose today after nearly discovering the art of upsetting the Browns.


Peru Drained By Inflation And Violence
LEAD: Rampant inflation and terrorist threats have created a crisis of confidence in Peru's business community, prompting an exodus of capital that is undermining the economy's ability to recover.


Circuit City Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circuit City Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
471,591,000
396,115,000
Net inc
16,852,000
16,642,000
Share earns
.37
.36
6mo rev
879,587,000
723,763,000
Net inc
27,587,000
25,595,000
Share earns
.60
.56


Donaldson Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donaldson Co (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
98,534,000
92,942,000
Net inc
3,123,000
b3,812,000
Share earns
.33
.40
Yr sales
397,535,000
362,862,000
Net inc
15,434,000
b17,622,000
Share earns
1.62
1.80


Icot Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Icot Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
3,619,000
6,644,000
Net loss
5,702,000
3,849,000
Shares outst
12,059,000
11,059,000
Yr sales
23,397,000
33,996,000
Net loss
12,375,000
6,432,000
Shares outst
11,353,000
10,848,000


VIRGINIA CONTEST AVOIDS RACE ISSUE
LEAD: Virginia's two candidates for Governor, separated by only a few percentage points in public opinion polls, have turned to bruising attacks on one another as the campaign passes the halfway mark.


Success Has No Kick for Champagne
LEAD: It should be time for the Champagne industry to break out the bubbly, as grape growers cheer a vintage harvest and worldwide sales soar to record levels.
Instead, the industry's unprecedented success is threatening to tear apart the closely knit Champagne region, an area of gentle slopes and generous vines 90 miles east of


Action Auto Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Auto Stores Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
29,505,000
23,797,000
Net inc
262,000
b28,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr sales
104,666,000
85,195,000
Net inc
1,172,000
c1,421,000
Share earns
.40
.48


Results Plus
LEAD:  Golf  McCallister Wins: Blaine McCallister broke out of a six-way tie with birdies on the last two holes yesterday for a one-stroke victory over Brad Faxon in the Bank of Boston Classic.
He shot a five-under-par 66 for a 72-hole total of 271 at the Pleasant Valley Country Club in Sutton, Mass.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about college admission test scores misidentified John Weiss, co-author of ''Standing Up to the SAT.'' He is the founder and a former executive director of Fairtest, a consumer-testing advocacy group.
The executive director is Cinthia Schuman.


Turnaround Expert's Award and Rebuke
LEAD: While some investors are fuming about what happened to one company under the stewardship of Q. T. Wiles, a turnaround specialist, another group is tossing him bouquets for the come-from-behind performance of another company.


Literary Fare for Book-Hungry Throngs
LEAD: Literature was the order of the day as readers, writers and publishers swarmed onto Fifth Avenue in midtown yesterday for the 11th annual New York Is Book Country festival.
While 164 booksellers, publishers and other purveyors of the printed word enticed people with books, games, entertainment and literary celebrities, 11 noted writers discussed the ins and outs of authorship at several nearby gatherings.


Sri Lanka Offers Rebel Front A Secure Role in Peace Talks
LEAD: After the island's worst week of violence in months, the Government today offered Sinhalese rebels security and protection if they joined a peace conference.
The rebel group, the People's Liberation Front, has usually spurned such invitations.


Low Levels of Asbestos Fibers Pose Few Risks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Smoothing the Sailing for the Disabled
LEAD: LEARNING to sail a boat, and ultimately, racing one, is no longer just a fantasy for disabled people.
A boat designed to accommodate almost any physical handicap has helped hundreds of aspiring sailors become yachtsmen.


Review/Television; Mort Sahl, Daring From the Hungry I Until Today
LEAD: ''Mort Sahl: The Loyal Opposition'' is the sort of show that Mort Sahl, the irreverent comedian, might have kidded on a good night.
This earnest 90-minute contribution to the ''American Masters'' series, at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, takes Mr.
Sahl at his own estimate, but without his redeeming humor.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Starting today, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays within 75 miles of New York City, and on all of Long Island, is increased to 40 cents.
The change is prompted by rising production and distribution costs.
The newspaper's Sunday price is unchanged, as is its weekday price outside the 75-mile area.


Christiana Cos reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Christiana Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b483,000
c923,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr net inc
b1,476,000
cd653,000
Share earns
.27
-
b-After income from discontinued operations of $45,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $86,000, or 2 cents a share, for the year.


A.&amp; S. a Hit, but Can It Keep the Shelves Full?
LEAD: Shoppers thronged to the new Abraham &amp; Straus department store in Manhattan over the weekend, and cash registers rang up sales of $1 million a day.
But questions remained about the store's ability to maintain its inventory in the wake of a cash crisis at its Canadian parent company, the Campeau Corporation.


United Air's Workers and Unions To Get Final Say in Big Decisions
LEAD: In an unusual development in management-labor relations, the employees and unions participating in the buyout of the UAL Corporation will not only own United Airlines but will have the final say over the parent company's major decisions and strategy, the leader of the United pilots' union said yesterday.


Prime Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net inc
767,000
681,000
Share earns
.56
-
Yr net inc
3,429,000
2,617,000
Share earns
1.58
-
Per share data is not applicable; the company went public in November 1988.


Olga Erteszek, 73, Dies; Founder And Designer of a Lingerie Firm
LEAD: Olga Erteszek, designer and founder of the Olga Company, which makes women's underwear and sleepwear, died of cancer Friday at her home in Brentwood, Calif.
She was 73 years old.


Dr. Lisa I. Aaron Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa Iris Aaron, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Aaron of New York, and Dr.
Daniel Jaime Pilowsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Beny Pilowsky of Santiago, Chile, were married on Sunday at Alder Manor on the grounds of Elizabeth Seton College in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  MINNESOTA (AL) - Renewed the contract of Tom Kelly, manager, through the 1991 season.
BASKETBALL  SEATTLE (NBA) - Signed Dana Barros, guard, to a four-year contract plus an option year.
COLLEGES  JACKSONVILLE - Named Gary Izzo athletic director.
MANHATTAN - Named Tony Sterra men's assistant tennis coach.


Issue by Credit Unit Of Pitney Bowes
LEAD: The Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation is offering $150 million in notes, due in 2009, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Passport Travel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Passport Travel Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,319,000
10,676,000
Net inc
47,415
72,728
Share earns
.05
.06
Shares outst
895,576
1,180,900
9mo sales
29,546,000
30,307,000
Net inc
76,681
263,351
Share earns
.08
.22
Shares outst
926,805
1,207,791


Cocoa Hits Contract Lows After Failure of Price Talks
LEAD: Cocoa futures prices fell to new life-of-contract lows yesterday on New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange following the international cocoa cartel's failure to salvage a derailed price-support plan.


U.S. Agency Accused Of Favoring I.B.M.
LEAD: Six computer companies accused a Federal agency yesterday of awarding more than $1 billion in data processing contracts to the International Business Machines Corporation without competition, saying that the practice may have cost the Government millions of dollars in excess procurement costs.


Blue Jays' Lead Is Cut To 2 Games
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox, unable to defeat Toronto at home since 1987, beat the first-place Blue Jays tonight, 6-3.


Bid Brings Goldsmith To America
LEAD: Sir James Goldsmith, whose $21 billion bid for B.A.T.
Industries has stirred controversy in Europe and the United States, has come to America to try to persuade members of Congress and state insurance regulators that his proposal posed no threat to the company's operations here.


A Tough Choice Facing Peugeot
LEAD: A 14-day-old strike at the Peugeot automobile group is threatening to slow the momentum of the company's recent turnaround.


A United Pilot Sticks to His Goal
LEAD: Airline industry veterans often scoffed after Frederick C. Dubinsky made up his mind in January 1987 that the best way to insure the pilots' future at United Airlines was for them to own the carrier.


'Crystal Wind' And Torrents Lash San Juan
LEAD: With swirling winds and crashing rain, Hurricane Hugo virtually cut off Puerto Rico from the rest of the world today.


PPC Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPC Oil &amp; Gas
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
939,946
681,441
Net inc
119,045
b215,990
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss  Figures are in Canadian funds.


Human Transplant of Altered Cells Is Success
LEAD: Scientists at the National Cancer Institute said today that the first federally approved transplant of genetically altered cells into a human had been successful.


Microbilt Accord Revised by Block
LEAD: H &amp; R Block &amp; Company, the tax-preparation concern, said the terms of its agreement to acquire the Microbilt Corporation had been revised.
The original offer was for $18 a share in Block stock.


Macmillan Deal With Merrill
LEAD: Macmillan Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Merrill Publishing for $260 million in cash.
Merrill, based in Columbus, Ohio, publishes textbooks for the secondary, high school and college markets.


Kings Road Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kings Road Entertainment (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,072,527
10,932,001
Net inc
b218,907
c1,424,276
Share earns
.04
-
b-Included a gain of $365,211 on the restructuring of debt.
c-Net loss


Tab Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tab Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
33,561,000
30,331,000
Net inc
1,232,000
907,000
Share earns
.19
.14


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lakeland Industries (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,308,498
9,055,841
Net inc
106,019
201,451
Share earns
.04
.08
6mo sales
20,427,795
18,062,904
Net inc
381,282
401,643
Share earns
.15
.16


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Werner Enterprises (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
61,249,000
46,500,000
Net inc
5,244,000
4,372,000
Share earns
.45
.37
6mo rev
119,261,000
89,037,000
Net inc
9,514,000
8,293,000
Share earns
.82
.71


Breathalyzer Test Allowed, But Evidence Issue Looms
LEAD: A Criminal Court judge in Manhattan rejected a defense challenge to a Breathalyzer test yesterday, but a high-ranking prosecutor said drunken-driving cases that relied on the tests would still be difficult to prosecute.


Theater Secret: Keep It Small
LEAD: Five years ago Thomas Viertel and Steven Baruch were partners in a real-estate business, and Richard Frankel was managing director of the Circle Repertory Company, a nonprofit theater group in Greenwich Village.
Today the three men are among the most successful producers of Off Broadway theater in New


Clancy to Train Cooney
LEAD: Gil Clancy, the color commentator for CBS Sports and the Madison Square Garden cable-television network, will be training Gerry Cooney for his Jan. 15 match against George Foreman in Atlantic City.
Clancy came to terms yesterday with Tom Mara, the Long Island construction man who represents Cooney.


Emmy Awards for 'Roe v. Wade' and 'Day One'
LEAD: The television industry saluted the movies ''Roe v.
Wade'' and ''Day One'' with Emmy Awards on Sunday evening.


Imports Lead Mileage Lists
LEAD: Imported cars again dominated the best-mileage and worst-mileage lists in an annual survey by the Environmental Protection Agency.


Dow Rises 12.92 for Second Straight Gain
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average gained 12.92 points, to 2,687.50, yesterday, adding to the small rally of Friday.


Backman May Move On
LEAD: Wally Backman, the former Met second baseman who was traded last December to the Minnesota Twins, is not likely to be with that team in 1990.
Backman said yesterday in Minneapolis that he plans to test the free-agent market at the end of this season with the understanding that the Twins are unlikely to bid for him.


John Burr Williams, 88, Economist, Dies
LEAD: John Burr Williams, an economist and investment manager, died of complications of a stroke on Friday at the Weston Manor Nursing Home in Weston, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Wellesley Hills, Mass.


AIDS DRUG'S MAKER CUTS PRICE BY 20%
LEAD: The Burroughs Wellcome Company cut the price of the AIDS drug AZT by 20 percent today after a month of mounting protests over its cost.


The Corcoran to Apologize for Canceling Show
LEAD: The Corcoran Gallery of Art said today that it had decided to issue a statement of regret and apology for its cancellation of the Robert Mapplethorpe exhibition in June.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in some editions of SportsMonday this week about the Islanders' exhibition game against the Rangers misidentified a player who had signed with the Islanders as a free agent.
He is Don Maloney, not his brother Dave, who has retired.


Philadelphia Ordered to Restore Funds for the Mentally Retarded
LEAD: A Commonwealth Court judge here today ordered the state to provide Philadelphia with $7.5 million so it can restore social services to 4,000 mentally retarded people who live at home.


Where's the Flag Fire?
LEAD: Americans were angry over the Supreme Court's flag-burning decision in June, but their anger has cooled.
Some members of Congress learned during their August recess that the public hates flag desecration - but also recognizes that tolerating dissent, even the hateful views of scoundrels, is what America is about.


Currents Will Dictate Course of Storm
LEAD: Scientists watching the hurricane that swept Puerto Rico yesterday say its future course and possible impact on the East Coast depend on timing.


Credo Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Credo Petroleum Corp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
445,000
311,000
Net inc
125,000
63,000
Share earns
.04
.02
9mo rev
1,230,000
868,000
Net inc
365,000
178,000
Share earns
.11
.05


Picking Winners For the 80's
LEAD: It is too early to fill out this year's Eclipse Award ballot for thoroughbred racing's divisional champions since the season's decisive races have yet to be run.
But it's not too soon to fill in most of an imaginary ballot that is 10 times more interesting: Who are the Horses of the Decade, the champions among champions of the 1980's?


General Public Utilities reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Public Utilities (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,868,939,000
2,764,181,000
Net inc
261,741,000
295,105,000
Share earns
4.61
4.84


Hurricane Is Scrambling Travel and Cruise Plans
LEAD: With a hurricane churning through the islands of the eastern Caribbean, tourism officials said yesterday that the industry was straining to assure the safety of the guests and cruise ship passengers and to offer alternative vacations.


News Summary
LEAD:  International A3-18  U.S. foreign policy was criticized by George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, who said the Administration has not encouraged changes in the Eastern bloc and was ''almost nostalgic about the cold war.'' Page A1  Pravda's writes ugly profile of Yeltsin in the U.S.


Dress Barn Inc reports earnings for 13wks to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dress Barn Inc (OTC)
13wks to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
65,637,000
56,035,000
Net inc
5,276,000
4,601,000
Share earns
.24
.21
52wk sales
249,201,000
204,968,000
Net inc
18,936,000
15,832,000
Share earns
.85
.71


First Ferries for New Commuter Service Arrive in Harbor  The 90-foot-long 399-passenger ferries, the   George Washington and the Thomas Jefferson, will be joined later by the Alexander Hamilton and the Abraham Lincoln.   The service, the first between Hoboken and Manhattan in 22 years, will be inaugurated Oct. 11, with regular rush-hour service beginning Oct. 16. (The New York Times/Michelle V. Agins)


HURRICANE ROUTS THOUSANDS IN PATH ACROSS CARIBBEAN
LEAD: A powerful hurricane struck Puerto Rico yesterday after cutting a path of destruction across a 350-mile chain of Caribbean tourist islands.
The storm severed communications with the region and left at least eight people dead and tens of thousands homeless.


Books of The Times; Third-World Refugees Rootless in the U.S.
LEAD:  Jasmine  By Bharati Mukherjee  241 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $17.95.


Frances Denney Cos reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frances Denney Cos (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,566,553
8,696,021
Net loss
1,496,634
1,863,954
6mo sales
17,278,590
18,214,750
Net loss
1,585,256
1,990,157


Gooden Start Scratched
LEAD: Dwight Gooden was scratched tonight as the probable starting pitcher for the Mets Tuesday against the first-place Chicago Cubs because of stiffness in his right shoulder.
But both Gooden and Davey Johnson, manager of the Mets, said the stiffness was normal and not related to the torn muscle that disabled the 24-year-old ace for 10 weeks this summer.


Jet Quarterback Vows He Will Play Smarter
LEAD: Ken O'Brien's world - the one he sees when he is upright - is easy to define.


Senate Leader Asserts U.S. Fails To Encourage Change in East Bloc
LEAD: George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, accused the Bush Administration today of failing to encourage changes in the Eastern bloc and feeling ''almost nostalgic about the cold war.''


Two Possibilities
LEAD:  1.
If the hurricane continues at its current speed, a low-pressure system over the Southeast and a high over the Atlantic could direct the storm toward the South Atlantic coast by Thursday.  2.
If the storm slows, a low-pressure system moving toward the Northeast could pull it northward on Friday.


Science Accessories reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Science Accessories
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
766,979
1,150,867
Net inc
b420,876
147,278
Share earns
.10
.04
9mo sales
2,215,575
2,771,422
Net inc
b321,815
216,480
Share earns
.08
.05
b-Included a non-recurring pretax gain from litigation settlement of $925,001.


Circuit City Choice Seen
LEAD: After an exhaustive search that ended in a showdown between J. Walter Thompson and Young &amp; Rubicam, Circuit City Stores Inc. yesterday awarded its $25 million account to Thompson's New York office, a person familiar with the account said.


Public Service Enterprise reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,590,122,000
4,246,653,000
Net inc
509,069,000
523,411,000
Share earns
2.48
2.55


Corestates and First Pennsylvania to Merge
LEAD: The Corestates Financial Corporation and the First Pennsylvania Corporation agreed today to merge in a $730 million deal.


Kentucky Youth Frees 11 Hostages and Surrenders
LEAD: An armed 17-year-old student apparently acting out the plot to a novel entered a high school classroom and took 11 classmates hostage today.
He released them all and after nearly nine hours surrendered.


Prices of Treasury Issues Ease
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities eased slightly in very sluggish trading yesterday.


Lawsuits Snarl Study of Imperiled Alaskan Eagles
LEAD: FOR the last three months a bald eagle with a full crown of snowy hair and a wingspan of five feet has been cowering inside a cage at the Arctic Animal Hospital here, sick from a small sample of the cargo of the Exxon Valdez.
Intoxicated after eating oiled prey, the eagle was unable to fly correctly and crashed to the ground, breaking its wing.


East Germans Said to Impound Passports
LEAD: East German emigres say that Czechoslovak and East German authorities have begun seizing passports to stop them from reaching Hungary and emigrating to the West.


Critics Fault Secret Effort To Test AIDS Drug
LEAD: A NEW YORK man participating in an unorthodox private study of an AIDS drug has died, and the circumstances surrounding his death are making AIDS patients and their advocates take a critical look at this method of testing drugs.


Bank of Tokyo Trust Appoints a Chairman
LEAD: After a 10-year tour of duty in Tokyo and in Jakarta, Indonesia, Kenji Yoshizawa is returning to the United States, this time as chairman of the Bank of Tokyo Trust Company in New York and the bank's resident senior managing director.


Skylink America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skylink America Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,433,174
610,538
Net loss
520,743
196,090
The company said revenues for the recent quarter reflected one month of operations contributed by the Thomson Consumer Electronics and Commercial Satellite Services contracts.


Harry Tugend, Film Writer and Producer, 91
LEAD: Harry Tugend, a screenwriter and film and television producer who helped establish the Screen Writers Guild, died of heart failure on Sept. 11 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 91 years old.
Mr.
Tugend's long, prolific career in the entertainment industry began around 1930, when he wrote sketches for ''Ziegfeld Follies'' and Fred Allen's radio show.


Thrift, Bowden Cleared
LEAD: Syd Thrift and his former assistant, Jim Bowden, have been cleared of any suggestion they stole Pittsburgh Pirate records when they left for the Yankees, the baseball commissioner's office said yesterday.


NCNB Stock Offer in Japan
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation will be offering its common shares in the Japanese market for the second time in two years.
The company plans to offer five million newly issued shares at $51 a share.


Smoking and Pets
LEAD: While scientists have long known that passive smoking, inhaling smoke produced by a smoker, is hazardous to people,a new study indicates that it is hazardous to pets as well.


Vernal B. Pemberton, Educator, 70
LEAD: Vernal B. Pemberton, who helped create the first black history program in the New York City schools, died of cancer Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Beckman Instruments Inc., Fullerton, Calif., which makes analytical instruments, said it would phase out 150 jobs in its Bioanalytical Systems Group by the end of the year.


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark's Work Wearhouse
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
44,923,000
39,902,000
Net loss
b117,000
1,083,000
6mo sales
85,180,000
76,579,000
Net loss
b588,000
1,963,000
b-Included extraordinary credits of $289,000, or 3 cents a share, and $739,000, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Value Line Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Value Line Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,607,000
17,308,000
Net loss
b927,000
c4,693,000
Share earns
-
.47
b-Included a $7.5 million non-recurring after-tax charge resulting from the purchase, with one of its subsidiaries, of Integrated Resources Inc.


Talking Business with Donohue of American Trucking; An Industry Plan To Curb Pollution
LEAD: The nation's $224 billion trucking industry is emerging from a decade of rapid change that began with its deregulation in 1980.
Truck companies can now change schedules and prices more easily.
Although parts of the industry have consolidated under deregulation, new companies have entered other sectors, including the transport of large shipments over long distances.


Knicks Tickets Go on Sale
LEAD: Tickets for the Knicks' two home exhibition games and their first 19 games of the 1989-90 season, at an average price increase of about 25 percent, will go on sale at 10 A.M. today at the Madison Square Garden box office, TicketMaster outlets and by mail.


Frequent-Flier Move by Hertz
LEAD: The Hertz Corporation said yesterday that it would pull out of airline frequent-flier programs because the growth of mileage awards had made them too costly.


Dallas Paper Is Rebuffed
LEAD: A state judge in Texas has refused to grant The Dallas Times Herald a preliminary injunction that would prevent many of its most popular syndicated features and comic strips from switching to The Dallas Morning News, its archrival.


Killearn Properties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Killearn Properties Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,013,775
4,136,605
Net inc
249,241
665,787
Share earns
.17
.46


Torotel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torotel Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,166,000
2,379,000
Net inc
8,000
145,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
2,565,000
2,578,000
Year-ago quarter results restated to reflect the adoption of FASB No.


John McShain, 90, Constructor Of Pentagon and Kennedy Center
LEAD: John McShain, a contractor and developer who erected several important public buildings in Washington, including the Pentagon, the State Department Building and the Jefferson Memorial, died of a stroke on Sept. 9 in Killarney, Ireland.
He was 90 years old.


Surprise Resignation By Kellogg's President
LEAD: In a move that surprised Wall Street, Horst W. Schroeder, until now considered a shoo-in to be the Kellogg Company's next chief executive, resigned his position as president and chief operating officer of the world's largest cereal company, effective immediately.


Financial Adviser Is Vindicated
LEAD: Last week's agreement on an employee-led buyout of the UAL Corporation came as vindication for Eugene J. Keilin, the Lazard Freres investment banker who has advised the company's pilots for 29 months despite criticism that a deal was impossible and his firm's fees were unnecessary.


Premier Industrial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Industrial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
154,357,000
143,904,000
Net inc
18,784,000
17,509,000
Share earns
.48
.40
Shares outst
38,813,180
43,309,223


Advance Is Seen In Treating Infections
LEAD: A new treatment could save the lives of thousands of people who would otherwise die from bacterial infections they contract in hospitals, a biotechnology company reported today.


Oppenheimer Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oppenheimer Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,293,287
1,066,504
Net loss
768,559
789,533
6mo rev
6,764,524
2,388,108
Net loss
1,649,762
1,481,027


Dollar Continues to Fall; Gold Prices Down in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar dropped again yesterday in the aftermath of the panicky decline at the end of last week, hurt by traders' fears that central banks would sell and by the uncertain effect of an upcoming meeting of finance ministers.


Market Place; Oryx Energy's Overseas Gamble
LEAD: THE Oryx Energy Company's leap into the ranks of global energy producers offers a clear example of why many American oil companies are placing more of their bets on foreign oilfields.


Mubarak and Rabin Meet in Cairo on Voting Plan
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and President Hosni Mubarak discussed starting peace talks in the region today in the first direct Egyptian-Israeli discussions on the Middle East stalemate.


JAPANESE MAKING BIGGEST DEAL YET WITH A U.S. BANK
LEAD: The world's biggest bank, the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank of Tokyo, announced plans yesterday to buy control of a unit of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation and a portion of the bank's stock.


U.S. Contends The Garcias Needed Money
LEAD: Representative Robert Garcia was a politician who ''went bad'' because he and his wife ''were in desperate need of money'' for a style of life they could not afford, a prosecutor said yesterday in opening statements at Mr.
Garcia's extortion, bribery and conspiracy trial.


Many Countries Improve Their Reputations on Debt
LEAD: The creditworthiness of a broad range of nations improved in the last year, a survey of international bankers has found, but the debt reputations of Latin American and African nations continued to decline.


Prism Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prism Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,349,000
5,027,000
Net inc
93,000
c36,000
Share earns
.04
.02
6mo sales
9,575,000
10,051,000
Net inc
b476,000
c438,000
Share earns
.22
.20


U.S. and Japan Executives Exchange Barbs on Trade
LEAD: Tensions over the trade imbalance between the United States and Japan today produced some unusually blunt exchanges between chief executives gathered here for a conference on the outlook for manufacturing industries.


By Design; The Coat of the Moment
LEAD: Shearlings are No. 1.
Fake furs are big fashion, too.
But if you want to look impossibly well turned out as well as warm, you'll go looking for a wool bathrobe of a coat right now before winter comes.
Pull it on, wrap it around, sash the waist, snuggle the collar up around your ears, and let it drape down over your shoulders - that's 1990's style.


Numbers Into Pictures
LEAD: THE electronic spreadsheet is an essential tool of business, but its results are not always easily grasped.
It is much simpler to see the trend in monthly gizmo sales by looking at a bar chart than by studying columns of numbers.


INSIDE
LEAD:  The Corcoran to Apologize The Corcoran Gallery of Art, after three months of protests and criticism, said it would apologize for canceling the Robert Mapplethorphe exhibition in June.
Page C16.
An About-Face in Drug War  Redefining the Pentagon's role, Defense Secretary Cheney gave the military three weeks to find new ways to stop the drug flow.


Skyline Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skyline Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
93,062,000
97,154,000
Net inc
2,781,000
4,561,000
Share earns
.25
.41


In a Suspicious Death, an Autopsy Alone May Be of Little Help
LEAD: WHEN a medical examiner is trying to determine the cause of a death, a witness's description of the scene and circumstances surrounding the death can be as important as an autopsy.
Without carefully reconstructing events, a pathologist has great difficulty deducing from an autopsy whether any cuts, bruises, broken bones or damaged organs contributed to the death.


In Defense Of Ads That Win Awards
LEAD: NOT for Allan Beaver the awards-bashing that has become fashionable among those who believe in a distinction between creative advertising and sales.


Nuclear Dump Plan Ignites Rural Protests
LEAD: Federal Express made an unwelcome delivery the other day to Marilyn Ostrander's farm here in the lush green hills of Allegany County.


Qantel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qantel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,281,000
17,819,000
Net inc
b1,231,000
471,000
Share earns
.07
.03
Shares outst
17,184,000
16,684,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $2,217,000, or 13 cents a share, on the redemption of debentures.


G.E.-Asahi Effort
LEAD: Wear-resistant diamond coatings may be the first product of a venture involving a unit of the General Electric Company and the Asahi Diamond Industrial Company.
G.E.'s Superabrasives unit, the world's largest producer of manufactured diamonds, has joined with Asahi to develop a process of making diamonds.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  WEIGHT LIFTING  Record Lift: The lightweight lifter Israil Militosian of the Soviet Union set a world record of 352 pounds yesterday in the 148 1/2-pound division snatch competition at the world championships in Athens.
The 21-year-old broke his own mark of 349 pounds on his second lift.
Militosian failed in a bid to lift 357 1/2 pounds.(AP)


Plan to Lower World Debt Criticized
LEAD: An organization that represents most of the world's big commercial banks contended today that a new international strategy to cut global debt could misfire by shrinking the core of lenders to the third world.


Playmaker and Goalie Raise American Hopes
LEAD: The United States finally got to use its best playmaker and may have found its best goalkeeper Sunday in a World Cup qualifying game against El Salvador.
Hugo Perez scored the goal, Tony Meola got the shutout, and with the 1-0 victory, the Americans took a giant stride toward joining soccer's elite in


Apple Computer Picks Key Officer
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said today that Ian W. Diery had been named senior vice president of the company and president of Apple Pacific, its sales and marketing organization for Pacific Rim countries.
He succeeds Delbert W. Yocam, who announced last year that he would conclude his operational duties at Apple on Nov.


Errant Rocket Spares U.S. Embassy in Colombia
LEAD: Terrorists struck the United States Embassy here with a homemade rocket on Sunday night.
Fired from a park 10 blocks away, the rocket bounced harmlessly against a wall and fell to the ground without exploding.


A Milestone in Laser Printers
LEAD: THE Hewlett-Packard Company, which dominates the laser printer market for personal computers, last week unveiled a new low-cost model that could become the first laser to flirt with a price tag under $1,000.
Until recently the lowest discounted prices for laser printers were at least $1,500.


Schwartz Brothers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schwartz Brothers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,549,578
21,062,057
Net inc
164,885
49,639
Share earns
.09
.03
6mo rev
45,232,640
42,093,702
Net inc
271,907
247,079
Share earns
.15
.13


For Child of Detectives, Torment Over Drugs
LEAD: Something made Detective Pat DeGregorio do a double-take on the ride home that afternoon a year ago, an instinct, perhaps, after years of making undercover drug buys on the streets of Brooklyn and Queens.


Rangers Lose Game and Millen
LEAD: There were sections of ceiling missing in the hallways, scaffolding dominating one end of the building and a large, black, makeshift shroud hiding the other end.


Light Reduction Doesn't Cut Infant Blindness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gencorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gencorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
425,000,000
473,000,000
Net inc
b71,000,000
c19,000,000
Share earns
2.26
.61
9mo sales
1,406,000,000
1,360,000,000
Net inc
b231,000,000
c57,000,000
Share earns
7.30
1.81


Bridge
LEAD: A strong surge at the start of the Bermuda Bowl contest here today gave the United States a big lead against Australia.
The margin after 16 deals was 74 international match points, but the host country fought back and cut the deficit to 54 imps at the end of the day.


General Mills Inc reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Mills Inc (NYSE)
13wks to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
1,501,800,000
1,337,000,000
Net inc
b114,900,000
c218,800,000
Share earns
1.39
2.66
Shares outst
82,400,000
82,200,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $7.7 million.


Help Is Offered Across a Void of Silence
LEAD: As a hurricane ripped across Puerto Rico and other Caribbean islands yesterday, people in the New York, Philadelphia and other mainland centers of Puerto Rican population organized relief efforts and relatives sought information they could not get.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  Dai-Ichi Kangyo will buy control of a Manufacturers Hanover unit and a portion of the bank's stock for $1.4 billion, the largest investment yet by a Japanese bank in a U.S. financial company.
The financing will help to strengthen the financial condition of Manufacturers, which said it would add $950 million to its reserves for losses on third-world loans.


Diodes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diodes Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,202,591
3,698,021
Net inc
17,990
106,481
Share earns
.01
.03


London Journal; For Asia's Children, Hard Knocks in an Alien Land
LEAD: When the schools of London opened this month amid a national teacher shortage, the worst crisis affected the poorest areas of East London, where the faces of the students are brown and Asian.
Most are from families that have immigrated from Bangladesh.


Denigrate, Debase of Revile
LEAD: Representative Sidney Yates has any number of well-chosen words - ''incredible hodgepodge of administrative barriers,'' for instance, and ''the start of George Orwell's age'' - for the proposal by which Senator Jesse Helms would shackle the National Endowment for the Arts.
Last week they fell on willing ears.


Organizations Helping a Relief Fund
LEAD: Organizations involved in hurricane relief said yesterday that the greatest needs were money, nonperishable foods and building supplies.


Cooper Cos reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,737,000
28,837,000
Net loss
b11,800,000
c61,000,000
9mo sales
39,449,000
103,062,000
Net loss
b49,800,000
c92,350,000
b-Included extraordinary losses of $5,399,000 for the quarter and $7,305,000 for the 9 months, and the 9 months also included a loss from discontinued operations of $21,172,000.


Everett Puts New Life Into Rams' Offense
LEAD: Last season, when Jim Everett passed for 3,964 yards and 31 touchdowns, the Los Angeles Rams saw the merits of the riveting, three-team trade that sent Eric Dickerson to the Indianapolis Colts on Halloween 1987.
Last Sunday, against the Colts, Everett again showed why he is a better quarterback and why the Rams are a more explosive team without


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the United States' current account deficit referred incorrectly to the change for the second quarter.


The Editorial Notebook; There She Is, Miss Different
LEAD: My wife wondered: Should we tape that movie on public television and watch the Miss America pageant live, or vice versa?
It was no contest.
There are certain things one simply does at certain seasons.
We could no more pass up Miss America in September than the World Series in October, the bowl games on New Year's or the Oscars in April.


Anatomical Atlas Caps a Half-Century of Medical Illustration
LEAD: DR.
FRANK H. NETTER, probably the world's best-known medical illustrator, has completed what he considers his crowning achievement: a comprehensive color atlas of the human anatomy that is the fruit of several decades of work and study.


First Interstate In Merger Deal
LEAD: The First Interstate Corporation of Wisconsin said today that it would merge with the Norwest Corporation, one of the largest bank holding companies in the Midwest.
Under the agreement, First


Mood to Alter Medicare Sets Off Budget Alarm
LEAD: Convinced that repeal of the Medicare program to cover the catastrophic cost of extended illness is more and more likely, Administration officials are said to be searching for ways to minimize the impact of a repeal on the budget for the next fiscal year.


Hugo Cuts Off Calls to Islands
LEAD: Long-distance communications between the United States and several Caribbean islands were severed Sunday as Hurricane Hugo swept the area.


Skull of Slain Woman Found
LEAD: The partial remains of a 26-year-old woman from Switzerland who was apparently slain after a lovers' quarrel were found yesterday in a plastic bucket in a parcel check area at the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the police said.
The former boyfriend of the woman, who the police said was a modern dancer, was arrested and charged in the slaying.


Secrets of the Concert Hall Yield to the Laws of Physics and the Computer
LEAD: THE design of acoustically pleasing concert halls, long considered an obscure art mastered by only a few builders, has begun to yield its secrets to computer programs capable of shaping a hall's geometry even in the midst of a concert.


Giuliani Assails Dinkins, Citing A Goldin Audit
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday used a critical report by one Democrat, City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, to question the administrative ability of another Democrat, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic mayoral nominee.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Playboy Enterprises has sold Boarts International Inc., a distributor of periodicals and paperback books, to Worldwide Media Service Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Town Agonizes Over Dioxin Levels
LEAD: The paper industry was surprised a few years ago when a study showed that paper mills were producing toxic dioxin and releasing it into nearby rivers.


Judge Halts Random Drug Tests of All Police
LEAD: A new Police Department policy making all uniformed officers subject to random drug testing that was to have gone into effect yesterday was blocked when a police union won a temporary restraining order.


Sceptre Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sceptre Investment
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,757,410
2,888,379
Net inc
1,130,432
799,104
Share earns
.48
.34
9mo rev
10,250,336
8,080,463
Net inc
3,037,792
2,050,298
Share earns
1.29
.87


Quadrex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quadrex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,320,000
9,383,000
Net loss
b3,926,000
c1,819,000
6mo rev
21,643,000
18,779,000
Net loss
b5,425,000
c3,896,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $2,234,000 and $2,663,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Agent Who Beat Pedestrian Is Given Six-Month Sentence
LEAD: A Secret Service agent convicted of using excessive force to arrest a man near a Presidential candidate's New York motorcade last year was sentenced yesterday to six months in a halfway house and fined $2,000.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


The Cali Cartel: Colombia's Smoother Drug Gang
LEAD: When the Government began cracking down on drug traffickers nearly five weeks ago, the cartel in Medellin lashed back with a wave of bombings and shootings.


Echo of South Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Library Acquires Stage Designer's Works
LEAD: The New York Public Library has acquired an all-embracing collection of the work of Rouben Ter-Arutunian, whose critically acclaimed scenery, costumes and artwork have for a half-century been a hallmark of leading dance, theater, television and film productions.


Jayark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jayark Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,198,910
4,858,569
Net inc
267,180
238,486
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
5,579,240
5,633,640


Courter Strives To Revitalize His Campaign
LEAD: Hit in the last week by a struggle over his campaign staff and doubts about his position on key issues, Representative Jim Courter, the Republican candidate for governor, moved today to regain control of his apparently flagging campaign.


Yeltsin in U.S.: Pravda's Ugly Profile
LEAD: The visit to America of Boris N. Yeltsin, the critic of the Kremlin, was depicted at length today in the Communist Party newspaper Pravda as a vulgar spree by a hard-drinking demagogue.





10 Are Killed in Beirut As Shells Hit Building
LEAD: Ten people were killed and nine seriously hurt when an apartment block collapsed in the Muslim part of Beirut overnight after being hit by artillery fire during renewed heavy gun battles, police and hospital officials said today.


Business Seeks to Trim Rising Cost of Flying
LEAD: The air fares used mainly by business travelers have jumped as much as 47 percent in the last year, but the Wall Street investment firm Bear, Stearns &amp; Company has managed to limit the increase in its overall travel costs to 10 percent in that time.


Chess
LEAD: The richest tournament payoff in chess history, the World Cup Cycle, came to a close on Sept. 2 in Skelleftea, Sweden, when the world champion, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union, and his countryman and perpetual challenger, Anatoly Karpov, tied for first place in the sixth and final competition of the series.


Faradyne Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Faradyne Electronics
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,015,158
3,568,656
Net inc
330,168
206,304
Share earns
.20
.12
6mo rev
9,505,973
7,215,231
Net inc
633,216
399,057
Share earns
.38
.24


Bulgarian Turks Finding Disillusion With Exodus
LEAD: His timing was terrible, Hassan Ahmedov said.
He was bemoaning his own plight, but he could also have been describing the predicament facing tens of thousands of Bulgarian Muslims who want to leave the country and feel stranded.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''The Bush Administration seems almost nostalgic about the Cold War and the rigid superpower relationship that divided the world into two hostile and isolated camps.''  -Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell.  [ A14:3. ]


Austrian-Israeli Rift Deepens
LEAD: Austria will downgrade diplomatic relations with Israel because the Israelis refuse to send an Ambassador to Vienna as long as Kurt Waldheim is President, the Foreign Ministry said today.
A ministry spokesman said Austria's Ambassador to Israel, Otto Pleinert, had been reassigned to Stockholm.
No replacement will be named, and Mr.


Get the Pentagon Out of Biological Warfare; Tested in Manchuria
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mozambique to Ban Flogging
LEAD: Mozambique's Parliament voted today to abolish public flogging, which had drawn criticism from international human rights bodies.
Flogging was introduced in 1983 as a punishment for security offenses, black marketeering, armed robbery and the rape of minors.


Jetronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jetronic Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,578,000
13,519,000
Net inc
b38,000
c301,000
Share earns
.02
.13
6mo rev
25,036,000
26,832,000
Net inc
b64,000
c14,000
Share earns
.03
.01


Banner Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banner Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
116,087,000
105,088,000
Net inc
b795,000
d947,000
Share earns
.04
.02
Yr sales
433,042,000
373,763,000
Net inc
b49,967,000
cd7,041,000
Share earns
3.30
-


Nike Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nike Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
602,648,000
510,686,000
Net inc
75,854,000
56,986,000
Share earns
2.01
1.52
Shares outst
37,721,000
37,488,000


Get the Pentagon Out of Biological Warfare
LEAD: To the Editor:


Finding Fingerprints
LEAD: A scientist working with the Secret Service has devised a method of developing fingerprints that can find them on things like adhesive tape, where they have not been found before.


Filming the Life of a String Quartet Is Like Filming a Marriage, Times 2
LEAD: ''No matter how well people know one another, there is a certain distance that is naturally a part of life in any kind of relationship, whether a friendship or a marriage or a business.''


Deferment for Divac
LEAD: Vlade Divac, the center from Yugoslavia who was signed by the Los Angeles Lakers last month and is currently working out at the Lakers' training camp, was granted a one-year deferment from his military obligation to his native country yesterday.
Tanjug, the Yugoslav news agency, said that Divac, who had been scheduled to begin his military service yesterday, may also be granted another year's deferment.(


Ron Whyte, 47, Dead; Playwright of Disabled
LEAD: Ron Whyte, a playwright, editor and advocate for the disabled, died of a cerebral hemorrhage at his home in New Haven on Wednesday.
He was 47 years old.


Biogen Gets Funds For Protein Drug
LEAD: Biogen Inc. said the New York Life Insurance Company would provide $20 million to expand the company's development of CD-4, a protein that may provide a potential treatment for AIDS.
CD-4 is a protein found on the outer member of immune system cells attacked by the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


Cabby Fatally Shot Near Park
LEAD: A 56-year-old taxi driver was found shot to death behind the wheel of his cab early yesterday on West 84th Street near Central Park, the fourth medallion driver to have been killed at work this year, the police said.
The victim was identified as Thomas F. Dooley of 318 West 51st Street.
A Taxi and Limousine Commission official said he had driven a cab for 35 years.


Jumping-Jacks Shoes reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jumping-Jacks Shoes (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,693,000
8,485,000
Net loss
676,000
410,000


Standard Microsystems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Microsystems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,649,000
17,153,000
Net inc
1,613,000
b1,352,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo rev
37,046,000
35,899,000
Net inc
1,718,000
b1,971,000
Share earns
.15
-


Careers; Fund-Raisers In Demand At Colleges
LEAD: THE weekly Chronicle of Higher Education is filled with persuasive advertisements about jobs for development officials.
In collegiate circles, development means fund raising.


McCormick &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McCormick &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
314,878,000
300,651,000
Net inc
b19,368,000
c11,869,000
Share earns
.90
.51
Shares outst
21,588,000
23,342,000
9mo sales
884,531,000
857,603,000
Net inc
b115,205,000
c26,299,000
Share earns
5.21
1.12
Shares outst
22,053,000
23,379,000


Insufficiency Is the Only Scandal in Legal Services for the Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
B.
Altman &amp; Co., the department store chain, named Warren Wishart senior vice president and controller.


2 Positive Drug Tests Not Reported by U.S.
LEAD: The chairman of the medical commission of the world governing body for track and field said today he was concerned that The Athletics Congress of the United States failed to report that two athletes had tested positive for drug use at the national indoor championships last February in New York.
A spokesman for T.A


Penril Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penril Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,135,000
9,921,000
Net inc
1,642,000
601,000
Share earns
.49
.21
Yr rev
42,212,000
39,027,000
Net inc
4,201,000
2,184,000
Share earns
1.36
.77


Bertram D. Tallamy, 87, Official For U.S. and New York Highways
LEAD: Bertram Dalley Tallamy, an engineer who supervised billions of dollars in highway construction for the Federal Government and for New York State, died of kidney failure Thursday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 87 years old and lived in Washington.


CRASH TAPE SHOWS A PESSIMISTIC CREW
LEAD: A transcript of cockpit voice recordings released today by investigators shows that the crew of United Flight 232 was pessimistic about whether it could safely land the crippled plane in Sioux City, Iowa, on July 19.


72 Killed as Typhoon Hits Chinese Province
LEAD: A storm has killed 72 people and left hundreds missing in Zhejiang province, Chinese national televison reported today.


Anti-Sandinista Candidate Seeks Aid Among Exiles in Miami
LEAD: Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the presidential candidate of the Nicaraguan opposition, has visited Miami for two days to explain her electoral strategy, seek financial support and try to unite Miami's large Nicaraguan exile population behind her candidacy.


Cilluffo Slate Wins Seats at Amdura
LEAD: Cilluffo Associates L.P. has won its battle to replace the board of the Amdura Corporation, a Denver hardware distributor, after gaining the consent of shareholders representing about 3.6 million, or nearly 51 percent, of Amdura's shares, the companies said.


Third Big Coup For an Executive
LEAD: The agreement on Thursday for an employee-led buyout of United Airlines is the third major coup in less than four years for its chairman and president, Stephen M. Wolf.


Pier I Imports Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pier I Imports Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
134,855,000
107,796,000
Net inc
7,290,000
7,259,000
Share earns
.20
.24
Shares outst
35,811,000
30,655,000
6mo sales
248,785,000
204,945,000
Net inc
14,013,000
12,637,000
Share earns
.39
.41
Shares outst
35,814,000
30,578,000


First Bank Weighs Cuts in Work Force
LEAD: The First Bank System Inc. may cut its work force by up to 20 percent under a revamping that could cost nearly $40 million and reduce assets by $2 billion.
Its chairman, DeWalt H. Ankeny Jr., said the possible restructuring was still being studied and had not been presented to the board.


PARTY IN POLAND SEEKS NEW IMAGE
LEAD: The Central Committee of Poland's Communist Party today took up the question of whether the party - euphemistically called the United Workers Party -should water down its name further in the hope of making it less objectionable to more Poles.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  What Crisis?


Indian Army Agrees to Leave Sri Lanka
LEAD: India agreed today to withdraw its 43,000 troops from Sri Lanka by December and end hostilities with the main ethnic Tamil insurgent group.


Hungary Restores Israeli Ties
LEAD: Hungary became the first Communist nation to restore ties to Israel broken in 1967.
It also moved closer to Washington on trade.
Page A3.


Detroit Journal; In Joe Louis's Shadow, The Discipline to Win
LEAD: In the dim lobby of the Wheeler Recreation Center, in the center of the Brewster housing project, there is a framed painting of Joe Louis, the longtime heavyweight champion, his fists up, his eyes fixed and hard, staring into the gloom.


Out of Disorder, a Deal: 5 Weeks of UAL Talks
LEAD: When the management of UAL agreed five weeks ago to listen to a proposal to participate with United Airlines' pilots in a buyout, relations between the sides were at a low.
After more than a year of negotiations, there was almost no progress on a new contract, and on-the-job slowdowns by the pilots had caused many summer delays on


Milken Case Inquiry Sought
LEAD: The Justice Department has been asked to investigate leaks of confidential information to the news media about the racketeering and securities fraud case against Michael R. Milken, Government lawyers said yesterday.


Hungary's Heart, and America's
LEAD: Four months ago Hungary ripped a hole in the barbed wire in its section of the Iron Curtain.
Now, more dramatically, it gives East Germans safe passage to the West.
For that, Hungary deserves America's salute - and more.
Yesterday's announcement that the Bush Administration hopes to grant Hungary new trade status is a timely step in the right direction.


Review/Music; Rita Noel, Mezzo-Soprano
LEAD: Rita Noel is a mezzo-soprano who was trained on the viola and continues to play it in public, an unusual combination that sets one wondering whether she performs the solo and obbligato parts of the Brahms viola songs simultaneously.
She did not play the viola during her attractive song recital Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert


Jay Jacobs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jay Jacobs Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
31,234,000
29,803,000
Net inc
1,476,000
1,649,000
Share earns
.25
.28
Shares outst
5,941,000
5,804,000
6mo sales
53,907,000
49,785,000
Net inc
1,825,000
618,000
Share earns
.31
.11
Shares outst
5,921,000
5,800,000


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
180,646,169
174,140,418
Net inc
3,323,825
4,449,152
Share earns
.41
.55
Shares outst
8,088,941
8,078,338


Airsensors Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airsensors Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,641,003
266,736
Net loss
431,476
519,750
The company said the loss in the recent quarter resulted from non-recurring expenses of combining, restructuring and centralization of its Impco Carburetion acquisition.


Defense Chief Imposes a Deadline In Pentagon's War on Drug Flow
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, redefining the Pentagon's mission to make the anti-drug campaign a ''high priority,'' today gave military commanders three weeks to find new ways to stop the flow of narcotics, even if it means diverting troops from other activities.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with a review of the play ''Carnage, a Comedy'' referred incorrectly in some copies to the performer at the center.


Use of a Special Prosecutor Is Proposed in H.U.D. Case
LEAD: Members of Congress from both parties are calling for a special prosecutor to review allegations of impropriety involving former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. and others who worked at senior levels of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Salvador Rebel's Peace Offer Brings Skepticism From U.S.
LEAD: The United States is skeptical of a Salvadoran rebel leader's offer to stop fighting if the United States halts military aid to El Salvador's Government, the State Department said today.


Take Off That Tie, Pal, You're in the Bleachers
LEAD: Two innings into last Tuesday night's game here between the Chicago Cubs and the Montreal Expos, the Bleacher Preacher put down one of his many signs that exhort the hometown heroes and left his lucky seat to conduct some very important business.


General Mills Posts Decline
LEAD: First-quarter earnings at General Mills Inc. were only about half the level of a year ago although operating profits rose 18 percent, the food and restaurant giant said today.


Filmstar Inc reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Filmstar Inc (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,976,000
-
Net loss
961,000
1,006,000
Shares outst
4,011,000
2,957,000
The latest fiscal year was the company's first as an operating company.


People in China Scoff at Official Version of the Events of June; The Fallen Novelist
LEAD: To the Editor:


The 'People's Opera' vs. Parity for the Musicians
LEAD: The current strike by the New York City Opera orchestra doesn't seem on the surface to make a whole lot of sense - for either side.
The two parties appear to be within negotiating distance, and the six-day-old strike threatens the entire fall season, which is scheduled to end Nov. 19.
Indeed, Martin J.


Harold's Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harold's Stores Inc
Qtr to July 3
1989
1988
Sales
6,237,000
6,167,000
Net inc
46,000
25,000
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo sales
12,944,000
11,669,000
Net inc
121,000
b153,000
Share earns
.04
.05
b-After an extraordinary credit of $119,000, or 4 cents a share, representing the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


After the Hudson Spill: Bathing Fowl and Rocks
LEAD: Cleanup of an oil spill in the Hudson River continued on two fronts today, as crews scoured the river's rocky shoreline and wildlife biologists at a nearby laboratory scrubbed oil from sick waterfowl.


More Rigs Drill for Gas
LEAD: Drilling for natural gas has surpassed oil exploration in the United States for the first time.
Baker Hughes Inc. reported that 486 rigs had drilled for gas last week, while 468 had drilled for oil.


Polydex Pharmaceuticals Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polydex Pharmaceuticals Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
393,043
921,920
Net loss
376,828
b7,387
6mo sales
878,270
1,770,090
Net loss
620,306
b11,861
b-Net income  The results are in U.S. funds.


Pact Seen in Computer Type
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. and the Microsoft Corporation are expected to announce on Tuesday an agreement to cooperate on developing technology to allow type styles to be displayed on computer screens and printed by computers on paper.


Witness Names Youth's Shooter In Bensonhurst
LEAD: A defendant in the Bensonhurst slaying told the police that he heard a gunshot and saw another defendant, Joseph Fama, pointing a gun at a young black man and ''saw him shoot the gun three more times,'' according to the statement he gave detectives after the killing.


Saynor Varah reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Saynor Varah
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,086,000
6,173,000
Net inc
b553,000
c428,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $290,000, or 2 cents a share.
c-Net loss  The company said year-ago income figures have been restated and included a $676,000 gain on the sale of its western operations.


3 Airlines Weigh Merging Ticket Systems
LEAD: Delta, Northwest and Trans World Airlines are considering merging their computer reservation systems, executives at the three airlines said yesterday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Unauthorized Gun Tests Aboard Iowa Not Tied to Blast, Navy Says
LEAD: The investigation of the explosion that killed 47 sailors aboard the battleship Iowa disclosed that a naval team had been conducting unauthorized tests of the ship's 16-inch guns.


Peerless Mfg reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peerless Mfg
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
14,431,862
11,925,837
Net inc
b91,235
b638,048
Share earns
.10
.69
b-Included extraordinary credits of $15,229, or 2 cents a share, and $34,794, or 4 cents a share, for the latest and prior years, respectively.


National Health Enhancement Sytems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Enhancement Sytems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
929,717
360,854
Net inc
29,699
b400,248
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
1,788,380
904,744
Net inc
40,340
b577,246
Share earns
.02
-


Japanese See Gains in '90
LEAD: The Japanese economy remains robust and the trend will continue into the first quarter of 1990, the Finance Ministry said today in a report.


Judy's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Judy's Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
15,245,000
12,966,000
Net inc
221,000
b184,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
4,618,000
4,529,000
6mo sales
28,063,000
24,562,000
Net inc
26,000
b51,000
Share earns
.01
-


Lendl Gets Married
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, runner-up to Boris Becker at the recent United States Open, was married to Samantha Frankel last Friday at their home in Greenwich, Conn.
The couple honeymooned for the weekend at a Connecticut inn, then flew to Europe, where Lendl will play in a tournament in Barcelona, Spain.


A Panel Recommends 3 Finalists In Search for Schools Chancellor
LEAD: A search committee set up to find a new schools chancellor for New York City recommended three finalists for the post yesterday: the superintendents in Miami, Fairfax County, Va., and Portland, Ore.


Mexico Set To Sell Its Phone Unit
LEAD: Mexican Government officials said today that the state intended to put its majority stake in Telefonos de Mexico, the country's troubled, unpopular and inefficient telecommunications monopoly, up for sale in the next few days.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Wave Heights  Q. How are wave heights measured?
A.
In marine weather forecasts, wave heights are estimated, rather than measured, said Dennis Sigrist, a geophysicist with the National Weather Service.


7% Christies Stake Sold
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, an Australian investor, has sold his 7 percent interest in Christies International P.L.C., the auction house, for a profit of more than $:10 million (about $15.7 million).


Our Towns; To Drum Corps, A Drill Is Serious And Color-Blind
LEAD: The Montrose Fire Department has no patience for people who take parades lightly. ''We march in black shoes - no frills,'' said Chief Richard Stickles. ''Black socks.
Not brown.
Hair cut above the collar.
We march in a very close formation which always looks good.
We're tight.
After the parade, in the beer tent, a lot of firemen will take off their jackets.


Sonics Sign Barros To Long-Term Pact
LEAD: Dana Barros, the Big East Conference scoring champion for the past two seasons at Boston College, has signed a long-term contract with the Seattle SuperSonics.


Two New Exhibitions Show I.B.M. Artworks
LEAD: Artworks from the I.B.M. collection are on display in one of two new exhibitions at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, at Madison Avenue and 56th Street. ''Fifty Years of Collecting: Art at I.B.M.'' includes more than 100 paintings, sculptures, photographs and works on paper by such artists as Childe Hassam, George Bellows, Edward Hopper, Oskar Kokoschka, Willem de Kooning, Emil Nolde and Jean


Bush, in a Visit to the West, Prods Congress About Key Bills
LEAD: President Bush gave Congress a sharp elbow today, suggesting that it ''move fast'' on his legislation covering crime, drugs and the environment.


NEW BID TO CURB MONEY LAUNDERING
LEAD: A senior American Treasury official said today that the best way to make banking havens with strict secrecy laws part of the fight against the laundering of drug money was through cooperation, not confrontation.


Fraud Inquiry By Ferranti
LEAD: Ferranti International Signal P.L.C., the British military electronics company that is investigating serious financial losses in a United States subsidiary, said it might have been a victim of fraud.


Dressing Up, and Down, for Fall
LEAD: Just four days before the official end of summer, Arnold Scaasi had the last word on fall fashion.


Thanks, Boris, but No
LEAD: Americans who meet Boris Yeltsin in Moscow sometimes tell him it is a pity he is not American himself.
They say he is so charming, so open and candid that he would win an election back home.


Stars to Re-enact News on Chung Program
LEAD: In the first edition of the new Saturday night CBS News program, the anchor will be Connie Chung - and the star will be James Earl Jones.


Why the Gypsy Moth Had Such a Bad Year
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have identified the mysterious fungus that has kept leaf-eating gypsy moths in check across much of the Northeast this summer.


Hungary Restores Ties With Israel
LEAD: Hungary today became the first Communist country to restore full diplomatic relations with Israel after having broken them over the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.


Landlord Found Guilty in Deaths Of Two Tenants in Yonkers Fire
LEAD: The landlord of a rooming house in Yonkers where eight residents perished in a fire this year was convicted today of criminally negligent homicide in the deaths of two occupants, whose attempts to flee were thwarted by a door locked by a key from the inside.


Investment Firm Raises Saatchi Stake
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. has disclosed that Southeastern Asset Management Inc., the conglomerate's largest shareholder, has raised its stake to 10.2 percent from 9.4 percent.


U.N. to Open Session in an Optimistic Mood
LEAD: The United Nations gathers here Tuesday for the opening of its 44th General Assembly as the organization's prestige and support from the Soviet Union are growing.


Hughes Aircraft Unit to Cut Jobs
LEAD: A unit of the Hughes Aircraft Company involved in radar technology said it had reorganized its operations and was eliminating 1,000 jobs.
The cuts at the Hughes Radar Systems Group come in a revamping at Hughes, part of the General Motors Corporation.
Hughes said in June that it would eliminate 6,000 jobs through layoffs and attrition to prepare for expected cutbacks in military spending.


Investors Seen Joining Del Monte Bid
LEAD: In an attempt to overcome significant obstacles to the deal, additional investors are expected to join Citicorp Venture Capital's effort to acquire the canned food and processing division of Del Monte, people familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.


Revitalized Broncos Stop Bills' Streak, 28-14
LEAD: Denver's big-play defense, sparked by interceptions from Wymon Henderson and Tyrone Braxton, helped the Broncos build a 21-0 lead and they held on for a 28-14 victory over the Buffalo Bills tonight.


Giants' Dorsey Breaks a Foot and Will Be Out for the Season
LEAD: The Giants' happiness over winning their first two games of the season was tempered today when they learned that Eric Dorsey, their starting left defensive end, has been lost for the season with a broken foot.
He will probably be replaced by John Washington, like Dorsey a fourth-year pro who is especially strong against the run.


T Cell Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T Cell Sciences
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,089,000
1,679,000
Net loss
637,000
313,000


Northwest Drug Co reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Drug Co
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
32,800,000
28,500,000
Net inc
113,089
192,797
Share earns
.09
.15
Results are in Canadian funds.


People in China Scoff at Official Version of the Events of June
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets' Pennant Hopes Go From Faint to Worse
LEAD: Whatever it was, the Chicago Cubs delivered it tonight: the haymaker, the knockout punch, the coup de grace.
And they destroyed the Mets in what was left of their battle for first place.


Reeves Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reeves Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,931,000
46,711,000
Net loss
12,194,000
b3,936,000
Share earns
-
.31
Yr rev
79,250,000
105,530,000
Net loss
14,980,000
b8,326,000
Share earns
-
.65


REVISED DRUG PLAN WEIGHED BY G.O.P.
LEAD: Senate Republicans proposed modifications to President Bush's $7.9 billion drug-fighting package today, suggesting that it be financed by across-the-board cuts in most Federal programs and some deeper cuts in a few areas.


Judge to Admit Tax and Drug Charges
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice in the Bronx, William T. Martin, will plead guilty tomorrow to Federal tax evasion and the use and possession of cocaine, his lawyer said yesterday.


Macy Discloses Its Earnings
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company told its investors yesterday in a letter that its full-year earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation totaled $925 million, an 11 percent increase from $833.6 million the year before.


Among Alaska Spill's Victims: America's National Symbol


Argentine to Pardon Ex-Officers
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem says he intends to pardon about 20 retired generals and admirals facing charges of political killings and torture and nearly 100 younger officers who took part in military rebellions.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 3 P.M., followed by consecutive meetings of main committees.
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - 10 A.M.


Pennsylvania Under Abortion Spotlight
LEAD: As members of the General Assembly return to work this week, they are encountering a barrage of letters, demonstrations and lobbying about how they should vote on abortion issues.


WINE TALK
LEAD: SOME people from the Robert Keenan Winery turned up in New York last week to plug their merlot wine.
The California winery, on the slopes of Spring Mountain, overlooking the Napa Valley, makes three wines - chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon and merlot - and is especially proud of the third.


Court Rules Mullin Must Pay $3.9 Million
LEAD: Chris Mullin, the former St.
John's University star who now plays for the Golden State Warriors of the National Basketball Association, has been instructed by a Brooklyn Supreme Court jury to pay $3.9 million in damages to a pedestrian who was permanently injured in a 1985 accident after he was struck by an automobile driven by


Steroid Testing In N.F.L. Upheld
LEAD: A Federal judge refused today to stop the National Football League from testing for anabolic-steroid use and declined to reinstate 13 players suspended under the program.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Turnaround at Ally &amp; Gargano
LEAD: For 27 years, the advertising agency Ally &amp; Gargano has battled on behalf of America's corporate underdogs, helping unknown companies like Federal Express and MCI Communications become household names.
It now appears that the New York agency known among marketers for its pugnacious advertising is triumphing over its own demons.


Teacher Corps of 70's Inspired Team Spirit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Namibian Election Rivals Say Swapo Tortured Its Prisoners
LEAD: As it begins campaigning for elections here in November, the South-West Africa People's Organization has found itself combating politically damaging allegations about its treatment of dissidents in exile.


Vatican Strongly Urges Removal Of Convent at Site of Auschwitz
LEAD: Intervening in a dispute between Roman Catholics and Jews, the Vatican expressed strong support today for the relocation of a Carmelite convent from the site of the Auschwitz death camp in Poland.


Blockbuster Deal
LEAD: The Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, which runs hundreds of video rental stores, said Cox Cable Communications had agreed to buy one million Blockbuster common shares at $15 each.
It said Cox Cable had also signed a letter of intent to operate 100 Blockbuster video superstores.


Bush Prods Congress to Pass His Clean-Air Proposals


Many Oil Tankers Lack Radio Officer After U.S. Eases Rule
LEAD: Oil companies have obtained waivers from the Federal Communications Commission to eliminate radio officers on many tankers, a move to reduce costs that critics contend will increase the chances of oil spills.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air Malta, the airline of the Republic of Malta, ordered three Boeing 737-500 jetliners for about $90 million.


220 DC-10 Engines Are to Be Inspected For Possible Defects
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration today ordered inspections of 220 jet engines like the one involved in the crash landing of a United Airlines DC-10 in Iowa that killed 112 people two months ago.


Bond to Sell Breweries In a $1.9 Billion Deal
LEAD: The Australian entrepreneur Alan Bond announced today that he had reached a multibillion-dollar deal to sell half of his brewing operations to Lion Nathan Ltd., a New Zealand brewer and retailer.


Kemp Would Cut Officials' Power To Award Housing Funds at Will
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp will propose ending the awarding of funds based on personal discretion over need and merit.
Mr.
Kemp said he would also propose that consultants be required to register with his department and disclose their fees.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-15  The Vatican supported relocation of a Carmelite convent from the site of the Auschwitz death camp in Poland.
It said it was willing to pay part of the cost of a new interfaith prayer center outside the camp.
Page A1


FRENCH DC-10 LOST OVER WEST AFRICA
LEAD: A DC-10 jetliner bound for Paris from Congo with 170 people aboard disappeared today, probably over West Africa, the French airline UTA said.


Soybeans at 22-Month Low For the September Contract
LEAD: Soybeans for spot delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade fell to a 22-month low yesterday on a combination of harvest pressure and position-shifting in the September contract before its expiration today.


Corrections
LEAD: Picture captions in some copies of Science Times yesterday, with an article about a private study of an AIDS drug, reversed the identities of two men.
George Annas, a professor at Boston University School of Medicine, was at the right with beard and glasses; Martin Delaney, director of the study, was at the left.


Bentsen Ends Hearing Because Sullivan Is Missing
LEAD: In an action some Republicans called politically motivated, Senator Lloyd Bentsen angrily ended the committee's deliberations about Medicare today because Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services, was not present.


Canadian Inquiry Ends
LEAD: After eight months of testimony from 120 witnesses, the Canadian Government's inquiry into the use of performance-enhancing drugs by athletes ended today with a sober look to the future.
The final witness, Lyle Makosky, the assistant Deputy Minister of Fitness and Amateur Sport, said that despite the heightened awareness around the world of drug use in sports and a variety of initiatives to address the problems, ''the international campaign has been largely on paper.


Century of Deadly Storms
LEAD: Following is a list of the worst Atlantic hurricanes of the 20th century.
Hurricanes were given names in 1954.
Sept. 8, 1900 - Galveston, Tex., 6,000 dead.
Sept. 16-22, 1926 - Florida and Alabama, 372 dead.
Oct. 20, 1926 - Cuba, 600 dead.
Sept. 12-17, 1928 - West Indies and Florida, 6,000 dead.


Forestville, Calif.
LEAD: WHEN you walk into Brother Juniper's Bakery in Forestville, Calif., it always smells a little bit like harvest time.


Budget Roundup; Senate Votes to Increase Limit On Mortgages Insured by U.S.
LEAD: The Senate approved a measure tonight to raise the ceiling on mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration, making them more available to home buyers in high-cost areas.


New York Games May Join Grand Prix
LEAD: The New York Games, an artistic if not financial success in its debut as an international track and field meet last July, would become affiliated with the worldwide Grand Prix circuit next summer if the International Amateur Athletic Federation approves a measure designed to restructure the circuit.


Strong Sales to China
LEAD: China continues to be a substantial buyer of United States farm products this year, the Agriculture Department reports.
The value of commodity sales to China are still expected to be around $1.5 billion in the fiscal year that runs through Sept. 30, up from $613 million in 1987-88, the department's Economic Research Service said Monday.


House Panel Backs Minimum Wage Plan
LEAD: The Democratic-controlled House Labor and Education Comittee bowed today to President Bush's insistence that a proposed increase in the minimum wage be held to $4.25.


Washington at Work; Spokeswoman on Foreign Affairs: A Behind-the-Scenes Player Is Up Front
LEAD: Before Margaret Tutwiler took the job as State Department spokeswoman, she called many people she knew and some she did not know who had held the job in the past.


William Eddy, 87, a Developer of TV, Dies
LEAD: William Crawford Eddy, an engineer who developed television transmission and helped to establish Chicago's first television station, died at his home in Michigan City on Saturday after a long illness.
He was 87 years old.


Three Scottish Tables For Top-Notch Eating
LEAD: BORN with the name of McIntire, growing up in a north-country family, I must have Scottish blood in my veins.
It's a connection I'd resisted most of my life, disliking heather honey, Scotch terriers and anything with tartan wrapped round it.
Then six years ago work forced me up to Scotland.
Gorse shone yellow against blue sea and white sand.


August Home Construction Dropped 5%
LEAD: Housing construction, depressed by a jump in mortgage rates, fell by 5 percent in August, the Government said today in a report many analysts viewed as only a temporary setback for the housing industry.


Where Vermont and Quebec Meld
LEAD: THINK of Derby Line, Vt., and Rock Island, Quebec, as an El Paso and Juarez of the north.
Smaller and colder than the Texas-Mexico border towns, but both locked in a geographic embrace across an international divide.
The invisible United States-Canadian border runs through the center of what appears to be a single town.


Economic Scene; Fighting Cocaine, Coffee, Flowers
LEAD: EVEN as President Bush cheers Colombia's brave effort to stamp out exports of cocaine, others in the Administration are making it more difficult for Colombians to profit from exports of coffee and cut flowers.


Forest Murder: Ours and Theirs; Tongass Trees Aren't Cheeseburgers
LEAD: When visiting U.S. senators urged President Jose Sarney of Brazil earlier this year to stop the burning of the Amazon's wondrous rain forest, he asked: ''But what about Tongass?''


Our Sugar Protectionism Spurs Coca Growing; Look at the Causes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scotland
LEAD: To the Editor: Having just returned from my second visit to the Grampian and other areas of Scotland in two years, I read the articles about Scotland (Travel, July 16) with particular interest.


Costs in New York Area Rose by 0.2% in August
LEAD: Consumer prices in the New York metropolitan area rose by two-tenths of 1 percent in August, the regional bureau of the Labor Department reported yesterday.


The Can't-Do Guy
LEAD: President Bush says nothing can be done about these massacres.


Remote Splendors of the Highlands
LEAD: NOWADAYS even the English enjoy visiting the Northwest Highlands of Scotland.
It wasn't always so.
For more than a thousand years, they ventured there only to chase Highlanders, just like the Romans before them, thinking, like them, that neither the place nor the people were quite civilized.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


WHAT'S DOING AROUND: Lake Champlain
LEAD: Perhaps it is childhood memories of stories about the pilgrims, but whatever the reason, Americans seem to have an atavistic yearning for New England each fall.
Those craving frosty nights and crisp, clear days may chose to tour Lake Champlain, where they can admire the autumnal beauty of the Green Mountains of Vermont and the Adirondacks of New York State.


OPPOSITION FORMS IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: The largest of several new groups formed to campaign for change in East Germany announced today that it had applied to field candidates in parliamentary elections next May as the first countrywide opposition organization.


Fleeing Suspect Killed by Bus
LEAD: A homicide suspect who was fleeing from the police was struck and killed by a bus on Manhattan's East Side yesterday afternoon, the police said.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Raymond O'Donnell, said the man, whose identity was not immediately released, was a suspect in the fatal stabbing on Sept. 14 of a man on the Lower East Side.


Review/Film; Sutherland Catches On To Apartheid Slowly
LEAD: Being on the side of the angels isn't always an advantage.
Moral certainty can reduce matters that are, quite literally, black and white to terms that are even more so.
Thus far, virtually every cinematic attempt to convey the outrages of South African life under apartheid has been diminished by its own good intentions and by a grim sameness that eradicates any element of surprise.


Christian Chief Rejects Lebanese Peace Plan
LEAD: An Arab League envoy's efforts to arrange a cease-fire stalled today as Christian leaders insisted on assurances for an early withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon.


Real Estate; Jamaica Mall Is Renovated After Setback
LEAD: THE owners of the shopping mall in the former Gertz department store in Jamaica, Queens, who have seen a third of their retail tenants leave since the mall opened 18 months ago, are trying to infuse new life in the stalled center with a renovation and a new name.


Sooner to Go to Prison
LEAD: The former University of Oklahoma quarterback Charles Thompson is scheduled to report today to the Federal prison at Big Spring, Tex., to begin serving a two-year term for a cocaine-related conviction.
Thompson, who would have been a junior this season, faces a maximum of 27 months in prison and a minimum of 21 months.


A Craftsman's Touch Brings Wood to Life


Jet on Injured Reserve
LEAD: The Jets placed their strong safety, Rich Miano, on injured reserve and waived a running back, Nuu Faaola, yesterday.
Miano, a fifth-year veteran, reinjured his left knee in the second quarter of the 38-24 loss Sunday at Cleveland.
He was originally hurt in the Aug. 12 exhibition game at Green Bay.


'Junk Bonds' Recapture Much Lost Ground
LEAD: Trading in the ''junk bond'' market rebounded sharply yesterday, making up a third to a half of the ground lost last week, as buyers came looking for bargains.


Honda Prices Up
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company said it had raised prices in the United States on its 1990 models an average of 4.4 percent, or $549, over its 1989 models.
Honda said the centerpiece of its 1990 lineup would be the newly redesigned Accord mid-sized car, which would carry suggested retail prices of $12,145 to $17,345.


Market Place; Griffin Proposal To Cost Investors
LEAD: LESS than a year after raising $325 million in the ''junk bond'' market, Merv Griffin yesterday proposed a reorganization of Resorts International that will leave bondholders with substantial losses but holding a 25 percent equity stake in the troubled casino company.


With Koch Out, Giuliani Tailors Appeal to the Right
LEAD: Changing a strategy that was drawn up with Mayor Edward I. Koch in mind as the likely Democratic opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani and his advisers are now trying to appeal not so much to liberal Democrats as to conservative and independent ones.


A Natural Fat Substitute
LEAD: To The Living Section:


U.S. Official Questions Foreign Airline Deals
LEAD: Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner said today that the Bush Administration had serious questions about the increasing number of foreign investments in United States airlines, even when the foreign partners buy stakes smaller than the 25 percent legal limit.


Louisa Campbell, 81, American Art Expert
LEAD: Louisa Dresser Campbell, former curator of collections at the Worcester (Mass.) Art Museum and a specialist in early American painting and American decorative arts, died of a systemic infection on Friday at the Medical Center of Central Massachusetts-Memorial in Worcester.
She was 81 years old and lived in Worcester.


Whose Millennium Is It Anyway?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ethiopian Peace Talks Recess With Some Issues Unsettled
LEAD: Negotiators for the Ethiopian Government and an Eritrean rebel group have recessed their talks for two months with some procedural issues unresolved.


Urging Testy Drivers to Be Easy Riders
LEAD: It is not much fun commuting on Connecticut highways, with their daily delays because of construction projects and jackknifed tractor-trailers.
No wonder drivers get testy.


Hefty New Primers For Cooke Lacking Practice and Time
LEAD: COOKBOOK publishers this fall are rolling out weighty new editions intended for an audience of inexperienced but eager cooks.
Their needs are seen as different from, and their tastes more wide ranging than, those of the generation that already wore out the basic cookbooks bought in the 60's, 70's and early 80's.


Portable and Desktop Units To Be Introduced by Apple
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce its long-awaited portable Macintosh computer Wednesday and a new high-end desktop machine known as the Macintosh IIci.


The Editorial Notebook; Still a False Start
LEAD: President Bush promised Monday to produce proposals for reducing strategic arms that will ''capture the imagination of the Soviet people.'' But in the next breath he said he felt in ''no rush on that subject.'' Not that anyone would accuse him of haste.
In his eight months in office, there's been practically no movement in these almost eight-year-old negotiations with


Blazing Trails
LEAD: To the Editor: In ''Blazing Unfamiliar Trails'' you write, ''Ms.
Wadsworth was too old for youth hostels . . . .'' I hope you meant that she preferred to camp out.
The youth hostels in Europe are not restricted by age.
In fact, there are often special accommodations for families.


Frank's Friends Dispute Suggestions of Demise
LEAD: Friends and colleagues of Representative Barney Frank today disputed suggestions that his chances of political survival were rapidly dimming.


Accused Slayer of Girlfriend Began a Religion, Police Say
LEAD: A 28-year-old East Village man charged with killing and dismembering his girlfriend is a marijuana dealer who created his own bizarre religion, practiced animal sacrifice and sometimes said he was God, acquaintances and the police said yesterday.


McDonald's Hopes Pizza Will Be the Next McHit
LEAD: After several years trying to develop a pizza-making operation fast and good enough to satisfy its customers, the McDonald's Corporation has begun to test-market a product.


G.O.P. Senators Offer More Drug Spending
LEAD: Senate Republicans offered today to add $800 million to President Bush's anti-drug proprosals to meet a political challenge from the Democrats, said lawmakers involved in the negotiations.


For Chips That Overheat: A Tiny Radiator
LEAD: The success of computer designers in cramming increasingly powerful chips into ever smaller spaces for the next generation of supercomputers is creating a difficult problem: overheating.


Text of Vatican Statement
LEAD: Following is the text, translated from the French by The New York Times, of a Vatican statement today on the Jewish-Catholic dispute over a convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp:


Book Notes
LEAD:  Harper the Winner


Pierce Considers Citing the Fifth Amendment
LEAD: A lawyer for Samuel R. Pierce Jr. raised the prospect today that the former Housing Secretary would consider citing his constitutional right against compelled self-incrimination if, as expected, he is forced to appear before a House panel on Tuesday.


Review/Dance; A Jammed Carnegie Shows That Tap's Time Has Come
LEAD: Is tap dancing popular?
Does the sun rise in the morning?
A packed Carnegie Hall filled with aficionados applauded fine points and roared their approval Monday night as they confirmed the art form's rebirth.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Connaught's Stock
LEAD: Connaught Biosciences Inc. rose again today on continued speculation that Institut Merieux S.A. of France would try to top a bid of $764 million (Canadian), or about $644 million (United States), from Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and the Chiron Corporation.
Connaught shares rose 62.5 Canadian cents, to $32.375, on the Toronto Stock Exchange - $2.375 higher than the offer from Ciba and Chiron.


Cubs, Salazar: Right Player, Right Team
LEAD: The Yankees used to do this kind of thing, the last-minute shopping expedition when company is coming.


U.S. Securities Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in sluggish trading yesterday, despite economic reports that were better than expected, while the ''junk bond'' market staged a rally after losing ground last week.


Our Sugar Protectionism Spurs Coca Growing; Colombian Police
LEAD: To the Editor:


Koch Details His Final Year as Mayor
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch issued his annual Mayor's Management Report for the 12th and last time yesterday, praising his own stewardship of New York City while noting that the next Mayor faces ''enormous problems.''


And for the Proficient Cook...
LEAD: FOR experienced cooks, the fall season for cookbooks and books about food promises to be one of the most interesting and exciting in years.
Among the early offerings for cooks and readers alike, look for the following:


Pauley Discussing Her Role With 'Today'
LEAD: After yet another major change at NBC's ''Today,'' the co-anchor Jane Pauley has scheduled a meeting with NBC executives to discuss her future with the program.


Dreyfus Sets Sale
LEAD: The Dreyfus Corporation, an operator of mutual funds, agreed to sell its credit card operation to the Delaware unit of the Bank of New York Company for about $120 million.
In addition, Dreyfus will receive payments of about $8 million a year for six years for an agreement not to compete with Bank of New York in the credit card business.


MOVE BY VATICAN APPLAUDED IN U.S.
LEAD: The Vatican's declaration backing relocation of a Roman Catholic convent from the site of the Auschwitz death camp removes a serious impediment to better Catholic-Jewish relations, leaders of the church and of Jewish organizations said yesterday.


HEADS FOR THE U.S.
LEAD: The fiercest hurricane to rake the northeastern Caribbean in a decade sideswiped the Bahamas yesterday and began swirling toward the United States after damaging tens of thousands of homes and causing billions of dollars of damage.


Relief Agencies Gear Up to Help Victims of Storm
LEAD: As reports of devastation caused by Hurricane Hugo continued to pour in from Puerto Rico and other Caribbean islands, government and voluntary relief agencies geared up yesterday for a vast effort to assist the victims with medicine, food, shelter and money.


Ryan Honored Again
LEAD: Nolan Ryan of the Texas Rangers, who struck out his 5,000th major league batter on Aug. 22, has been named recipient of the American League's Joe Cronin Award for significant achievement in 1989.
Ryan also won the first Cronin award in 1973 while pitching for the California Angels and becomes the first player to win it twice.(


Gertrude T. Friedberg, Playwright, 81
LEAD: Gertrude Tonkonogy Friedberg, a playwright and an author, died of cancer on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 81 years old.


GPA Group to Buy 12 Airbus Planes
LEAD: Airbus Industrie, the European consortium, said GPA Group Ltd., an Irish aircraft leasing company, would acquire 12 A321 airliners, with delivery set for 1996.
It gave no financial details, but industry officials said the list price for an A321 was $45 million.


Haiti's Chief Cuts Sentence of Duvalier Aide
LEAD: The life sentence of the chief of Francois Duvalier's secret police has been commuted to 30 years in prison, a state-run newspaper said today.


Quarterback Suspended
LEAD: Penn State's starting quarterback, Tom Bill, has been suspended at least one game for violation of team policy, Coach Joe Paterno announced yesterday at his weekly news conference.
Paterno said a sophomore, Tony Sacca, would replace Bill in the starting lineup Saturday against Boston College.
The coach said the suspension was for an indefinite term and would be reviewed ''when reasonable and proper to do so.


Ford Buys A Stake In Jaguar
LEAD: Firing the first shot in what analysts expect to erupt into a bidding war for Jaguar P.L.C., the Ford Motor Company announced today that it had begun buying shares of the troubled British manufacturer of luxury cars.


New Products From Next Inc.
LEAD: Next Inc. stepped up its campaign to capture a chunk of the business market today, announcing two new products and promoting a deal with the International Business Machines Corporation.
Steven Jobs, who founded


James Sheils, 76, Dies; Headed Siboney Corp.
LEAD: James H. Sheils, a former New York City Commissioner of Investigation and a retired president of the Siboney Corporation, died of complications from lymphoma Monday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 76 years old.


Bridge
LEAD: After a battle down to the last few deals here tonight, the Dutch women's team qualified for the final of the Venice Trophy world championship contest.
After trailing the West German team by 18 international match points going into the final session of 16 deals, the team gained 39 to win by 21.
The turning point came when the star German pair had a disastrous misunderstanding, losing 1,700 by playing in four clubs doubled with a 2-1 trump fit, rejecting an 8-4 fit in hearts.


Q and A
LEAD:  Air Couriers


Yields Down On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were down for the week ended yesterday.


Private Study of AIDS Drug: Praise and Warning
LEAD: A private study of a promising AIDS drug has produced encouraging results, its director said yesterday.
But he warned people who have obtained the drug on the underground market not to take it until more studies are completed.


Student Sues Wesleyan on Tuition-Fixing
LEAD: A Wesleyan University student is suing Wesleyan and 11 other private universities and colleges, saying they traded confidential information in a conspiracy to fix their tuition rates.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Sept. 12 about machines that detect explosives in luggage referred incorrectly in some copies to the abilities of one device.


Lawrence Marks, 64, Corporation Executive
LEAD: Lawrence I. Marks, former chief financial officer of the Culbro Corporation, a manufacturer of tobacco, candy, health and beauty aids and other products, died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, on Saturday at his summer home in New London, N.H.
He was 64 years old and lived in Forest Hills,


After the Maples, The Golden Tamarack
LEAD: THERE'S a tree in Lyme, our New Hampshire village, that serves as an infallible guide.
Set on the village common, it's the first large maple visitors see as they drive into town.
In early September, somewhere between the first frost and the beginning of the foliage forecasts on the nightly news, a leaf toward the top will take on a barely detectable tinge of red.


Vatican Acts After Persuading Polish Primate to Ease Confrontational Stance
LEAD: The Vatican statement supporting the removal of a Carmelite convent from the site of the Auschwitz death camp was apparently issued after quiet but firm efforts to nudge the Polish Roman Catholic leadership around Jozef Cardinal Glemp to take a more conciliatory stand on the issue.


In Command At the U.N.
LEAD: The United Nations opened its 44th General Assembly today by unanimously electing as its new President a former Nigerian major general who was a leader of one of Africa's most unusual military coups.
The new Assembly


Carolco Plans To Raise Stake
LEAD: Carolco Pictures Inc. said today that it planned to buy additional shares of Live Entertainment Inc. in the open market.


France
LEAD: To the Editor: One of the methods used by the Republicans to dispatch the objecting Vendeans (Travel, July 9) was the noyades, or wholesale drowning.


Hanover's Debt Rating
LEAD: Officials at debt-rating agencies said yesterday that they had not raised the investment ratings of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation despite the banking company's announcement Monday that it would sell control its business finance unit for $1.28 billion and raise $620 million through the sale of new stock.


When Spain Ruled the Southwest
LEAD: DRESSED as an 18th-century Spanish colonist, Della Roybal, a volunteer at the Old Cienega Village Museum south of Santa Fe, thrusts along-handled paddle into the horno, or beehive oven, and withdraws a paddleful of plump, perfectly browned miniature loaves.
The aroma of freshly baked bread wafts around the adobe courtyard, and like a pied piper in black skirts and white lace, the baker collects a crowd on her way to the sale table.


Abducted West Bank Mayor Rescued by an Angry Crowd
LEAD: A mayor in the Israeli-occupied West Bank was abducted by Arabs suspected of collaborating with the Israeli authorities Monday night but freed after hundreds of residents attacked the house where he was held, witnesses said today.


A Heavy Rainfall Pelts the New York Region


Citicorp Rates Dip at Auction
LEAD: For the third consecutive week, interest rates fell yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Gorbachev Offers Fractious Nationalists Both Olive Branch and Stick
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today laid down a policy on growing nationalist agitation in the Soviet Union that invited conciliation but drew the line firmly against the separatist hopes of the nation's restive republics.


New FICO Issue Of $665 Million
LEAD: The Financing Corporation, an arm of the Federal Home Loan Bank system, yesterday priced through competitive bidding $665 million in 8.6 percent bonds due Sept. 26, 2019, through Salomon Brothers, which purchased the entire issue.


Season Ends as a Profitable One for Many Baseball Farm Clubs
LEAD: In a sport where buses are as much a staple as cramped clubhouses and $11 a day in meal money, not many Class A baseball teams fly to their games.
But the Mets of Pittsfield, Mass., flew to a playoff game recently and by all accounts they deserved it.


Frazier Wins Knicks Radio Job
LEAD: Clyde and the Pearl, also known as Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe, spent their playing careers trying to upstage one another as opponents and as teammates.
Recently, they each made a play for the spot in the Knicks' radio booth left vacant when Ernie Grunfeld moved to the bench as an assistant to Stu Jackson.


25 Cinematic Treasures
LEAD:  The Best Years of Our Lives (1946); director, William Wyler; starring Fredric March, Myrna Loy and Dana Andrews.
American World War II veterans try to readjust to civilian life.
Casablanca (1942); Michael Curtiz; Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman and Claude Rains.
Everybody comes to Rick's.
Citizen Kane (1941); Orson Welles; Orson Welles, Joseph Cotten and Everett Sloane.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Unorthodox AIDS Study Asserts Some Promise  Despite three deaths and other complications, a much-criticized study of an AIDS drug produced some encouraging results, its director said.
But he warned patients not to take Compound Q yet.
Page A21.
Campeau Gets $250 Million  Agreement was reached for a loan to help ease a cash crunch at Bloomingdale's and the eight other Campeau-owned department stores.


Gorbachev Warns Separatists
LEAD: The Soviet President called for 'solving all problems by political methods,' but denounced secessionists as 'adventurists.' Page A8.


Deals
LEAD:  Basketball


SUNY and CUNY Plan No Increases in Tuition
LEAD: With both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Legislature eager to avoid a replay of this spring's protests against proposed tuition increases, administrators at New York's public universities said today that they did not plan to seek any rise next year.


Review/Music; Concert of Italian Works
LEAD: The Cathedral Free Concert Society opened its eighth season of free performances at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine with a Saturday evening concert of Italian music.
The performance, which featured the Brooklyn Philharmonic, the Cathedral Singers and vocal soloists, was co-sponsored by the Italian Government and was offered as an adjunct to the ''Italian Artists Against Apartheid'' exhibition at the cathedral, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, through Sept.


Lawyer Denies Police Bensonhurst Account
LEAD: The lawyer for a defendant in the killing of a black youth in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn denied yesterday that his client had told the police that he saw another defendant shoot at the teen-ager.


Smoothing Out the Bumps a Bit in Charter Flights
LEAD: In his capacity as spokesman for the consumer affairs section of the Department of Transportation, Hoyte B. Decker Jr. does not have many occasions to laugh.
But this time he did.
Asked if he thought 1989 would go into the books as not having seen the stranding of mobs of people traveling overseas on air charters, he roared.


About New York; Brother Fights Possible Parole In Fatal Beating
LEAD: In New York, they say, people get away with murder.


States Using Stiff Methods To Collect Child Support
LEAD: Using strengthened Federal and state laws, New Jersey, Connecticut and New York are tracking down parents who fail to pay court-ordered child support and collecting the money by seizing their wages, intercepting tax refunds or putting the delinquents in jail until they pay.


Methanol Defended as Option
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency responded today to oil and auto industry criticism of an important part of President Bush's clean air legislation by defending methanol as both an economically and environmentally sound fuel alternative to gasoline.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Information Services Co., a unit of American Express Co., named Louise M. Parent general counsel.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The people on the islands respect these storms.
When they have warnings they take them seriously.
People in the United States should do likewise.''  - Lee Grenci, Pennsylvania State University meteorologist.  [ A1:6. ]


Gorbachev: Beyond Our Help
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev's troubles are mounting again, and Americans wonder whether and how to help him.
This week's events frame the question nicely.


Oompah Time in Hermann, Mo.
LEAD: DISGUSTED with their life in Philadelphia and hoping to create a Teutonic empire in the wilderness, a band of hardy German-American settlers founded a new town, Hermann, in the rolling hills of central Missouri just before Christmas in 1837.
The site they chose, on the banks of the Missouri River, must have reminded them of the Rhine.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 15
Sept. 8
Sept. 16
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
218.6
218.4
216.9
Distillate stocks
121.4
119.8
131.8
Crude imports, daily
6.3
6.5
4.1
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.1
2.3
Crude stocks
329.0
338.6
322.7
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
89.8
92.0
84.5


Task for Bacteria: Getting Rid of PCB's
LEAD: Naturally occurring bacteria are increasingly being used to clean up chemical waste sites, particularly watery ones where methods developed for concentrated wastes would be costly to apply.
But they have not been particularly effective on a group of chemicals known as polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCB's, which were widely used and discarded in places like the Hudson


Interim Chief Named At Home Loan Banks
LEAD: Mary K. Bush, a top official at the Federal National Mortgage Association, yesterday was named the interim managing director of the Federal Housing Finance Board, an agency created to oversee the Federal Home Loan Bank System.


On the Trail of the Wild Porcini North Italy
LEAD: YEARS later I can still remember my first taste of fresh porcini.
My Tuscan host insisted on ordering the first of the fall season's wild mushrooms, and tucked in his napkin with a flourish.
When the dish arrived, with its strong taste of musk and forest, it wasn't at all what I expected.
Some six inches across, the mushroom cap had simply been broiled and was served up like a steak.


Lessons
LEAD: In a speech to the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Walter Lippmann once lamented what he called the ''enormous vacuum'' in American college curriculums.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States asked yesterday that donations to assist victims of Hurricane Hugo be sent to the American Red Cross or branch offices of three banks that are setting up special accounts for Puerto Rican disaster assistance.


CONSUMER PRICES STEADY IN AUGUST
LEAD: Consumer prices over all were unchanged in August, making it the first month in more than three years that the Consumer Price Index did not rise, the Labor Department reported today.


Blazing Trails
LEAD: To the Editor: I was joyed yet saddened to read the article ''Blazing Unfamiliar Trails'' by Paul L. Montgomery (Travel, Aug. 13).
Joyed to read about others who share my love for walking and saddened because of Esther Wadsworth's statement: ''I wouldn't recommend it for anybody alone.
It's too lonely.


Wary Southeast Watches the Skies
LEAD: Coastal residents across the Southeast warily followed the path of Hurricane Hugo today as some experts raised concerns about what a combination of runaway coastal development and unprepared residents could mean if the storm slammed into the area.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 9 about a former mayor of Danbury, Conn., indicted on Federal racketeering charges misstated the number of terms he served.
The former Mayor, James E. Dyer, served four two-year terms between 1979 and 1987.


Goetz Freed From Jail Just After Midnight
LEAD: Bernhard H. Goetz was released from jail early this morning after serving more than eight months of a one-year sentence for possessing an unlicensed handgun.


Mets Fine And Bench Two Stars Who Left
LEAD: The Mets finally won a game today but steepened their fall from grace when Darryl Strawberry and Kevin McReynolds were fined and benched for being in the locker room during the ninth inning Monday night, while their teammates were trying to rally against the first-place Chicago Cubs.


Witness Calls Garcia's Wife Power Behind Congressman
LEAD: Robert Garcia's wife, Jane Lee Garcia, was known in political and business circles as ''the real Congressman,'' a former executive of the Wedtech Corporation testified yesterday at the bribery trial of the seven-term Representative from the Bronx and his wife.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


Container Center Helps Poor and Homeless to Help Themselves
LEAD: To the Editor:


Salary Data Show 8 College Heads Top $200,000
LEAD: The chief executives of eight leading private universities each earned more than $200,000 last year, according to Federal tax forms the institutions made available to the public for the first time.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: PESTO sauce, among the most glorious exports of Genoa, has myriad uses aside from mixing with pasta.
I often use pesto, or some variation of it, as a sauce for grilled fish, cold meat or salads.


NBC Is First All Season
LEAD: Even with ABC and CBS offering some of their new series last week, NBC managed (with a little help from Miss America and Sister Kate) to retain its hold on first place in prime time.
It was the 65th consecutive first place for NBC, which became the first network ever to place first for all 52 weeks of a season.


Writer Wins Plea on U.S. List of Excluded Aliens
LEAD: Three years after the Government, without explanation, barred a Colombian journalist from entering the United States, a Federal district judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered the Immigration and Naturalization Service to make available to the woman's lawyers its secret list of all excluded aliens.


Avon Reduces Profit Forecast
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. disclosed yesterday that it had reduced its 1989 earnings projections because of weakening sales and a strong dollar.


Orioles Stay in Chase By Beating Tigers, 6-2
LEAD: Craig Worthington and Tim Hulett broke out of slumps with home runs as the Baltimore Orioles beat the Detroit Tigers, 6-2, tonight for their third victory in four games and stay right behind Toronto.


Vietnamese General Says Rebels Have 23,000 Troops in Cambodia
LEAD: A week before Vietnamese forces are scheduled to pull out of Cambodia, a senior Vietnamese general said today that the guerrilla coalition opposed to the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh has 37,000 soldiers, of whom 23,000 are currently inside the territory of Cambodia.


Koch Issues His Last Report and a Dire Prediction


Japan to Limit Ships With Huge Nets
LEAD: Under pressure from the Western allies and South Pacific nations, Japan said today that it would cut by two-thirds the number of fishing boats permitted to deploy giant drift nets that sweep up large amounts of ocean life, including sea birds, seals and dolphins.


Communists and Foes Back a Multiparty Hungary
LEAD: The Communist Party and six opposition groups reached partial agreement Monday night on arrangements for Hungary's transition from a one-party state to a multiparty parliamentary system.


Results Plus
LEAD:  TRACK AND FIELD  Berger Upsets Lewis: Andreas Berger of Austria upset Carl Lewis in the 100-meter sprint yesterday at an international meet in New Delhi.
Berger was timed in 10.46 seconds to Lewis's 10.47 on a hot, humid evening at the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium.


WASTE STUDY SET AT WEAPONS PLANT
LEAD: The Department of Energy said today that it would begin studying how to dispose of toxic solvents stored at the Rocky Flats plant near Denver under an agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency and the State of Colorado.


Experts Say Tyson Would Not Beat Louis
LEAD: Site fees for Mike Tyson's title defenses have diminished by millions since the Las Vegas Hilton paid $7 million for his bout with Frank Bruno in February because of the scarcity of credible opposition for the heavyweight champion.


Soliciting In Airports Is Upheld
LEAD: A rule against distributing literature and soliciting contributions at the three major airports in the New York metropolitan area is unconstitutional, a Federal judge ruled Monday.


U.S. Appeals Court Refuses To Re-examine Attica Case
LEAD: Eighteen years after the bloody prison uprising at Attica, N.Y., the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has foreclosed a new examination of Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller's responsibility for the violence that ended in the deaths of 10 hostages and 29 prisoners.


L.I. Merlot Wins State Contest
LEAD: A 1987 merlot from Le Reve, a financially troubled Long Island winery, won the best-of-show honors Saturday in a tight contest sponsored by the New York Wine and Grape Foundation.
But none of the competing wines were considered good enough to be awarded gold medals.


New MGM Grand Complex
LEAD: MGM Grand Inc., which owns a luxury airline and the Desert Inn &amp; Casino of Las Vegas, Nev., said today it plans to build an entertainment complex in Las Vegas.
The $100 million complex will include a new MGM Grand hotel, a movie theme park and a studio tour.


Books of The Times; When Winter Will Neither Chill Nor Charm
LEAD:  The End of Nature  By Bill McKibben  226 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Dow Falls Slightly, but Many Issues Gain
LEAD: Stocks ended narrowly mixed yesterday on moderately higher volume.


Ferranti Unit Under Inquiry
LEAD: The Defense Department said today that it is investigating a Pennsylvania company bought two years ago by Ferranti International Signal P.L.C., a British electronics company.
A Pentagon spokesman, Fred Hoffman, was asked about reports that the British military contractor had lost up to $235 million through questionable contracts it inherited in a takeover of the International Signal and Control Company, based in Lancaster,


On Appeal, San Diego Club Recovers the America's Cup
LEAD: A New York appeals court ruled yesterday that the San Diego Yacht Club could keep the America's Cup, which it won a year ago on the water but then lost in court.


Our Sugar Protectionism Spurs Coca Growing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Teacher Corps of 70's Inspired Team Spirit; Take a Vow of Poverty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Genia Nemenoff, 84, Partner in Piano Duo
LEAD: Genia Nemenoff, a pianist who toured widely in the 1940's and 1950's as part of a duo with her husband, the pianist Pierre Luboshutz, died of heart failure on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 84 years old.


Jackson Tells Bensonhurst School to Reaffirm Rights Effort
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson told a crowd of cheering students at a high school in the Bensonhurst area yesterday that after the killing of a black teen-ager there last month, they had an important opportunity to reaffirm the victories of the civil rights movement.


A Connecticut Farm Turned Crafts Cornucopia
LEAD: ON a rare stretch of U.S. 1 that is still framed by apple and peach orchards, just a few miles from the urban clutter surrounding New Haven, an old farm in Branford has been transformed into a thriving crafts center.
About 20 artists and artisans work at Branford Crafts Village at Bittersweet Farm, in unpretentious but attractive quarters that double as workshops and stores.


Review/Music; Love Songs Of Mexico, Some Bawdy
LEAD: ''Mexico Romantico,'' the program that Repertorio Espanol is presenting at the Gramercy Arts Theater, 138 East 27th Street, is an enchanting revue built around 42 popular and traditional songs from Mexico, performed in Spanish by seven singers.


Forest Murder: Ours and Theirs; Brazil's Season of Shame
LEAD: This is the time of year when Brazil's farmers torch the Amazon forest, the ancient home of 80,000 different species of plants and 30 million species of animals, many still unknown to science.


Angola Is Admitted to the World Bank and I.M.F.
LEAD: Angola joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank today, despite objections by the United States, which earlier this summer cast the only vote against its membership.


Joining the Wranglers at the Circle Z
LEAD: IN the morning sun, the sandstone walls of the canyon glowed yellow, orange and a dozen shades of red.
A gnarled mesquite or a cactus jutted out here and there from a crack in the rock wall.
I felt at home in the saddle after a week of daily riding, and I scarcely glanced at my horse, Butterfly, a lively chestnut mare with flaxen mane and tail.


Review/Opera; Brecht-Weill 'Mahagonny,' Set in 20's Hollywood
LEAD: The Los Angeles Music Center Opera, which in its first three seasons has brought home-grown, big-time opera to this city for the first time, has a penchant for splashy, flashy productions.
The opening pair of fall operas consists of a ''Tosca'' with Maria Ewing, conducted by Placido Domingo, and a new staging of the Brecht-Weill ''Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny'' directed by Dr.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and picture captions in Science Times yesterday about Alaskan eagles, and a related front-page caption, misidentified a biologist and her institution.
She is Karolann Kemenosh-Longo of the Arctic Animal Hospital of Anchorage, of which the Bird Treatment and Learning Center is a part.


Artists Divided On Corcoran Apology
LEAD: Artists remained divided today over whether a statement of regret by the Corcoran Gallery of Art for canceling an exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe was acceptable.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Air Strike In Australia Causes Delays


Wisconsin-Palestinian Link Is Praised and Criticized
LEAD: The student government at the University of Wisconsin here says it is forming one of the first student-to-student relationships between a Palestinian university and an American one.


The Case of the Reluctant Idler
LEAD: I SUPPOSE I inherited my aversion to vacations from my father.
His idea of foreign travel consisted of venturing from his office in suburban Los Angeles all the way downtown, which his job occasionally required him to do.


Baker, Defending Policy, Details 'Creative' Response to Gorbachev
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d moved today to counter charges that the Bush Administration was unresponsive to opportunities presented by changes in the Soviet bloc.


I.B.M. Data Will Speed Programs
LEAD: Filling in one of the final pieces of its vision of computing in the 1990's, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday introduced a broad range of software-development tools designed to speed the process of writing and managing new programs.


Los Angeles Journal; In a Quest For Profit, Beethoven Is Ousted
LEAD: The final anguished notes of the symphony still hung in the air as the announcer, Mary Fain, said, ''That was Tchaikovsky's 'Pathetique' Symphony, composed just a few months before his death, and played just a few hours before ours here at KFAC.''


Move by Simmons On Georgia Gulf
LEAD: The Dallas financier Harold C. Simmons has raised his stake in the Georgia Gulf Corporation to 9.9 percent from 8.9 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Simmons said he had bought 250,000 Georgia Gulf shares for prices ranging from $51.875 to $52.50 a share.
Mr.
Simmons had sold a portion of Georgia


Review/Theater; Identity Loss in 'Imperceptible Mutabilities'
LEAD: Behind the imposing title ''Imperceptible Mutabilities in the Third Kingdom,'' there is the voice of a thoughtful young playwright, Suzan-Lori Parks.
In a quartet of thematically related scenes (at BACA Downtown in Brooklyn), the author demonstrates a historical perspective and a theatrical versatility.


Schools Chief Choice
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education has decided to select Joseph A. Fernandez of Miami to be schools chancellor.
Page B1.


College Housing Headache: Research Equipment
LEAD: The increasing sophistication and cost of scientific and engineering research equipment is straining the ability of the nation's major colleges and universities to house and maintain the devices properly, officials in higher education and the Federal Government say.


John G. Main, Executive, 60
LEAD: John G. Main, managing partner of Management Practice Inc., a management-consulting business in Manhattan, died of a heart attack on Monday at his home in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
He was 60 years old.


Upjohn Says President Plans to Retire on Jan. 1
LEAD: Lawrence C. Hoff, who joined the Upjohn Company in 1950 as a drug salesman calling on doctors, will retire as its president and chief operating officer on Jan. 1, the company said yesterday.


Campaign Trail; Giuliani Seeking D'Amato's Support
LEAD: The D'Amato-Giuliani political minuet began yesterday and is likely to end later this week with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato pledging his support to Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose mayoral candidacy he tried to derail by backing Ronald S. Lauder in the Republican primary.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The World Bank yesterday announced the pricing and terms of a $1.5 billion global bond issue.
Not only is the sale the organization's largest, but analysts also said it would be the first offering structured for sale and trade simultaneously in the leading world markets.


25 Films Chosen for the National Registry
LEAD: In accordance with the National Film Preservation Act passed last year by Congress, the Library of Congress today issued a list of 25 American films that will be placed on the National Film Registry as ''culturally, historically or esthetically significant.''


How the Cup Was Won
LEAD:  Sept. 26, 1983 Dennis Conner, sailing for the New York Yacht Club, loses the America's Cup to Australia.
Feb. 4, 1987 Conner, sailing for the San Diego Yacht Club, wins back the cup from Australia and begins making plans for a 1990 defense in 12-Meter sloop.
July 17, 1987 Michael Fay of the Mercury Bay Boating Club of Auckland, New Zealand, challenges the San Diego Yacht Club to a race in 1988 with boats larger than a 12-Meter.


Campeau Wraps Up Loan Pact
LEAD: Resolving a weeklong financial crisis, the Campeau Corporation said yesterday in Toronto that it had reached a definitive agreement for a $250 million loan that would help ease a cash shortage at its nine department store divisions in the United States.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.87
8.87
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.61
7.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.68
7.68
7.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.09
8.08
9.04
30-YR.


It's Still Too Cold
LEAD: A gap is widening between U.S.


Yankee Game Is Postponed
LEAD: The daylong rain yesterday forced the Yankees and the Milwaukee Brewers to postpone their game last night at the Stadium and reschedule it as part of a twilight-night doubleheader today beginning at 4:30 P.M.


4 Executed in Burkina Faso As an Attempted Coup Fails
LEAD: Four men were executed in Burkina Faso after security agents uncovered a plot to overthrow the head of state, Capt.
Blaise Compaore, the sub-Saharan nation's official press agency said today.
The Government spokesman, Clement Ouedraogo, reached by telex from here, said the coup leaders planned to seize the airport and if they had met resistance, and to shoot down Captain


Small Storm Nearby May Sap Hugo
LEAD: The hurricane heading toward the East Coast may be weakened by a smaller tropical storm that has developed in its wake, meteorologists said yesterday.
Partly as a result, they said, the heavy rains accompanying the hurricane may prove a bigger threat to the United States mainland than the winds.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Tastes of France Past


Review/Film; Tomatoes Smash, Music Swells and Lovers Love
LEAD: The opening sequence of ''Queen of Hearts'' revels in its own melodrama.


Storm Cut Across the Economic Lines
LEAD: The two extremes of San Juan's social spectrum - the shantytowns of the poor and the oceanfront condominiums of the wealthy - appeared to suffer the most from the hurricane that swept across Puerto Rico on Monday.


Ex-ZZZZ Best Official Fined
LEAD: A former ZZZZ Best Company official was ordered to return profits he made by trading stock in the rug-shampooing company founded by Barry M. Minkow, who was convicted of defrauding investors.
Jerry Polevoi, 41 years old, of


Thornburgh Urged to Limit Iran-Contra Role
LEAD: The independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra cases said today that the Attorney General should stay out of those cases unless he believes that national security considerations are sufficient to cancel a trial entirely.


Judge Fines a Jersey Polluter $3.2 Million
LEAD: A Federal judge today fined a chemical-storage company $3.2 million for systematically polluting coastal waters and harshly criticized the company and environmental officials for inaction.


Dollar Posts Mixed Results Amid Intervention Reports
LEAD: The dollar was mixed in nervous worldwide trading yesterday amid reports that the Federal Reserve had intervened to keep the currency down.


Where Mallomars Don't Exist
LEAD: EXPATRIATE New Yorkers out here engage in a ritual whenever they meet: they immediately pat each other on the back, extol the glories of warm weather and otherwise congratulate themselves on the joys of Pacific Coast living.


Bush's Mother Hospitalized Suffering From Pneumonia
LEAD: Dorothy Walker Bush, the President's 88-year-old mother, was admitted to Greenwich Hospital with pneumonia Monday.


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:  Tina Turner - 50?


Vietnamese Leader, Assailing the West, Ignites Fear at Home
LEAD: The Vietnamese leadership has intensified a crackdown in ideological and intellectual life, warning against Western subversion in the language of the cold war.


Hazards Cited In Asbestos Job By Metro-North
LEAD: For at least a year, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad routinely ordered its workers to remove asbestos from steam pipes, walls and wires under Grand Central Terminal ''without any protection from the serious health risks of inhaling the cancer-causing material,'' the New York State Attorney General charged yesterday.


Miami Official to Be Named New York City Schools Chancellor
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education decided yesterday to select the Superintendent of the Miami-Dade County school system, Joseph A. Fernandez, to be the city's next schools chancellor and is expected to approve the choice in a formal vote this morning, several members of the board said.


Oil Services Export Aid
LEAD: The United States Department of Energy will begin ''a major export initiative'' to help American oil-service companies gain business abroad, W. Henson Moore, the Deputy Energy Secretary, said today.


Coats and No Coats
LEAD: New York experiences many temperatures but only two seasons, Coats and No Coats, and they just changed.
In spring and summer, commuters can go to work carrying nothing more than the paper and maybe an umbrella.
The windswept rain yesterday demanded more than umbrellas.


Deng, Looking Fit, Sees a Japanese Politician
LEAD: Appearing healthy and lucid, Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, today made his second public appearance in four days today and laughed at rumors that he had been ill.


Mookie's No Longer a Spectator
LEAD: The routines have regained a lovely and long-lost rhythm.
Trips to the ball park are now unfailingly followed by trips to the plate.
Mookie Wilson's name is now in the lineup and not just over his locker.
And so all the small rituals -batting practice and the shagging of fly balls - have assumed a purpose beyond being a way to kill an early evening.


Kwang Lim Koh, 68, Envoy, Dies
LEAD: Kwang Lim Koh, a scholar and diplomat who was professor of political science at Central Connecticut State University in New Britain for the last 23 years, died Sunday at his home in New Haven.
He was 68 years old.


Wine-Making Family Expands L.I. Operation
LEAD: September is a vintage month for members of the Simicich family of Mattituck, L.I.
They harvested their pinot noir last week and have just sent their winery label to the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms for approval.
Soon, they will bottle their very first wines, '88 chardonnay and '88 riesling.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Wells Is Losing Lauren And Procter &amp; Gamble
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company and the Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation yesterday dealt Wells, Rich, Greene a major setback, confirming industry rumors that they would shift their accounts from the agency.


Rosso Journal; Age-Old Hatred Burns as Hot as the Desert Sun
LEAD: It was in the chilly hours before dawn when the soldiers arrived.
They surrounded the camp, firing pistols in the air.
Then, the man said, they herded several dozen of his family's cattle, kidnapped his mother and two sisters and shipped them in canoes across the Senegal River.


Brazil Skips Loan Payment
LEAD: Brazil, the third world's biggest debtor, skipped an important interest payment Monday, joining a growing list of Latin American countries in arrears on debt.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Morgan Goes to B.S.B.
LEAD: J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company yesterday assigned its advertising account, which had been at Doyle Graf Raj before that agency dissolved, to Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.
And B.S.B. plans to work internationally for Morgan, which used Doyle almost entirely to advertise its private banking services to wealthy Americans.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  GENERAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about a Yale law student who works as a law clerk for a Supreme Court judge in South Africa misidentified the judge.
He is Richard Goldstone.


More Bad News for Bills
LEAD: The bad news for the Buffalo Bills on Monday did not end with their 28-14 loss at home to the Denver Broncos.
Yesterday, the Bills confirmed that their Pro Bowl linebacker, Shane Conlan, had suffered a serious knee injury that will sideline him for at least six weeks.
Conlan, who was hit by the Denver tight end Clarence Kay early in the fourth quarter, wasn't available to talk about the injury.


Campeau's Aim in Picking U.S. Chief
LEAD: The new chief executive of Campeau U.S., the large unit of the Campeau Corporation that operates nine American department store chains, will be chosen from the ranks of financial rather than retailing executives, Robert Campeau, chairman of the corporation, said this week in an interview.


Albert Leslie Cole Is Dead at 94; Guided Growth of Reader's Digest
LEAD: Albert Leslie Cole, the first general manager of Reader's Digest and the engineer of its expansion into international editions, books and records, died Tuesday after a brief illness at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 94 years old.


Venus May Tell Us How to Escape Its Fate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Environment Dominates 91-Nation Energy Talks
LEAD: In a striking shift of focus, the 3,400 delegates gathered here from 91 countries to discuss the world energy picture have one dominant concern: the environment.
Price and supply, the traditional focus of energy suppliers, have almost been squeezed off the agenda.


Oakland Schools Face Bankruptcy and Scandal
LEAD: The Oakland school system is enmeshed in a scandal involving arrests of school officials and allegations of widespread patronage at a time when it is threatened with bankruptcy.


'Friendly Talk' Takes Strawberry Off Bench
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry paid his fine and made his peace today with Davey Johnson, who restored him to the Mets' lineup after benching him for Tuesday's game, declared the great schism ended and said: ''The air is cleared.''


IViva O'Higgins!
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dribbling in Peace: Integrated Basketball in Bensonhurst
LEAD: Tryout time for the Flames, and it must have been the beginning of autumn because the gym lights at Lafayette High School in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn were giving off that familiar, depressing yellow glow.


Relief Workers and Supplies Reach Caribbean
LEAD: Relief workers and supplies were arriving at the airport here tonight to aid residents of the nearby island of Montserrat and other Caribbean islands that were struck by a hurricane on Sunday.


Free Readings
LEAD: Free readings of writing by women are being presented this month by Judith's Room, 681 Washington Street, between West 10th and Charles Streets.
Readers are to include Cynthia Rich, tonight at 7 o'clock; Mary Korte, Lynn Lonidier and Janine Canan next Thursday at 7 P.M., and Cheryl Clarke, Jewelle Gomez, Terri Jewell and Storme Webber on Sept.


U.N. Supports Arab League Panel In Effort to Mediate Beirut Truce
LEAD: In a new attempt to stop the bloodshed in Lebanon, the United Nations Security Council declared its full support today for the three Arab countries trying to mediate in the conflict.


Downed Plane Is the Newest Among Boeing's 737 Jetliners
LEAD: The Boeing 737-400 jetliner that plunged into the bay off La Guardia International Airport last night is the newest in a long line of 737's made by the company.


Negotiations Set in City Opera Strike
LEAD: The New York City Opera and the union representing the company's striking orchestra players are scheduled to resume negotiations tonight at the New York State Theater, spokesmen for both sides said yesterday.


2 More Leave Morgan Posts
LEAD: Two executives, Neal Garonzik and Allan W. Karp, have left Morgan Stanley &amp; Company to join Thomas A. Saunders 3d, the former chairman of Morgan's merchant banking fund who left in August.


Rax to Rosenfeld
LEAD: Rax Restaurants Inc. yesterday consolidated its $8 million marketing account at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss.
Rax, a fast-food chain based in Columbus, Ohio, had distributed its advertising business among several agencies scattered around the nation.
Rosenfeld, a New York agency, will create national and local television and in-store advertising.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''When we landed, we were pounced upon by about 15 tourists.
They said, 'Please get food!
Please get water!
Please help us!
They're looting.
We've seen police looting.
We've seen National Guard looting.


William S. Rose, 60, Electronics Executive
LEAD: William S. Rose, vice president and general counsel of Avnet Inc., an electronics company, died of cancer on Tuesday at his home in Weston, Conn.
He was 60 years old.


Prosecutor Won't Seek New Abuse Charges
LEAD: The Bronx District Attorney yesterday dismissed a sex-abuse case against a former day-care teacher whose conviction on rape and sodomy charges was overturned by the state's highest court in May.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: A $108.5 million bond sale by the Monroe County Airport Authority in upstate New York was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 7.65 percent for an issue due in 2019 through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.


Abortion Foes Lose Appeal On Protests
LEAD: A Federal appeals court panel has upheld an injunction barring anti-abortion protesters from blocking access to abortion clinics, saying the order does not violate the demonstrators' First Amendment rights.


Oz, Wonderland and Other Memories
LEAD: A YOUNG couple walked into Books of Wonder and rattled off the name '' They had been searching for it for years; the woman's grandmother was nicknamed Moo because she used to read it to her children.
The couple assumed none of the staff knew of the thin volume, which was published in the 1920's.


James Stewart Writes 'Stories That Rhyme'
LEAD: ''Well,'' James Stewart says in his famous middle-America drawl, ''it happened almost by accident.
I didn't say, 'Well, I'll start writing poetry.' Something happened, and I had a feeling it was either funny or different, and I thought I'd like to get this down so I can remember it.
And my wife, Gloria, encouraged me to try to make things rhyme.


Knight-Ridder Plant
LEAD: Knight-Ridder Inc. said today that its board had approved construction of a $299.5 million production and distribution plant for its Philadelphia Newspapers Inc. unit, publisher of The Philadelphia Inquirer and The Philadelphia Daily News.
The Philadelphia operations are Knight-Ridder's leading revenue producer, the company said.


Tax Reform Reform
LEAD: Tax reduction has worked.
Despite liberal grumping throughout the 80's, the Kemp-Roth tax cut followed by the Packwood rate reform has produced higher tax revenues and a longer prosperity than most optimists envisioned.


Review/Television; The High Court and a Higher Authority
LEAD: No issue has so frequently divided the Supreme Court as the meaning of the first 16 words of the Bill of Rights - ''Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.'' What, precisely, is meant by ''establishment'' and ''free exercise''?
What did the Founders mean by ''religion''?


K Mart Tie-In Helps CBS in Ratings
LEAD: CBS is scoring ratings successes that the network believes are attributable, in part at least, to extra attention from K Mart shoppers.
Two new Monday night series attracted better ratings for CBS than any new show since 1986, and a new CBS series starring Richard Chamberlain staged a major upset Tuesday night.


People
LEAD: * Stephen Harty has been named general manager of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York.


Home Improvement
LEAD: GARAGE doors need periodic lubrication and adjustment to keep them operating smoothly.
The job is usually easy, but some of the procedures may require two people.


Nixon's Birthday a Holiday
LEAD: This Orange County community where former President Richard M. Nixon was born has declared his birthday, Jan. 9, a holiday for its 100 municipal employees. ''We're not here to judge history - we're here to recognize it,'' Mayor Henry Wedaa said.


Di Giorgio Offer
LEAD: Rose Partners said it had extended its $32-a-share offer for the Di Giorgio Corporation until Oct. 16.
The bid was to have expired today.
The firm said it was discussing the proposed terms of a standstill agreement with the San Francisco food company.
As of Tuesday, 7,940 Di Giorgio common shares had been tendered under the offer, Rose said.


Comerica Buying California Bank
LEAD: Plaza Commerce Bancorp, a $450 million bank holding company based in San Jose, Calif., announced that it had agreed to be acquired by Comerica Inc., an $11.5 billion bank holding company based in Detroit, for $117 million, or $16.50 a share.
Plaza has three offices in the San Jose area, with 170 employees.


Topics of The Times; In Full View
LEAD: Whenever something is pulled down in the city, some new vista comes up.
A building is demolished and across the unblocked space a handsome row of pillared windows can be seen, or a line of concrete gargoyles, or the outline of an old door frame traced on a brick side wall.
Now, with the old elevated highway all torn down north of 42d Street in Manhattan, a wide-open scene unfolds for drivers traveling 12th


Four on the Move in the Politburo
LEAD:  VLADIMIR A. KRYUCHKOV: Age 65, voting member of the Politburo and chairman of the K.G.B. . . .
Headed the foreign intelligence arm of the K.G.B. before being appointed agency chief in 1988 . . .
Protege of Yuri V. Andropov, former Soviet leader and longtime K.G.B. chief . . .
Moved to K.G.B. in 1967 when Mr.


CARIBBEAN TRAVEL BEGINS TO REBOUND
LEAD: Air and sea travel slowly returned to normal yesterday in the Caribbean, as Hurricane Hugo continued moving away from the tropical resort islands and toward the United States.


Currents; Modern Design in an Ancient Setting
LEAD: ''OLD wood beams and old stones - Americans particularly like them,'' said Marianne Maugirard, who is now ensconced in her new design shop in the Sixth Arrondissement in Paris.
The shop's name, Artistes et Modeles, is as clever as its locale at 1 rue Christine.


For Toddlers in Preschool, a Pushy Approach May Be Pointless
LEAD: Parents who rush preschoolers into academically enriched activities do not appreciably help their youngsters, and may even do some harm, a new study suggests.


Economy Is Expanding Slowly, Fed Says
LEAD: The nation's economy is advancing at a slow to modest rate with substantial regional variation, the Federal Reserve Board said today in its ''beige book'' on current economic conditions.


What Are We Waiting For?
LEAD: For Americans it may be the most hopeful development of the last 40 years in world history.
Whether it can work is in the balance.
And the United States Government, shrugging lackadaisically, says it will do nothing to help.


Carter Reports Progress in Ethiopian Peace Talks
LEAD: After a nonstop week of personal diplomacy, former President Jimmy Carter says he is pleased with the modest progress made in peace talks he sponsored here between the Ethiopian Government and a rebel group.


Lavish Sofa Cushions From Antique Textiles
LEAD: FRANCOISE NUNNALLE thinks of pillows not simply as decoration, but also as works of art.


U.S. Troops to Remain In Korea, Quayle Says
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that American troops would remain in South Korea to block threats from North Korea, which he said remained a major threat to peace.


After a Loss to Phillies, Cubs Start To Get That Old Feeling
LEAD: Shortly before his first-place Chicago Cubs took the field for the game today against the Philadelphia Phillies, Manager Don Zimmer was asked if he was worried about meeting the San Francisco Giants in the National League playoffs.
Zimmer shook his head. ''We haven't won our division yet,'' he said.


The Cry Is Play Ball! Ignore New Jersey!
LEAD: New York and New Jersey's border war, which has flared in recent years over garbage slicks and commuter taxes, was revived today when Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo authorized special license plates designating New York State ''the birthplace of baseball.''


Venus May Tell Us How to Escape Its Fate; The Next Giant Step
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Some, It's Too Late to Buy Storm Insurance
LEAD: Coastal homeowners in the Southeast who do not have adequate insurance will probably not be able to obtain more coverage before Hurricane Hugo comes ashore.


Currents; When Inspiration Strikes Twice
LEAD:  A. Spun-aluminum ''Ovni Coupe'' (1982), by the designer Christian Duc for Duc &amp; Camroux.
B.
Crystal ''Archaic Bowl'' (1989), part of ''Archaic Vessels'' collection by the architect Michael Graves for Steuben.


Reviews/Music; A 'Tosca' With Domingo Filling In
LEAD: ''Tosca'' is a triangle, interlocked bonds of love and hate between Tosca, her lover Cavaradossi and the evil Scarpia.
There is Roman local color, too, and the backdrop of passionate idealism during the Napoleonic era that lifts the melodrama beyond the personally hysterical.
But it's the triangle, and


World's Fastest Train Makes Debut in France
LEAD: A sleek silver and blue train known as the T.G.V.
Atlantique sped from Paris to LeMans at 186 miles an hour today, as France introduced the world's fastest train to be put into commercial service.
The train is so fast that France's principal domestic airline worries that it will lose passengers to the rail line.


Novelist and Biologist Receive $20,000 Prizes
LEAD: George Garrett, a novelist, short story writer and poet, was named the winner of the T. S. Eliot Award for Creative Writing.
Edward O. Wilson, the Harvard biologist, was named winner of the Richard M. Weaver Award for Scholarly Letters.
Both awards, announced yesterday, carry cash prizes of $20,000.


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Round of Bank Losses


Books of The Times; Life on the Farm, Seed Time to Harvest
LEAD:  A Year in the Life of an American Farmer  By Richard Rhodes  Illustrations by Bill Greer. 336 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Discovery Could Lead to Test for Alzheimer's
LEAD: A distinctive protein linked to Alzheimer's disease has been found outside the brain for the first time, and the researchers who made the discovery say they hope it may ultimately lead to the first practical test for the disease.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Care Communications Inc., Chicago, a health-care consulting concern, named Tom Balacek chief executive.


News of Hurricane Damage Sends Oil and Gasoline Up
LEAD: Reports of hurricane damage to a major Caribbean refinery sent gasoline and heating oil futures prices surging on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday.


Soviets Ease Stand on Aircraft Cuts in Europe
LEAD: The Soviet Union has informed the United States that it plans to present a new proposal on limiting aircraft, which is the principal issue blocking an agreement to cut conventional forces in Europe, American officials said today.


American Ryder Team Has Much To Prove
LEAD: It was just one of those things, just a little mistake when the team of all-powerful United States pro golfers lost the 1985 Ryder Cup matches here at the Belfry.
That was the way Ray Floyd, this year's United States Ryder Cup nonplaying captain, described it.


Campaign Trail; A Terrific 'Boring' Speech by Dinkins
LEAD: Even in politics, friends sometimes blurt out the most amazing things.
Take Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President and Democratic leader, who rose to the podium at a Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce luncheon yesterday right after David N. Dinkins, the Democratic nominee for New York City mayor, had finished a long speech on economic development.


A Dream Born of Liberace and Magic
LEAD: Come now, Siegfried and Roy, do you really expect New York City to take you seriously?
Two magicians from Las Vegas? ''Actually, we're from Germany, but we're American citizens now,'' said Siegfried.
He's the blond one, who grew up in Rosenheim, Bavaria.


New York Sues G. E. on Dump
LEAD: New York State sued the General Electric Company today to force the corporation to clean up an area surrounding a Rensselaer County dump where fish have been found to contain 22 times the acceptable level for PCB's.


Democrats Split Over Selection On Judicial Post
LEAD: The Democratic Party convention that nominates State Supreme Court justices is likely to reverse an 18-year tradition on Monday and reject the recommendations of a party screening panel.


Currents; Collecting 'Outsider Art'
LEAD: AARNE ANTON is one those dealers who travels ''from Vermont to Florida and cross-country, of course,'' in search of what he calls ''eccentric things.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


U.S. Fines Pan Am for Lax Security on Day of Jet Bombing
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration today fined Pan American World Airways $630,000, saying the airline had repeatedly violated security rules in the boarding of Pan Am Flight 103 the day a jetliner was brought down by a bomb over Scotland.


Currents; Central Park's Artful Ark Of Sculptural Animals
LEAD: ANYONE jogging, bicycling or walking through the southeastern part of Central Park will notice a host of new arrivals - birds, fish, a bear, even a ''Bovinitron,'' a wood and metal cow by J. Nebraska Gifford and Timothy Cramer.
The sculpture is one of 16 contemporary pieces in ''Noah's Art,'' an outdoor exhibition organized by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation that will be on view through


Louisana Utility Sets Debt Issue
LEAD: The Louisiana Power and Light Company, a unit of the Entergy Corporation, is offering $309.1 million in bonds, divided into two maturities, through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., said John J. Cardwell, chairman of the company's new board of directors, would work with existing management, other board members and outside consultants to review the company's current strategy and operations.


Panel Rejects Bush's Proposal on Auto Emissions
LEAD: A House subcommittee voted unanimously today to eliminate a provision in President Bush's clean air package that would have allowed many automobiles to pollute more than the Government standard now permits.


Grow Group Board Faces Proxy Fight
LEAD: A Grow Group Inc. shareholder group that controls 9.4 percent of the company said it intends to wage a proxy fight to replace three directors at the New York-based concern's annual meeting on Oct. 25.


A Sri Lankan Truce in North As Rebels Fight in the South
LEAD: Ethnic Tamil rebels have responded to a cease-fire announcement by Indian troops in northern and eastern Sri Lanka by suspending attacks, a rebel spokesman said today.


Campaign Matters; With TV Ads, New Jersey Race Starts in Earnest
LEAD: Does anything else count in the campaign for governor of New Jersey except television commercials?


Rome Journal; Why Vatican's Voice Sometimes Bites Its Tongue
LEAD: When Pope Pius XI inaugurated Vatican Radio with a brief message one winter's morning in 1931, the only cause for worry was whether the crackly sound and unstable signal emanating from the new station would somehow diminish the occasion.


A Film Tweaks G.M. Over Jobless
LEAD: Just as the General Motors Corporation was about to forget its public relations headaches of the 1980's, a rookie film maker appears to have scored a highly acclaimed hit with a documentary that tweaks the auto maker for the plight of the unemployed.


3 Die as Jetliner Plunges Into Bay Off La Guardia
LEAD: A USAir jetliner taking off for Charlotte, N.C., from La Guardia Airport late last night skidded off the end of a rain-slicked runway and plunged into the bay near Rikers Island, killing 3 and injuring 51 of the 62 people aboard, police and fire officials said.


Yields Show Little Change
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report showed little or no change for the week ended yesterday.


GORBACHEV OUSTS 5 FROM POLITBURO IN PARTY SHAKE-UP
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev carried out a major purge of the Communist Party leadership today, in a strong demonstration of his concern that the party is losing initiative in the face of wide social upheaval in the Soviet Union.


Success Magazine To Begin a Campaign
LEAD: Success magazine will try to accelerate its successful growth through a $1 million trade ad campaign that begins this week in several newspapers and magazines.
Using the tagline ''The indispensable small business machine,'' the ads present Success as a primer for the would-be entrepreneur.
The campaign was created by Baron &amp;


Refugee Crisis Awakens Poland's Anxieties About Germany
LEAD: One hundred twenty East German men, women and children stranded in Warsaw and seeking to emigrate to the West have confronted Poland's new Government with an intractable problem.


At Mets' Expense, Cards Cut Gap to 3 Games
LEAD: The Mets may have healed the great schism in the clubhouse tonight but they didn't do much for the great schism between themselves and first place when they lost to the St.
Louis Cardinals, 5-3, and stayed five and a half games out with only 11 to go.


Houston Man Gets 25 Years In Slayings of Two in Queens
LEAD: A man convicted of killing an Army friend and a bystander over drugs was sentenced Tuesday night to 25 years to life in prison, the Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, said yesterday.


L.I. Draws Economic Breath and Looks to a High-Tech Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; Plainchant by an Early Polyphonic Master
LEAD: When Michael De Beringhen left a bequest to the Cathedral of Cambrai, France, for a new feast in honor of the Virgin, the greatest composer of the day was sought out to compose the plainchant.
A messenger was entrusted with the texts (by Gilles Carlier, dean of the cathedral) and dispatched to the court of Savoy, where Guillaume Du Fay was in residence.


Utility Limits Power Sales
LEAD: Hydro-Quebec has no more power that it can sell to the United States in this century, beyond contracts already signed or nearing approval, an official of the utility said today.


Market Place; The Road Ahead For Action Auto
LEAD: RAPID growth made Action Auto Rental Inc. a Wall Street darling even as some of its competitors ran into problems.
Yesterday, as it became clear that Action was not immune to industry woes, its share price plunged $6, to $11.25, in over-the-counter trading.


Senate Panel Votes More East Bloc Aid
LEAD: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved a nearly $1.2 billion, three-year aid package to Poland and Hungary today, adding to the chorus of criticism from Congressional Democrats that the Bush Administration has been too passive in reacting to the developments in Eastern Europe.


Dollar Is Off Amid Rumors; Gold Prices Move Higher
LEAD: The dollar slumped in skittish trading yesterday, while gold prices moved higher.


Goetz Released After Spending 8 Months in Jail
LEAD: Bernhard H. Goetz got out of jail early yesterday, but he was not a free man.


Chrysler Forecast
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it expects its 1990 car and truck sales to hold at this year's levels of about a million cars and a million trucks.
Robert A. Lutz, Chrysler's president, made the prediction at the preview of 1990 models.


Woods on Injury List
LEAD: Ickey Woods, the Cincinnati Bengals fullback who rushed for more than 1,000 yards last season, has a torn knee ligament and will miss at least six weeks of play, the Bengals announced yesterday.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


American May Increase Two Discount Fares
LEAD: American Airlines said yesterday that it planned an increase in two of its popular discount fares.
But other major carriers said they had not decided whether to go along, and this made American's own plans tenuous.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States has asked that donations to assist victims of Hurricane Hugo be sent to the American Red Cross or branch offices of three banks that are setting up special accounts for Puerto Rican disaster assistance.


Rebel Rockets and Explosion From Truck Kill 12 in Kabul
LEAD: At least 12 people were killed and 17 wounded today when rockets launched by rebels rained on the capital and a military truck exploded.


Democrats Propose To Raise Tax Rates On Upper Incomes
LEAD: In a political gamble to defeat the capital gains tax cut promoted by President Bush and approved last week by the House Ways and Means Committee, House Democratic leaders agreed today to offer a substitute plan that would raise the top income tax rate for upper-income Americans to 33 percent, from 28 percent.


Generic Drug Unit Suspended
LEAD: American Home Products, a leading maker of brand-name drugs, said today that it had temporarily suspended operations of a generic drug subsidiary as it undergoes Federal inspection.
The Food and Drug Administration said it had uncovered evidence that some drug data might have been misrepresented to the agency.


House Panel Backs Minimum Wage Plan
LEAD: The Democratic-controlled House Labor and Education Committee bowed Tuesday to President Bush's insistence that a proposed increase in the minimum wage be held to $4.25.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-23


A Soviet General's Second Thoughts
LEAD: In 1968, Ivan D. Yershov was a young Soviet general serving as second-in-command of the Warsaw Pact forces that invaded Czechoslovakia.


'91 Breeders' For Louisville
LEAD: Churchill Downs's performance during last year's record-breaking Breeders' Cup has prompted a decision to return the seven-race, $10 million event to that track in 1991.


Who Is Watching Over The Thrifts Bailout?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Retailers Seek More Detailed Sales Data
LEAD: The International Council of Shopping Centers began issuing new monthly retail sales data yesterday that it said would be more accurate and comprehensive than those reported by the United States Government.


United Telephone Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: The United Telephone Company of Florida yesterday priced $135 million in first-mortgage bonds due in 2019 through competitive bidding, which was won by a group of underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Review/Dance; The Roots and Rhythms of American Indians
LEAD: The stage is ablaze with, yes, color.
The American Indian Dance Theater, which made its New York debut Tuesday night at the start of a three-week season, is a feast for the eye.


Lionel Corp.
LEAD: The board of the Lionel Corporation said it plans to review the $150 million takeover offer from Robert I. Toussie at its next meeting.
The board's decision was contained in a letter last Friday to the New York real estate developer and disclosed today in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: JOHN HORNICKEL looked up from his dinner plate one evening to see his 5-year-old daughter, Jane, staring intently at a small dark object darting along the edge of the table.


Thatcher Urges Japan Shift
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain told Japan to open its markets or risk international retaliation.


Accounts
LEAD: *
J.
I.
Case, the Racine, Wis., construction equipment division of Tenneco Inc., to J. Walter Thompson, Detroit, with a budget of $5 million.


Winds Likely to Slam Coast At Georgia or the Carolinas
LEAD: The hurricane bearing down on the East Coast, much weakened but still dangerous, is most likely to come ashore in the Carolinas or Georgia late Thursday or early Friday, meteorologists at the National Hurricane Center and elsewhere said today.


Currents; A Bed Only Red Grooms Could Have Envisioned
LEAD: FEW pieces of furniture can make the transition from a child's room to the living room, but Red Grooms's ''Fire Engine Bunk Bed for Children'' might be the exception.


Correction
LEAD: A listing yesterday of 25 American films to be placed on the National Film Registry omitted Buster Keaton's co-director for ''The General.''


Offer by IMA Under Review
LEAD: The IMA Holding Corporation, which has made an offer for American Medical International Inc., said today that it was talking with American Medical officials to resolve uncertainties created by pending Federal legislation that would eliminate the tax deductibility of interest on certain debt instruments.


Judge Has 'No Recollection' Of Pressuring Jurors in Trial
LEAD: A Federal judge who is facing unusual assertions that she improperly pressured jurors to return a verdict in a lengthy criminal trial has filed a statement contending that she had ''no recollection'' of interfering in the deliberations.


Crops Occupy Rural China, Not Unrest
LEAD: Huang Dani giggled nervously at the mention of the turmoil in Beijing, and then inched her way as far back as she could against her living room wall near a large old portrait of Mao.


Cineplex Considers Several Offers
LEAD: The Cineplex Odeon Corporation of Canada said it had reviewed takeover bids today that were submitted by several suitors.
Cineplex officials had no comment on a meeting of a special board committee.
Rumors have swirled around Cineplex since its chief executive, Garth Drabinsky, and vice chairman, Myron Gottlieb, signaled in


Rev. Leonard Di Falco, 64, a Bronx Pastor
LEAD: The Rev.
Leonard D. Di Falco, the pastor of St.
Clare's Roman Catholic Church in the Morris Park section of the Bronx, died of cancer on Tuesday at Rosary Hill Hospital in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 64 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Administration Agrees to Back Bipartisan Plan to Revise Medicare
LEAD: Senate Democrats elicited a reluctant statement of support from the Bush Administration for a bipartisan proposal that would revise the program that protects Medicare beneficiaries from catastrophically high costs of extended illness.


POWELL SEES RISKS IN WAR ON DRUGS
LEAD: Gen.
Colin L. Powell, President Bush's nominee to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that involving the armed forces in the war on drugs would be risky but would not lead to another Vietnam.


Doskocil Sale Off
LEAD: The Doskocil Companies said WFC Acquisition had been unable to obtain financing for its proposed $150 million purchase of Doskocil's Wilson Foods business, and the transaction had been terminated.
Doskocil's stock plunged $1.625 a share, to $8, in over-the-counter trading today.
Its 16.9 percent drop was the fourth worst of the day.


U.S. Psychiatrists Reject Soviet Members for Group
LEAD: The American Psychiatric Association has voted to oppose the readmission of the official Soviet psychiatric society to full membership in the World Psychiatric Association, saying the Soviets had not released all the people held in mental hospitals for political reasons.


Soviet Weekly Criticizes Pravda on Yeltsin
LEAD: A Soviet weekly criticized the Communist Party newspaper, Pravda, today for publishing a denunciation of a Soviet opposition leader's conduct during his recent tour of the United States.


Other Side of the Story
LEAD: ''Hi, I'm Jose Canseco, and thank you for calling my hotline.''


Fashion Industry Executives Find Situation Exasperating
LEAD: From the beginning, Robert Campeau's high-wire retailing ambitions aroused deep concern in the fashion industry.
As his retail giant came crashing down to earth this week and Mr.
Campeau was forced to step down as chief executive of the company, fashion industry executives found the situation exasperating but not at all surprising.


Unity Plans In Europe
LEAD: The European Commission agreed today on proposals for closer cooperation as part of an ambitious but controversial blueprint for a full economic and monetary union starting next year.


Brady Plan Is Forcing Bank Loss
LEAD: The wrap-up last week of an accord to provide debt relief to Mexico is forcing a new round of losses at major American banks.


Matsushita Venture
LEAD: A joint venture between the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan and the Beijing municipal government, delayed by the turmoil in China this summer, will begin full operations in October, a Matsushita spokesman said today.
The Beijing-Matsushita Color CRT Company will initially make 20,000 cathode ray television tubes a month, increasing output to an annual 500,000 next year.


Griffith Joyner Accused Of Buying Growth Drug
LEAD: A former American track athlete reportedly said that he purchased growth hormones in 1988 for Florence Griffith Joyner, the sprinter who won three gold medals at the Seoul Olympics.
Darrell Robinson, a former 400-meter runner, told the West German magazine Stern that Griffith Joyner asked him to look into the price of growth hormones.


P.L.O. SAID TO BACK CAIRO PEACE PLAN
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt indicated today that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, had shifted position and approved Cairo's proposal for a direct discussion between Israelis and Palestinians to negotiate a settlement of their bitter conflict.


Chicago Journal; For Fans of the Cubs, The Bubble Defies Fate
LEAD: Only the true believers can see it.
But it is there.
It is as vivid as the texture of hope, as bright as the color of dreams.
It wafted into town off Lake Michigan several weeks ago, blown by a magical breeze.
And it has grown larger with the passing of each September afternoon.


Marcel Loeb, Importer Of Steel, Is Dead at 84
LEAD: Marcel Loeb, a steel importer and a founder and president of the American Institute for Imported Steel Inc., died of heart failure Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Woodstock, N.Y.


A Garden Calendar Of Autumn Events
LEAD: There are a variety of horticultural exhibitions, plant sales, harvest festivals and related classes, lectures and tours being offered in New York and New Jersey through October.
These are some of them:


Dolphins Are Learning How Other Half Lives
LEAD: Nearly four years have passed since Don Shula's Dolphins finished first in the American Conference East, the spot that seemed to have been the coach's birthright.
Now, he's happy with a 1-1 record in the division.


Pickens Raises Koito Stake
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, the Texas corporate raider, said today that he would raise his stake in the Koito Manufacturing Company and renewed his demand for a seat on the Japanese concern's board.


Review/Theater; 'Solid Gold Cadillac' on Centennial Of Kaufman
LEAD: As a playwright and director, George S. Kaufman was the great collaborator of the popular American theater.
But some of his collaborations were far less rewarding than others, as is demonstrated by his partnership with Howard Teichmann in writing ''The Solid Gold Cadillac.'' This 1953 Broadway comedy about chicanery in big business has been revived at the Yale Repertory Theater for the centennial of


Alaska Ghost Town May Become a Park
LEAD: A half-century ago, Federal officials made their first pitch to add the bright red buildings of this abandoned copper-mill camp, the country's largest ghost town, to the national park system.
Several decades and proposals later, the idea is alive again.


DEALS
LEAD:  FOOTBALL  JETS (AFC) - Agreed to terms with Kerry Glenn, cornerback.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS (AFC) -Re-signed Linden King, linebacker.
Released Joe Costello, linebacker.
MIAMI (AFC) - Waived Alvin Powell, offensive guard.
Signed Ron Davenport fullback.
WASHINGTON (NFC) - Placed Ralph Tamm, center, on the injured-reserve list.


Talking Deals; Making Raiders Disclose Stakes
LEAD: THE Federal Trade Commission, to get corporate raiders to obey the law, is moving in two different directions, simultaneously considering plans either to relax or to tighten its disclosure rules.


Getting a Start on Autumn Hiking
LEAD: Here and there in northern New England and New York, the leaves of maples, sumacs and beeches are already touched with red or gold, a reminder that fall is the ideal season -the days are cool and biting bugs are scarce - for woodland wandering.


The Promise of Chancellor Fernandez
LEAD: The selection of Joseph Fernandez, Superintendent of Schools in Dade County, Florida, as New York City's new schools chancellor is an encouraging sign for the renewal of the city's troubled school system.


Bridge
LEAD: The final of the world team championship for the Bermuda Bowl will begin Thursday, with the United States opposing Brazil.


No Free Ride for Farmers
LEAD: The Federal crop insurance program is plagued by waste, fraud and too little participation by the nation's farmers.
A House subcommittee has now begun hearings on the program.
But the subcommittee will do the taxpayers no favor if it relies on a hopelessly biased report by a special commission created by


'Junk Bonds' End Mixed
LEAD: Prices of ''junk bonds'' were mixed yesterday, after rebounding on Tuesday.


CBS Is Altering Its System For Developing New Shows
LEAD: CBS's entertainment division announced a radical change yesterday in the traditional network system of commissioning pilots for prospective series.
The new CBS plan would split the development process into three cycles that would last throughout the year.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Burnt Kitchen Cabinet  Q. A candle placed too close to one of my kitchen cabinets resulted in a small burn mark in the finish, as well as some small blisters.
The damage is too small to interest a professional refinisher, so how can I repair this small damage myself?
A.
The burnt material and the blisters must be scraped off first.


Company to Be Sued Over Toxic L.I. Wells
LEAD: New York State and Suffolk County announced yesterday that they were suing the makers of Dacthal, a weed killer that they said had contaminated groundwater in scattered areas of Suffolk.


Coach Can't Coach
LEAD: Chuck DeBus, the former Los Angeles Track Club coach who was under investigation for allegedly giving performance-enhancing substances to athletes, has agreed to leave the sport for two years, The Athletics Congress said yesterday.
DeBus, 44 years old, signed an agreement yesterday in Indianapolis under which he will ''not act as an athlete, coach, agent, manager, official or trainer'' in track and field from Oct.


Phone Plan Confirmed By Mexico
LEAD: The Mexican Government announced today that it would sell its majority stake in Telefonos de Mexico, the nation's troubled telephone monopoly, to private interests and that it intended to eliminate the company's longstanding monopoly in some service areas.


Review/Dance; Poland's National Folk Troupe Rejoices in Song
LEAD: When members of Slask stepped proudly forward in a polonaise as the curtain rose on Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the performers' fervor was both unmistakable and admirable.
Near the evening's conclusion, a sense of love of country and folk tradition was again communicated when the company offered a dignified cracovienne while the backdrop glowed with a slide projection representing the ancient towers of


Personal Health
LEAD: Last June, four years after she was first treated for cancer, my mother-in-law made out a ''living will,'' specifying her desire not to be given any means of life support should she become terminally ill or permanently unconscious.


Sony Shrinks Video Player
LEAD: The Sony Corporation plans to sell a portable videotape player that is 30 percent smaller than its previous model, the company said in a statement released today.


Money-Match Fire Needed In Ryder Cup
LEAD: For both Arnold Palmer and Lanny Wadkins, the money match began as a ''little something to play for'' during a practice round before the Heritage Classic at Hilton Head, S.C., about 15 years ago.
But after Palmer and his partner, Tom Weiskopf, lost ''a few dollars'' to Wadkins and Bert Yancey over 18 holes, Palmer invoked an ''emergency nine.


Environment Magazines Spring Up
LEAD: ENVIRONMENTALISM has grown beyond the publications of groups like the Sierra Club and the Audubon Society to become one of the hottest sources of new magazines.
At least three publishers are betting that there is an untapped group of readers - and advertisers - interested in an independent mass-market magazine about the environment.


New Music, Aided and Abetted by 6 Composers
LEAD: Friends and Enemies of New Music is the wry name of a new six-member composers' coalition that gave a concert Tuesday evening at the Greenwich House.
The group was formed this year to give programs ''representing, as far as possible'' in the words of a program note by one member, ''the great diversity of both style and substance among contemporary compositions.


After Jolt, Passengers End 'Nose First' in the Water
LEAD: USAir Flight 5050 was more than three hours late by the time it pulled away from the terminal last night.
Inside the cabin, passengers read and watched the lights outside their windows as they waited for takeoff. ''The pilot said they were ready to go up,'' said Fred O'Loughlin, who was sitting in the fifth row.


Bill Would Set Aside Space For Burial of Veterans' Ashes
LEAD: An area of Arlington National Cemetery would be set aside for the unmarked burial of the ashes of veterans as a way to prevent overcrowding, according legislation approved today by a House panel.


Kodak Offering Is Increased
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company is offering $300 million in notes due in 2004 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The financing was raised from $250 million.


Brierley Unit Owns 11.5% of Cummins
LEAD: A Hong Kong investment concern has increased its stake in the Cummins Engine Company to 11.5 percent, but a spokeswoman for Cummins said it does not suspect a takeover attempt.
Industrial Equity Pacific Ltd. said it had purchased an additional 164,000 shares of Cummins stock, increasing its total to 1.175 million shares.


Peruvian Rebels Said to Kill 2
LEAD: The leftist Shining Path guerrillas have killed two mayors in the Andean region of Peru, the army said today.
The Mayor of San Luis de Shuaro, Abraham Fernando Carhuapoca, was subjected to a mock trial first, the police said.


Panel to Review Blast Inquiry
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee said today that the panel would hold hearings on the Navy's investigation of the explosion that killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa in April.


Rough Night For Soviet Players
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov, making their first appearances in a National Hockey League game, were booed even before the puck was dropped.
Exactly 14 seconds after it was, Fetisov found himself knocked on his pants, and 30 seconds after that, Starikov found himself in the penalty box for slashing.


Review/Music; Jon Hassell, With Trumpet And Electronics
LEAD: Jon Hassell has taken a long way around to reach basic musical ideas.
The trumpeter and composer has studied Asian and African music, and he uses sophisticated electronic gadgets to alter and multiply the sound of his trumpet, turning single lines into phantom choirs.
But when the New Jon Hassell Group performed Monday at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center in


Stocks Prices Slip, With Dow Falling 3.42
LEAD: Stock prices slipped yesterday in another cautious and slow trading session.


Benched For Being Bad


Review/Pop; Katrina and the Waves Change Course
LEAD: Katrina and the Waves, once a snappy, buoyant pop-rock band, seem to have taken some awful advice.
They started their show Monday night at the Cat Club with a sustained blast of guitars and drums, leaning back and grimacing as if they'd just finished an arena-rock show.
Then they proceeded to load down their songs with enough second-hand histrionics for a week of MTV.


BOMB SUSPECTED IN MIDAIR WRECK OF FRENCH DC-10
LEAD: A DC-10 airliner that disappeared on a flight from the African nation of Chad to France on Tuesday apparently exploded in midair and was found in the desert today in a neighboring country.
The airline said that a bomb was probably responsible.


Tyson May Sell Holly Farms Units
LEAD: Tyson Foods Inc. said it was considering the sale of two divisions of the Holly Farms Corporation, which it acquired from Conagra Inc. in July for $1.29 billion, to raise about $300 million to ease the debt load from the takeover.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Zabriskie Shares Lead Bruce Zabriski posted a five-under-par 65 to share the lead with Doug Steffen in the second round of the Izod Metropolitan tournament yesterday in Purchase, N.Y.
The two had a two-day total of 139 and a two-shot lead over Bobby Heins, winner of the last two Met Opens.


Panel Subpoenas Ex-Housing Chief
LEAD: A House subcommittee voted unanimously today to subpoena former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. to testify next week about allegations of political favoritism and mismanagement at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


World Bank's China Talks
LEAD: The World Bank is in ''close consultations'' with China about a resumption of lending to China ''in the not too distant future,'' the bank's president, Barber B. Conable Jr., said today.


Papal Balm for Auschwitz Pain
LEAD: Decent people everywhere have been pained by the increasingly bitter quarrel between Jews and Poles, the two peoples most devastated by the Nazi genocide.
Pope John Paul II has acted with vision and compassion in giving Vatican endorsement to a compromise settlement of their dispute over a convent on the site of the


Talk by Bennett Is Disrupted By Bomb Threat at a School
LEAD: William J. Bennett was forced to deliver his anti-drug message to children outside an elementary school today after a bomb threat forced the police to evacuate the school.


Garcia Trial Implicates Governor of Puerto Rico
LEAD: Gov.
Rafael Hernandez-Colon of Puerto Rico told executives of the Wedtech Corporation in 1985 that he would ''take care'' of their request for a Government contract after Representative Robert Garcia had ushered the executives into a private meeting at the Governor's mansion in San Juan, a former Wedtech executive testified yesterday.


Parole Is Denied In Slaying of Actor
LEAD: The State Parole Board denied parole yesterday to John Bonizio, who has served six years of a maximum 18-year prison sentence in the killing of an actor.


Senators Near Agreement on Funds to Fight Drugs
LEAD: The Senate moved closer to a possible compromise on anti-drug legislation today.
Republicans proposed spending $800 million more than the $7.9 billion President Bush recommended and Democrats countered with a plan that would increase spending by a full $1 billion.


David R. Loxton, 46, a Producer Of Documentaries for Public TV
LEAD: David R. Loxton, a producer of documentaries and other programs for public television, died of pancreatic cancer on Wednesday morning at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Ex-Singer Executed in Texas for Contract Killing
LEAD: A former singer whose act included an impersonation of Elvis Presley was put to death early today for one of five slayings he was accused of committing.


Topics of The Times; Trees, Rehabilitated
LEAD: It took eight years, but there's finally a President in the White House who understands about trees.
Unless someone is foolish enough to burn them, as Brazilians do, trees are powerful natural detergents, cleaning the air as they breathe.


Investor Increases Stake in USAir
LEAD: Michael H. Steinhardt, a New York money manager, has raised his stake in USAir Group Inc. to 8.38 percent from 7.3 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Steinhardt said he purchased 460,600 additional USAir shares on the open market between Sept. 7 and Monday for prices ranging from $45.598 to $48.476 a share.


Glemp Is Reticent on the Auschwitz Convent
LEAD: A day after the Vatican threw its authority behind the relocation of a Roman Catholic convent from the site of the Auschwitz death camp, there was no formal response from Jozef Cardinal Glemp of Warsaw.


Peugeot Plant Strike
LEAD: Striking workers halted production today at the Peugeot S.A. auto plant as management and union members appeared to harden their positions in the two-week pay dispute.
Between 600 and 800 strikers blocked access roads to Peugeot's plant at Mulhouse in eastern France with barricades and burning tires, preventing nonstrikers from going to work.


Exotic Feats Of Furniture Are Unleashed
LEAD: MAD King Ludwig would have approved of the charming pair of demonic torchiers that made their museum debut at the National Academy of Design Monday evening at an $850-a-plate benefit to open ''Fantasy Furniture: The First 50 Years of the Newel Art Galleries.''


Bailout Urged For Hospitals With Losses
LEAD: Foreshadowing what is likely to be a divisive debate in Albany next year, a representative of New York City's private hospitals called today for a $300 million bailout of many financially troubled hospitals.


Little Brown Jug Today
LEAD: Harness racing's Little Brown Jug, the third jewel in the 1989 triple crown for 3-year-old pacers, will lack some glamour when it is run today at the Delaware (Ohio) County Fairgrounds.


Parents and Grandparents
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Man Found Guilty of 13 'Night Stalker' Murders
LEAD: A man was convicted of 13 murders and 30 other felonies today by a jury that decided he was the Night Stalker whose attacks terrified Southern California in 1985.


Lionel Malamed, 65, Former Basketball Star
LEAD: Lionel Malamed, a stockbroker who starred in basketball for City College in the late 1940's, died of a heart attack while playing tennis Sunday at the East River Tennis Club in Long Island City, Queens.
He was 65 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.


Orioles Close Gap on Ballard's 18th
LEAD: Jeff Ballard got his 18th victory and Mickey Tettleton hit a home run and drove in four runs as the Baltimore Orioles tied a season high with 17 hits, beating the Detroit Tigers tonight, 9-2.


Picker International Names New President
LEAD: Picker International, which makes high-end medical diagnostic imaging machines, has named Cary Nolan as president and chief executive.


Poland Holds Debt Talk
LEAD: Poland's new Government opened talks today with the Paris Club of creditor nations, but no immediate agreement was expected on rescheduling more than $20 billion of its foreign debt. ''This is rather a tentative first meeting after a new Cabinet was formed,'' said an East European source close to the talks.


Adobe Is Set To Disclose Technology
LEAD: In a dramatic effort to preserve its business, Adobe Systems Inc. said today that it would reveal its closely guarded corporate crown jewel - its technology for generating different styles of type on computer screens and drawing them with laser printers.


Three Good Reasons Why Mets Can't Win
LEAD: Six months ago, no team was a more solid selection to win a division championship than the Mets.
They were expected to have such a lock on first place that neither key nor combination could be found to penetrate their position.


NEW BILL COULD AID A JAILED MOTHER
LEAD: The case of Dr.
Elizabeth Morgan was argued today in the District of Columbia Court of Appeals while, half a mile away on Capitol Hill, the House of Representatives was passing legislation that could free her from jail.


Krzyzewski to Become International Coach
LEAD: Coach Mike Krzyzewski, who led Duke University to three Final Four appearances in the last four seasons, will lead the United States into the next decade of international competition next summer.
The 42-year-old Duke coach was recommended by the Amateur Basketball Association of the United States to coach the nation's team during the Goodwill Games in Seattle next July and the world championships in Argentina in August.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  House Democrats proposed raising the top income tax rate.
The plan, to be voted on by the House next week, is a political gamble to defeat the capital gains tax cut promoted by Bush and approved last week by the Ways and Means Committee. [ Page A1. ] The Brady plan to provide relief to the most indebted nations is forcing new losses at American banks.


Spain Braces for a Surge in Basque Terrorism
LEAD: Spain is bracing for a surge of Basque terrorist activities aimed at disrupting next month's elections after the killing of a Government prosecutor here last week.


De Klerk Calls For Gradual Change
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk urged South Africans of all races today to rise above their mistrust, suspicion and fear and help him build a peaceful nation free of domination and repression.


Man in the News: Joseph Anthony Fernandez; From Dropout to Chancellor
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez, the Miami School Superintendent who was formally chosen yesterday to head the New York City school system and deal with its problems, including an alarmingly high dropout rate, was himself a New York high school dropout.


Studies Suggest Daily Removal of All Contacts
LEAD: Contact lenses intended for extended wear should not be left in the eyes for even one night, researchers say.


Trains to Reduce Speeds
LEAD: N.J.
Transit will reduce the speed of its commuter trains on a 14-mile stretch of its Atlantic City line after a fatal weekend collision with a car, a spokeswoman said today.
Speeds will drop to 60 miles per hour, from 80, the spokeswoman said.
N.J.
Transit came under criticism after a commuter train, on the first day of the agency's Atlantic City service, struck a car and killed a Sicklerville woman and her 4-year-old daughter.


Treasury Issues Post a Decline
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities sank yesterday as dealers marked down issues in a largely futile attempt to attract investors.
Dealers said investors, domestic and foreign, are seeking higher yields to offset what many perceive will be a concerted effort of the industrial nations to cap or reduce the value of the dollar, which declined yesterday.


Bush Dispatches Troops to Island In Storm's Wake
LEAD: President Bush ordered more than 1,000 military police to the Virgin Islands last night to help restore calm after two days of looting and sporadic shooting on St.
Croix that was set off by the devastation of a major hurricane.


Tests Find 1 Prisoner in 24 Has AIDS Virus
LEAD: Blood tests of prison and jail inmates across the country show that fewer than expected, or 1 in 24, are infected with the AIDS virus, researchers say.


Bond Offering By Berkshire
LEAD: Investors lined up yesterday to buy a piece of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Corporation.


Judge Pleads Guilty In Tax-Cocaine Case
LEAD: A suspended State Supreme Court justice from the Bronx pleaded guilty yesterday to evading Federal taxes while a lawyer and to possessing cocaine for personal use.


Don't Blame Feminists For No-Fault Divorce
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pan Am Security Found Lax
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration said Pan American World Airways violated security rules before the flight that was bombed over Scotland in December.
Page A10.


Calendar: Walking Tours and Folk Art
LEAD:  City Sights, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; 212-534-1672, extension 206.


Melodic, Even Brahmsian
LEAD: Richard Kapp has built a loyal following for his Philharmonia Virtuosi chamber orchestra over the last 15 years, and for the last several seasons he has presented the group in an annual series at Town Hall.
This year's series got under way on Tuesday evening with a program that included three works by Beethoven and the premiere of a new piece by Vittorio


Washington Talk; Scandals Now Playing: 2 Melodramas in 4 Acts
LEAD: Like sonnets or sonatas or Ginger Rogers dance routines, Washington scandals follow fixed patterns.


Giants Must Contend With a Rejuvenated Hogeboom
LEAD: For six years with the Dallas Cowboys and three with the Indianapolis Colts, Gary Hogeboom was usually a second-string quarterback.
In 9 seasons he played in 64 games, starting 24.
He played well at times and not at others, won a few games off the bench and waited for the day he would be a starter and not have another backup waiting to unseat him.


The World Of Baker; Critics Assert Politics Dictate Foreign Policy
LEAD: With one sentence on Tuesday, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d confirmed openly what everyone suspected: that he looks at his job and the world first and foremost through the prism of American politics.


Railroads Battling Thieves Searching for Copper Cable
LEAD: On Sept. 8, thieves in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx broke into two small buildings near the tracks of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and began severing cables that supply power to the railway's signal system.


Rhone-Poulenc to Pay $1.3 Billion for 2 Units
LEAD: Rhone-Poulenc, France's largest chemical company, announced today that it had agreed to pay $1.3 billion to buy an American and a British specialty chemicals operation.


Congress Consults Journalists on Ethics Coverage
LEAD: Stung by nine months of scrutiny and scandal that has shaken public trust in Congress, a special House panel today consulted three journalists about how news organizations shape their Congressional coverage and sought advice on how to revise House ethics rules.


Europe Vows No Bias Against U.S. Chips
LEAD: The United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today that the European Community had assured her that it would not discriminate against American manufacturers in setting rules of origin for computer memory chips.


Argentina's Chief to Try Charm on U.S.
LEAD: In two and a half months in the presidency, Carlos Saul Menem has woven a kind of magic over the Argentines.


Merchant Marine Winning By Foot
LEAD: Last Saturday was a long one for Rich Egal, a plebe at the United States Merchant Marine Academy.
Egal was up at dawn preparing for the Acceptance Day ceremonies.
At 10 o'clock he and the other plebes marched onto Tomb Field at Kings Point, L.I., to be formally accepted into the academy and sworn in as midshipmen in the United States Naval Reserve.


Review/Art; With New Annex, the Phillips Comes Into Its Own
LEAD: The Goh Annex of the Phillips Collection, which opens to the public on Saturday, transforms what had been in certain ways a homespun gallery into a full-fledged museum.
It is the latest and perhaps most important addition to one of the most attractive small museums in the world.


Deputies Order Papandreou To Stand Trial in Wiretapping
LEAD: Former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou was ordered by Parliament today to stand trial on criminal charges of ordering illegal telephone wiretapping during his eight years in power.


Another Yankee Rainout
LEAD: Showers and a gloomy forecast forced the Yankees and the Milwaukee Brewers to postpone their twilight-night doubleheader yesterday at the Stadium.
The two games were rescheduled for this afternoon beginning at 4 o'clock.


Guests and Ghosts Gather For 'Saturday Night Live'
LEAD: Younger spirits have come to haunt the place since the fall of 1975, when the ghosts of Arturo Toscanini and the NBC Symphony Orchestra were chased out of NBC's famous Studio 8H, at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, to make way for an anarchic band of comics aptly called the Not Ready for Prime Time Players.
There, for example, is John Belushi, wielding his sword over a sandwich at the Samurai Deli.


Close to Home
LEAD: MY sister has found us a house: built in 1809, six bedrooms, three and a half baths, many fireplaces, a summer kitchen and a winter kitchen, an enormous tree and a backyard big enough to land a helicopter.
Its only flaw is its color, pink, which we think looks peculiar in New England's thin, pure light.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.
GENERAL COMMITTEE - 9:30 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Wells, Rich Account
LEAD: Wells, Rich, Greene yesterday won the advertising account for the business credit services division of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation.
Kenneth Olshan, chairman of Wells, Rich, said the account would bill between $5 million and $10 million and represented the bulk of Dun &amp; Bradstreet's advertising expenditures.


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCBY Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
46,967,000
32,703,000
Net inc
11,500,000
7,891,000
Share earns
.43
.30
9mo rev
112,012,000
72,789,000
Net inc
23,284,000
15,068,000
Share earns
.87
.57


Dinkins Sharpens His Sword To Win a Wider Constituency
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, who campaigned for the Democratic mayoral nomination as ''a liberal and proud of it'' and shunned the word ''tough,'' is now courting a broader constituency by proclaiming himself a ''mainstream Democrat'' and challenging Rudolph W. Giuliani, his Republican opponent, for the title of New York City's ''toughest'' crime fighter.


Review/Cabaret; Julie Wilson Sings Porter, Sondheim And More
LEAD: During her last six years on the cabaret stage after a lengthy show-business sabbatical, Julie Wilson has methodically worked her way through the songbooks of leading popular songwriters including Porter, Sondheim, Rodgers and Hart, Weill, and Schwartz.
Now, for the first time since coming out of retirement, the singer, who is appearing at the Cafe Carlyle, 76th Street and Madison Avenue, through Oct.


On Stage
LEAD:  Keeping 'Roberts' in the Family


19 Students Killed in Texas School Bus Accident


Charles Blount Jr., 92, Dye Works Ex-Chief
LEAD: Charles Blount Jr., the retired president of United Piece Dye Works Inc. in Manhattan, died Tuesday at Evanston Hospital in Evanston, Ill.
He was 92 years old and had homes in Evanston and Palm Beach, Fla.


Brooklyn Neighborhood Not a Cradle of Racists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Cowgirl Hall of Fame


Andrew F. Peck, Securities Executive, 63
LEAD: Andrew F. Peck, a securities executive, died of cancer Wednesday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 63 and lived in Manhattan.
At his death he was chairman of Andrew F. Peck Associates, a discount brokerage firm that he formed in 1979.
He was previously executive vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp;


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Best Products Co reports earnings for 13wks to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Products Co
13wks to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
429,611,000
426,332,000
Net loss
27,213,000
4,014,000
6mo sales
820,860,000
804,203,000
Net loss
62,201,000
12,447,000
Best Products was acquired in a leveraged transaction in November 1988 by Adler &amp; Shaykin, a private New York investment firm.


Confronted With Cookie That Doesn't Crumble, Lawyers Find Patent Case a Hard Nut to Crack
LEAD: Jerome G. Lee, a senior partner in the New York firm of Morgan &amp; Finnegan, has been practicing patent law for 39 years.
For 32 of them, he represented Procter &amp; Gamble, and his cases have involved a laundry list of household names, like Tide, Pampers, Rely, Bounce, Bounty, Luvs, Coast and Crest.


Brooklyn Neighborhood Not a Cradle of Racists; Scapegoat Community
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Greetings Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Greetings Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
282,722,000
265,496,000
Net inc
5,018,000
2,381,000
Share earns
.16
.08
Shares outst
32,095,000
32,145,000
6mo rev
572,462,000
568,667,000
Net inc
22,502,000
17,894,000
Share earns
.70
.56
Shares outst
32,119,000
32,148,000


Dollar Up in Quiet Session; Gold Prices Post Small Rise
LEAD: The dollar gained ground against the major currencies in quiet trading yesterday.


Judge Says Owens-Illinois Violated Laws in Acquisition
LEAD: Owens-Illinois Inc. lost a round yesterday in its continuing feud with the Federal Trade Commission over its acquisition of Brockway Inc., a competing maker of glass containers, in April 1988.


Wells Fargo Buys Central Pacific
LEAD: Wells Fargo &amp; Company agreed to purchase the Central Pacific Corporation of Bakersfield, Calif., and its American National Bank subsidiary for $160 million, or $28.50 a share.
Shareholders of Central Pacific will have the option of receiving either cash or Wells Fargo common stock for their shares.


Troops Find Looting and Devastation on St. Croix
LEAD: Twelve hundred United States Army troops landed on St.
Croix today to restore order to an island devastated by a hurricane, then torn by looting and violence.


Sergeant Is Acquitted in Tompkins Sq. Case
LEAD: The first police officer to be tried on brutality charges stemming from the melee in Tompkins Square Park last year was acquitted yesterday.


Senate Votes to Ease Limits on U.S.-Paid Abortion
LEAD: The Senate voted today to ease restrictions on federally financed abortions, brushing aside outnumbered conservatives and flouting a White House threat of a veto.


Peres Plans to Visit Moscow At Peace Group's Invitation
LEAD: Shimon Peres, the Israeli Labor Party leader, conditionally accepted an invitation from the Soviet Peace Committee to visit Moscow, a spokesman for the Israeli Government said yesterday.


Hanoi in Last Phase of Cambodia Pullout
LEAD: The formal period of what is said to be the final Vietnamese military withdrawal from Cambodia began today, with some farewell ceremonies in the provinces and the return here of Prime Minister Hun Sen from talks with the Thai Prime Minister in Bangkok.


Arafat Stops Short of Backing Egypt's Peace Plan
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, withheld a direct, public endorsement of Egypt's newest Middle East initiative today, but said he was ready for a discussion with Israel.


Navy vs. Irish Set for Jersey
LEAD: The Naval Academy today chose Giants Stadium over London, Dublin and Cleveland as the site for its 1990 football game with Notre Dame.


Still Raging Against the Dying of the Light
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Peaceful Coexistence


Review/Pop; Argentine Baritone Makes a Debut
LEAD: Hope, friendship, idealism and poetry animate the songs of Alberto Cortez, the Argentine pop singer who made his New York debut Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall.
Mr.
Cortez, who has lived in Spain since 1964, has a large, loyal audience that gave him a standing ovation when he walked on stage Wednesday.


Market Place; Why Is Buffett Raising Money?
LEAD: IF Warren E. Buffett is borrowing money, does that mean he thinks there are compelling investment opportunities awaiting?


Brooklyn Neighborhood Not a Cradle of Racists; Yet Change Comes
LEAD: To the Editor:


I.B.M. and Baxter in Venture To Sell Health-Care Systems
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and the Baxter Healthcare Corporation said yesterday that they were forming a partnership to sell computer software and services to hospitals and physicians.


Homer Hankies Inspire the Cubs
LEAD: As Doug Dascenzo, the Chicago Cubs' first batter of the game, approached home plate in today's game against the Philadelphia Phillies, a group of fans in the grandstand seats down the right-field line stood up and performed a Wave.


Japanese in Deal for 10% of Tiffany
LEAD: Tiffany &amp; Company, the jewelry maker whose fine products in robin's-egg-blue packages are status symbols around the world, said yesterday that Mitsukoshi Ltd., one of Japan's leading department stores, would buy about 10 percent of its shares.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Fela at the Ritz


G.N.P. Growth in 2d Quarter Revised to 2.5% From 2.7%
LEAD: The nation's economy grew at a 2.5 percent annual rate in the April-June quarter, slightly lower than previously estimated, the Commerce Department said today.


Familiar Partisan Banners Unfurl As Fight Over Taxes Takes Shape
LEAD: The lines were drawn in the House today for a bruising fight over taxes, with Democratic leaders scrambling to sell their newly devised plan as a boon to the middle class and Republicans asserting that it was just another tax increase.


Review/Art; Wishing Cocteau a Happy 100th Birthday
LEAD: Even at the Pierpont Morgan Library, which customarily has the touch of gold in these matters, Jean Cocteau (1889-1963) is not the easiest of subjects for a 100th birthday exhibition.
Heaven knows, there is plenty of material.
No one role was ever enough for Cocteau, who for 60 years was active in his native


Dow Drops 3.61 Points, To 2,680.28
LEAD: A late spurt of program selling depressed stocks yesterday in continued moderate trading.


Questions About Aouita
LEAD: The men's Mercedes Mile down Fifth Avenue tomorrow was hitting a snag yesterday.
One of the two dream runners in the 19-man field, Said Aouita of Morocco, holder of the world record at 1,500 meters, was proving to be something of a reluctant competitor for the other one, Abdi Bile of Somalia, the world champion at the distance.


U.S. REVISES PLAN TO AID OPPOSITION IN NICARAGUA VOTE
LEAD: The Bush Administration submitted a new proposal today to help opposition groups in the Nicaraguan elections scheduled for February, revising a plan that Congress rebuffed amid questions about its legality.


Murdoch to Sell TV Station To Owners of Boston Celtics
LEAD: Under regulatory pressure, Rupert Murdoch has agreed to sell his television station in Boston to the Boston Celtics L.P.
While some other teams in the National Basketball Association are owned by media companies, this is the first time a team has bought a television station.


Bush, the U.N. and Too Many People
LEAD: When President Bush addresses the General Assembly on Monday, he will not call the U.N. ''an unreal place . . . torn by tensions'' as he did during the 1988 campaign.
Now he is likely to praise U.N. peacekeeping forces in regional trouble spots and call for stronger U.N. measures to protect the global environment.


Beijing Journal; Revel Planned Where Goddess of Democracy Fell
LEAD: Near the spot in Tiananmen Square where the Goddess of Democracy held vigil over the democracy movement several months ago, the Government has put up what it regards as a more appropriate mascot of China: a giant statue showing a worker, a farmer, a soldier and an intellectual united in a heroic revolutionary pose.


Senate Puts Limit on Child Custody Jailings
LEAD: The Senate voted today to limit the length of jailings in child custody cases in the District of Columbia.
The measure was intended to free a mother who has been in jail more than two years in a custody dispute.


Jet vs. Dolphins: Anything Goes
LEAD: Giants Stadium, the Orange Bowl, Joe Robbie Stadium - it doesn't matter where they play, the Jets and Dolphins produce a typographical-error explosion of scoring.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Edwards (A.G.) Inc(N)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
17,280,000
10,486,000
Share earns
.75
.46
6mo net inc
31,799,000
13,993,000
Share earns
1.39
.62
The company said share earnings have been restated to reflect a 10 percent stock dividend payable on Oct.


Devastated by Hurricane, Montserrat Starts to Rebuild
LEAD: ''I always thought of wind as something you can hear and feel,'' Kenneth Allen said today as he looked from his doorstep at the remains of this devastated Caribbean island, hard hit by Hurricane Hugo. ''I never thought you could see wind.''


Carolina Hotels Awash in Evacuees
LEAD: They began streaming away from the coast early in the day, and by nightfall here, inland hotels throughout the Carolinas were awash in residents fleeing Hurricane Hugo.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SL Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,490,000
15,563,000
Net inc
842,000
b3,398,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
73,173,000
63,225,000
Net inc
3,672,000
b1,358,000
Share earns
.61
-


Stewart's Leg Broken
LEAD: Al Stewart, a scrappy 25-year-old left wing for the Devils, fractured his left leg in a training camp accident yesterday at South Mountain Arena in West Orange, N.J., and is lost to the team indefinitely.
Stewart apparently caught a skate blade and twisted his leg as he fell backward to the ice.


Met Plans Park Entrance and Restaurants
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum of Art plans to build at least two restaurants and open a Central Park entrance to the museum.
The new entrance is to open in 1991, and the restaurants are to be completed a few years later.
They will allow the Metropolitan to convert its present public dining area to gallery space for Greek and Roman art, William H.


Glaxo Holdings Plc reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glaxo Holdings Plc (NYSE)
12mo to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,984,000,000
3,521,000,000
Net inc
1,066,000,000
976,000,000
Share earns
1.43
1.32
Share earnings represent American Depositary Receipts (ADR); each ADR represents one Glaxo ordinary share.


Where the Elk and the Diplomats Roam
LEAD: In choosing Grand Teton National Park as a setting to talk about arms control with Soviet diplomats this weekend, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will be showing off one of the most dramatic places in the American West but also an area that is in conflict with itself.


Giovanni Migliuolo, 62, Italian Envoy at U.N.
LEAD: Giovanni Migliuolo, Italy's representative at the United Nations since last September, died of brain cancer yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Sanford Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanford Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
36,043,000
26,935,000
Net inc
5,995,000
4,982,000
Share earns
.40
.33
Shares outst
14,981,000
14,938,000
9mo sales
97,023,000
71,636,000
Net inc
14,424,000
12,263,000
Share earns
.96
.82
Shares outst
14,968,000
14,916,000


Lloyd's Comeback
LEAD: One of Short's former teammates at Houston, Lewis Lloyd, is on the verge of a historic comeback in the N.B.A.
With the announcement on Wednesday that he had reached agreement with the Rockets on a one-year, $350,000 contract, Lloyd is ready to become the first player to return to the N.B.A. after being banned for drug use.


New Unit Head Named At American Express
LEAD: The American Express Company yesterday announced the formation of the new Consumer Financial Services Group, which will deal with international consumer businesses, and named Steven D. Goldstein as president.


Reeves Exercises Total Control
LEAD: As vice president and head coach of the Denver Broncos, Dan Reeves carries an awfully big stick.
It's his show, his party.


Saudi Arabia Beheads 16 Kuwaitis Linked to Pro-Iranian Terrorism
LEAD: Saudi Arabia beheaded 16 Kuwaiti Shiites by sword in public today in the Islamic holy city of Mecca in connection with bombings and other terrorism during the annual Muslim pilgrimage in July.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  BRONZE MENAGERIE


Neiman-Marcus Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neiman-Marcus Group (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
344,181,000
273,742,000
Net loss
3,219,000
14,254,000
Yr rev
1,467,504,000
1,223,162,000
Net inc
25,258,000
b4,938,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-After a charge of $10,542,000 resulting from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Indian 'Night Ragas'
LEAD: Pandit Pran Nath, the Indian vocalist and composer, will present ''Night Ragas,'' the second part of his ''Raga Cycle,'' at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, tonight at 9 o'clock.
The ensemble accompanying the singer includes La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela, who will sing and play tamburas, and Ray Spiegel, who will play the tabla.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Paramount And MCA To Sell Jointly
LEAD: PARAMOUNT COMMUNICATIONS INC. and MCA Inc. said yesterday that they would join forces to sell advertising time for the television shows they produce and distribute to local stations.


Famous for (No, in) 15 Minutes
LEAD: Just inside the living room window of the long, thin, white two-story home on a tree-lined street, two tiny glass hands are pressed together, fingertips facing up.
The words printed at their base are pointed outward for the world to see: ''Prayer Changes Things.''


Facts of Museum Life For Prospective Donors
LEAD: To the Editor:


IBC Publications Adds Donoghue
LEAD: IBC USA Publications Inc. said yesterday that it had acquired the Donoghue Organization Inc., which publishes Donoghue's Moneyletter, a mutual fund newsletter, and Donoghue's Mutual Fund Almanac, a directory of mutual funds.
Terms of the deal were not announced.


Orioles: Young Team Heading For an Old-Style Photo Finish
LEAD: It is still a stretch of the imagination to consider the crazy thing that has happened in baseball.
The season has turned to September, leaves have begun to change their color, cooling breezes are sweeping across the city at night, and yet they are still up there, defying the laws of gravity almost magically, pressing forward as the days pass, offering a pennant race when they should be nowhere near first place.


H.U.D. Inquiry Links Five More to Big Fees
LEAD: Investigators at the Department of Housing and Urban Development have identified five more consultants who together received at least $128,000 in fees for work on a program marked by favoritism and mismanagement, according to a report released today.


Congress Adds to Penalties of Resident Aliens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bernstein Orchestrated
LEAD: Gerard Schwarz will conduct the New York Chamber Symphony, the mezzo-soprano Susan Graham and the baritone Kurt Ollmann in the world premiere of the orchestrated version of Leonard Bernstein's ''Arias and Barcarolles'' at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, tomorrow evening at 8 o'clock.
The orchestration is by the composer Bright Sheng, under Mr.


Sleep-Inducing Drug Studied
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration is investigating an unusually high number of reports of unwanted side effects to the drug Halcion, a widely prescribed sleep medication.


Deals
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CHICAGO (AL) - Announced that Greg Walker, first baseman, is out for the season.
BASKETBALL  CLEVELAND (NBA) - Signed Charley Brown, forward.
NETS (NBA) - Signed Purvis Short, forward, to a one-year contract.
ORLANDO (NBA) - Signed Nick Anderson, forward, to a four-year contract.


Officials in New York Region Begin Preparing for the Storm
LEAD: New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, already soggy from torrential rains on Tuesday and Wednesday, will experience flooding if Hurricane Hugo follows its current track and passes over the Northeast Friday night.


Putter Problems


Grain and Soybeans Spurt On Forecasts of a Freeze
LEAD: Prices of grain and soybean futures rallied strongly on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday as the markets braced for the first hard freeze of the season in the Midwest.


United's Income Expected To Cover Cost of Buyout
LEAD: The pilots' union and management group that made a $300-a-share tender offer for the UAL Corporation predicted yesterday that the $7.2 billion in debt needed to finance the takeover of the company's airline could be paid off in eight years from operating income.


Coke in Bitter Legal Fight Over Cost of Sweetener
LEAD: In the cavernous lobby of the Coca-Cola Company's headquarters here is a crystal globe ringed with delicate glass doves marking the company's 100th anniversary in 1986.
It carries the inscription: ''Congratulations from your partners and friends, the bottlers of Coca-Cola 1886-1986.''


Lebanese Legislator Killed by 3 Gunmen On a Street in Beirut
LEAD: A Sunni Muslim member of the Lebanese Parliament was assassinated in West Beirut today, the second prominent Sunni to be killed in four months in the part of the city policed by Syrian soldiers.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  OPEN HOUSE, for children up to age 12 and their parents, from noon to 4 P.M. tomorrow, at the Rhinelander Center Visual and Performing Arts Program, with activities that include puppetry, painting, sculpture, music, rock-theater workshops, clowns and refreshments at the newly renovated building, 350 East 88th Street.


Review/Music; A Benefit Of Wagner Begins A Season
LEAD: Isolde's ''Liebestod,'' the half-crazed outpouring of emotion with which Wagner ended his ''Tristan und Isolde,'' has been a successful staple of Jessye Norman's repertory for many years.
Although she has never sung the complete role on any stage, she has handled this fearsome 10-minute challenge with increasing vocal authority and dramatic insight.


Top Draft Choice Scores But Islanders Are Losers
LEAD: The Islanders' first-round draft choice scored his first goal for the team as it lost, 4-2, tonight to the Philadelphia Flyers in an exhibition game at Nassau Coliseum.


Blount Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blount Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
197,199,000
330,295,000
Net inc
8,173,000
b1,118,000
Share earns
.68
-
Shares outst
12,023,395
11,939,928
6mo sales
392,037,000
611,838,000
Net inc
9,318,000
b11,388,000
Share earns
.78
-
Shares outst
12,022,327
11,939,555


American to Add Miami Flights
LEAD: Officials of American Airlines Inc., a subsidiary of the AMR Corporation, announced plans to nearly double, to 70, the number of daily flights serving Miami by the end of the year.
It said it expected the number of employees involved to double to more than 2,600 within the next several years.


Brooklyn Neighborhood Not a Cradle of Racists; Facing the Bullies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Restaurants
LEAD: The summer of '89 belonged to Pino Luongo.
For the last three months, Le Madri, his Tuscan restaurant on West 18th Street, has been the coolest sanctuary of the bronzed and fashionable set, its weeknight West Hampton.
On eastern Long Island, in Wainscott, he snagged road-weary weekenders at his stylish Sapore di Mare.


Texas Air Reported Talking to G.M.
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation, pressed for cash because of the strike and bankruptcy of its Eastern Airlines subsidiary, is discussing the sale of a stake in its computer reservation system to the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, sources said.
Spokesmen for both companies declined comment.


Memorial for Sidney Hook
LEAD: A memorial tribute to Sidney Hook, the philosopher and professor, will be held from 3 to 5 P.M.
Monday at the New York University Law School, 40 Washington Square South.
Speakers will include John Brademas, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Leo Cherne, Lane Kirkland and Jeane Kirkpatrick.
Mr.
Hook died on July 12 in Stanford, Calif., at the age of 86.


Reform New York's Judicial Reform
LEAD: For years, reformers in New York City have pointed to the screening panel used by Manhattan's Democratic Party as a model for choosing judges.
But a furor over this year's choices spotlights the need for more extensive reform.


I. M. Bomba, 90, Dies; A Schieffelin Executive
LEAD: I. M. Bomba, director and consultant to Schieffelin &amp; Company, importers of wine and spirits, died Monday at Moses Ludington Hospital in Ticonderoga, N.Y.
He was 90 years old and had suffered a stroke 10 days earlier.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
M.
T.
Rainey has been named chief executive of the London office of Chiat/Day/Mojo.


Super Value Stores Inc reports earnings for 12wk to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Value Stores Inc (NYSE)
12wk to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
2,549,215,000
2,337,644,000
Net inc
25,656,000
24,645,000
Share earns
.34
.33
Shares outst
74,962,000
74,768,000
28wk sales
5,822,728,000
5,324,698,000
Net inc
66,716,000
63,527,000
Share earns
.89
.85
Shares outst
74,929,000
74,752,000


Politburo Shuffle? Muscovites Shrug
LEAD: Out on the streets, where Kremlin-watching is no mere academic exercise, the morning-after view of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, master Politburo purger, was of a man whose political gifts still fail to ease the national torment of fading opportunity.


PBS Corporate Support
LEAD: Corporations donated a record $70 million for national public television programs in the 1989 fiscal year, with 20 corporations giving more than $1 million each, the Public Broadcasting Service said Wednesday.
The $70 million in the fiscal year that ended June 30 was 6.9 percent more than in the previous year, PBS said.


Corrections
LEAD: The Calendar of Events in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday gave an incorrect closing date for the exhibition ''Maurice Freedman: Paintings, 1929-1982'' at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
The show continues through Sunday.


Clorox Sells Paints To PPG Industries
LEAD: The Clorox Company said it had agreed to sell its Olympic and Lucite brand paint businesses to PPG Industries for $130 million in cash.
PPG, based in Pittsburgh, markets paints under the Pittsburgh Paints brand name in North America and the PPG Corona name in Europe.


Pravda Eats Those Words About Yeltsin
LEAD: Pravda, the Communist Party's once officially unimpeachable organ, had another free-press innovation forced upon it today: the apology, or ''grovel,'' as it is more vividly termed by Western practitioners.


Review/Jazz; Elmer Gill With Drums And Bass
LEAD: Though New York is home for the world's best jazz musicians, club bookings here often rely on the same group of players, over and over again.
The arrival of the pianist Elmer Gill, who last played New York in the early 1950's as a member of the Lionel Hampton orchestra, underscores the fact that out there fine musicians lurk.


New England Electric System reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,578,211,000
1,482,906,000
Net inc
120,500,000
b31,593,000
Share earns
2.08
-
Shares outst
58,005,657
56,495,576
b-Net loss  The company said the 1988 loss was the result of a rate settlement of its New England Power Co.


Japan's Boom Continues, And It's Creating Problems
LEAD: Japan's economy is continuing to expand at a robust rate, according to Government figures released today, adding to a growing labor shortage and increasing inflationary pressures.


TV Weekend; Death in Central Park, Lives of 80's Youth
LEAD: The docudrama as cynical exploitation - the issue takes on new urgency with ''The Preppie Murder'' on Channel 7 at 9 P.M. this Sunday.
The phenomenon of chasing sensational headlines is hardly new to television, but the pace has accelerated to a point that is becoming downright reckless.
Now we get a questionable dramatization of the Robert Chambers Jr.-Jennifer Levin case.


Richardson Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Richardson Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
36,570,000
29,331,000
Net inc
1,961,000
2,530,000
Share earns
.18
.23


Magic Signs Anderson
LEAD: The Orlando Magic, an expansion team, announced yesterday the signing of its top draft choice, the 6-foot-6-inch Nick Anderson of Illinois.
Salary terms in the four-year agreement were not disclosed, but negotiations had been stalled for weeks at a first-year salary demand reported to be more than $625,000.


Supplies Rushed to Puerto Rico
LEAD: Crews worked today to restore Puerto Rico's water and elecricity, knocked out by Hurricane Hugo, as disaster relief efforts accelerated.


Economic Scene; Some Proposals For Gorbachev
LEAD: THE Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, has carried out a purge of the Communist leadership, sacking three hard-liners in the Politburo and thereby demonstrating that he still holds a strong grip on power.
But his economic policies, in the judgment not only of many Western but also Soviet economists, are failing and undermining his country's political stability.


Skipper's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skipper's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 3
1989
1988
Revenue
19,857,000
17,936,000
Net inc
361,000
b808,000
Share earns
.13
-
9mo rev
57,701,000
53,743,000
Net inc
444,000
b1,349,000
Share earns
.16
-
b


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 7.1% Increase Projected In TV Advertising Sales
LEAD: Emboldened by predictions of a robust economy, the Television Bureau of Advertising projected yesterday that revenue from television advertising would increase 7.1 percent in 1990.
The bureau said the sharpest growth, an estimated 15 percent, would be in revenue from sales on syndicated programs.


Open Mind and Bayakoa in Early Showdown
LEAD: The showdown everyone thought would have to wait until the Breeders' Cup Distaff on Nov. 4 is now scheduled to come off at Belmont Park this Sunday: Open Mind will face Bayakoa in the Ruffian Handicap and the winner will be hailed as the best filly in the country.


FPS Computing reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPS Computing (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,446,000
17,099,000
Net loss
9,860,000
3,510,000
Shares outst
9,647,000
8,942,000
9mo rev
45,010,000
53,993,000
Net loss
12,320,000
16,488,000
Shares outst
9,549,000
8,872,000


Giants vs. Cards: Who Is for Real?
LEAD: The Giants, who have started the season with a 2-0 record, may be for real, though it is too early to tell.
But is there any way the Phoenix Cardinals, 2-0 after two road games, can also be contenders?


Federal Express Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Express Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,647,453,000
1,078,490,000
Net inc
30,422,000
66,326,000
Share earns
.58
1.26
Shares outst
52,716,000
52,437,000
The company said the year-ago quarter's net included a gain of $18.1 million, or 34 cents a share, for the effect of a change in income tax accounting.


What's Ahead
LEAD: Cautioning that predicting the course of a hurricane is chancy at best, meteorologists yesterday gave this estimate of the likely path and impact of Hurricane Hugo.
They said the storm was likely to lose intensity once it moved inland.


Hanover in Sale
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Leasing International Corporation sold its 45 percent holding in the Korea Industrial Leasing Company to Japan's Nippon Credit Bank for $68 million.
The seller, a unit of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation, said Korea Industrial Leasing is the second-largest leasing company in South Korea, with assets of about $800 million.


American General Selling 2 Divisions
LEAD: The American General Corporation, a Houston-based insurance and financial services company, said it had a definitive agreement to sell its Dallas-based group-life and health insurance companies to American Insurance Companies of Indianapolis for $195 million.
American General would receive $175 million in cash and a $10 million note, which is contingent on the companies' performance.


Man and 2 Women Are Found Slain In Harlem Rooms
LEAD: The bodies of a man and two women, one who appeared to be in her 60's and the other in her 70's, were found in a Harlem apartment yesterday.
The police said that all had been stabbed to death and that the man's throat had been slashed.


Pilots in Jet Crash at La Guardia Are Sought by U.S. Investigators
LEAD: Federal investigators tried unsuccessfully yesterday to locate the pilot and co-pilot of the USAir jetliner that crashed into the East River Wednesday night to learn why the flight was aborted in its 140-mile-an-hour rush down a runway at La Guardia Airport.


Ohio Steer Owner Gives Up Ribbon and Cash
LEAD: Because she broke a rule by dyeing hairs on her steer, the 18-year-old owner of the grand champion at the Ohio State Fair has agreed to relinquish the blue ribbon and the $28,000 she earned when the steer was sold at auction.


The Mad Circle
LEAD: Yesterday it was Colonel Higgins, hanged by the neck.
The day before, Pan Am 103, blown into bits of metal and bone over Scotland.
Today a French plane, exploded somewhere over Africa.
Tomorrow will come, soon enough.
Each time, the world - the part of it that cares - draws a breath of horror.
Political leaders say that by


At the Jet Crash: Fear, Futility and Bravery
LEAD: A sudden braking that threw passengers forward in their seats.
The shouted alarms of flight attendants -''Get your heads down!
Brace yourselves!
Cover your heads!'' A shower of debris and the dark waters of Rikers Island Channel filling the back of the USAir 737-400 jetliner.


Picasso and Braque, Brothers in Cubism
LEAD: ''PICASSO AND BRAQUE: PIONEERING CUBISM,'' opening Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, is the show of the decade.
It is remarkable on every level: in the quality and importance of the art, in the intelligence and originality of the installation, in the psychological and esthetic implications of its story.


DEFECTS TOP CAUSE OF INFANT DEATHS
LEAD: Birth defects are the leading cause of death in infants, Federal researchers say, and their prevalance will make it difficult to meet national goals for reducing the infant mortality rate.


Bush Rejects Coffee Appeal
LEAD: President Bush is refusing a request by President Virgilio Barco of Colombia to reinstate a one-year Colombian coffee export program that has been beneficial to Colombian farmers, the White House says.


19 Texas Students Die When Bus Plunges Into Water
LEAD: Nineteen high school students were killed and 64 were injured today when their bus plunged into a rain-filled 40-foot gravel pit after being struck by a delivery truck.


Dining Out Guide: Off Museum Mile
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current.
Azzurro  ** (Sept. 26, 1986), 1625 Second Avenue, at 84th Street (517-7068) - Azzurro is a family-run Sicilian restaurant that offers some very good pastas and regional seafood.


Langston Heads List Of Possible Free Agents
LEAD: Mark Langston, whom the Montreal Expos have already offered $9 million for three years, and Mark Davis, who leads major league relief pitchers with 41 saves, head the list of 138 players who are marking time until they can become free agents at the end of the season.


Amid Howl, Spark and Spray, Charleston Endures the Wind
LEAD: The quaint city of Charleston blazed in a glare of stroboscopic light tonight.


Bridge
LEAD: An exciting day of world team championship play here today ended with both titles in the balance.


3Com Posts A Profit, After All
LEAD: Last month, when the 3Com Corporation told analysts it could not rule out the possibility of a quarterly loss, the widespread perception was that the company had finally hit the wall.


Qume reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qume (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
55,260,000
47,105,000
Net inc
b3,122,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.26
.10
6mo sales
111,808,000
75,059,000
Net inc
b6,820,000
1,522,000
Share earns
.57
.13


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.93
9.75
8.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.83
7.82
7.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.74
7.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.22
8.19
8.82
30-YR.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Service Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
405,379,000
374,682,000
Net inc
26,002,000
23,669,000
Share earns
.53
.48
Yr sales
1,539,511,000
1,414,188,000
Net inc
94,718,000
86,122,000
Share earns
1.92
1.75


Household Finance Issue
LEAD: A $100 million issue of senior subordinated notes due in 2001 for the Household Finance Corporation was priced yesterday through competitive bidding.
Underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company made the winning bid on the issue and reoffered the notes to investors with a 9 percent coupon at a price of 99.275, to yield 9.101 percent.


Irwin Towers, 56, Sales Promotion Executive
LEAD: Irwin Towers, a New York sales promotion and marketing executive, died of multiple myeloma, a bone marrow cancer, yesterday at New York University Hospital.
He was 56 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Fluor Daniel, Irvine, Calif., an engineering company, said it had been awarded a $125 million contract with Fort Howard Corp., Green Bay, Wis., to build a tissue-making machine for its Savannah River mill.


Nichols (S.E.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols (S.E.) (A)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
51,452,000
67,308,000
Net inc
b1,810,000
c982,000
Share earns
.38
.21
6mo rev
105,398,000
127,041,000
Net loss
b5,687,000
cd647,000
Share earns
-
.14


Murry Dickson, Pitcher, 73
LEAD: Murry Dickson, a pitcher who compiled a 172-181 record and a 3.66 earned run average with 5 teams in 18 major league seasons, died from complications of emphysema today at Bethany Medical Center.
He was 73 years old and lived near Leavenworth, Kan.


Conagra Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 21
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conagra Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 21
1989
1988
Sales
4,008,042,000
2,808,115,000
Net inc
49,985,000
38,185,000
Share earns
.60
.48
The latest quarter's income included a $26.9 million after-tax gain from the settlement of litigation and a $24.8 million after-tax charge for realigning processed meats operations.


Insurers Win Court Round
LEAD: A Federal judge today dismissed a lawsuit filed by 19 state attorneys general that had charged numerous insurance companies with engaging in anti-competitive behavior that made liability insurance expensive or impossible to get.


Morgan's Reserve Up $2 Billion
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company announced yesterday that it had added $2 billion to its reserve against third world loans.
The step is expected to create a $1.8 billion loss in the third quarter, as well as a loss for the year.
Morgan's move is likely to intensify the pressure on other banks to increase their reserves as well.


Angels Lose in 17th On Sacrifice by Jacoby
LEAD: Brook Jacoby hit a sacrifice fly in the bottom of the 17th inning to score Tommy Hinzo, who was pinch-running, and give the Cleveland Indians a 5-4 victory over the Angels tonight.


Uncovered Short Sales Fall 1.3% on the Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest slipped 1.3 percent in the four-week period that ended Sept. 15.
Short interest is the number of shares sold short by investors and not yet covered.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
276,700,000
226,635,000
Net inc
19,542,000
12,391,000
Share earns
.57
.45
Shares outst
34,453,000
27,292,000
9mo rev
695,440,000
649,143,000
Net inc
51,053,000
30,922,000
Share earns
1.55
1.13
Shares outst
32,047,000
27,251,000


INSIDE
LEAD:  Saudis Behead 16  Saudi Arabia beheaded 16 pro-Iranian Kuwaitis in Mecca in connection with bombings and other acts of terrorism during the Muslim pilgrimage in July.
Page A8.
Auschwitz Plan Advances  Poland's Roman Catholic Primate, who renounced a pact to move a convent from the Auschwitz death camp, has endorsed the move.


ABC Rejects Nixon Effort to Stop Show
LEAD: Lawyers for Richard M. Nixon have tried to keep ABC from broadcasting a drama based on Mr.
Nixon's last months as President, but the network and the program's sponsor, A.T.&amp;T., said today that the program would be broadcast as scheduled next month.


Floyd's 'Empty Words' Motivate Ryder Team
LEAD: Raymond Floyd, the captain of the United States Ryder Cup team, was called upon to introduce his dozen players at the traditional ball Wednesday night and said, ''It is my pleasure to introduce the 12 best players in the world.''


Treasury Issues Decline Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped further in moderately active trading yesterday as concerns about upcoming auctions of new issues prompted traders to sell securities.


Auctions
LEAD:  A 30-Tear Collection


Review/Film Festival; Love Out of Sync in 'Too Beautiful for You'
LEAD: Bernard (Gerard Depardieu), a prosperous garage owner and automobile salesman, is in a Continental fix.
He is married to the beautiful, model-chic Florence (Carole Bouquet) when he develops an inexplicable passion for the sweet, plain, somewhat overweight Colette (Josiane Balasko), a temporary secretary not in the bloom of youth.


Bank Set To Manage Bond Sale
LEAD: Making quick use of new powers granted by the Federal Reserve Board, the Bankers Trust Company announced plans yesterday to handle the sale of a new issue of ''junk bonds,'' thus becoming the first banking company to manage a public sale of corporate bonds.


Rockwell Sues U.S. Over Waste at Nuclear Plant
LEAD: Saying it is trapped between the conflicting demands of different Government agencies, the Rockwell International Corporation sued the Federal Government today over the company's role as manager of the Energy Department's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Year of Kyra Sedgwick


Most I.M.F. Members Ask Aid Rise
LEAD: The head of the International Monetary Fund said today that most of the fund's membership supported a substantial increase in the amount it could make available to meet emergency financing needs in the 1990's.
The United States, however, does not.
The managing director, Michel Camdessus, said at a news conference that 19 of the executive board's 22 members, representing 70 percent of the weighted vote in the I.M


DeGaetani Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for the mezzo-soprano Jan DeGaetani will be held next Friday at noon at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street.
Friends and colleagues will speak, and the Juilliard String Quartet will play.
Miss DeGaetani died of leukemia on Sept. 15 at the age of 56.


Immunex Plans To Shift Focus
LEAD: The Immunex Corporation announced a plan yesterday that would transform it from a research-dominated concern in medical biotechnology into a pharmaceutical company.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Mercedes Mile foot race, Fifth Avenue between 62d and 86th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 1 P.M. to 2 P.M.
Because of the West End


Even Ugly Wart Hogs Deserve to Survive
LEAD: To the Editor:


D'Amato, After Backing Lauder, Supports Giuliani for Mayor
LEAD: Proving that strong feelings can have short lives in politics - at least publicly - Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday that he would support Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican nominee for mayor of New York City, ''without equivocation.''


Judicial Panel Urges Limit on Appeals by Death Row Inmates
LEAD: A special committee of Federal judges, set up at the request of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist to study the judicial system's handling of death penalty cases, today recommended strict new limits on the multiple appeals that are now commonly filed by death row inmates.


Brooklyn Neighborhood Not a Cradle of Racists; Italy's True Heritage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miguel Manteo, a Puppet Maker And Theater Patriarch, Dies at 80
LEAD: Miguel (Papa Mike) Manteo, a puppeteer and the patriarch of the Manteo Familiy Sicilian Marionette Theater, died Sept. 13 in Clove Lakes Nursing Home on Staten Island.
He was 80 years old.


Review/Art; Richard Serra in Shows Of Drawing and Sculpture
LEAD: Richard Serra's latest works are terrific.
They are complex and resolved and they richly reward the patient observer.
One of the saddest legacies of the debacle involving the removal this year of ''Tilted Arc'' from Federal Plaza in Manhattan is that many people who have never spent much time with Mr.


New Antiques Extravaganza With an International Flavor
LEAD: GLORIOUS gilded eagles, decorating an assortment of wares from Italy, Russia, England, France and the United States, reflect the global character of the goods presented by 84 dealers at New York's newest bazaar for secondhand wares - the International Antique Dealers Show.
The fair at the Seventh Regiment


Corrections
LEAD: The Market Place column in Business Day on Sept. 11 referred incorrectly to the Spinnaker Capital Corporation in Boston.
It is a private investment corporation.


Books of The Times; An Era Revealed in a Perfect Butler's Imperfections
LEAD:  The Remains of the Day  By Kazuo Ishiguro  245 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Floods Seen as Storm Marches Up Coast
LEAD: The first hurricane to threaten the United States this year will probably bring gales, heavy rains and flooding to a broad swath of the East Coast, meteorologists said today.


Health Union Votes to Strike
LEAD: Members of the state's largest health-care workers union voted overwhelmingly yesterday to strike at 56 hospitals and nursing homes in the New York City area on Oct. 4 unless a contract settlement is reached.
Members of the union, Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees, which includes nurses aides, blood bank technologists, orderlies and X-ray technicians, have been working without a contract since June.


Texas Concern In Revamping
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. said today that it had reorganized most of its computer products operations to put more emphasis on developing complex software and information management systems.


Teachers Taking More Pride In Profession, Survey Finds
LEAD: Teachers feel substantially better about their profession and about themselves than they did five years ago, a survey of 2,000 teachers of kindergarten through 12th grade reported yesterday.
In fact, 92 percent of those surveyed said that the quality of education in their schools was good or excellent.


Boston Celtics LP reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Celtics LP (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,100,806
7,679,122
Net inc
2,113,348
3,226,279
Share earns
.32
.49
Yr rev
27,385,698
28,404,122
Net inc
12,223,866
10,347,860
Share earns
1.88
1.59


Monsanto Wins Mobil Damages
LEAD: A Federal jury has awarded the Monsanto Company more than $21 million for a breach of contract by the Mobil Oil Corporation.
Monsanto contended that Mobil had violated a five-year agreement to buy phosphorus and other products, including detergents and lubrication additives, for Mobil plants in Ohio and South


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ambase Corp., a financial services company, named Christopher C. York vice president of planning and marketing.


Campeau Denies Rumors of Price Cuts at 3 Chains
LEAD: Retailing officials of the Campeau Corporation denied yesterday that three of the largest department stores in their nine retailing chains would soon cut prices to raise money for the troubled company.


Undercover Drug Detective Shot and Critically Wounded
LEAD: An undercover narcotics detective was shot and critically wounded today while arresting suspects on cocaine-selling charges, the authorities said.


Much Better Than Tax Tactics
LEAD: ''Under the Bush proposal, the rich get a tax cut paid for by the middle class.
Under our proposal, the middle class gets an I.R.A. paid for by the rich.''


Vestaur Securities Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vestaur Securities Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,924,000
1,950,000
Share earns
.30
.30
9mo net inc
5,832,000
5,868,000
Share earns
.91
.92
Net income represented net investment income.


Norway Mistakenly Exports Barred Computers to Soviets
LEAD: Norway broke Western export rules by mistakenly sending high-tech computers to the Soviet Union, believing it was flying supplies to a Red Cross hospital in Armenia, Norwegian customs oficials said today.


Verniton Cancels Kollmorgen Deal
LEAD: The Vernitron Corporation terminated its agreement to acquire the Kollmorgen Corporation for $25 a share, or $320 million.
Kollmorgen, based in Stamford, Conn., produces parts for electric motors, optical instruments and electronic circuit boards.


Wausau Paper Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wausau Paper Mills (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
83,031,000
72,656,000
Net inc
4,372,000
4,133,000
Share earns
.80
.75
Yr sales
317,097,000
284,240,000
Net inc
20,912,000
16,005,000
Share earns
3.81
2.92


Henricus A. F. Heidweiller, Ex-Suriname Official, 60
LEAD: Henricus A. F. Heidweiller, a former Foreign Minister of Suriname, died Tuesday at his home in Paramaribo, the South American's country's capital.
He was 60 years old.


Fernandez Wants to Empower Local Schools to Make Decisions
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez, who will soon take control of New York City's public schools, said yesterday that he would like to replace the 21-year-old decentralized school administration with the system he has started to put into place in Miami, where important decisions are made at the school level.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  HARNESS RACING  Goalie Jeff Wins: Goalie Jeff, winner of the third division, never trailed in the raceoff and won the Little Brown Jug yesterday at the Delaware County Fairgrounds in Delaware, Ohio.
Goalie Jeff, driven by Michel Lachance, drew the first post position in the raceoff and won in 1:54 1/5 over the mile course.


Chock Full O' Nuts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chock Full O' Nuts Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
62,589,000
48,274,000
Net loss
557,000
251,000
Yr sales
238,654,000
211,626,000
Net inc
b3,461,000
c1,544,000
Share earns
.44
-
b-After an extraordinary credit of $671,000, or 8 cents a share, from utilization of capital loss carryforwards.


Barney Frank's Right to Judgment
LEAD: If Representative Barney Frank knew a male prostitute was selling sex from Mr.
Frank's Washington apartment, he cannot remain in the House.
If he was unaware of what went on while he was back in Massachusetts, he is guilty only of admitted abysmal judgment and misplaced trust in a man he had hired for household errands.


Review/Film; Police Chase a Gangster In a Bright, Menacing Japan
LEAD: Near the beginning of ''Black Rain,'' Ridley Scott's new police melodrama, two New York City detectives, Nick Conklin (Michael Douglas) and Charlie Vincent (Andy Garcia), are ordered to escort a Japanese gangster back to Osaka.


Stabilizing the Dollar; Coordination Process of Group of 7 Is Under Pressure as Allies Convene
LEAD: Foreign exchange traders and economists will be looking for a new sign of commitment to a stable dollar policy when the United States and its economic allies meet tomorrow in Washington.


Sprinter's Drug Allegations Draw Denials
LEAD: An American sprinter who says he received performance-enhancing drugs from two of the nation's leading track coaches and supplied drugs to Florence Griffith Joyner, one of the nation's most acclaimed track champions, drew a series of vehement denials yesterday, one of them delivered to his video face on national television.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States has asked that donations to assist victims of Hurricane Hugo be sent to the American Red Cross or branch offices of three banks that are setting up special accounts for Puerto Rican disaster assistance.


Review/Film; Antic Duo in Atlantic City: Magic a la Penn and Teller
LEAD: Anatomy of a magic trick: the Amazing Bouncing Bagel Effect is achieved through the use of a table top, which is ordinary in all respects but which happens to be upside down.
That way the magicians, who are upside-down themselves, can drop bagels or playing cards or other objects onto the table and make these things appear, to the eye of a similarly inverted television camera, to bounce or fly.


Koch Warns of Layoffs Over Coliseum Suit
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch warned last night that New York City faces ''massive'' layoffs of city workers and will have to drop plans to hire additional police officers if opponents of the Columbus Center project pursue a lawsuit to block construction and deprive the city of $247 million.


New Yorker Named As Chief of Research On Rwanda Gorillas
LEAD: Diane Doran, a researcher at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, has been chosen from 15 applicants to be the next director of the Karisoke Research Center, the gorilla research station in Rwanda that was formerly headed by Dian Fossey.


Reynolds to Curtail Cigarette Shipments
LEAD: The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company said today that it would reduce United States cigarette shipments for the rest of the year and eliminate its sales incentives.


GPA Group Ltd. Establishes $1.25 Billion Credit Facility
LEAD: One of the largest credit facilities ever raised in the aviation industry has been established by GPA Group Ltd., Shannon, Ireland, an airplane leasing company.


Pop/Jazz; Blending Ethnic Music In a Series At Town Hall
LEAD: ''Fusion'' once referred to a heady mixture of the spirit of jazz and the energy of rock.
Now it usually describes a kind of slick, predictable pseudo-jazz.


Retiring Joint Chiefs Chairman Says Military Could Be Used in Drug War


Jack Smith, Film Maker, 57
LEAD: Jack Smith, an independent film maker and theater artist, died of AIDS on Monday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Shevardnadze Gives Bush Arms Offer as Summit Pans Are Worked Out
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union edged toward setting a date for a summit meeting today as Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union presented President Bush with new proposals on arms control.


Connaught Meets To Weigh Offer
LEAD: The board of Connaught Biosciences Inc., a maker of biological products based here, said it had met to consider a response by Monday to a takeover offer of $30 a share, or $25.36 in United States dollars, from Ciba-Geigy Ltd., a chemicals and drug maker based in Switzerland, and the Chiron Corporation, a California-based health-care products maker.


Hjelm's (Jim) Private Collecion Ltd(O) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hjelm's (Jim) Private Collecion Ltd(O)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,017,146
469,823
Net inc
50,216
35,613
Share earns
.03
.02
9mo rev
2,760,467
1,014,247
Net inc
157,000
b136,511
Share earns
.08
-


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 466 money market mutual funds increased by $1.3 billion, to $348.98 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 141 institutional funds decreased by $645.4 million, to $84.21 billion.
The assets of the 230 general-purpose funds were up by $1.13 billion, to $113.21 billion.


Bronx Racial Attack Reported
LEAD: A black teen-ager shot and seriously wounded a white 19-year-old early yesterday in the Bronx in what the police said was apparently a racially motivated attack.
They said it was prompted by an argument in which the wounded man's white friend had been told, ''You don't belong here.''


Chief Executive Quits At First Bank System
LEAD: The First Bank System, Minnesota's largest banking company, yesterday announced the resignation of DeWalt H. Ankeny Jr. as chairman, president and chief executive.


Yankees Salvage Split With Brewers
LEAD: Fewer than 200 fans were at Yankee Stadium for the start of a twilight-night doubleheader yesterday.
And for those who stayed, and the ones who came later, the Yankees played two of their ugliest and most dramatic games of the season, while salvaging a split with the Milwaukee Brewers.


Review/Film; Former Teen-Agers Look Back on 50's Fooleries
LEAD: ''Heavy Petting'' is a brief, cheery compendium of teen-age enthusiasms, filtered through the memories of an interesting array of former teen-agers.
Though its interviewees range from David Byrne to William Burroughs, the film's heart is firmly planted in the 1950's, when adolescent longings were so fervently at war with social mores.


Mets Reduced To Being Spoilers
LEAD: The Mets slipped spectacularly into the role of spoiler tonight when they defeated the St.
Louis Cardinals, 6-1, behind a dazzling performance by Sid Fernandez, who allowed only 2 hits, struck out 13 batters and personally outhit the Cardinals by delivering two singles and the first home run of his career.


Darryl? Or Davey? Or Both?
LEAD: In olden days, a gossip columnist named Walter Winchell had pet phrases for people who were not getting along: for professional feuds he wrote, ''Don't invite Martin Mogul and Stanley Star to the same party,'' and for personal estrangements he would write, ''I hear Liz and Dick are pffft,'' as in cat-fighting.


3 Airlines to Match American Fare Increase
LEAD: Three major airlines moved yesterday to match American Airlines in raising fares typically used by business travelers, and other carriers were considering similar increases.


Publishers Oppose Laws on Recycled Paper
LEAD: The nation's newspaper publishers say they support the increased use of recycled paper for printing newspapers but oppose legislation requiring its use.
Such legislation has been passed or offered in 14 states so far.


F.B.I. to Abide by Ruling In Hispanic Agents' Suit
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it would not appeal a sweeping court order intended to eliminate discrimination against Hispanic agents.


Fort Tryon Park Joins the Medieval World
LEAD: Not so long ago or so far away, on a wooded bluff in the small island fief of Manhattan, there appeared troubadours and jesters, knights on horseback and even a dragon.
There were colorful pageants and dances, and a marketplace full of exotic foods and wares, not to mention tens of thousands of 20th-century time-travelers.


780 White South Africans Vow to Resist Draft
LEAD: In the largest concerted campaign so far to resist conscription, more than 780 whites of military age pledged today to refuse to serve in South Africa's armed forces.


Review/Theater; Four One-Acts by Young Playwrights
LEAD: The four writers in this season's Young Playwrights Festival are among the most talented to emerge in the eight years of the annual series.
Their short plays opened last night at Playwrights Horizons (three by other playwrights will be given staged readings in October).
As was also true last year, there are definite signs that the young playwrights - they have to be under the age of 19 when they submit their work to the Dramatists


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Nothing really terrible happened except that the plane broke in half.''  - Joanna Trojer, a passenger on USAir Flight 5050.  [ B4:1. ]


Chicago Merc to Allow Some Trading Off Floor
LEAD: To accommodate the demands of large institutional traders, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange announced today that it would begin an experiment in which some trading of futures contracts would take place off the exchange floor, outside the confines of the exchange's cherished ''open outcry'' system.


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,787,878,000
5,427,935,000
Net inc
726,390,000
858,171,000
Share earns
2.97
3.58


Investigators Reach Wreckage of French Jet
LEAD: With all signs pointing toward sabotage, investigators converged on the wreckage of a French DC-10 jetliner in the North African desert today.
A French magazine and French officials said pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon had warned France that it would suffer terrorist acts.


Our Towns; In a Small Town, One Pharmacist Versus a Chain
LEAD: Neil Norwood has always tried to give his small-town pharmacy a personal touch.
He keeps one bottle of Odol imported mouthwash on the shelf for Mrs.
Bogyo. ''Mrs.
Bogyo's happy when she comes in and sees it,'' Mr.
Norwood said. ''The fire chief comes in for Ionil medicated shampoo in the 32-ounce size.


Continuum Concert
LEAD: Continuum, an ensemble that specializes in 20th-century music, is to perform works by Henry Cowell, Luigi Dallapiccola, Roberto Sierra, John Anthony Lennon, Francis Schwartz and Manuel de Falla at Armor Hall, Wave Hill, 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx, on Sunday at 3 P.M.


Eagle-Picher Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle-Picher Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
169,017,915
189,038,801
Net inc
2,256,993
9,016,846
Share earns
.21
.84
Shares outst
10,680,000
10,706,000
9mo sales
554,359,507
567,165,191
Net inc
42,846,920
30,684,648
Share earns
4.01
2.87
Shares outst
10,683,000
10,697,000


Opto Mechanik Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Opto Mechanik Inc (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
30,255,863
26,936,840
Net inc
925,154
818,022
Share earns
.43
.38
Shares outst
2,159,139
2,155,102


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
127,467,000
131,757,000
Net inc
4,665,000
6,054,000
Share earns
.50
.65


Wise Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wise Stores Inc
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
22,415,000
15,689,000
Net inc
136,000
194,000
Share earns
.03
.03
6mo sales
37,097,000
28,136,000
Net loss
989,000
343,000
Figures are in Canadian funds


The Apple Crop Is Ready, But the Supply Is Smaller
LEAD: The apple harvest has begun in orchards close to metropolitan New York, with scores of farms in the Hudson Valley, Connecticut and New Jersey open for those who want to pick their own fruit.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Kent Cigarettes Leaves BBDO
LEAD: After suffering a chronic decline in market share for its Kent cigarette brand, Lorillard Inc. yesterday dismissed BBDO Worldwide as the agency for Kent advertising.
A spokeswoman for Lorillard said the company had ''mutual differences in creative approach'' with the agency.


Documentaries Are Hot At the '89 Film Festival
LEAD: HAS the power of the documentary film to bear witness to reality endured in an era saturated by the instantaneous images of television news?
Has the documentary been rendered irrelevant - or worse, boring - by the competitive video verite of the Cable News Network and its 24-hour-a-day bulletins in millions of homes?


Tennessee Judge Awards Custody of 7 Frozen Embryos to Woman
LEAD: A Tennessee state court yesterday granted temporary custody of seven frozen embryos to the woman who produced the eggs.
The court rejected the efforts of her estranged husband, whose sperm fertilized the eggs, to prevent them from being implanted in her womb.


Fairs and Festivals
LEAD:  This Weekend  Today  TWELFTH CRAB AND BEER FEST, Our Lady of Pompeii Church, Bleecker and Carmine Streets; sponsored by Village Visiting Neighbors.
Food and entertainment.
Today, 6 to 9 P.M. $20 ($15 for the elderly).
Information: 260-6200.
CRAFTS AT LYNDHURST, Great Lawn of the Lyndhurst estate, Route 9, Tarrytown, N.Y.; sponsored by Gannett Westchester Rockland Newspapers.


Regan Criticizes How State Debts Were Financed
LEAD: Since the state hit rocky financial times 18 months ago, communications between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, have had all the warmth of eviction proceedings.


Nets Sign Short To One-Year Contract
LEAD: Purvis Short, who has averaged 18 points a game in an 11-year National Basketball Association career, will be throwing up his familiar high-arching rainbow jumpers for the the Nets this season.
Looking for more scoring and ''someone who has been there before,'' the Nets signed the 6-foot-7-inch Short, an unrestricted free agent, to a one-year contract yesterday.


Full Force of Storm Hits South Carolina
LEAD: Surging in power and speed, Hurricane Hugo hit Charleston, S.C., shortly before midnight last night, lashing the coastal city with 135-mile-an-hour winds, toppling trees, snapping power lines and cartwheeling telephone poles down streets.


United Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Bankers (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
2,100,697
2,727,171
6mo net inc
312,283
b5,745,549
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-11  Nicaraguan opposition groups in the election scheduled for February would be assisted by a new proposal that the Bush Administration submitted to Congress.
The initial plan was rebuffed amid questions about its legality.
Page A1


Polish Primate Backs Convent Move
LEAD: Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Roman Catholic Primate of Poland, has stated, in a letter made public today, that the disputed Carmelite convent at the site of the Auschwitz death camp should be moved to an interfaith center to be built nearby, as the Vatican urged two days ago.


For the Record
LEAD:  Law in the Fast Lane


Dow Jones Bids for Rest Of Telerate
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company moved unexpectedly yesterday to make complete its ownership of Telerate Inc., the rapidly expanding financial information service, with a $576 million offer for the portion of Telerate in public hands.
Dow Jones already holds 67 percent of the company.


Bid for B.A.T. Clears Hurdle
LEAD: The British Government gave conditional approval today to the hostile takeover bid by Sir James Goldsmith for B.A.T.
Industries.


Kaiser Health Group Offering
LEAD: Kaiser Permanente, the nation's largest health maintenance organization, is offering $150 million in notes due 2001 through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Paychex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paychex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
28,529,000
24,874,000
Net inc
2,697,000
2,759,000
Share earns
.21
.21
Shares outst
13,029,000
12,990,000


Time to Talk About Afghanistan
LEAD: Washington has kept faith with Afghanistan's mujahedeen guerrillas, and more.
Direct Soviet military involvement justified U.S. support for the Islamic resistance forces.
The presumption was that the aid would cease when Soviet forces withdrew.
But though Soviet troops left in February, generous U.S.


British Pet Food Deal
LEAD: Harrisons &amp; Crosfield P.L.C., a food, commodities and chemicals company, said it would buy Edward Baker Holdings Ltd., a pet food manufacturer and flour miller, for about $:44 million.
Edward Baker annually manufactures about 40,000 tons of dry and moist pet food.


Central Illinois Public Service reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
599,672,000
608,954,000
Net inc
86,643,000
83,678,000
Share earns
2.36
2.27


Bogota Justice Chief Is Reported to Resign Amid Death Threats
LEAD: Colombia's Justice Minister, a symbol of this nation's war against cocaine cartels, has resigned, a presidential aide confirmed today.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY SEPTEMBER 23, 1989
LEAD:  The Economy


Drug Inquiry Likely
LEAD: The governing body of track in the United States will likely investigate charges of drug use by Florence Griffith Joyner and other American athletes, a spokesman for the organization said yesterday.


IN IRELAND, A TRIUMPH OF WILL; A Particular Coming Of Age
LEAD: Born in 1932 with cerebral palsy, the ninth of the 22 children his parents would eventually have (13 survived), Christy Brown grew up as an archetypal member of Dublin's working class - painfully poor, often deprived of essentials, yet also miraculously resiliant.


Leonard E. Kust, 72, New York Tax Lawyer
LEAD: Leonard E. Kust, a tax lawyer, died of spongiform encephalopathy, a neurological disorder, Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: The Lottery Numbers chart yesterday listed the New Jersey Pick-It number incorrectly in some editions.


In Fear, Settlers From Vietnam Leave Cambodia
LEAD: Several thousand Vietnamese citizens living in Cambodia have recently returned to Vietnam, nervous about what will happen once Vietnamese soldiers complete their withdrawal from Cambodia next week, diplomats and relief officials said today.


Panel Clears Zion's Doctors Of Wrongdoing in Her Death
LEAD: After more than two years of hearings, a New York State Health Department panel has recommended that all administrative charges be dropped against the two doctors who treated 18-year-old Libby Zion in the hours before her death in 1984.


East Berlin Officials Declare Pro-Democracy Group Illegal
LEAD: The East German Government has declared a pro-democracy group illegal and accused the group's organizers of ''anti-state policies'' and attempts to deceive the public about its true aims.


Conservative Figures See 'Bright' Future
LEAD: There was more than a trace of self-congratulation in the air today as Vice President Dan Quayle, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and other like-minded political leaders assured each other that Communism and socialism were on the defensive everywhere.


Europeans Take Lead In Ryder's First Day
LEAD: Led again by the inspirational and artistic leadership of Seve Ballesteros of Spain, the European Ryder Cup golf team this afternoon swept four four-ball matches against the United States, just as it did two years ago.
This time, the sweep enabled the cup defenders to erase a 3-1 deficit after the foursome matches in the morning and take an impressive 5-3 lead after the first day of the event at the


Patents; New Biotech Rulings Stir Confusion
LEAD: The Patent and Trademark Office has given two companies what appears to be strong patent protection for the same drug, setting the stage for another biotechnology dispute.


Books of The Times; 2 Strangers Telling Each Other Their War Stories
LEAD:  Dirty Work  By Larry Brown  236 pages.
Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill/Workman Publishing. $16.95.


Bogota Justice Chief Was Ousted By President Barco, Aide Reports
LEAD: Colombia's Justice Minister was asked to resign because she was ''dragging her feet'' on signing papers to extradite drug suspects for trial in the United States, a presidential aide said today.


U.S. Also an Offender in Setting Nets in the Sea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thomas F. Burke, 60, Electronics Executive
LEAD: Thomas F. Burke, the chairman and chief executive of M/A-Com Inc. of Burlington, Mass., manufacturers of electronic equipment, was fatally injured Thursday in an automobile accident near Tewksbury, Mass.
He was 60 years old and lived in North Andover, Mass.


Soviets, in Apparent Shift, Remove Barrier to Strategic Arms Treaty
LEAD: In a possible shift that could remove a major obstacle to an accord on strategic nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union appears to have dropped its demand that an arms agreement be held in abeyance until a separate accord is reached on space weapons, a senior American official announced tonight.


Texas Bus Accident Victim Buried


113th Texas Bank Fails
LEAD: The number of bank failures in Texas this year, 113, equals the number recorded in all of last year.
The latest bank to fail, Rose Capital Bank of Tyler, was closed Thursday by state regulators.
Nationally, Rose Capital was the 160th failure this year.
The bank, which had assets of $64.6 million and deposits of about $61.1 million, was purchased by the First City Bancorporation of Texas Inc.


Woman Held in Attack On Doctor at Hospital
LEAD: A doctor at Bronx Lebanon Hospital was stabbed in the arm and chest last night by a woman wielding a barbecue fork, the police said.


M.T.A. Rejects Sex-Act Curbs By Metro-North
LEAD: A Metro-North Commuter Railroad proposal to outlaw some sexual acts on trains and in stations was rejected yesterday by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's board.


Adobe Systems' Stock Repurchase
LEAD: Adobe Systems Inc. said its board had authorized the repurchase of up to $15 million of its common stock, or about 4.8 percent at recent prices, in the open market in the next few weeks.
Adobe will use existing cash to pay for the shares, which will be bought at the discretion of the company's management.


When Hurricane Ripped Charleston, It Rated as 10th Strongest to Hit U.S.
LEAD: The hurricane that last night ravaged Charleston, S.C., surprised forecasters by gathering strength almost at the last moment to become the 10th most intense of the 137 hurricanes that have hit the United States coast in this century.


Louisville Sets Out To Gain Recognition
LEAD: In four years, Coach Howard Schnellenberger transformed the University of Miami Hurricanes from mediocrity to a national collegiate championship team in 1983.
He has been striving since 1985 to pull off a similar feat with Louisville, where for three seasons he has labored with teams that had records of 2-9, 3-8 and 3-7-1.


No U.N. Monitors for Cambodia
LEAD: The Cambodian Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has been rebuffed in an attempt to assemble an international force of military observers to monitor the Vietnamese troop withdrawal, diplomats here say.
The Vietnamese pullout is scheduled to be completed next week.


And You Don't Need a Key
LEAD: People who jog or bicycle to work may want to consider an alternative: roller skating.
Modern technology has refashioned the old metal skate into a lighter plastic model that snaps over a shoe.


Outside U.S. Embassy, Soviet Extortion
LEAD: American officials trying to cope with increasing crowds of Soviet applicants for immigration say the people in long lines outside the United States Embassy are being victimized by an extortion racket involving Soviet police guards assigned to keep order.


The Good News About Asbestos
LEAD: Water can kill - in quantities large enough to permit drowning.
The same is true for asbestos.
It can cause illness and death, but only after victims have been exposed to sufficient concentrations over a long time.


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 46. 1.
This new Postal Service stamp, one of four celebrating dinosaurs, has created quite a stir among paleontologists.
Why? 2.
With one sentence on Tuesday, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d confirmed what had been assumed in political circles.


Reorganization For Steel Concern
LEAD: The New York investment firm Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it was in talks about a new plan to reorganize the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation, the nation's eighth-largest steel producer.
Wheeling-Pittsburgh has been in reorganization proceedings under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy


Two U.S. Women in Crisis In the England of Thatcher
LEAD: ''Strapless,'' the new film written by David Hare, the English playwright, is about two American women, sisters, who come to terms with their womanhood in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's England.
The movie is about some of the perils of womanhood and what Mr.
Hare sees as unbridled Toryism.


Fixed Mortgage Cost Off
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.03 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporaiton.
The average rate was 10.05 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.70 percent this week, up from 8.68 percent the week before, Freddie Mac said.


France Finds Evidence of Explosives on Jet
LEAD: Officials investigating the wreckage of a French airliner that broke up over an African desert have found evidence of explosives on board the DC-10, the Government said tonight.


Michelin to Acquire Uniroyal Goodrich
LEAD: In a deal that will create the world's largest tire company, the Michelin Group of France agreed yesterday to acquire the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company in a transaction valued at $1.5 billion.


Campeau's Foes in Toronto Gloat
LEAD: There has been little sympathy for Robert Campeau this week on Bay Street, Toronto's clubby financial district.


Budget Deficit Down 11.7%
LEAD: The Federal deficit for the first 11 months of the fiscal year was 11.7 percent smaller that a year earlier, the Treasury Department said today.


Jet Defenders Eager As They Await Marino
LEAD: Who owns the football field?


Rights Panel Is Critical of Care of Disabled Newborns
LEAD: A report issued today by the United States Commission on Civil Rights asserts that children born with severe disabilities ''continue to be denied'' adequate medical treatment in violation of Federal anti-discrimination law.


Don't Liken Smokingnto oruguA ddciitno
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pride Bowl Is Rescheduled
LEAD: The possibility that Hurricane Hugo would hit North Carolina forced officials of the Pride Bowl in Newark to postpone the college football game today between Davidson and Wagner until tomorrow.


Hundreds of Children With AIDS Are Unable to Obtain AZT
LEAD: Hundreds of children with AIDS are suffering or dying prematurely because they are unable to obtain AZT, a drug that could prolong and improve the quality of their lives, Federal officials, researchers and advocates for AIDS patients say.


Memorial Obliterates French Nazi Victims
LEAD: To the Editor:


Your Money; Advisers Divided Over 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: Although investors in ''junk bond'' mutual funds have been collecting fat monthly income checks this year, on paper at least, they have large principal losses.
The net asset value of their funds is down sharply this year.


Salvadoran Guerrillas Refuse To Extend an Expiring Truce
LEAD: Salvadoran guerrillas said today that they would not extend a truce that runs out at midnight because the Government had not responded positively to their peace efforts.


Leon Culberson Outfielder, 71
LEAD: Leon Culberson, an outfielder who played with the Boston Red Sox and the Washington Senators during a six-year major league career, died last Sunday.
He was 71 years old.
He broke into the majors with Boston in 1943 and was with the Sox for five years.
His best season was in 1946, when he batted .313 as the Red Sox won the American League pennant.


Senate Bargaining on Drug Funds Collapses
LEAD: Negotiations between Democratic and Republican senators over the financing of an anti-drug package unexpectedly collapsed late this afternoon, with the two sides only $150 million apart on how much money to add to President Bush's $7.9 billion proposal for the new fiscal year.


One Germany: Bonn's Quiet Yearning
LEAD: Much as they welcomed the thousands of East Germans flooding over the Hungarian border, West Germans have greeted the unexpected revival of the ''German question'' with a mixture of deep emotion and some unease.


Rockwell Is Giving Up Rocky Flats Plant
LEAD: The Department of Energy and the Rockwell International Corporation said late yesterday that the company will give up management of the department's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant in Colorado.


Bridge; Americans win in one world championship but are in trouble in another.
LEAD: The bridge players representing the United States snatched a victory in one world championship event here tonight, but were in trouble in another.


Suspect Jailed in the Death Of Noted Kidnapping Victim
LEAD: A worker at a tomato packing house has been jailed in the hit-and-run death of Steven Stayner, whose kidnapping as a child almost two decades ago was the subject of the recent television movie ''I Know My First Name Is Steven.''


Stamford Commuters Try To Leave the Driver's Seat
LEAD: James Slattery drives 50 miles to work each day on some of the most crowded roads in the state.
If all goes well, the trip takes an hour and a quarter.
But if there is an accident or a storm, Mr.
Slattery said: ''Forget it.
You're dead.''


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Mercedes Mile foot race, Fifth Avenue between 62d and 86th Streets will be closed today from 1 P.M. to 2 P.M.


Yanks Become Spoilers And Hold Off Orioles
LEAD: The race ran away from the Yankees long ago.
It is lost somewhere in their collective memory, somewhere among the losses and the trades and the managerial changes that seem to be a part of every summer they play.


U.S. Also an Offender in Setting Nets in the Sea; First Agreement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cummins Stock Takes Tumble
LEAD: The stock of Cummins Engine Company Inc. tumbled $5.125 today, to $57.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, and analysts attributed the drop to a negative earnings estimate issued late Thursday by the Columbus, Ind., manufacturer of diesel engines and automotive parts.


Cairo Journal; Egypt's Pain: Wives Killing Husbands
LEAD: When the newspapers here began chronicling a series of attacks in which women killed their husbands, the stories seized the headlines and stirred some debate about the future of a land where no transition seems easy.


Advertisers Drop Program About the Timber Industry
LEAD: A television program about threats to timberlands in the Pacific Northwest has lost all its advertising, after pressure was put on the companies by a group representing the logging industry, the program's co-producer and the television network that is carrying the program said.


Dollar Up in Thin Trading Before Group of 7 Meeting
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday in thin, erratic trading in advance of a meeting today of finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrialized nations.
Gold prices also rose.


Corrections
LEAD: A film review on Sept. 15 about ''High Fidelity: The Adventures of the Guarneri String Quartet'' misattributed an earlier film, ''From Mao to Mozart: Isaac Stern in China.'' It was produced and directed by Murray Lerner.
Alan Miller, producer and director of ''High Fidelity,'' served as artistic supervisor of the earlier film.


A Polish Director's Vision Of the Evil That Men Do
LEAD: In ''A Short Film About Killing,'' Krzysztof Kieslowski, one of the most respected of the postwar generation of Polish directors, has the daring to build an argument against capital punishment around an utterly unsympathetic character.


Campaign Trail; Unveiling Campaign TV Ads and Gaining New Endorsements
LEAD: Is it a subtle attack on his Republican opponent?
Or a gentle homily to Democratic values?


Army Clears West Point Doctor in Sex-Abuse Case
LEAD: The United States Military Academy has cleared an Army gynecologist of charges of sexual abuse brought by three women at West Point who claimed that he hugged, kissed or fondled them and, in one case, had sexual intercourse.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''For these two pilots to have been sequestered for more than 36 hours after an accident that took two lives, and to do so without explanation, is highly questionable.''  - James B. Busey, the Federal Aviation Administrator.  [ 26:1. ]


Review/Opera; A 'Mefistofele' That Mixes Its Symbols
LEAD: The San Francisco Opera's new production of Boito's ''Mefistofele'' seemed initially attractive for the chance to hear Gabriela Benackova, a Czechoslovak soprano, in music in which she is infrequently encountered.
Miss Benackova was fine, but the real attraction turned out to be the direction and design.


About New York; 2, Finally Alone, Instead Decide To Live as One
LEAD: The invitation arrived a couple weeks ago.
Two fat pink hearts and shimmering orchids graced the front. ''Two hearts that beat as one,'' it said. ''Jerilyn and Jorge.''


FORMER H.U.D. HEAD BARS TV COVERAGE
LEAD: Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. did the unthinkable today in this publicity-conscious town: he pulled the plug on television coverage of his appearance on Capitol Hill.


Child-Care Plan Raises Church-State Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the Vatican statement on the Carmelite convent at Auschwitz misstated the current affiliations of Rabbi James Rudin of New York.
He is national interreligious affairs director of the American Jewish Committee and chairman of the Jewish Council for International Interreligious Relations.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Clampett Leads: Bobby Clampett, who is in danger of having to qualify for the PGA Tour next year, shot a six-under-par 64 yesterday to take a one-shot lead after two rounds of the Southern Open in Columbus, Ga.
Clampett's 36-hole total of 131 over the par-70, 6,775-yard Green Island Country Club course was one stroke better than the scores of Rick Fehr, Steve Pate, Dave Rummells and Ted Schulz.


U.S. RELIEF MOVES BEGIN IN CARIBBEAN
LEAD: President Bush declared seven counties in South Carolina to be major disaster areas today, making them eligible for Federal assistance, while the Defense Department and other agencies began relief operations in the Caribbean islands hit by Hurricane Hugo earlier this week.


New York Tax Cut Delay Means a Tax Increase
LEAD: To the Editor:


UAL Deal To Enrich Executives
LEAD: The chairman of the UAL Corporation stands to gain $76.7 million for his stake in the parent of United Airlines if a proposed buyout by pilots and management is completed, but he plans to work without pay for a year after employees take control, a company official said yesterday.


A BARRACKS BLAST KILLS 10 IN BRITAIN
LEAD: At least 10 people were killed and 22 wounded today when an explosion ripped through a barracks at a marines' music school and damaged dozens of nearby homes in southeast England.
The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility.


President's Choice For Post on Ethics Is Out of Running
LEAD: A Houston judge and religious leader who was President Bush's choice to head the Office of Government Ethics has been removed from consideration as a result of a background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, White House officials said today.


Attempted Murder Charged In Police Officer's Shooting
LEAD: The man accused of shooting an Essex County police officer in the back was arraigned today on an attempted murder charge, a sheriff's department spokeswoman said.


City Opera Strike Talks Produce No Progress
LEAD: Negotiators for the New York City Opera and its orchestra, which has been on strike since Sept. 13, met Thursday night. ''We clarified our positions but made no real progress,'' said Martin J. Oppenheimer, the City Opera vice chairman and its chief negotiator.


Treasury Issues Are Little Changed
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices were essentially unchanged yesterday, while bill rates posted moderate gains.
Dealers described trading as light and featureless in the absence of any significant news.
The fixed-income market largely ignored Government reports of rises of four-tenths of 1 percent in personal income and nine-tenths of 1 percent in spending in


Swedish Bank Raided
LEAD: The police this week raided the head office of Sweden's largest bank, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, to seize material in a tax evasion inquiry against its chief executive.
Neither the executive, Jacob Palmstierna, nor the prosecutor who is leading the inquiry, Bengt Stromberg, was available for comment.


Walsh to Ask Cowboys For Trade by Deadline
LEAD: Steve Walsh, the Dallas Cowboys' rookie backup quarterback who has not played since an exhibition game on Aug. 26, is hoping the Cowboys will trade him to another National Football League team within the next three weeks, before the trading deadline on Oct. 17.


Aouita Pulls Out of Mile
LEAD: The men's Mercedes Mile down Fifth Avenue this afternoon was virtually conceded to Abdi Bile of Somalia yesterday as his chief rival, Said Aouita of Morocco, officially withdrew, passing up a $25,000 appearance fee and a chance to cap an outstanding season.


ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
LEAD: Questions appear on page 13.


For Storm Victims, a Day of Slow Agony After a Day of Fear
LEAD: Yesterday was the uncertainty of anticipating what was coming.
Today was the slow agony of finding out what came.


Patents; Sending Messages To Electronic Pagers
LEAD: Using a technique he calls ''word guessing,'' Bernard N. Riskin of New Hope, Pa., has invented a computer system that he says makes it much easier to transmit written messages to electronic pagers through an ordinary Touch-Tone telephone.


Dr. Allan M. Sachs, 68, Physicist
LEAD: Dr.
Allan M. Sachs, former chairman of Columbia University's physics department, died of a heart attack Wednesday while playing tennis at a tennis club in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 68 years old and lived in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Leader of Christians In Lebanon Accepts Arab Plan for Truce
LEAD: The military commander of the Lebanese Christians, Gen.
Michel Aoun, today formally accepted an Arab League plan for a cease-fire in the civil war, setting the stage for discussions on national reconciliation.


Watchman Kemp, and His Watchers
LEAD: Secretary Jack Kemp's outline of proposed reforms for the Department of Housing and Urban Development seems well conceived, as far as it goes.
It deserves careful scrutiny by Congress.
But one of the chief failures uncovered in the H.U.D. scandals was of Congressional oversight.
Congress also needs to scrutinize itself.


Third World Debt Woes; Major U.S. Banks, After Absorbing Losses, Could Lose Their Appetite for New Loans
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company's surprise decision Thursday to drastically increase its financial cushion against bad loans to third world countries raises new questions about how those countries will escape their severe economic problems.


Jaguar Fights Tie With Ford
LEAD: Jaguar P.L.C.'s board today characterized the Ford Motor Company's plans to buy a stake in the company as unwelcome and vowed to preserve the British luxury auto maker's independence.


A Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a letter Sept. 16 from Adm.
C.
A.
H.
Trost on the Navy's Trident II missile program incorrectly identified the submarine Tennessee as a battleship.


Suits Name Avon
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. has been sued by two groups of shareholders contending the cosmetic and jewelry company wrongfully inflated earnings figures to buoy its falling stock price.
Two class action suits, filed in Federal court in Manhattan this week, say that Avon overestimated its future earnings to stop the decline of its stock after the withdrawal of a $2.1 billion takeover bid by the Amway Corporation in May.


Variety of Agencies Providing Aid to Hurricane Victims
LEAD: A variety of Federal and other agencies are providing disaster relief because of Hurricane Hugo, including these:


IN IRELAND, A TRIUMPH OF WILL; A Gangster Makes Good As a Father
LEAD: Harry Plotnik has been kept under wraps for 20 years, but he is none the worse for wear.
Harry is the glum Jewish gangster at the center of ''The Plot Against Harry,'' a funny, sharply drawn and appealingly modest film that very nearly missed seeing the light of day.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Players for Video Disks
LEAD:  There is an alternative to the videocassette recorder: the Laservision video disk player.
LV's provide better pictures and sound than do VCR's, the disks never wear out and most of the new machines also play compact disks.
The disadvantages are that most stores offer movie disks for sale only and not for rental (they generally cost about $25 to $35) and that you cannot record on disks.


3 Nobel Resignations Over Rushdie
LEAD: Three members of the Nobel Literature Prize selection committee have resigned over the body's refusal to speak out against threats against the British author Salman Rushdie, but the committee has refused to accept the resignations.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aris Corp., Phoenix, completed the acquisition of Lamonts Apparel Inc., Bellevue, Wash., a fashion retail chain, from Northern Pacific Corp.
The purchase price was about $136.5 million.


Buyer Is Sought By Anchor Glass
LEAD: The Anchor Glass Container Corporation's directors have agreed to seek a buyer for the nation's second-largest glass maker in an attempt to thwart an unsolicited $280 million takeover bid from a Mexican company.


Growing Hole in Ozone Shield Is Discovered Over Antarctica
LEAD: A hole has opened in the atmosphere's ozone shield above Antarctica, and scientists said yesterday the hole was growing at the same rate as one in 1987, which broke records and alarmed environmentalists.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Monday about the British Broadcasting Corporation misstated its ownership.


Joseph G. Kvasnicka, Economist, Dies at 59
LEAD: Joseph G. Kvasnicka, an international economist and former vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, died of cancer Tuesday at the Northwestern Memorial Hospice in Chicago.
He was 59 years old and lived in Chicago.


I.B.M. Duties Are Expanded
LEAD: James A. Cannavino, who is in charge of the personal computer unit of the International Business Machines Corporation, has been given additional responsibilities, the company announced yesterday.





Wang Reaches Pact On $175 Million Loan
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc., the struggling minicomputer maker, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with a unit of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation to borrow up to $175 million, which the company needs to revamp its operations.


Same Old Same Old Deficit
LEAD: The Federal budget taking shape for 1990 will scale new heights of hypocrisy.
The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law requires deficit reduction each year and President Bush and Congress are doing their best to make it appear they've complied.
In truth, they're still playing games.


Bush Calls Courter's Race a Poll on G.O.P.
LEAD: President Bush came to New Jersey today to endorse the Republican candidate for governor, Representative Jim Courter, and paint a picture of the race as a nationally significant referendum on Republican policies and values.


Patents; A Chemical Treatment To Prevent Blindness
LEAD: Dominic Man-Kit Lam, chairman of Houston Biotechnology Inc. of The Woodlands, Tex., has patented a chemical treatment to prevent blindness caused by degeneration of the optic nerve and retina.


Computers in the Toolbox
LEAD: Shoppers at the Ridgefield Supply Company, a large hardware store and lumberyard in this affluent town just south of Danbury, are confronted by what appears to be a large video game in the center of the showroom.


2 Medical Bill Workers Plead Guilty in Fraud
LEAD: Two managers of a company that handled medical billing and collections for 10 private hospitals in New York City pleaded guilty Thursday to falsifying documents used to qualify hundreds of patients for Medicaid coverage, state officials said yesterday.


Mistakes by Inexperienced Crew Blamed for Crash at La Guardia
LEAD: Federal investigators said last night that a series of miscues by a relatively inexperienced cockpit crew had led to the aborted takeoff of a USAir jetliner that crashed into the East River at LaGuardia Airport Wednesday night, killing two passengers.


John Leith, 90, Dies; Was a Dean at Lehigh
LEAD: John Douglas Leith, a former dean at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., died Monday at the Meadowlark Hills Health Care Unity in Manhattan, Kan.
He was 90 years old and had lived there since 1987.
Mr.
Leith, a graduate of the University of North Dakota, taught there until 1936.
From 1937 to 1941 he was the director of student personnel at Teachers College, Columbia University.


Senate Confirms Powell
LEAD: By voice vote, the Senate early today confirmed Gen.
Colin L. Powell of the Army to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
He will succeed Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., who is retiring, on Oct. 1.


School Plan Draws Praise And Cautions
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez's proposal to reshape the New York City school system so important decisions are made at the school level elicited praise from several quarters yesterday along with some cautions about the obstacles to its adoption.


Betsy B. Erskine Weds Executive
LEAD: Betsy Bevan Erskine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John McArdle Erskine of Hurst, Tex., and Leopoldo Cortes Toralballa, the son of Gloria Cortes Toralballa of Stamford, Conn., and the late Leopoldo Vasquez Toralballa, were married yesterday at the New York home of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Gaye McGuigan.
The Rev.


Don't Liken Smoking to Drug Addiction; Stop Cigarette Ads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinkins Outdoes Giuliani in Donations
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, the Democratic mayoral candidate in a predominantly Democratic city, raised twice as much in the latest two-week reporting period as his Republican-Liberal opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, according to financial reports filed yesterday with the Campaign Finance Board.


Dr. William Hammon Dies at 85; A Pioneer in Fight Against Polio
LEAD: Dr.
William McD.
Hammon, a public-health physician and medical missionary who conducted research into polio and tropical diseases, died Tuesday at his home in Seminole, Fla., where he had lived in retirement since 1973.
He was 85 years old.


Arts Nominee Speaks Out Against Helms Amendment
LEAD: John E. Frohnmayer, who has been nominated by President Bush as chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, spoke out today against the Helms Amendment, the proposed law that would forbid Federal support of obscene or indecent art.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL 2-5, 24  An explosion in a British barracks killed at least 10 people, wounded 22 others, and damaged dozens of homes in southeast England.
The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility.
Page 1


Spending Is Up 0.9% as Incomes Rise 0.4%
LEAD: In another sign of continued economic expansion, consumer spending increased by nine-tenths of 1 percent in August even though incomes rose just four-tenths of 1 percent.


Pact for McCammon
LEAD: Bob McCammon, who nearly guided the Canucks to a first-round upset of the Calgary Flames in the Stanley Cup playoffs last spring, signed a new multiyear contract as coach in Vancouver yesterday.
Details were not released.(AP)


Abrupt Oil-Price Shifts Seen As Unlikely Despite Swings
LEAD: Prices of crude oil, which have edged higher in recent weeks after being remarkably stable through much of the year, may fluctuate as much as a dollar a barrel in the months ahead, but abrupt changes are not likely, many analysts believe.


Stocks Remain Sluggish; Dow Gains 1.33
LEAD: Stocks edged up yesterday, adding 1.33 points on the Dow Jones industrial average to close at 2,681.61, finishing a lackluster week with an uninspiring gain of 7.03 points, as volume continued at a plodding pace.


Durham Suspended
LEAD: Leon Durham, a seldom-used first baseman with the St.
Louis Cardinals, has been suspended for 60 days for failure to comply with the baseball commissioner's drug policy, the commissioner's office announced yesterday without issuing any other details. (AP)


Lotus to Get Sybase Stake
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation and Sybase Inc. said today that they were entering into a strategic alliance under which Lotus will acquire 15 percent of Sybase.
The price of the deal was not disclosed.


Bielecki Helps the Cubs Win a Big Victory
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs made a division championship a little more certain today by beating the Pittsburgh Pirates, 4-2, but the victory was tempered by the uncertain status of one of the team's pitching mainstays, Rick Sutcliffe.


U.S. Limits Aid to Buyers of Savings Units
LEAD: The Bush Administration is limiting the protection it is willing to give to buyers of insolvent savings institutions, a marked shift from a much-criticized Government policy in the 1988 savings and loan bailouts.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.93
8.93
8.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.83
7.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.75
7.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.24
8.22
8.83
30-YR.


Between Takeoff and Abort, Just Three Seconds to Judge
LEAD: Pilots facing a split-second decision on whether to take off or abort the flight of a jet in trouble must rely on instinct and experience, and also on mathematical calculations.
The decision to abort is particularly pressing at La Guardia Airport, which does not have long runways and is nearly surrounded by water and homes.


Mary Gail Conner, Executive, Weds
LEAD: At Trinity Episcopal Church in Red Bank, N.J., Mary Gail Conner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest G. Conner of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas Aloysius Gallagher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Gallagher of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth D. Aldrich Jr. officiated.


Belgian Deal by Bass
LEAD: Bass P.L.C., the British brewing and leisure company, said today that it had acquired, through its Coral Racing subsidiary, 369 betting shops in Belgium from Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. for an undisclosed sum.
The shops operate under the name Tierce Franco-Belge.


MANY AID EFFORTS FOR STORM VICTIMS
LEAD: With the hurricane's path of destruction at an end, efforts in New York to help aid its victims show no signs of waning.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 19 about the naming of conservators for Willem de Kooning's assets misstated part of an agreement that let the artist's daughter, Lisa de Kooning, and his lawyer, John Eastman, become co-conservators.


Mihai Alimanestianu, Parking Engineer, 71
LEAD: Mihai Alimanestianu, a civil and mechanical engineer who originated Speed-Park in Manhattan, one of the first completely automatic parking garages, died on Tuesday in the crash of a DC-10 jumbo jet in the Niger desert en route from Chad to France.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Otto Obermaier Named To Replace Giuliani
LEAD: Otto G. Obermaier, a defense lawyer and former prosecutor, was confirmed yesterday by the United States Senate as Rudolph W. Giuliani's successor as United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.


Attic Of Failed Miracles
LEAD: The attic is filling up with electronic miracles.
The good old personal computer went up just yesterday. ''Old'' means it was bought in 1985, ''good'' that it worked until last Aug. 2.


Bronx Cheers Now Stylish In Flushing
LEAD: At a time when coffee, replays and gratification are often considered either instantaneous or worthless, maybe we have arrived at the point where five years is just too long for a memory to last.
It has been almost that long since that early December evening when Met fans made the shocking discovery that propelled them through a winter and legitimized their team.


G.M. Incentives
LEAD: Some General Motors Corporation car and truck divisions announced today incentives ranging from $200 to $1,250 on a variety of 1990 vehicles.
Incentives on two Chevrolet pickups and the Chevrolet Corsica came a week before the vehicles officially went on sale.
Some incentives on the Chevrolet, Buick, Oldsmobile and GMC Truck products varied, depending on option packages purchased.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States has asked that donations to assist victims of Hurricane Hugo be sent to the American Red Cross or branch offices of three banks that are setting up special accounts for Puerto Rican disaster assistance.


Some Mets Annoyed Over Team Psychiatrist
LEAD: In a season of controversy, the latest storm enveloping the Mets centers on the team psychiatrist, Dr.
Alan Lans, whose role was publicly questioned by several Mets players during the tumultuous road trip that ended Thursday night in St.
Louis.


CAROLINAS REELING FROM DEVASTATION LEFT BY HURRICANE
LEAD: Charleston, S.C., was reeling yesterday from the devastation left by the most powerful hurricane to hit the United States in two decades.
Bridges were twisted, buildings leveled and television towers toppled as the storm raced ashore, then swept northward through the Carolinas.


Bhutto on Defensive Amid Tensions in Punjab
LEAD: Nearly 10 months after coming to power, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Government is on the defensive, losing popularity because of unfulfilled election promises but unable to risk bold legislation because of its small parliamentary majority.


Campeau May Seek New Mortgages
LEAD: The new committee charged with rebuilding the American retailing arm of the Campeau Corporation is expected to give high priority to arranging new mortgages for many of the 125 retail buildings that the company owns outright.


MATHEW SESHI OGAWA, EXECUTIVE, 69
LEAD: Mathew Seshi Ogawa, who was to assume the presidency of Lions Club International next year, died Thursday at University of California-Los Angeles Medical Center after cancer surgery.
He was 69 years old and lived in Tokyo.


Expect a Rough Mayoral Campaign
LEAD: New York City is enjoying, temporarily, an era of good feeling following David Dinkins's historic victory in the Democratic mayoral primary.
The general election campaign, however, will be a very different from the primary fight.


America's Vietnam Trauma Is the Stuff of British Musical
LEAD: Broadway, get ready for ''Miss Saigon,'' the $4.8 million Cameron Mackintosh musical about love, separation and tragedy in the Vietnam War.
The spectacle, which brings ''Madama Butterfly'' into the 20th century, complete with the last American helicopter battering its way out of Saigon in 1975, has been leaving most of its opening-week audiences here in stunned, tearful appreciation.


New Deal for Clayton
LEAD: The Miami Dolphins and Mark Clayton reached a four-year contract agreement yesterday that could make Clayton one of the five highest-paid receivers in the National Football League.
Clayton had sought that status during a seven-week holdout that ended 10 days ago when the team promised to negotiate a new deal in good faith.(


Gallo Curbing Skid Row Sales
LEAD: The E.&amp;J.
Gallo Winery, the world's largest wine maker, said this week that it had stopped selling its high-alcohol Thunderbird and Night Train brands to retailers in skid rows throughout the country.
The skid rows were not identified.
Thunderbird and Night


Film Producer Named Editor of Variety
LEAD: Peter B. Bart, the independent film producer, novelist and former newspaper journalist, will become editor of Variety on Oct. 9, the weekly newspaper's executive publisher, Gerard A. Byrne, announced yesterday.


Chrysler Cuts Stake In Mitsubishi
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, taking a $310 million profit on a longstanding investment, has reduced its stake in the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation to 12.1 percent from 21.8 percent.


Whalers Sign Dineen
LEAD: The Hartford Whalers yesterday announced the signing of Kevin Dineen, a right wing who last season led all scorers in the Adams Division of the National Hockey League with 89 points.
Dineen received a four-year contract, the value of which was not disclosed.(AP)


Silver and Gold Prices Rise; Coffee, Oil and Grain Fall
LEAD: Prices of silver futures prices rose sharply for a third straight day yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange but analysts were divided on whether the market could sustain the technically inspired rally.


European Minds Who Fled Fascism
LEAD: One of the less appreciated consequences of the rise of fascism in Europe in the 1930's was that it put an end to Europe's cultural and intellectual supremacy.
That status was transferred to the United States in part by way of a small but historic emigration of the persecuted and the unwanted.


INSIDE
LEAD: AIDS Drug Not for Children  Hundreds of children with AIDS are dying prematurely because they cannot get the drug AZT.
Page 8.
Pierce Bars TV Coverage  A House rule has allowed the former Secretary to bar television cameras when he testifies next week.
Page 8.
World's Biggest Tire Maker


White House Set Up Drug Buy in the Park For Bush TV Speech
LEAD: Government agents lured a drug dealer to the park in front of the White House to buy crack for a prop in President Bush's televised speech on drugs, a move the President testily defended today.


I.B.M. Computer
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said it plans to make an announcement Tuesday related to its Microchannel computer bus.
Analysts said that the company is expected to introduce a faster version of the bus, which moves data inside the computer.
I.B.M. is competing against the Compaq Computer Corporation, which is trying to establish a competing computer bus standard known as Extended Industry Standard Architecture.


Denise Dadas Wed to Richard Clarke
LEAD: Denise Elizabeth Dadas, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Dadas of Lake Forest, Ill., and Richard W. Clarke, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Ellsworth Clarke Jr. of Birmingham, Mich., were married yesterday at the Fourth Presbyterian Church of Chicago.
The Rev.
David A. Donovan officiated.


Gabriel Giannini, 83, Aerospace Executive
LEAD: Dr.
Gabriel Maria Giannini, a physicist and aerospace equipment manufacturer, died of a stroke Wednesday at the Eisenhower Medical Clinic in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 83 years old and lived in Indio, Calif.


U.S. Also an Offender in Setting Nets in the Sea; South Korean Efforts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Irving Berlin, Nation's Songwriter, Dies
LEAD: Irving Berlin, the Russian-born minstrel whose songs like ''Cheek to Cheek'' and ''White Christmas'' became part of the fabric of American life, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan, just a few miles from the Lower East Side tenement he lived in when he wrote the first of his 1,500 songs.
He was 101 years old.


F.D.A. Asks Stronger Label On Sleep Pill Under Scrutiny
LEAD: A Food and Drug Administration advisory committee today suggested stronger labeling for the sleep drug Halcion to explain more clearly what side effects some patients might expect.
The panel also concluded that reports of adverse effects had been overstated.


Anti-Apartheid Protests Continue in South Africa


How the Outlets Help Shoppers And Factories


U.S. to Tighten Drug Tests for Pilots in December
LEAD: The pilot and co-pilot of USAir Flight 5050, as well as other crew members, were not obliged by law or regulation to submit to drug or alcohol tests after the accident on Wednesday at La Guardia Airport in which two passengers died.


Janet La Bianca Weds Accountant
LEAD: Janet Camille La Bianca, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gaspare La Bianca of New York, and Dowlan Richard Nelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl L. Nelson of New York and Santa Barbara, Calif., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York.
The Rev.
Charles Quinn officiated.


Uneasy Merchants Back Plan to Rid Main Street of Panhandlers
LEAD: JOSEPH S. LOMBARDO has lived in Middletown all of his 74 years, including 53 years as owner of the Friendly Barber Shop on Main Street, and he wholeheartedly supports a proposed ban on panhandlers who, he said, are ''all over Main Street.''


FASHION: On the Street; Putting Rainwear To the True Test
LEAD: Last week New York endured quite a bit of what the weather forecasters on television call ''thundershower activity'' and the rest of the English-speaking world calls rain.
Whatever, the stuff came down in buckets, creating Lake Ticonderoga-sized puddles at every corner.


First Conviction Based On DNA Use Is Upheld
LEAD: The first murder conviction in the nation based on the use of DNA ''fingerprinting'' has been upheld by the State Supreme Court.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday about a new center in Valhalla to aid the hearing-impaired misidentified the woman with Edith Shapiro.
She was Renata Scheder.


Waterfront Developer Picked
LEAD: The Battery Park City Authority has named a developer for a waterfront condominium, clearing the way for the construction of a long-planned Holocaust museum.


Design; OPEN HOUSE: HANGING OUT NEW SHINGLES
LEAD: NO TYPE OF HOUSING HAS BEEN more closely copied during the past decade than the shingle-style house.
The reasons are many.
As architects have taken a new look at forms from the past, they have come to appreciate the scores of shingled houses built during the early decades of this century.
From a practical point of view, shingled exteriors make sense.


2 Benjamin Franklin Books Stolen From Library at Penn
LEAD: Two rare books printed or written by Benjamin Franklin and worth up to $60,000 were stolen from the University of Pennsylvania library, the police said today.


TOUGH TIMES FOR MR. LEVITTOWN
LEAD: THIS IS MOSTLY ABOUT LUCK.
SPECIFICALLY IT is about how William J. Levitt, the builder who practically invented the modern suburbs, made his own good luck through a series of astute moves and enjoyed its rewards with gusto for nearly 50 years, and how after conspiring in his own bad luck, he is enduring the turn of fortune with grace in his old age.


Margaret Stimpson Weds
LEAD: Margaret Anne Stimpson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Irving Stimpson of Wellesley, Mass., and Rye, N.H., was married yesterday to Thomas Dawson Gaillard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Dawson Gaillard of Greenwich, Conn., at the Wellesley Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the Episcopal ceremony.


Assessments
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Sweet Jewish New Year
LEAD: ROSH HA-SHANAH, the Jewish New Year, begins Friday evening.
One symbolic food for the holiday is honey, which signifies a sweet New Year.


A Potter Who Found Art in the Mississippi Mud
LEAD: George E. Ohr, a turn-of-the-century wizard at the potter's wheel who made witty, frequently erotic paper-thin vessels in Biloxi, Miss., is to be celebrated this week in his first museum retrospective.


MAVERICK ON TIPTOE
LEAD:  SOLITARY SONG  By Pauline Koner.
Illustrated. 305 pp.
Durham, N.C.:  Duke University Press. $26.95.


Let Debtor Countries Fill Our Oil Reserves
LEAD: To the Editor:


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Should The Mets Trade Strawberry?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Caring for Finished Wood Floors
LEAD: FINISHED wood floors are durable and easy to care for.
With regular maintenance and prompt repair when necessary, they will retain their original appearance for many years.


IN THE ANTIPODES
LEAD: WHAT'S THE NEXT step for a globally minded entrepreneur who already enjoys the cachet of having his name affixed to a business school? (Vide, the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration at the University of Rochester.) An export program, of course.


Leaders of Carmelite Order Support Moving of Convent
LEAD: Leaders of the Roman Catholic Carmelite order said today that they supported moving one of their convents from the site of the Auschwitz death camp in Poland as many Jewish groups have demanded.


The Koreans' Big Entry Into Business
LEAD: LIKE other newcomers to these shores, many Korean immigrants here speak little English, want to start their own businesses, are short on cash and cannot get the time of day from the bank loan officer.
So they go to a ''kye,'' a kind of private banking club, where a loan of $20,000 or $30,000 can be had without applications or even a promissory note - at a usurious rate of 24 percent or higher.


IRELAND WITHOUT THE TEARS
LEAD:  WALLED GARDENS  Scenes From an Anglo-Irish Childhood.
By Annabel Davis-Goff.
Illustrated. 255 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf.


Geraldine Baum, Reporter, Marries
LEAD: Geraldine Baum and Michael Oreskes were married yesterday evening at the Fairfield, Conn., home of the bride's mother, Louise Baum.
Rabbi Alexander Schindler officiated.


Group That Fights Taxes To Focus on Assembly
LEAD: THE rejection of various town and school budgets this year has given rise to a citizens taxpayer group that organizers say will go after state spending next year.


Everybody Loves Solar Energy, But...
LEAD: ON A SUMMER MORNING, just before dawn, the sky turns a coppery gold above the Mojave Desert, a 15,000-square-mile expanse of sand and sagebrush in southern California.
In the handful of communities clinging to the two-lane highways crisscrossing the desert, nothing breaks the quiet except for the occasional trucker pulling over at a dusty drive-in.


U.S. Is Taking a New Look at Indochina
LEAD: The Bush Administration is reassessing its policy toward Indochina after the failure of a monthlong international conference to devise a political settlement for Cambodia.


New York's New Schools Chief Has a Super-Decentralization Plan
LEAD: EVEN before he arrives in New York City in January to take over the public schools, Joseph A. Fernandez has clearly signaled what he intends to do when he gets here.


FROM THE CAMPUSES: ADVENTURES IN PUBLISHING
LEAD: How much simpler this country would be if it had stalled out at 13 states.
Most of the complicated mountains, climates and ethnic cultures would lie west of the border, as would all of the intimidating plains and deserts.
Visiting the Great Lakes would be a foreignJU adventure.


New Kinds of Work and Workers Take Shape
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Do College Fotball Polls Mean Anything?
LEAD: Unfortunately, yes.
Until the bowl games are formulated into a playoff tournament (Rose Bowl winner vs. Orange Bowl winner, to play the winner of the Fiesta and the Sugar, and so on, for example), the poll will be the only way to decide the national champion.
Mythical national champion, that is.
We can eliminate the word mythical once a playoff tournament has been devised.


READING FOOD: THERE'S MYTHOLOGICAL CONSTRUCTION IN MY SOUP
LEAD: ''Food is good to think,'' Claude Levi-Strauss has said, and it is certainly good to read.
American commercial publishers who once thought of cookbooks as strictly ''How-to'' now embed recipes in costly illustrated works that dramatize the rise of food from kitchen to library, where readers who never lifted pot or pan whet their chops each season over cookbooks, reading them as travel literature, social comedy, utopian fantasy, pastoral romance.


Pittsburgh Wins Behind Van Pelt
LEAD: The pinpoint passing of Alex Van Pelt, the redshirt freshman who was not supposed to be the starting quarterback this season, directed Pitt to a 30-23 victory over Syracuse tonight at Pitt Stadium.


Veterans Housing Loan Program Feels Pinch
LEAD: A housing loan program for veterans is having financial problems because of high foreclosures and may require more aid than the Veterans Affairs Department has requested, according to a Government audit.


Additional Alternatives To the Shoreham Plant
LEAD: Regarding the article ''Despite Shoreham's Closing, Energy Alternatives Exist'' (Aug. 13) by Thomas A. Twomey Jr.:


VOTER DRIVE SET FOR NEW JERSEY
LEAD: Prodded by a national voting-rights organization and an executive order by Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, state agencies in New Jersey are preparing for a voter registration effort that could significantly alter the makeup of the state's electorate.


Question Of the Week; Do College Fotball Polls Mean Anything?
LEAD: In college football, there are about 105 Division I-A teams and 89 I-AA teams in the nation.
Not to mention about 116 Division II and 213 Division III teams.
With so many teams, it is difficult to compare one team's record to another since their competition may have varied greatly.


Outrageous Acts Give Way to Eccentric Sculpture
LEAD: In the early 1970's you could have bet good money that Chris Burden would not be having a museum retrospective in the late 1980's.
At the time, Burden was one of the bad boys of contemporary art, a Conceptual artist specializing in grueling and sometimes gruesome performance works, also known as Body


Lice: Equal-Opportunity Scourge
LEAD: ''MOM,'' she says, two days after her return from sleep-away camp, ''my head itches.'' I check her head, praying for dry scalp, and there I see the little white buggers clinging to her hair, hardly visible to an untrained eye. ''Lice,'' I scream in terror.


Some Lessons From Avis for UAL Buyout
LEAD: At 2 P.M. on the first Thursday of every month, thousands of employees at Avis Inc., the nation's No. 2 rental company, walk off their jobs.
With their company's blessing they gather for employee-management sessions that are at the heart of Avis's two-year-old experiment with employee ownership.
From these meetings, held across the country, have come such innovations as multilingual information cards for international customers at John F.


SPECIAL TODAY: The Business World/Magazine Part 2
LEAD:  Special Reports in this issue include:  Consultant Bill Bain Gets Close To the C.E.O.'s.
The Rainmaker at Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Dutch Treat in America.


DRUG STRATEGY: The Real Goals - A special report.; President's 'Victory Over Drugs' Is Decades Away, Officials Say
LEAD: Administration officials concede that the goal President Bush set forth in his drug-policy address to the nation three weeks ago - ''victory over drugs'' -cannot be achieved in this generation.


HOW ONE RUSSIAN DREAM WENT AWRY
LEAD:  BEHIND THE URALS  An American Worker in Russia's City of Steel.
By John Scott.
Enlarged edition prepared by Stephen Kotkin.  306 pp.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Cloth, $27.50; Paper, $9.95.


Police Say Princeton Deaths May Be Work of Serial Killer
LEAD: The Mercer County, N.J., authorities are investigating whether a serial killer may be responsible for two fatal stabbings and a near-fatal stabbing in less than six months.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: DECADES of experience have shown that when cities go down, schools go bad.
The reverse, however, does not appear to hold true.
Most New Jersey cities have made modest or even spectacular recoveries, their schools have not always reflected the new prosperity.


Airline Debt, Foreign Investors Worry Washington
LEAD: Although details of the meeting were not disclosed, when Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner sat down to breakfast on Friday with Alfred Checchi, the leader of the investment group that is buying Northwest Airlines, it is likely Mr.
Skinner had some strong things to say.
The meeting was described as a private talk about Northwest's fitness to operate under new management, but the transportation secretary doubtlessly expressed concern about recent trends in the airline industry that are worrying many Government officials, both in the Administration and


Tennis Fan Finds Fun Ill-Served
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Man Hurt in Bias-Linked Attack
LEAD: A 23-year-old black man was beaten by a white man in lower Manhattan Friday night in what the police say was a racially motivated fight.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My redwood deck is in the shade, and after heavy rain the wood gets slimy and slippery.
I have a similar problem with a blacktop tennis court.
What can I do?


C. L. Taben Wed To Eve Leventhal
LEAD: Eve Leventhal, the daughter of Mrs.
Murray A. Weber of New York and the late Benjamin F. Leventhal of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Charles Lawrence Taben, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Taben of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Nina Mizrahi performed the ceremony at the New York Academy of Art.


Restricting Illegal Apartments
LEAD: THE time-honored Long Island tradition of one house, one family, is being severely tested as more and more apartments are being carved into existing homes, usually in contravention of the housing codes.


Reporter Married To Ms. Shannon
LEAD: Margaret Mary Shannon, an account executive for the Chicago advertising agency of Bentley, Barnes &amp; Lynn, and Dirk Edward Johnson, a correspondent in the Chicago bureau of The New York Times, were married yesterday at St.
Hedwig Roman Catholic Church in Chicago.
The Rev.
Gerald Watt officiated.


Ashley Bourne Weds Bradley Dewey
LEAD: Ashley Powers Bourne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Edelin Bourne of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Bradley Morrill Dewey, a son of Rowena Bauer Berkeley of New York and Robert Manson Dewey Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
Thomas Guinan performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in


Why the U.S. Closed the Door Halfway on Soviet Jews
LEAD: FOR 20 years, the United States and Israel have denounced the Soviet Union for severely restricting the right to emigrate.
Now that Moscow is allowing record numbers of Soviet Jews and Pentacostals to leave, it is not clear where they will go.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Island Paradise


Barbara L. Mills, Banker, Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Barbara Louise Mills to William Floyd Henagan took place yesterday at the Presbyterian Church of Lawrenceville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dana Fearon officiated.
Mrs.
Henagan, 30 years old, is a daughter of Bradford Mills and Elizabeth Leisk Mills, both of Princeton, N.J.
A graduate of Princeton University, she is a general partner in Bradford Associates, a merchant banking firm in Princeton.


Soviet 'Soldiers' Dance to a Peaceful Beat
LEAD: Oddly - or perhaps not -the exceedingly well-traveled Alexandrov Red Army Song and Dance Ensemble from the Soviet Union is making its United States debut only this fall on a North American tour that began this month at the City Center.


Yonkers Primary Hearing Set
LEAD: A Yonkers Councilman who has played a major role in the fight against a court-ordered housing-desegregation plan forced a delay in the certification of the Republican Party primary results last week after a recount turned an apparent Primary Day victory into a defeat.


Question Of the Week; Do College Fotball Polls Mean Anything?
LEAD: Since major sports rankings are ultimately determined by win-loss records at season's end and since man cannot absolutely predict the future, then pre- and midseason rankings are fictions.
But they are meaningful fictions.
Without polls, college sports interest would be localized to Ann Arbor, Austin or Lexington.


A Colombian Campaigns Amid Risks of Drug War
LEAD: From the front of the airplane, the candidate emerged blinking into the bright sunshine of this Andean metropolis.
He greeted a crowd of local politicians and then plunged happily into a forest of microphones.


Yorktown Is Granted a Hearing on I.B.M. Toxic-Waste Plan
LEAD: PROMPTED by an outpouring of letters from concerned residents, state officials agreed last week to hold a public hearing on the International Business Machine Corporation's request to store hazardous and toxic waste at its Yorktown site.


Georgia Deaver: Calligrapher
LEAD: Georgia Deaver has applied her art to opera programs (San Francisco and Seattle) and to beer cans (Sapporo Silver).
But she draws the line at counterfeit college diplomas or people who want ''something very tight and clunky'' not in keeping with the free-flowing letter forms she prefers.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''The best time to buy assets may be when it is hardest to raise money.''
Warren E. Buffett,
chairman,
Berkshire Hathaway Corporation


Sara L. Herbert, A Nurse, Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Sara L. Herbert, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth R. Herbert of Uniontown, Pa., to Bruce R. Galloway, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Galloway of Forest Hills, Queens, took place last evening at the Hotel Inter-Continental in New York.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel officiated.


Bush Clean Air Plan Called Energy Policy in the Making
LEAD: As members of Congress and interest groups look more closely at President Bush's clean air proposal, many are saying it is not just an anti-pollution plan but a national energy policy in the making.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The Minnesota Twins have signed Juan Berenguer, one of their six players who could have opted for free agency after the season, to a two-year contract extension.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Berenguer, who is making $625,000 this season, is used mostly as a setup relief pitcher.
He has an 8-3 record, 3.71 earned run average and three saves in 54 relief appearances.


Sports of The Times; Why the Mets Didn't Win: Dr. K
LEAD: Now some of the Mets are blaming the club shrink for their shrinking season.


A Director Puts His Stamp on 'Love Letters'
LEAD: In ''Love Letters,'' A. R. Gurney's two-person play that, over the last eight months has snowballed from a once-weekly to a full-scale production at the Promenade Theater, the actors sit side by side facing the audience, scripts on a table before them, isolated in a pool of light.
The play's director, John Tillinger, gives them two inflexible rules: ''They must not look at each other; I wanted that to create a tension, to put a kind of Tristan-and-Isolde sword between them.


After Hugo, a Storm Over Beach Development
LEAD: Besides the ravages of its roaring winds and surging tides, Hurricane Hugo has left behind a vexing question with millions of dollars at stake: What can be rebuilt on South Carolina's battered coast?





Newspaper Novels
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Age of the Hierarchy Is Over
LEAD: In 1854 my great-great-grandfather founded a small glass manufacturing business, the Union Glass Company.
Today it is a global corporation known as Corning Inc.
Until a few years ago, like most American companies, Corning had a traditional business structure more appropriate to the 19th century than the intense competitive environment of the 20th.


Review/Theater; 1960's Dream of 'Midsummer Nights'
LEAD: Few plays travel more easily to different times and places than ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' The Public Theater moved it to fin de siecle Brazil to open its Shakespeare Marathon and the Royal Shakespeare Company put it somewhere in limbo in its new staging at Stratford-on-Avon last spring.
Now the Musical Theater Works has, with not a few liberties, plopped it down in Laguna Beach, Calif., circa 1965, and set it to music under the title ''Midsummer Nights.


A Sweet Jewish New Year
LEAD: ROSH HA-SHANAH, the Jewish New Year, begins Friday evening.
One symbolic food for the holiday is honey, which signifies a sweet New Year.


Age 1, Going Strong
LEAD: ''It's Happy Birthday DKNY,'' Donna Karan said as she welcomed retailers to her showroom Friday for the first presentation of her less-expensive line's spring collection.
Just one year old and carried in 365 stores throughout the country, DKNY is one of the biggest successes on Seventh Avenue.
The line is expected to make $90 million worth of sales for 1990.


Social Events
LEAD:  The Tram to Morocco


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.48
7.36
7.94
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.60
8.61
7.69
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.44
6.44
6.01
Bank Rate Monitor


Investigators Look Beyond Pilot Error to Seek Explanation for USAir Crash
LEAD: Federal investigators looked beyond pilot errors yesterday and began examining a host of other questions in the search for an explanation of the aborted takeoff and crash of a USAir jetliner into the East River at La Guardia Airport last week.


Christopher Who?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beirut's Guns Silent; Some Exiles Return
LEAD: After more than six months of fierce artillery battles, the guns of Lebanon's warring Christian and Muslim factions were silent today as their representatives agreed on measures intended to bring the country back to a semblance of normalcy.


As the Market Becomes Flooded, Sales Sink
LEAD: The American market is soaked in perfume.
Manufacturers have been introducing 30 to 40 new fragrances a year - up from only 20 to 25 annually in the early 1980's.
But instead of invigorating sales, it has made matters worse.


Sidney R. Pine, Lawyer, 79
LEAD: Sidney R. Pine, a lawyer, died of cancer Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Dance; Art Colony Offers Results of Summer
LEAD: Every summer, the Yard, an arts colony on Martha's Vineyard, provides choreographers with space and time to create new works, some of which are later shown in New York City.
This summer's choreographers offered a program Thursday night at the Nikolais/Louis Choreospace.
As usual, the quality of the productions varied.


Denver Graffiti Fighters Protest AIDS Murals
LEAD: A state-financed project to remind drug users that they can help to avoid AIDS by not sharing needles has run into trouble with Denver's beautification campaign.


SISTERS AND THEIR SECRETS
LEAD:  THE WIDOWS' ADVENTURES  By Charles Dickinson.  381 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Brumfield Retires
LEAD: He rode Kauai King to victory in the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness in 1966.
He rode 4,572 winners in 33,222 mounts, earning purses totaling $43,557,499.
Now, saying it is ''time to do it,'' Don Brumfield is retiring after 35 years as a jockey.


'I CAN'T TELL YOU HOW SAD LIFE IS'
LEAD:  THE YEAR OF THE ZINC PENNY  By Rick DeMarinis.  174 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


The Bad Old Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: STEPHEN LONGSTREET made his New Jersey art debut 74 years ago in his native New Brunswick.
Of course he was only 8 years old, but that should not surprise anyone who has followed the career of this prolific artist, novelist and playwright.


DATA BANK: Sept.24, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
II Q'89
I Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,134.0
$4,106.8
$4,010.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.7
3.7
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7


Judges Reverse Ban on Cliffs Notes Parody
LEAD: Ruling in a case that involved a parody of Cliffs Notes, the study guides that have helped a few million students avoid over-indulging in Shakespeare and Dickens, the Federal appeals court in New York handed down a decision Friday that seemed destined for First Amendment textbooks.
The court ruled that the parody can be distributed.


10 Texas Athletes Are Sentenced to Jail Terms for Robberies
LEAD: A judge has sentenced 10 current and former high school athletes to prison terms of up to 25 years for their roles in numerous armed robberies in the Dallas area over the past year.


Review/Theater; A Homily in African Song and Dance
LEAD: If enthusiasm were all it took, most shows would be hits and ''Goree,'' a homily about self-discovery told primarily through African song and dance, would be a smash.


An Increasing Need For Special Education
LEAD: Re: ''Plan to Revamp Special Education Draws Criticism,'' Aug. 6:


ACTING,PREACHING AND FALLING
LEAD:  FORGIVEN  The Rise and Fall of Jim Bakker and the PTL Ministry.
By Charles E. Shepard.
Illustrated. 635 pages.
New York:  The Atlantic Monthly Press. $22.95.


POSTINGS: Faux Colonial; Clock Tower Mall
LEAD: A 60-foot-high clock tower is being built as the centerpiece of a small retail and commercial mall under construction in the Brewster, N.Y.


Budapest Finds Coat of Arms Suits It Better Than Red Star
LEAD: The red star, the symbol of Communist rule in the Eastern bloc for four decades, will be removed from all public buildings in Hungary to reflect the country's move toward a multiparty democracy.


Miss Beveridge, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Alexandra Delia Beveridge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert J. Beveridge 3d of Washington, was married there yesterday to Alessandro Spighi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boris Spighi of Florence.
The Rev.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Lafayette Square.


A Rematch for District Attorney
LEAD: FOUR years ago, Paul W. Pickelle, a Democrat from Scarsdale and a member of the Special State Prosecutors Office, resigned to seek elected office in the county, specifically, the post of District Attorney, which was firmly in the grasp of an experienced Republican, Carl A. Vergari.


American Pie With a Dash of the Eccentric
LEAD: Musical eccentricity is an attitude that the music industry, along with its audience, hasn't always found so attractive.
Those who fall between the cracks stylistically tend to fall through the commercial cracks as well; record companies, radio stations and record stores don't do much cutting of the barbed wire that separates genres.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bradley Beach  $85,000  1104 Beach Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, h/w floors, front porch; taxes $1,547.
Howell  $150,000  35 Aldrich Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch; deck, new kitchen, w/w carpeting; taxes $1,981.


Batmania: Will the Hype Hold at Home?
LEAD: It's a move without precedent.
On Nov. 15, in time for Christmas, ''Batman,'' currently the sixth-strongest box-office attraction of all time and still pulling briskly, will be released by Warner Home Video at a suggested price of $24.98.


FICTION
LEAD:  TROUBLE THE WATER.
By Melvin Dixon. (University of Colorado/Fiction Collective Two, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $8.95.) The poet and scholar Melvin Dixon's first novel, which won the 1989 Charles H. and N. Mildred Nilon Excellence in Minority Fiction Award, is a slim, poetic work.
In the Southern Gothic tradition, Mr.


Correction
LEAD: An article today on page 22 of The Business World, part 2 of The Times Magazine, about Mario Baeza, a partner at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, appears without a byline.


WAITING FOR JESUS IN TEXAS
LEAD:  ORDINARY TIME  By A. G. Mojtabai.  223 pp. New York: Doubleday. $17.95.


Doldrums Troubling Housing Developers
LEAD: WITH birch trees and rhododendrons spread across their lush lawns, seven new town houses at the Racquet Club on Long Island Sound look like the pride of loving homeowners.
But a wasteland of mud ponds and hardpan that surrounds this manicured oasis in Centerville, L.I., offers evidence of big plans gone awry.


USAIR CREW LOGGED LITTLE TIME IN 737
LEAD: The pilot and co-pilot of the USAir Boeing 737-400 that crashed on takeoff from La Guardia Airport Wednesday night had logged thousands of hours of commercial flight time but were relatively inexperienced aboard 737's.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: The only universal government function is the mail service, and the most benign government propaganda may be that promulgated in the designs of stamps.


A QUESTION OF TRUST
LEAD: Paul Mandelbaum's account of his first outing alone with his girlfriend's 10-year-old daughter, Nicole, was touching (About Men: ''A Question of Trust,'' Aug. 6).
It's nice to know there are caring men who are searching for ways to win the trust of new young people in their lives.
His anxiety is understandable, but I think he is off to a good start and can relax a little.


Quarterback Runs As Yale Triumphs
LEAD: Darin Kehler, Yale's daring and fleet quarterback, ran through the rain for three touchdowns in the second half today as the Elis defeated Lehigh, 33-17, at the Yale Bowl.


ABOUT YOUR BOOK ...
LEAD:  GETTING PUBLISHED  The Acquisition Process at University Presses.
By Paul Parsons.  256 pp.
Knoxville:  University of Tennessee Press.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $14.95.


Q and A
LEAD:  The Right to Rent a Condo


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing; Early Ways of Farming On View in Westchester
LEAD: The disappearing agricultural heritage of Westchester County is just part of the appeal of Muscoot Park, a 777-acre area of rolling fields and dense woodland that includes a turn-of-the-century-style farm.


Katherine McWhorter Wed
LEAD: Katherine Elizabeth McWhorter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McWhorter of St.
Louis, was married last evening to Dr.
Philip Alan Seibel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Seibel of West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Lawrence Siegel and the Rev.
William Hague, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Kennedy-Warren building in Washington.


Baskets That Go Beyond Vessels
LEAD: THERE'S nothing functional about the baskets that Norma Minkowitz creates.
Indeed, although the Westport artist's work is included in ''The Tactile Vessel: New Basket Forms'' at the American Craft Museum in New York through Nov. 12, it is doubtful whether her poetic sculptural forms of crocheted thread, painted and stiffened, are really baskets at all.


CampusLife: Canisius; Students' Backing Of Athletic Field Puts It on Campus
LEAD: Sandwiched onto the Canisius College campus, between a subway stop and the basketball arena, is a new $4 million athletic field where next Saturday the college's football team will play its first game on campus.


Fatal Jet Accidents Highest Since 1968, Killing 275 People
LEAD: With 10 fatal accidents involving large United States commercial jets, this year is already the worst since 1968, when there were 12, according to statistics from the National Transportation Safety Board.
And the 275 deaths this year, including two this week at La Guardia Airport, are the highest toll since 1979, when 348 died.


Anne Kingsbury Weds Lee Andrews
LEAD: Anne Howard Kingsbury, a supervising analyst in the budget office of the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, and Lee Eric Andrews, an assistant media director at the New York advertising agency of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Bender performed the ceremony at the Ramapo Reformed Church in Mahwah, N.J.


Diane Morra, Editor, Weds Jonathan Oatis
LEAD: Diane Leslie Morra, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry J. Morra of Toms River, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Walker Oatis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Oatis of New York.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations.


Runners Can Do More Than Just Run
LEAD: RENOVATION of my town's high school football field and track recently provided three occasions that raised the civic hackles on my neck and caused me to reflect on the role runners might play in discouraging vandalism.


THE WAY I LIVE NOW
LEAD: I share similar experiences with David Leavitt and agree with him on many facts about the AIDS epidemic (''The Way I Live Now,'' July 9).
However, I feel the need to express another point of view about what it was like to have worked in the middle of this crisis.


Elliott and Ivan Win Miles
LEAD: Running hard so he could ride in ease, Peter Elliott of Britain outsprinted the favored Abdi Bile of Somalia yesterday to win the men's Mercedes Mile down Fifth Avenue after Paula Ivan of Rumania had swept to an expected victory in the women's race.


The Sea That Unites Also Divides
LEAD: EVERY day more people than ever in communities from Stonington, Conn., to Mamaroneck, N.Y., from City Island in the Bronx to Oyster Bay, L.I., are pleading the case for the Long Island Sound.


Jennifer Cannon Weds
LEAD: First Lieut.
Jennifer Anne Cannon, U.S.A.F., and First Lieut.
Warren Woodward Michelsen, U.S.A.F., both stationed at Fairchild Air Force Base in Spokane, Wash., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert W. Gish, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Damon House in Mica, Wash.


Trim the Fat From High Cost of Education
LEAD: THE 1989 school board budgets are history.
The pros and cons have been hashed and rehashed.
The anti-tax groups have been heaped with calumny.
They have been called demagogues for daring to suggest that schools are not akin to motherhood.


Carolyn Bekkedahl Wed in Delaware
LEAD: Carolyn Bekkedahl, a daughter of Capt.
Clifford Lewis Bekkedahl, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Bekkedahl of Westfield, N.J., and Michael Thomas Skrak 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Thomas Skrak Jr. of Chicago, were married yesterday at Seagate Manor in Dewey Beach, Del.
The Rev.
Michael Sparough, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.


'Heart Condition' Raises the Specter Of Bigotry
LEAD: Considering Hollywood's preference for escapism, it is surprising to see the cameras turning on a spate of strong, controversial movies about racial conflict. ''Do the Right Thing'' and ''Mississippi Burning'' have drawn large audiences as well as reams of divided critical commentary, and more stories about racial prejudice are to hit the theaters during the next year.


Lake Champlain Is Searched for a 1776 Gunboat
LEAD: Under slate gray skies on the waters of Lake Champlain, it is easy to imagine the day in October 1776 that Benedict Arnold scuttled two of his gunboats off Schuyler Island.


Monday Myth
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Trades Helped to Improve Rangers and Padres
LEAD: Dealing in a whirlwind manner that made Trader Jack McKeon envious, Tom Grieve, the Texas Rangers' general manager, last December made 3 trades involving 15 players and signed a notable free agent.
All in a 48-hour span.


Drug Abuse To Be Focus Of Hearing
LEAD: NEW JERSEY, whose turnpike the authorities say has become a major channel for illegal drugs flowing into New York and whose cities are home to some 200,000 cocaine and heroin users, will convene a Congressional field hearing tomorrow in which local experts will testify on the narcotics problem in the northern part of the state.


Four Health Care Vigilantes
LEAD: Medical costs continue to run wild despite widespread efforts by the nation's employers to contain them.
The cost of the typical company medical plan is projected to rise by 20 to 25 percent this year, according to the latest surveys, after increasing by 15 to 20 percent last year.


Hush Favored
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Friendly Rivalry For Old Friends
LEAD: They were an odd couple in the St. Louis Cardinals' training camp in 1979.


Mary Jo Budesa Marries
LEAD: Mary Jo Budesa, the daughter of Mary Ellen Utell of Asharoken, L.I., and the late Joseph G. Budesa of Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to William Pearce Fornshell, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Fornshell of Danbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Fink performed the ceremony at St.
Philip Neri Roman Catholic Church in Northport.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My redwood deck is in the shade, and after heavy rain the wood gets slimy and slippery.
I have a similar problem with a blacktop tennis court.
What can I do?


The Sea That Unites Also Divides
LEAD: EVERY day more people than ever in communities from Stonington, Conn., to Mamaroneck, N.Y., from City Island in the Bronx to Oyster Bay, L.I., are pleading the case for the Long Island Sound.


Ceremony for Ms. Kuoni and Mr. Oakes
LEAD: A wedding ceremony for Carin Christine Kuoni, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Andreas Kuoni of Domat-Ems, Grisons, Switzerland, and John George Hartman Oakes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Oakes of New York, took place last evening at the summer home of the bride's parents in Lain, Switzerland.
The bride's uncle, Wolfram Kunick, a professor at the University of Kassel in West Germany, conducted the interdenominational service.


Life With Mother Was a Parade of Great Artists
LEAD: What a time to be without a tape recorder!
Benny Goodman, who had comparatively recently discovered the joys of classical music, was there, in my family's Manhattan apartment, and, along with Milton Katims, the violist, and Benny's famous jazz partner, the pianist Teddy Wilson, had just finished playing the Mozart Clarinet Trio under the watchful eye of my mother, the pianist Nadia Reisenberg.


Low-Interest Mortgage Program Ignored
LEAD: WITH affordable housing at a premium and home ownership an impossible dream for many, a two-year-old state program that provides low-interest, low-down payment mortgages has remained largely ignored by brokers, bankers and even bargain-hunting home buyers.


The Third World Debt Crisis Reshapes American Banks
LEAD: UNITED STATES banks are being reshaped as the problem of lending too much to third world countries continues to haunt them.
As they are gradually being forced to raise more money to cushion themselves against future loan losses, banks are selling more assets, issuing new stock and pulling out of businesses that are not sufficiently profitable.


OPEC Is Back and Feeling Flush
LEAD: OPEC's lean years are over.
After nearly a decade of steep falls in revenues, wild price fluctuations, shrinking demand for oil worldwide and confrontation with the West, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries seems to be coming into its own once more.


For Cambodians, Joy and Foreboding
LEAD: With the last of Vietnam's troops scheduled to leave Cambodia on Tuesday, residents of this capital are dancing again, but the celebrations have a frenzied character, tempered by foreboding that they will be cut short by the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.


'THIS IS HOW IT IS FOR US!
LEAD:  RUSSIAN WOMEN'S STUDIES  Essays on Sexism in Soviet Culture.
By Tatyana Mamonova.
Illustrated. 179 pp.
New York:  Pergamon Press.
Cloth, $36.
Paper, $14.50.


U.S.C. Crushes Ohio State
LEAD: Todd Marinovich, a redshirt freshman, threw for four touchdowns, including a Southern Cal-record 87-yard pass play, as the Trojans routed Ohio State, 42-3, today.


WESTERN SAGA: A CLASH ON THE PRAIRIE
LEAD:  CHEYENNES AND HORSE SOLDIERS  The 1857 Expedition and the Battle of Solomon's Fork.
By William Y. Chalfant.
Illustrated by Roy Grinnell. 415 pp.
Norman:  University of Oklahoma Press. $24.95.


Cubs Moving Closer to Title
LEAD: In this improbable season for the Chicago Cubs, an improbable hero emerged today and helped nudge the club a game closer to a division championship.


MUSIC VIEW
LEAD: The naming of Hugh Southern as the general manager of the Metropolitan Opera continues a pattern, now 17 years old, of putting the job in the hands of men with executive experience but little or no operatic background.
There can be little doubt that this is a decision calculated to further consolidate power in the hands of James Levine, who first joined the


Caring for Finished Wood Floors
LEAD: FINISHED wood floors are durable and easy to care for.
With regular maintenance and prompt repair when necessary, they will retain their original appearance for many years.


Jets Give O'Brien Better Protection
LEAD: The number has been as steady as a drumbeat: for every nine passes Ken O'Brien has thrown in his career, he has been sacked once.
Three times a game on average.


Question Of the Week; Do College Fotball Polls Mean Anything?
LEAD: Yes, without a playoff or tournament system similar to college basketball's, writers and coaches polls will continue to decide our mythical college football champion.
MICHAEL POE  McLean, Va.


Louisa Campbell, A Writer, Is Wed
LEAD: Louisa D. Campbell, a writer of children's books under the pen name Liza Alexander, and Sven D. Travis, a commercial artist, were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Carleton Lee officiated.


Retrospective: Barbara Morgan at 89
LEAD: BARBARA MORGAN has just turned 89 and the retrospective she is having in the Davison Art Center, at Wesleyan University in Middletown, is a fitting celebration.


The Dutch Find New Treats In America
LEAD: Atlanta-based architect who introduced the atrium to the modern hotel.
Portman is developing a 100-acre complex of office towers, hotels and shops 18 miles from the hurly-burly of downtown Atlanta and hoped to whet the Dutch investor's appetite.


Lithuania Declares Annexation by Moscow Void
LEAD: The Legislature of Lithuania today voted to declare the 1940 Soviet annexation of the republic invalid, thus supplying what could ultimately become the legal basis for secession.


The Sea That Unites Also Divides
LEAD: EVERY day more people than ever in communities from Stonington, Conn., to Mamaroneck, N.Y., from City Island in the Bronx to Oyster Bay, L.I., are pleading the case for the Long Island Sound.


24 CITIES BUT NO CIGAR
LEAD:  DIARY OF A MAD PLAYWRIGHT  By James Kirkwood.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton. $19.95.


It's Time to Repeal Marijuana Prohibition
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Roots Of the Ridiculous
LEAD: This Thursday's opening of the late Charles Ludlam's first play, ''Big Hotel,'' at the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, directed by Everett Quinton, marks the first revival of this bohemian epic in 22 years.


Plot Twists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Villains of the World! Hollywood Beckons
LEAD: Wanted: a new public enemy.
Height, weight, sex, age and racial origins immaterial as long as the public enemy is sadistic, effete and strictly dishonorable.


Caring for Finished Wood Floors
LEAD: FINISHED wood floors are durable and easy to care for.
With regular maintenance and prompt repair when necessary, they will retain their original appearance for many years.


Counselor To The King
LEAD: THE INVESTIGATION BEGAN IN DECEMBER OF 1986.
Officials from Britain's Department of Trade and Industry descended upon the London headquarters of Guinness P.L.C., a huge liquor conglomerate.
When the charges were lodged five months later, Ernest W. Saunders, the chairman, and a number of leading British business figures stood accused of stock manipulation in connection with Guinness' $4.1 billion takeover of Distillers Company.


Girl Makes History in New Jersey Game
LEAD: Leanne Bollinger is listed among the promising newcomers on the Long Branch High School varsity football team.
That's not a milestone because girls have tried out for boys' teams before.


The Mystery Of the Single Shoe
LEAD: Re: ''Why Just One Shoe?,'' Opinion Page, Aug. 20:


WHAT POE DIDN'T KNOW
LEAD:  RAVENS IN WINTER  By Bernd Heinrich.
Illustrated. 379 pp.
New York:  Summit Books. $19.95.


Police Leader Likens Rival Group to Klan
LEAD: The president of a group of minority police officers has labeled a rival group that consists primarily of white officers as racist.
The comments on Thursday have prompted some members of the minority group to distance themselves from the description.


Food; Loafing Around
LEAD: FOR BREAD LOV-ers, these are glory days.
Restaurants and bakers have thrown out their recipes for flavorless, mass-produced rolls and are filling the breadbasket with robust creations.
Even all-purpose breads are far from bland.
Light, crusty rounds of country-style sourdough and dense, moist whole-grain loaves go with everything from soup to cheese, and make superior sandwiches.


Amy Whittlesey, A Student, Weds
LEAD: St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Amy Elizabeth Whittlesey, the daughter of Faith R. Whittlesey of Philadelphia and the late Roger W. Whittlesey, to George D. O'Neill Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Neill of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
John S. Keefer officiated.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; A $300 Million Downtown Bridgeport Plan
LEAD: FOR more than 20 years, Bridgeport - known to its detractors as the ''gritty city'' - has been struggling to redevelop its business district, but it has never taken the big step.


A Sweet Jewish New Year
LEAD: ROSH HA-SHANAH, the Jewish New Year, begins Friday evening.
One symbolic food for the holiday is honey, which signifies a sweet New Year.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Sept. 15  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $1.3 million  1220 Park Avenue (95th St.)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 2 maid's rooms, large kitchen, fireplace; maintenance $2,265, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: S.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  IN PRAISE OF IMPERFECTION: My Life and Work, by Rita Levi-Montalcini.
Translated by Luigi Attardi. (Basic Books, $9.95.) With the powers of that imperfect engine called the brain, an Italian neuroscientist discovers a chemical that makes nerve fibers grow and wins a Nobel Prize.
This is ''an arresting story of someone who insisted on being herself rather than someone else's idea of herself,'' Victor K.


Jennifer H. Smith Marries Guitarist
LEAD: Jennifer Harlow Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Kellum Smith Jr. of New York and Chatham, Mass., was married yesterday to Stephen Parker Hayden, a son of E. Parker Hayden Jr. of Grovers Mill, N.J., and Mary C. Hayden of Rocky Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Cynthia Ward, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony in Rocky Hill at the home of the bridegroom's mother and her husband, Weld


Golf's Appeal Brings New Courses
LEAD: TO meet what they say is a surging demand in the state for golf, developers are planning to build four new courses, in Columbia, East Lyme, Franklin and Middlefield.
At the same time, many golf courses are planning expansions and renovations, from the well-known Tournament Players Club in Cromwell to the municipal course in


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Charlotte Frank has bachelor and master of arts degrees, is working on a doctorate in education and is a vice president of a large corporation.
John Canemaker is head of the animation department at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.
Nancy Holmes's novel ''Nobody's Fault'' is to be published by Bantam early in 1990.


PLANS GO UNUSED AS STORM PASSES
LEAD: Ten thousand sandbags stayed in storage.
Refrigerators remained fully stocked.
Hastily dug drainage ditches stayed relatively dry.
And, throughout the New York metropolitan region, carefully crafted emergency plans were rendered unnecessary.
No one was complaining.  ''Having gone through Hurricane Gloria four years ago,'' said Brendan Sexton, New York City's Sanitation Commissioner, ''I'm sure we wouldn't have normal operations for a month'' had Hurricane Hugo turned eastward, a turn for the worse for New York


Patients' Families: More Doors Open
LEAD: Family Friends is grateful for the article ''Volunteers Open Homes to Families of Patients''  [ Sept. 3 ] .
Our nonprofit organization provides housing in private homes for family members of patients receiving specialized or emergency care in Westchester hospitals.
Within the last year we have grown beyond our fondest hopes and now have more than 25 volunteer families who have provided more than 500 days of cost-free housing to family members of patients being treated in our area hospitals.


Woman Is Held in Stabbing Of Doctor in Bronx Hospital
LEAD: A Bronx woman who the police said appeared to be deranged stabbed a doctor with a barbeque fork Friday night in an emergency room at Bronx Lebanon Hospital.


Beauty; FACING UP TO THE 90'S
LEAD: WHEN KARL LAGERFELD UNVEILED HIS FALL COUTURE collection for the house of Chanel, he introduced a parade of new beauties who seemed far removed from the upright image of this venerable fashion institution.
The three models shown here, he believes, display a changing sense of attractiveness.


Clarifying a Position On Skills Testing
LEAD: I plead guilty to only one of the several indictments Howard Berridge charges me with (Letters to the New Jersey Editor, Aug. 20).
After reading Mr.
Berridge's letter, I went back to my own and, scrutinizing it from his point of view, I found that my ''foolish frenzy'' seems in retrospect to be a bit of a wild pitch.


Anti-Abortion Protesters Arrested at Bronx Clinic
LEAD: Scores of anti-abortion demonstrators were arrested yesterday while trying to block the entrance to an abortion clinic in the Pelham section of the Bronx.


Anne Marie Sapienza Weds
LEAD: Anne Marie Sapienza, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Sapienza of Williamsville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Gary A. Paranzino, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony D. Paranzino of Ambler, Pa.
Msgr.
Joseph D. Joseph, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
John Maron Maronite Catholic Church.


Miss Brach Weds Arthur Williams
LEAD: At Our Lady of the Isle Roman Catholic Church in Shelter Island, L.I., Amber F. Brach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald A. Brach of Rochester, was married yesterday to Arthur R. Williams, a son of Patricia M. Williams of Shelter Island and Robert I. Williams of New York.
The Rev.
Richard Walsh officiated.


'Trixie True,'' A Spoof of Teen-Age Sleuths
LEAD: WHAT, one may wonder, is ''Trixie True, Teen Detective'' doing in a theater that has staked its reputation on a venturesome, intelligently chosen repertory?


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: God forbid, you criticize a Spike Lee film or scoff at a tirade by the Rev.
Al Sharpton. ''Racist'' is the charge.
Anthony Walton's paranoid article continues on the same track.
Notre Dame and Brown notwithstanding, a temporary doorman refuses to let him pass.
What's the big deal?
Who gets a cab in the rain in New York City anyway?


U.S. Misses Chance to Tie in Ryder
LEAD: With the Americans in good position to move up to a tie with the European team in the 28th Ryder Cup matches, two of the best United States pro golfers let the final four-ball match slip away over the last three holes today.


A QUESTION OF TRUST
LEAD: I am sure Nicole has some problems resulting from her parents' divorce - all children do - but if Paul Mandelbaum really wants her friendship, he'd better stop trying to ''shrink out'' her every word and action.
Her questions indicate no obsession with ''destruction and loss.'' She doesn't save 40 different things so ''she exerts a little control over the world.


Columbia's Trip Is a Rough One
LEAD: Ray Tellier's first road game as Columbia's head coach got off to a rough start even before the Lions left the Morningside Heights campus Friday afternoon.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Flattery, Fortissimo


A CORRECTION
LEAD: In the ''Talking: Title Transfer'' column on Sept. 17, the discussion about avoiding inheritance taxes failed to mention that a parent giving a home to a child would have to pay a Federal gift tax on the current worth of the home ($800,000 in the example).


PASTIMES: Numismatics
LEAD: A proof specimen of a $20 territorial gold piece has been sold for a reported price of $1,350,000, the highest amount ever paid for an American numismatic item.


Pilar Uribe Marries Dr. D. F. Buxton, a Surgeon
LEAD: Maria del Pilar Uribe, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Luis Enrique Uribe of New York and Ibague, Colombia, was married yesterday to Dr.
Douglas Francisco Buxton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jorge N. Buxton of New York and Buenos Aires, at St.
Gertrude's Roman Catholic Church in Bayville, L.I.
The Rev.
Theodore E.


Mistreating Venerable Walls
LEAD: OLD stone walls course through our neighborhood in fits and starts, depending on how the developer could work them into the plans of our subdivision many years ago.
Where possible, stretches of some walls were left fairly intact, to serve as boundaries for our irregular one-acre lots; others, parted and abandoned, were left as mere stubs of their former selves.


Rich, Complicated and Demanding Cezannes
LEAD: Every so often there comes along an exhibition that we absolutely had to have.
One such - and it goes straight to the top of its class - is ''Cezanne: The Bathers,'' at the Kunstmuseum in Basel.
Like the exhibition of late Cezanne at the Museum of Modern Art in 1977, and like the exhibition ''Cezanne: The Early Years'' that was seen in Paris, London and Washington in 1988-89, it digs deep, and in a new way, into one of the supreme subjects of


FICTION
LEAD:  LAST THINGS.
By Madison Jones. (Louisiana State University, $17.95.) Finishing Madison Jones's eighth novel is like waking up from someone else's nightmare - or maybe being released from someone else's paranoid fantasy.
That's because, although the fears that materialize in ''Last Things'' may not be anything like the reader's own, they still have a scary, spiky grip.


Campus Life: Wisconsin; Chancelor Shalala Joins the Police In a Raid on Underage Drinkers
LEAD: Some students at the University of Wisconsin expressed ''shock and surprise'' when the school's chancellor, Donna E. Shalala, accompanied the city's police last weekend on raids of local parties where underage drinking was reportedly taking place.


LARGE, UNCONTAINABLE HEROINES
LEAD:  OBSCENE GESTURES FOR WOMEN  By Janet Kauffman.  110 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.


UPDATE: September 24, 1989
LEAD:
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Aug.
July
Aug. 88
Rents
150.0
-0.3
5.3
Homeowner's costs
155.6
0.5
6.4
Fuel and utilities
100.2
-0.3
5.6
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson,
*4*Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


The High-Risk World Of Colombian Politics
LEAD: He has three bullets in his body.
His predecessor was assassinated.
And when he goes on campaign trips, he takes along an emergency supply of his own blood.
He is Senator Ernesto Samper Pizano, the governing party's leading presidential candidate, and his predicament points up the risks of political life in Colombia.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner; The Freshest of Fish And a Taste of Spain
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Cafe Greco


THE PAST HAS FLED
LEAD:  HIGHER GROUND  A Novel in Three Parts.
By Caryl Phillips.  218 pp.
New York:  Viking. $17.95.


U.S. to Help Warsaw Lure Private Investors
LEAD: Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher told Poland's new Government this week that Washington would help lure private credits and investment here but did not offer more immediate aid than President Bush brought with him when he visited Warsaw in July.


When Just Owning a Car Is a Hazard
LEAD: Did you hear the one about the guy who puts a ''No Radio'' sign on his car, goes off to a party and returns to find his car window smashed and a handwritten note saying, ''Get One.''


Pseudo-Liberal Hogwash?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kimi C. Puntillo, TV Aide, Is Bride
LEAD: St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Kimi Carmela Puntillo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Puntillo of Sands Point, L.I., to William Richard Collins.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Johnston performed the ceremony.


Campus Life: Tufts; School's Rewriting Of Its Handbook Brings No Laughs
LEAD: Tufts University's student handbook was a few weeks late this fall, and there was nothing funny about it.


Lovers Get A Second Chance In 'Bird on a Wire'
LEAD: While the actress Goldie Hawn sat knitting a sweater for her baby son, her co-star, Mel Gibson, entertained the film crew with magic tricks, and tigers prowled a make-believe jungle nearby.
Such was the scene here recently during production of ''Bird on a Wire'' in surroundings that sometimes looked more like a game farm than a film set.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Enfield, Conn.  $125,000  27 Alban Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; wraparound deck, woods at rear; taxes $1,168.
Hamden, Conn.  $169,250  49 Belmont Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath 50-year-old colonial; fenced-in yard, finished basement; taxes $1,774.


After 17 Years, A Director Reappears
LEAD: Twenty-five years ago, a young unknown Japanese director named Hiroshi Teshigahara sent tremors through the world of cinema with a film of stunning originality, awesome power and technical brilliance.
Called ''Woman in the Dunes,'' it won the Special Jury Prize at the 1964 Cannes Film Festival.
A spectacular debut, agreed European film critics; and later in the same year acclaim greeted the film in America when it was shown at the New York Film Festival.


How to Read Hopkins
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: BOOKSHELF
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


A Talent for Bad Luck and Intense Commitment
LEAD: ''Ariel'' ends with an inadvertently funny touch, a wonderful case of humor gained in translation.
You have to hear it to believe it, but ''Somewhere Over the Rainbow'' is extremely funny sung in Finnish, as it is over the closing credits of Aki Kaurismaki's film.
It will be shown today at 4:30 and tomorrow at 6:15 as part of the New York Film Festival.


GROUP OF 7 WARNS ON RISE OF DOLLAR
LEAD: Economic ministers from the seven largest industrial democracies said today that a further rise in the dollar could undercut efforts to promote a healthy global economy, and they vowed fresh cooperative efforts to try to keep a lid on the dollar.


A COVENANT WITHTHE SOIL
LEAD:  FARM  A Year in the Life of an American Farmer.
By Richard Rhodes.
Illustrated by Bill Greer. 336 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


French Find Signs That Plane Was Bombed
LEAD: France's Transport Ministry said today that the flight recorders of the DC-10 that crashed in the African desert on Tuesday supported the hypothesis that a bomb had exploded on the plane.


TO RELAX OR STAY ALERT, NEW MOOD-ATLERING SCENTS
LEAD: Fragrances are no longer just another luxury.
Now, manufacturers say they have merits in behavioral therapy. ''This is a new category of fragrance,'' said Annette Green, vice president and administrator of the Fragrance Research Fund Ltd., a group of 20 manufacturers formed nearly a decade ago to study the psychological effects of fragrances.


Bush Signs Bill to Release a Mother
LEAD: President Bush today signed into law a bill intended to free Dr.
Elizabeth Morgan, a mother who has been in jail more than two years because of a child custody dispute.


Sheryl Haft Married To Jeffrey Scott Flug
LEAD: Sheryl Alecia Haft and Jeffrey Scott Flug were married yesterday evening at Temple Bethel in Cedarhurst, L.I., by Rabbi Philip Berger.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: While some of us were off enjoying the last days of summer, the makers of cameras and film have been busy flooding the photo-shop shelves with new goodies.
Here's a brief run-down some of the newsworthy recent introductions:


Elizabeth Ehrlich, a Student, Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth Ehrlich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Ehrlich of Bloomington, Ind., was married yesterday to Peter V. Dumanian, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ara Dumanian of Chicago.
The Rev.
Carl E. Munger, a Congregational minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents at Indiana University.
Her father is the university's president.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  FIVE TOWNS WALK


Where It's Summer the Year Round
LEAD: AUTUMN is here, but summer lives on at Deep Sea Dive in Port Washington.
For many beach-loving Long Islanders, summer takes a nose dive on Labor Day.
Diehards staunchly string out the season through September.
Yet, it is summer the year round at this casual seafood spot.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the play ''Love Letters'' at the Promenade Theater gives an incorrect date for the first performance by Josef Sommer and Colleen Dewhurst.


Outdoors; Fishing for Smallmouth Bass
LEAD: Many fly fishermen regard the smallmouth bass as something to pursue when trout are off their feed, a species that, although acrobatic and strong, does not require much savvy to catch.


Gold Glows Bright by the TV Light
LEAD: I LOVE jewelry.
Gold is my favorite four-letter word, which is why the home-shopping channel on cable television caught my eye.


KILLING OFF DAISY
LEAD:  HENRY JAMES AND THE ''WOMAN BUSINESS''  By Alfred Habegger.  288 pp.
New York:  Cambridge University Press. $34.50.


2 Neighborhoods Celebrate Restoration of Their Bridge
LEAD: A century-old wooden bridge in Brooklyn, closed for repairs since 1985, was reopened yesterday with flags and brass bands in a ceremony that officially reunited two neighborhoods on opposite sides of the Gowanus Canal.


Erica deGroot Weds
LEAD: Erica deGroot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willem deGroot of Burlington, Vt., was married yesterday to David Adam Lustgarten, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bennett P. Lustgarten of Ardsley, N.Y., and Saltaire, L.I.
Justice of the Peace Ingrid Cichoski of Richmond, Vt., performed the ceremony at the nondenominational Round Church in Richmond.


BRITISH EXAMINING SECURITY AT BASES
LEAD: British defense officials said today that they had ordered a general review of security at military installations after an Irish Republican Army bomb attack that killed 10 members of the Royal Marines Band Friday.


'Trixie True' Taps Out The Secret
LEAD: WHAT, one may wonder, is ''Trixie True, Teen Detective'' doing in a theater that has staked its reputation on a venturesome, intelligently chosen repertory?


Pakistanis View U.S. as Friend, Suspiciously
LEAD: A year after the death of President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq in a plane crash, a public-opinion poll asked Pakistanis if they thought he was the victim of a conspiracy and, if so, who were the likely conspirators.


Lisa Rudolph, Reporter, Weds
LEAD: Lisa Beth Rudolph, a reporter for WCBS-TV in New York, and Richard Steven Hurwitz, a senior managing director at the brokerage firm of Bear Stearns &amp; Company in New York, were married last evening at the Tulip Walk of the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated.


Amy L. Stifel And Jay Quinn Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Amy Louise Stifel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry G. Stifel of Short Hills, N.J., and Stratton Mountain, Vt., was married yesterday to James Carroll Quinn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Quinn Jr. of San Marino, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
John B. Bell, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ecumenical ceremony at the interdenominational Christ Church in Summit, N.J.


POSTINGS: 388 East 88th St.; 46-Story Condo Rising
LEAD: One of the tallest buildings on the Upper East Side, a 46-story tower that is to house 163 condominium apartments, is under construction at the southwest corner of 88th Street and First Avenue on the site of what was a Children's Aid Society building.
The $82 million project, named Leighton House and carrying the address 388 East 88th Street, is being undertaken by the General Atlantic Realty Corporation, which bought the society's five-story building.


Cynthia Gregory to Dance with Connecticut Ballet
LEAD: THE ballerina Cynthia Gregory moved to West Redding four years ago, and now, she said, she has found the perfect arrangement.


Some War; Meanwhile, Crack Undermines America
LEAD: George Bush got his first big role as a drug warrior back in 1982 when he was Vice President and Ronald Reagan put him in charge of a task force to stop drugs entering Florida.
Later that year, Mr.
Reagan called for more task forces - ''a major initiative that I believe can mark a turning point in the battle against crime.


Army's Defense Is Solid
LEAD: Army's defense stopped Wake Forest inside the 15-yard line three times in the fourth quarter and the Cadets earned a 14-10 victory today.
It was a game in which a previously untested sophomore quarterback, Willie McMillian, emerged as the offensive hero when he completed his only pass on a 60-yard touchdown play.


STREETSCAPES: Ukrainian Academy of Arts and Sciences; Landmarking an 1898 Library
LEAD: WHILE there is ferment in the Ukraine as nationalists seek to free it from Russian domination, there is pragmatic capitulation at 206 West 100th Street, where the Ukrainian Academy of Arts and Sciences has decided not to appeal its designation as a landmark last month.


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: The 1989 World Team Championships now ending after two weeks have been greatly aided by the marvels of modern technology.
NEC, a giant Japanese computer corporation, is the major sponsor and provided a wide range of equipment.


Bush Will Back National Goals on Education
LEAD: President Bush is willing to be the first President to endorse setting national educational goals and standards by which improvements can be measured, Administration officials say.


Beijing Puts Khmer Rouge on Shorter Leash
LEAD: As a new round of civil war threatens Cambodia, diplomats here say China finds itself in the awkward position of wanting the Khmer Rouge troops it supports neither to win nor lose.


Groups Taking Donations for Aid to Storm Victims
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States has asked that donations to assist victims of Hurricane Hugo be sent to the American Red Cross or branch offices of three banks that are setting up special accounts for Puerto Rican disaster assistance.


Virtuosi Keeps Expanding Its Reach
LEAD: THE Philharmonia Virtuosi calls itself ''the county's most active performing-arts organization,'' and this season the ensemble will be presenting seven different series of subscription concerts, two in New York City and the others in Purchase, Valhalla, New Rochelle, Scarsdale and Peekskill.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  EVEN MISSISSIPPI.
By Melany Neilson. (University of Alabama, $24.95.) ''Even Mississippi'' is the memoir of a white University of Mississippi graduate's work with Robert Clark, a black Mississippi legislator, in his Congressional campaigns of 1982 and 1984 against a race-baiting Republican.
Mr.
Clark's losses lay the groundwork for Mike Espy's 1986 victory as the state's first black Congressman.


SIGNING UP CELEBRITY PROMOTERS TO GIVE PERFUMES STAR APPEALZ
LEAD: A glut of perfumes has sent manufacturers scurrying for new ways to distinguish their brands from the masses.
And signing up celebrities as promoters is their favorite new tool.


About Cars; Slow Down, Roast's Ready
LEAD: John Russell and I were on 10th Avenue in New York on Thursday, dripping sweat and fighting traffic in a Plymouth Voyager.
And what the heat and urban ugliness brought back were memories of another such van and heaped-up snow in Spencer, Idaho.


Has Kellogg Lost Its Snap?
LEAD: Until last week it had seemed a fait accompli: In two years, Horst W. Schroeder, the 48-year-old president and chief operating officer of the Kellogg Company, would be the cereal giant's next chief executive.
Yes, the 19-year Kellogg veteran had a reputation for being abrasive - at a company with a cozy, family-style culture.


Patient on Life Support Dies After Power Is Cut
LEAD: A woman on life support died this week after a utility company disconnected power to her home instead of the house next door.


Time for Bush to Back Up His Speeches With Action
LEAD: Nearly three-quarters of the way through the first year of the new Administration, extraordinarily little of major significance has been produced in Washington.
As a Governor, a citizen and a Democrat, I think we have given an appropriate period of deference to the new Administration.
It is time now for a different approach.


Denial Suppresses Moments of Magic
LEAD: WHEN we are young, we have sudden loves.
An article of clothing or a toy catches our eye and totally captivates us for the moment.
Getting the object is the be-all and end-all of our existence.
All too often, our parent or grandparent imposes his or her superior wisdom and all our hopes and passionate desires are dashed and lost forever.


Time to Take the Financial I.Q. Test
LEAD: Many people pride themselves on how much they know - or think they know - about financial matters.
Yet accountants and financial planners say misconceptions are rife among their clients.
And when it comes to money, the professionals say, ignorance is definitely not bliss.
The following questions and answers on investments and taxes can give you a sense of your financial I.Q.


Newspaper Novels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Oregon; Fraternities Learn Costly Lessons In Fire Safety
LEAD: Fall festivities at the University of Oregon's fraternities might be a bit subdued this year because of the prospect of paying for improvements to meet the city's fire code.


Irish Hold Off Spartans
LEAD: Since the last time the congregation of 59,075 gathered on a Saturday afternoon at Notre Dame Stadium last November, their Fighting Irish had convincingly defended a No. 1 ranking, won another unofficial national championship and withstood the sudden loss of several important players that complicates their effort to repeat.


Beware the Conversation Miser
LEAD: IT'S fashionable these days to complain about widespread rudeness, and with good reason.
So I think I'll jump on the bandwagon.
But I won't be referring here to tailgating motorists or discourteous salespeople.
These are strangers.


Correction
LEAD: A listing of college football schedules on Aug. 27 incorrectly listed Boston University's games.
The university's schedule is: Sept. 9, Delaware; Sept. 15, at West Chester; Sept. 23, at Dartmouth; Sept. 30, Massachusetts; Oct. 7, at Richmond; Oct. 14, at William &amp; Mary; Oct. 21, Rhode Island; Oct.


Mideast Scholar to give 1990 Jefferson Lecture
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Humanities has announced that Bernard Lewis, a scholar of Middle Eastern History, will deliver the 1990 Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My redwood deck is in the shade, and after heavy rain the wood gets slimy and slippery.
I have a similar problem with a blacktop tennis court.
What can I do?


Mets' Trades Get Low Score
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Name-Dropping
LEAD: Arjune, by yet another name, was back out of sight last week.
Mr.
Arjune, who went into the Federal Witness Protection Program last year after his battle with New York City crack dealers led to the murder of a police officer guarding his home, turned up in Spokane, Wash., recently.
Mr.
Arjune, who was known locally as Amos Hardeen, accused the Spokane police of racial bias after his arrest on traffic charges.


New York Region's Housing: No Signs of Return to Boom
LEAD: More than a year after the great housing boom of the 1980's came to an end in New York City and its suburbs, the inventory of unsold homes has grown, demand remains sluggish and experts see no clear signs of improvement.


Bulletproof Vest Saves Officer as Suspect Is Killed
LEAD: A uniformed police officer was shot in the back yesterday in Brooklyn, but his life was saved by a bulletproof vest, the police said.


Where the Troops and Observers Are
LEAD: Here are existing or planned operations of United Nations peacekeeping forces and observers.
Middle East  United Nations Truce Supervision Organization: 296 observers assist peacekeeping forces in Lebanon and the Golan Heights.
Created in 1948.
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force: 1,329 troops and observers monitor disengagement between Israel and Syria on the Golan Heights.


Bigotry Leaves Ugly Mark on Scottish Soccer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Return to the Killing Fields
LEAD: On April 12, 1975, soon after Lon Nol, Cambodia's President, had fled the country, the United States withdrew its forces from the capital.
Sydney Schanberg, then a New York Times correspondent, and Dith Pran, his Cambodian assistant, stayed on to cover the story of the battle-scarred country under the control of the Khmer Rouge and their leader, Pol Pot.


ROLL OVER, WAGNER
LEAD: BACKSTAGE AT THE COACH HOUSE CONCERT HALL, a music club in San Juan Capistrano, south of Los Angeles, the drummer Stewart Copeland is getting ready for a tryout gig with his new rock group Animal Logic.
The drab dressing room is hardly high enough to stand up in.
To get to it, the players must walk through the kitchen with its greasy, tiled floor.


Hoping a Trip Helps Young Find Compass
LEAD: Not just miles but worlds marked the distance from the fancy sailboats on Lake Michigan to the impoverished South Side neighborhood of Bill Pinkney's childhood.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu; Don't Frown on Beans, Even Those From a Can
LEAD: Beans are an exception to the general belief about canned food: if it comes from a can, it will not taste like much.
Though canned beans are frowned upon by chefs, they are one of the few canned foods that do not differ significantly in texture and taste from fresh food cooked at home.


AW, SHUCKS
LEAD:  JIMMY STEWART AND HIS POEMS  By Jimmy Stewart.
Illustrated. 32 pp.
New York:  Crown Publishers.


Nicole Gordon Weds Roger Bernstein
LEAD: Nicole Ann Gordon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Gordon of New York, was married last evening to Roger J. Bernstein, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Martin Bernstein of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Abraham J. Klausner performed the ceremony at the Asia Society in New York.


Decades of Change: A Look Back At China in Chaos
LEAD: It is Shanghai in 1927.
Chiang Kaishek is conducting a bloody purge of his erstwhile allies, the Communists.
In the old black-and-white film, boyish-looking suspects are interrogated by laughing policemen, then held in a cage by a guard brandishing an executioner's sword and finally dispatched by a shot to the back of the head.


U.S.-SOVIET TALKS END WITH PROGRESS ON ARMS CONTROL
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union ended two days of talks here today by proclaiming progress on a broad array of arms control issues.


GADGETS
LEAD: NOWHERE DO THE WORDS ''INFORMATION GAP'' resonate so perilously as in the stock market.
News developments move stock, and a few minutes' head start can translate into millions of dollars in profits.
Several new technologies are further tilting a playing field that was never all that level.


THAT'S ALL FOLKS
LEAD:  PANATI'S EXTRAORDINARY ENDINGS OF PRACTICALLY EVERYTHING AND EVERYBODY  By Charles Panati.
Illustrated. 470 pp.
New York:  Perennial Library/Harper &amp; Row.
Cloth, $22.50; Paper, $10.95.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  WHERE THE RIVERS RAN BACKWARD.
By William E. Merritt. (University of Georgia, $24.95.) William E. Merritt, who served as an enlisted combat engineer in Vietnam, was asked by one of his former teachers to talk to her class about the war.
He declined and wrote ''Where the Rivers Ran Backward'' instead.


Campus Life: Vassar; Turning to Offer A Helping Hand To the Elderly
LEAD: About 150 students, administrators and faculty and staff members at Vassar College left the campus this month to help 25 community organizations, including the Dutchess Manor Home for Adults and the Dutchess County Mental Health Association.


Search Continues for Worker at Oil Spill Site
LEAD: Divers returned to the Hudson River today, searching for a worker who fell into the water while working on an oil spill cleanup for Clean Harbors Inc. of Albany, the state police said.


Gooden to Forgo Rest of Season
LEAD: Dwight Gooden has decided to forgo the last week of the season and save his right shoulder for next year. ''I'm just going to call it a year,'' Gooden said yesterday before the Mets' game with Montreal. ''That's what I decided.
The situation the team is in, there's no sense for me to take a chance.


How to Read Hopkins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nursing-Home Waits: More Help Needed
LEAD: Your article  [ ''Waiting for a Nursing-Home Bed,'' Aug. 13 ]  on the problems for the elderly and their families inherent in waiting for nursing-home placement is right on target.
It properly describes the pain and feelngs of displacement that waiting for available nursing-home beds engenders.
The requirement that anyone needing such placement must accept the first available nursing-home bed available within a 50-mile radius can and sometimes does cause serious problems.


A Soccer Tale
LEAD: The Cleveland Crunch of the Major Indoor Soccer League has signed its No. 1 draft choice, Simon Keith of the University of Las Vegas, but that's only half the story.
Keith has been living the last three years with a transplanted heart.


HOT STUFF
LEAD: In the article ''Hot Stuff'' (Food, July 23), Regina Schrambling writes: ''Apparently there's no scientific logic for it, but hot climates and spicy food seem to go together like chocolate and vanilla.'' The surgeon George Crile believed they do indeed go together, and cited a physiological basis for it in his autobiography, published posthumously in 1947.


T.A.C. May Open an Inquiry
LEAD: Senior officials of The Athletics Congress are meeting in New York this weekend to decide what, if anything, to do about accusations that Florence Griffith Joyner, Carl Lewis and other prominent American track and field athletes have used performance enhancing drugs.


New Game Puts Towns on the Board
LEAD: PLAYERS collect $200 each time they pass ''Go.'' They pay rent when they land on their opponents' property, and they go to jail - directly to jail - when they roll three doubles in a row.
But instead of Boardwalk and Park Place, there are local businesses like Coldwell Banker and Travel Desk in Greenwich; Rip Van Winkle Lanes and the Norwalk Bank in Norwalk, and Top Drawer and Sound Rigging Services in Essex.


The Education Governors
LEAD: For only the third time, a President has convened the nation's governors to discuss a single issue.
President Bush has the opportunity this week to follow through on his campaign pledge to be the education President.


Banks Take Blows On Foreign Debt
LEAD: Some big banks took big steps to deal with their problem third world loans.
J.
P.
Morgan added $2 billion to its loan-loss reserves, a move that is expected to give it a $1.8 billion loss in the quarter and a loss for the year.
Chase Manhattan put aside an additional $1.15 billion and forecast a loss of $1.12 billion this quarter.


How AIDS Made the Drug Regulators Speed Up
LEAD: UNDER intense pressure from advocates for AIDS patients, the Food and Drug Administration has begun to make fundamental changes in the way it approves drugs for patients who are fatally ill.
If the experiment works, the battle against AIDS may provide a model for regulating many other types of drugs in the future.


Miss Marciw Wed To Robert Griffin
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Marciw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steve Marciw of Pocono Manor, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert H. Griffin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John F. Griffin of Longmeadow, Mass., at St.
Mary of the Mount Roman Catholic Church in Mount Pocono, Pa.
Msgr.
Arthur J. Kaschenbach officiated.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  VISIT BY 'GISELLE'


Rapid Rail
LEAD: To the Editor:


Time Not Only Flies; It Crawls and Floats
LEAD: The chronograph, that high-tech icon of the 80's, is yesterday's news.
These days, the watches to have are sly parodies of both the concept of time and those who are slaves to it.


ARts Groups Listen and Wait
LEAD: ARTS administrators in the county have kept an ear tuned to Washington during their preparations for a new cultural season.
Their concern has been for the health and survival of the National Endowment for the Arts, whose fate has been the subject of heated Congressional debate.


As Giuliani Edges Right, His Party Is Skeptical
LEAD: RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI began last week to put together the pieces of a Republican Party shattered even more than usual by a bruising primary battle.


Sadism Seen In Johnson Rule
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Editors' Note
LEAD: A picture caption today on page 62 of The Business World, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about women and golf, identifies Susan Okon as an employee of Shearson Lehman Hutton.
After the article went to press, Ms.
Okon left that company.


3 Couples Make 'Baby' A Welcome Arrival
LEAD: EVERY parent knows the story of ''Baby,'' the musical by David Shire, Richard Maltby and Sybille Pearson now at the Arena Players' Main Stage Theater in East Farmingdale.
Every friend of every parent will recognize the characters in ''Baby.'' In fact, everyone who is or ever was a wanted baby from a middle-class home will find ''Baby'' recognizable.


On Noise Reform
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tests of Organisms With Altered Genes Gain Panel Support
LEAD: Field testing of genetically modified plants and microorganisms ''will not pose any hazard'' to the environment if done carefully under existing laws, a National Academy of Sciences panel has concluded.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Glimmer of Hope in Lebanon


The Tiniest Restaurant in New Canaan
LEAD: WHEN Paul L'Abbee, owner of L'Abbee Fine Catering in Scotts Corners, a hamlet in Pound Ridge, N.Y., decided to open a small retail store in New Canaan five months ago, he put in three tables and a few chairs for customers who wanted to sit a minute while ordering takeout salads, entrees and desserts.


U.S. Democrats Teach Politics to Hungarians
LEAD: In a lakeside resort owned by the Communist Party's elite guard, an offshoot of the American Democratic Party sent representatives recently to teach Hungarian opposition leaders techniques to help them take power from the Communists in coming elections.


MORE MONEY THAN ANYONE ELSE
LEAD:  FORTUNE'S CHILDREN  The Fall of the House of Vanderbilt.
By Arthur T. Vanderbilt 2d.
Illustrated. 496 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


Coffee Impasse Imperils Colombia's Drug Fight
LEAD: Since an international coffee agreement was suspended two months ago, prices have plunged more than 40 percent on Colombia's leading legal export.
Now many Colombians are saying that by allowing the collapse of the agreement, the United States has undercut its effort to encourage Colombia to fight production of its other major export, cocaine.


Review/Music; Young Chamber Group Illuminates the Present
LEAD: The Atlantic Sinfonietta, a three-year-old chamber group that specializes in new and unusual music, devoted its Wednesday evening concert at St.
Peter's Church to 20th-century works for flute, harp, strings and voice.
The performances were polished and expressive, and had an inner glow that cast a flattering light on the music at hand.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE CROWN: A Tale of Sir Gawein and King Arthur's Court.
By Heinrich von dem Turlin.
Translated by J. W. Thomas. (University of Nebraska, $25.) Readers accustomed to high-minded, nostalgic versions of the King Arthur tales may be surprised, amused, perhaps even shocked by this rollicking story by the 13th-century Austrian poet Heinrich von dem Turlin.


Newspaper Novels
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: 30-Year Tax-Exempt Bonds; A $22.8 Million A.S.P.C.A. Expansion
LEAD: The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, one of the nation's largest and oldest philanthropies, is to float $22.8 million in revenue bonds with the help of New York City to help pay for the largest expansion of its facilities in the metropolitan area in its 123-year history.
Under the unusual plan, the 30-year, tax-exempt, civic-facility bonds are to be issued next month by the New York Industrial Development Agency, with proceeds to be used to build two animal shelters in


Sincerest Flattery or the Subtlest Form of Dishonor?
LEAD: ThE Kimbell Art Museum is Texas's finest postwar building, and one of the nation's.
It is a late masterwork of the greatest architect of our time, Louis Kahn, and while it is not by any means a perfect museum, it is very nearly a perfect building.
Indeed, it is one of the few museums anywhere that would be pleasurable to visit even if it contained not a single work of art; Kahn's concrete vaults, washed with Texas sun filtered through curved metal reflectors, are at once gentle and powerful, serene and alive.


Suzanne Hooper, an Editor, Is Married
LEAD: Suzanne d'Harcourt Hooper, the managing editor of the publications program at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, and Michael Christie Huebsch, a vice president and senior portfolio manager at Blackstone Financial Management in New York, were married yesterday at St.
David's Episcopal Church in Wayne, Pa.


Transfer Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Man of Action and Uncommon Abilities
LEAD: He's big, rugged and speaks in a raspy voice.
So sometimes it's easy to forget that Nick Nolte is a skilled actor with a body of memorable films behind him and the uncommon abilities to be convincing as a man of action and a man of intellect and, when necessary, to rise above mediocre material.


Laura Mosedale, Writer, Marries
LEAD: Laura Paddock Mosedale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Munger Mosedale of New York and Star Island, Minn., was married yesterday to Matthew Mansfield Horgan, a son of John Poole Horgan 2d of New Canaan, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass., and the late Joan Horgan.
The Rev.
Guthrie Speers, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the New


Investors Confront a New Europe
LEAD: IMAGINE A EUROPE THAT RESEMBLES the United States, a continent in which people and goods move freely across state borders with nary a customs or immigration officer to interrupt the flow.


AFRICANS IN AWE OF THE CITY
LEAD:  THE SETTING SUN AND THE ROLLING WORLD  Selected Stories.
By Charles Mungoshi.  202 pp.
Boston:  Beacon Press.
Paper, $8.95.


Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:  Senate


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: If the ground is not too soggy, continue planting, especially perennials, new shrubs and young trees.
Start planting if bulbs are beginning to arrive from mail-order nurseries or buy early selections from garden centers; bulb planting will continue well into next month.
House plants should be indoors except Christmas cactus and jade plants, which remain outside so flower buds set.


Lessons Learned From a Silent Clock
LEAD: THE clock on my living-room wall is one of my favorite things.
It is a chime clock from Germany bought in 1971 from an elderly jeweler who lived with his wife in my hometown.


Dale Youngman Weds in Boston
LEAD: Dale Marie Youngman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel R. Youngman of Plymouth, Mass., and Matthew Kenan Green, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Green of Great Neck, L.I., were married last evening at the Gamble Building in Boston.
The ceremony was performed by Justice of the Peace Harry Wheeler.


Alexandra Goldsmith, Merchandiser, Is Married to Dr. J. Randall Forbes
LEAD: Alexandra Goldsmith, a daughter of Dr.
William M. Goldsmith and Dr.
Marianne G. Goldsmith of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
J.
Randall Forbes, the son of James Forbes of San Francisco and Janice Forbes Geil of Auburn, Calif.
The Rev.
John Schulle, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Federated Church in Edgartown,


Private Lives Exist Beyond Public Roles
LEAD: Growing up, I thought that to be successful, accepted or even loved, I had to win.
I had to be the best: altar boy, student, athlete.
And subtly, between the lines - it was never specifically addressed or expressed - I was taught that anything less was unacceptable.


Laurel Field and Joel Marcus Marry
LEAD: Laurel Beth Field, the daughter of Martin W. Field of Villanova, Pa., and the late June Kramer Field, and Joel Robert Marcus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ben Marcus of Brooklyn, were married last evening at the Valley Forge Hilton in King of Prussia, Pa.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony.


POSTINGS: 317 Montville Units; An Hour By Bus to Midtown
LEAD: The first 24 units of what is planned to be a 317-unit condominium development in Montville in Morris County, N.J., were put on sale this month and 20 have been sold.
Named Montville Chase, the development, at Changebridge Road and Church Lane, is to feature a variety of units ranging from one-bedroom apartments on a single floor to three-bedroom duplexes.


Christine Brunner Weds Scott Colby
LEAD: Christine Ann Brunner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Brunner of River Hills, Wis., and Bay Head, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Jordan Colby, the son of F. Jordan Colby of Sandy Hook, Conn., and Karen Colby of Bay Head.


Kossuth's Idea Is Timely
LEAD: Fissures in the Communist bloc are widening with stunning speed.
Who would have thought the new lineup would be Soviet-Polish-Hungarian reformers against East German-Czechoslovak-Rumanian orthodoxies, with Bulgaria mum?


Review/ Pop; Spontaneous Interaction in a Tribute
LEAD: As machine-made textures and jittery hip-hop rhythms make the sound of pop-soul music increasingly resemble a video-game arcade, good old-fashioned soul music is coming more and more to seem like a classic American style.


For the House, Painting by Numbers
LEAD: COLORS used to have names, not numbers.
Hamilton Blue.
Jamestown Blue.
Newburyport Blue.
Now those colors are No. 36, HC-148 and HC-155.
We learned how to play the color numbers game this summer when we painted the exterior of our house.


17 Killed and 38 Wounded In Rocket Attack on Kabul
LEAD: At least 17 people were killed and 38 wounded when rebels unleashed the most ferocious attack on the Afghan capital in weeks, hospital and Government officials said today.


Mixed-Race Generation Emerges but Is Not Sure Where It Fits
LEAD: Robin Tarver dreads the arrival of the first form, perhaps a school application, perhaps a medical certificate, that will ask her to list her daughter's race.
She knows that 2-year-old Ryan Jean's curly black hair, black eyes and sandy-brown skin mark her as black, in traditional American terms.
But ''to call her black denies what she gets from me,'' said Mrs.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: Minimalism continues to thrive even though it is never likely to win its upholders a great following among the fans.
Yet there is something fascinating to see how little an outstanding minimalist needs to win a game.
Besides, the top minimalists win a lot.


The Bridges Between Able and Disabled
LEAD: I AM a 40-year-old physically disabled woman.
I've been disabled since birth and get around on crutches or in a wheelchair.
I have an undergraduate degree in sociology and a graduate degree in education, and I'm employed as a switchboard operator at the headquarters of a local bank.
I enjoy going out with friends, writing and listening to soft rock music.


1-Yard Touchdown Lifts Penn State
LEAD: Tony Sacca overcame a mediocre passing day on a 1-yard rollout touchdown with 44 seconds left to give Penn State a 7-3 victory over Boston College today.


Detective Held as Shooting Ends Police Party
LEAD: A promotion party for a newly appointed police detective ended early yesterday with another officer firing his shotgun at a guest he had fought with minutes earlier, the police said.


Berlin's Work Is Recalled With Words and Music
LEAD: The marquee lights of Broadway playhouses were dimmed before curtain time last night in memory of Irving Berlin, the songwriter whose tunes were heard in nearly a score of shows over the decades and who died on Friday at the age of 101.


Warriors Sign Blab
LEAD: The Golden State Warriors, who already have three 7-footers scheduled for camp, have signed Uwe Blab, an unrestricted free agent, to a one-year contract.
Terms of the contract were undisclosed, but the 7-foot-1-inch Blab made $280,000 last season as a center with the Dallas Mavericks.


Quebec Separatists Jockey for 90's Power Play
LEAD: Jacques Parizeau, leader of Quebec's separatist Parti Quebecois, leaned into a microphone here this week and offered a familiar vision of the predominantly French-speaking province as a sovereign state.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  GIDEON AHOY!
By William Mayne.  156 pp.
New York:  Delacorte Press. $13.95.  (Ages 11 and up)


As Vietnamese Withdraw, Cambodians Fear Intensified Civil War


No Regrets For Thrift
LEAD: The drawl on the other end of the line sounded like Syd Thrift's.
It spoke of baseball and games as if nothing had changed, as if he were still a part of it, even though he hasn't been since Aug. 30, the day he resigned as the Yankees' senior vice president of baseball operations and returned home to Fairfax,


Yankee Affair Captures The Man o' War by 5 1/2
LEAD: Yankee Affair, who was beaten by just a length after a wide trip in the Arlington Million three weeks ago, found a soft Belmont Park turf course and a softer field to his liking yesterday and bounded away to a 5 1/2-length victory in the $470,400 Man o' War Stakes.


Lisa C. Semmes Wed To Lorren Ray Elkins
LEAD: At the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I., Lisa Chenoweth Semmes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Warner Lewis Semmes of Garden City, was married yesterday to Lorren Ray Elkins, the son of Margit Seligman Elkins of Manchester, Conn., and Clifford Elkins of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.


Characters Shine In 'Tom Jones'
LEAD: ISN'T it rash of the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival to take on a panoramic period piece that demands fluidity of movement, elegance of decor, an intrinsic lightness of touch and consistency of style?
It isn't likely that even an occasional visitor to the festival's performances of its namesake playwright would consider those among the company's graces.


Review/ Theater; Faust and the Devil Go to Heaven
LEAD: Faust and Mephistopheles go to heaven together, embraced by God, in Else Lasker-Schuler's ''I &amp; I,'' a wild play that upends not only Goethe but also many Western literary, religious and historical traditions.
Lasker-Schuler, a Jewish poet who fled Germany when the Nazis took over in 1933, wrote the play in Jerusalem in the early 40's and was still revising it when she died in 1945.


Israelis Training Groups of Arabs To Halt Uprising
LEAD: Palestinian residents in this city and several nearby villages say groups of Arabs armed and trained by the Israeli military have formed loose militias and are regularly assaulting their neighbors, bolstering the army's effort to quash the Palestinian uprising.


WHO'S WHO IN ISLAMBAD
LEAD:  BREAKING THE CURFEW  A Political Journey Through Pakistan.
By Emma Duncan.  313 pp.
New York: Michael Joseph/Viking. $22.95.


Campus Life: Pennsylvania; Coffee, Bagels And a Side of Art At a Student Cafe
LEAD: When Sydney Thornbury, a University of Pennsylvania senior, moved into her freshman dormitory in 1987, all she and her father, Will, wanted after a day of unpacking was a good cup of coffee in a relaxing place.
But after searching, the Los Angeles native finally settled for a nondescript restaurant.


Linda H. Riefler Weds C. L. Boyatt
LEAD: Linda Hawley Riefler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Brown Riefler of Glen Cove, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher Lynn Boyatt, a son of Mary Freedman Boyatt of Tucson, Ariz., and Ambassador Thomas David Boyatt of Great Falls, Va., at the home of the bride's parents.
The Rev.
Sandra Olsen, a minister of the United Church of


HAUNTED WORDS
LEAD: Richard Lederer's entertaining column ''Haunted Words'' (On Language, Sept. 3) fails to mention one hardy perennial among bogus word derivations: the one that traces tip, in the sense of gratuity, to the phrase ''to insure promptness.'' Actually, there's no acronym involved; the word simply reflects the fact that 18th-century pub habitues used to ''tip'' (i.e., tap) a coin on the counter when it came time to settle up with the gentleman in the apron.


Hugo Is the Latest Episode of Weather In the Extreme
LEAD: FROM the great drought and heat wave of 1988 to the monster hurricane that smashed Charleston, S.C., on Thursday and Friday, the last 16 months have brought a startling sequence of out-of-the-ordinary weather to the United States.


Holden Caulfield's Subversive Message Is Distrust of Adults
LEAD: To the Editor:


Don't Blame Johnny Carson
LEAD: To the Editor:


Works in Progress; Avanti
LEAD: TRAVELERS TO ROME HAVE long known that when their flights land, their journeys aren't over.
An hour from town if the traffic is cooperative, the airport has never been joined to the city's rail system.
Next year, however, after seven years of construction, the Italian State Railway Company expects to open a 26-kilometer stretch of track that will connect Leonardo da Vinci Airport with Ostiense station, near St.


Taking Liberties?
LEAD: Just when Richard M. Nixon was hoping it was safe to turn on the television again, he got wind of yet another Watergate movie in the works.
For months, Mr.
Nixon's lawyers tried to persuade ABC not to broadcast the program, ''The Final Days,'' based on the 1976 book by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein that turned a harsh light on end of the Nixon Presidency.


C.W. Post Upsets Hofstra by 23-14
LEAD: Dave Shanahan rushed for a school-record 197 yards in 43 carries and scored on a 2-yard run as C. W. Post upset previously undefeated Hofstra, 23-14, yesterday at Hickox Field in Brookville, L.I.


Yankees Help Out Orioles Cause
LEAD: The news that arrived from Milwaukee buoyed them in the late afternoon.
Then tonight, the Baltimore Orioles, perhaps rejuvenated by a Toronto Blue Jays defeat, made the race in the American League East even tighter.


In Search of Sovereignty: The Cambodian Torment
LEAD: Nov. 9, 1953 The kingdom of Cambodia, with Prince Norodom Sihanouk as monarch, is established as an independent state, effectively ending French control.
Over the next 15 years, Prince Sihanouk struggles to maintain Cambodia's precarious neutrality.
August 1969 The American-backed Marshal Lon Nol becomes Prime Minister under Prince Sihanouk, who delegates much of his power to the general.


Miss Enders Wed To Peter Soriano
LEAD: Alexandra Eustis Enders, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Talcott Enders of New York, was married in New London, Conn., to Peter Fernando Soriano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jose M. Soriano of Greenwich, Conn., on Sept. 9.
Msgr.
Paul J. St.
Onge performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Harkness Chapel of Connecticut


BUSH ASKS ACTION AGAINST ABORTION
LEAD: President Bush urged a group of Roman Catholic lawyers and judges today to link hiring and promotions to community service and to step up their efforts against abortion.


SCHOOL SPANKING DEBATED AS ABUSE
LEAD: When Gerald Winsett, a junior high school principal, paddled a 13-year-old boy in May, he thought he had simply done his job in accordance with state law, which permits corporal punishment.


Miss Kelty Weds Charles Law Jr.
LEAD: Susan Ellen Kelty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Kelty of Bronxville, N.Y., and Shelter Harbor, R.I., and Charles Blair Law Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Blair Law of Lyons Falls, N.Y., were married in Bronxville yesterday.
Msgr.
Patrick J. Sheridan officiated at St.
Joseph Roman Catholic Church.


'Balance' Is Boring
LEAD: To the Editor As former chairman of the department of communications at C.C.N.Y., as former director of programming at WNET, as one of the producers of a new series on civil liberties and as a Jew, I was interested in Walter Goodman's discussion of the ''Days of Rage''  [ ''Public TV Juggles a Hot Potato,'' Sept.


Cunningham Draws All Eyes to Him
LEAD: On a muggy September night with the moon over Miami, the Philadelphia Eagles finished their preseason schedule by edging the Miami Dolphins.
The Eagles were dressing in their locker room, scurrying to return to Philadelphia to continue earnest work on a season full of promise.


A CAR IS NOT A HOME
LEAD:  THE HISTORY OF LUMINOUS MOTION  By Scott Bradfield.  274 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


A Tune-Up For The Market
LEAD: THE ECONOMIC MOOD IS CHANGING.
We see it in the public reaction to the Exxon Valdez oil spill and the company's initial skirt-lifting response.
We find it again in the public and Congressional outrage over the sleaze in the savings and loan industry and the Pentagon scandals, not to mention Wall Street, where Masters of the


Traffic Tie-Up Expected at Bush's U. N. Visit
LEAD: Massive traffic snarls are expected in Manhattan tomorrow, when President Bush comes to address the 44th meeting of the United Nations General Assembly.


A Storehouse of Public Opinion
LEAD: A broadcast reporter called the Roper Center for Public Opinion Research in Storrs, the largest collection of national and international poll questions, to confirm a report.
Could the center provide statistics supporting the contention that for the first time a majority of Americans say they favor a woman's right to an abortion?


Susan S. Lloyd, Designer, Weds John W. Karrel
LEAD: Susan Storrs Lloyd, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Lloyd of Palm Beach, Fla., and Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to John Whipple Karrel, the son of Frances Whipple Karrel of West Redding, Conn., and the late Oscar Karrel.
The Rev.
Loring S. Ensign of the Southport Congregational Church performed the ceremony at the Southport home of the bride's parents.


Miss Dunne Weds Engineer
LEAD: Sheila Mary Dunne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Joseph Dunne of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Elizardi Rogan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William David Rogan of Bellevue, Wash.
Msgr.
Donald J. Pryor officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Rogan, 25 years old, is an operations supervisor at Smith Barney Harris Upham &amp; Company, the brokerage concern in New York.


Catherine Amdur Weds Scot Small
LEAD: The First Presbyterian Church in Red Bank, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Catherine Richardson Amdur, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Allen Amdur of Allenhurst, N.J., to Scot McCauley Small.
The bridegroom is a son of Francis M. Small Jr. of Aptos, Calif., and Karna Small of Washington.


Image-Makers In Takeover Land
LEAD: ON THE AFTERNOON OF Tuesday, June 6, Lawrence A. Rand, a partner and senior vice president of the Manhattan public relations firm of Kekst &amp; Company, was driving home to Westchester County with his son, Allan. ''My car phone rang at Madison and 51st,'' he recalls. ''It was Glenn Britt, the chief financial officer of Time Inc.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  LONG WHARF AT 25


The Democrats Struggle, but Energetically
LEAD: THE capital echoes these days with the clash of a newly assertive Democratic Congress and an amiable but equally unyielding President.


FASHION: Browsing On Lower Fifth; New Word for Shopping: Flatiron
LEAD: The Flatiron district, bounded by Broadway on the east, Seventh Avenue on the west and 23d and 14th Streets on the north and south, may become to the 90's what SoHo and Columbus Avenue were to the 80's -New York's hottest shopping area.
Named for the 1902 Flatiron Building, on 23d Street where Fifth Avenue and Broadway meet, the district, and especially its showcase stretch of Fifth Avenue, offers clothing from the inexpensive to the eyebrow-raising.


Robert M. Gray, Ad Executive, 85
LEAD: Robert M. Gray, an advertising executive who devised the ''Tiger in Your Tank'' gasoline campaign for Exxon in the mid-1960's, died Friday at the Twelve Oaks Hospital in Houston.
He was 85 years old and lived in Houston.


The Portable Mac: Sharp, but Heavy
LEAD: The road was long and hard, but Apple Computer Inc.'s portable Macintosh finally completed its journey to computer stores last week.
Apple resisted the temptation to name its machine the Mac IIgo, settling instead for the uninspired Macintosh Portable.
At its introduction here, the computer was greeted with what can only be described as enthusiastic ambivalence.


Asbestos Removal In Perspective
LEAD: The article ''Schools to Spend Millions to Comply With Asbestos Law''  [ Sept. 10 ]  accurately indicates the problems, both financial and practical, that schools are having in complying with the Environmental Protection Agency's regulation of the Federal law.


Rapid Rail
LEAD: To the Editor:


A BATTLE FOR BRANDS PROPELS BUYOUTS
LEAD: The consolidation among fragrance makers over the past year has dramatically reordered the industry.
For instance, Unilever PLC, the Anglo-Dutch consumer products conglomerate, entered the market in 1987 and is now the nation's third-largest fragrance producer.
Over the last few years, Avon Products Inc., the market leader, has moved even farther ahead of its closest competitor, Estee Lauder.


Vanished Monuments to Argentine Austerity
LEAD: People turning out to enjoy the sun in the parks and plazas of Buenos Aires in the Southern Hemisphere's first week of spring had an unpleasant surprise: Several statues and other sculptures had been stolen.


Landscape Photography As Envisioned by Women
LEAD: A SHOW that comes to Lehman College Art Gallery from the Tweed Art Museum in Duluth, Minn., ''Reclaiming Paradise,'' is a selection of landscapes by 20 female photographers.


ISLAND HERITAGE
LEAD:  THE LINE OF THE SUN  By Judith Ortiz Cofer.  291 pp.
Athens, Ga.:  The University of Georgia Press. $19.95.


Right Change for Small Change
LEAD: The 35th Congress had the good sense to abolish the half-penny in 1857.
The 101st should do likewise with the penny.
But that's not what Congress has in mind.
A House subcommittee will vote this week on a bill the Senate has already passed, to make U.S. coins look more ''patriotic.'' Why not make them more practical?


Rainmaker: Mario Baeza Of Devevoise
LEAD: MARIO BAEZA LOOKS TROUBLED.
IT IS A GRAY Tuesday morning in June and Baeza, a partner at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York, is sitting with a group of his colleagues in his 22d floor office, a diamond-shaped room with a dramatic view of Third Avenue.


HERE COMES NORDSTROM
LEAD: My husband and I had the opportunity to experience ''the gospel according to Nordstrom'' (''Watch Out Macy's, Here Comes Nordstrom,'' by Richard W. Stevenson, Aug. 27) on a recent visit to Portland, Ore.


H. F. Kean Wed To Edith Bacon
LEAD: At St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Lithgow, N.Y., Edith Williamson Bacon and Hamilton F. Kean were married yesterday by the Rev.
Brewster Beach.
The bride is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David Williamson of Chestertown, Md.
Mr.
Kean, a brother of Gov.
Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey, is a son of the late Representative and Mrs.


The Best Way To Hear Jazz Is to See It
LEAD: To learn the mechanics of jazz, there's nothing like recordings.
Over repeated playing, every note can be caught, every harmony parsed.
But unlike symphonic music, which can be perfected in recordings, or rock, which is often born and nurtured on tape, jazz has not let itself be reduced to its sounds.


What Happens When Prodigies Grow Up
LEAD: Ever since the rise of public concerts in the 18th century, child prodigies have been a regular part of the music scene.
By the 1760's, Leopold Mozart was hauling his son Wolfgang around Europe, impressing court and commoner alike with the youngster's artistic prowess.
Of course, Wolfgang was treated as a glorified carnival act, a musical freak of nature.


MONEY MAKES LOVE GO ROUND
LEAD:  LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS  By Lisa Zeidner.  256 pp.
San Francisco:  North Point Press. $18.95.


Suburbs Try Their Own Kind Of Drug War In the Schools
LEAD: CONFRONTED with a growing responsibility to warn children about drugs, schools in the New York metropolitan region have reached beyond normal channels for help.


Towns Ordering Drug Tests as Hiring Prerequisite
LEAD: WHEN Carnell Foskey was hired last July as executive assistant to the Supervisor of the Town of Hempstead, he took a drug test as part of the physical examination for employment.


CRIME
LEAD: Early in Martha Grimes's 10th mystery, THE OLD SILENT (Little, Brown, $18.95), Richard Jury of Scotland Yard finds himself in need of ''a calm book'' - something to stave off one of those bouts of melancholy to which this romantic detective is inclined, and to ease the bleakness of a winter's day in Yorkshire.


Architects Must Listen to the Melody
LEAD: Goethe once described architecture as frozen music; if he was right, could cities be described as congealed concertos?
Maybe this is stretching an already flimsy metaphor, but music, architecture and cities do share one striking characteristic.
Just as agreeable music requires both solo and ensemble playing, and great architecture needs expanses of serenity to provide the setting for moments of soaring drama so, too, successful cities demand an underlying melody.


Sports of The Times; One Baseball Man Who Got His Chance
LEAD: The way it works in Cito Gaston's career, opportunity doesn't just knock, it drives up to the curb and puts on the emergency brake.


Benching Urged For Power Nouns
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


TOUGH RED UNION
LEAD: UPHEAVAL IN THE QUIET ZONE  A History of Hospital Workers' Union, Local 1199.
By Leon Fink and  Brian Greenberg.
Illustrated.  298 pages.
Urbana:  University of Illinois Press.
Cloth, $24.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Give Japan a Target and Say 'Import!'
LEAD: Japanese tariff rates are only 6.4 percent, even lower than those of the United States, Canada or the European Community.
But even so,, gaining market access in Japan is an experience not unlike attaining justice in Franz Kafka's novel ''The Trial.''


Sarah Watson Weds Joseph Anderson
LEAD: Sarah Ann Watson, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Watson of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Joseph Michael Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harley T. Anderson of Binghamton, N.Y., at the Inn on Lake Waramaug in New Preston, Conn.
The Rev.
Laura Hiller Brumbaugh, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.


Nebraska Trounces Minnesota by 48-0
LEAD: Ken Clark ran 18 times for 100 yards and 2 touchdowns today as Nebraska avoided a slow start for the first time this season and continued its 27-year domination of Minnesota, beating the Gophers, 48-0.


TALKING: Interim Leases; Handle With Caution
LEAD: ANYONE seeking to buy an apartment this fall in a New York City rental building undergoing conversion into a cooperative or condominium is likely to be offered an ''interim lease.''


Pretoria Stops Anti-Apartheid March
LEAD: After tolerating technically illegal demonstrations for the last week and a half, the Government today cracked down on protest against apartheid by preventing a huge march by black and white women through the South African capital.


Review/Theater; Revising History of Lincoln
LEAD: The great American game of discovering the ''real'' assassin of a President or other major public figure is stretched to its most absurd limit in ''The Man Who Shot Lincoln,'' a play by Luigi Creatore that opened Thursday night at the Astor Place Theater.


Dr. Helain Landy To Wed a Lawyer
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Helain J. Landy and Eli J. Dicker, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Herman Dicker of Flushing, Queens, has been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
David Landy of Cranbury, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.


Big 2d Quarter for Clemson
LEAD: Wesley McFadden scored on runs of 6 and 12 yards, and Mitch Belton started a 21-point second quarter with a blocked punt as Clemson defeated Maryland today, 31-7.


Shirley Stevens Marries
LEAD: Shirley Stevens, the benefits coordinator at the Westin Hotel in Boston, and Otto F. Sperka, the hotel's director of guest services, were married yesterday at the Mead Memorial Chapel in Waccabuc, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eleanore W. Drury, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''However disastrous the hurricane was, it may have had one healthy result.
It hopefully will help rein in some of the unwise development we have had along the coast.''
- Gered Lennon
of the South Carolina
Coastal Council.  [ 1:6. ]


Bill Barron, Tenor Saxophonist, Composer and Teacher, Dies at 62
LEAD: Bill Barron, a saxophonist, composer and professor of music at Wesleyan University, died of cancer Thursday in Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 62 years old and lived in Middletown.


'I Just Got Married . . . '
LEAD: To the Editor:


SPEAKING THE PRINCE'S ENGLISH
LEAD: BRITAIN'S PRINCE OF Wales, Prince Charles, for the last several years the battering scourge of the post-modernist architects, has been speaking his mind on another serious matter.
He has been commenting on the way the citizens of today's Britain speak and write their own language. ''Bloody badly,'' is his royal conclusion.


Using Social Security Checks for Greater Need
LEAD: People who do not need their Social Security payments to live on are being asked to give them to charity under a novel fund-raising strategy being introduced by United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York.


Ferry Makes Debut
LEAD: When Il Messaggero Roma defeated Vismara Cantu, 90-86, yesterday, most of the Italian basketball league game's attention was focused on Danny Ferry and Brian Shaw, the young American stars who defected from the National Basketball Association.
In his first regular-season game for the Rome-based team, Ferry, the No.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-20


Prospects; When Jaguar Is the Prey
LEAD: Last week the Ford Motor Company announced plans to acquire up to 15 percent of Jaguar P.L.C., the British maker of prestige automobiles.
The offer was not welcomed by Jaguar, whose stock in London rose from $6.40 on Monday to $9.18 on Friday.
The company is currently valued at about $1.68 billion.


The Mystery Of the Single Shoe
LEAD: I never realized that others were intrigued by the mystery of shoes on highways, streets and country roads.
But for the record, it isn't always just one shoe found sitting in pristine solitude.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Lendl Is Upset by Gomez: Andres Gomez of Ecuador, ranked 30th in the world, upset Ivan Lendl, the world's No. 1 player, 1-6, 7-6, 9-7, yesterday in the semifinals of the Count of Godo tournament in Barcelona, Spain.
Gomez will face Horst Skoff of Austria in today's final of the clay court event.


The Riches of Those Who Sought Refuge
LEAD: ''The Exiles,'' Richard Kaplan's two-hour documentary on Channel 13 tonight at 7, uses as its spoken epigraph a poem that begins, ''We are the last ones.
Question us.'' Although delivered by an actress in an offputtingly affected way, the poem, written by Hans Sahl, one of the hundreds of intellectuals, scholars and artists who found their way to America from Nazi-dominated Europe, is on the mark.


Campus Life: Villanova; Living Off Campus Could Be Tougher In Two Townships
LEAD: Responding to complaints of parking problems, loud parties and more Villanova students living in one house than the law allows, the Haverford Township Planning Commission voted unanimously this month to restrict off-campus housing for students.


2 Die in Grain Elevator Blast
LEAD: A grain elevator exploded in this southwestern Minnesota town Friday, killing 2 people and injuring t3.
The cause of the explosion was not immediately known.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $162,000  477 First Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, pool; taxes $4,200.
Farmingdale  $194,000  324 Vancott Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, partial basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.


Grandma and the Modern Baby
LEAD: I STILL have not recovered from the aura of my youngest son, Paul, being a father to little Sarah Seymour.
I enjoyed him as a child so very much, and now, at age 27, he and his wife, Jane, are proud and dedicated parents.


SOVIET PARLIAMENT TO WEIGH A PLAN FOR RIVAL PARTIES
LEAD: An official working group of the Soviet legislature has drafted a law that would legalize the creation of alternative political parties and give them equal rights with the Communist Party, according to those involved in the project.


Marchers Protest Bail for Suspects in Slaying
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton led 100 demonstrators yesterday through Bensonhurst and past the homes of several defendants in the racial killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins to protest their release on bail.


Moscow Sets Aside Big Obstacle to Arms Treaty
LEAD: The new strategic arms control initiative put forth by the Soviet Union here on Friday appears to remove the principal obstacle to a treaty on reducing long-range nuclear weapons.


Honey, They Shrunk the Camcorder
LEAD: Sony's obsessive penchant for miniaturization has found formidable expression in its CCD-TR5 camcorder.
It's the smallest and lightest yet.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My redwood deck is in the shade, and after heavy rain the wood gets slimy and slippery.
I have a similar problem with a blacktop tennis court.
What can I do?


Commuter Misses the IRT
LEAD: SURELY this can't be me at 7:39 on a Monday morning, panting after a mad dash through closing doors amid a crowd of suits and briefcases and Wall Street Journals.
Shouldn't I be in bed at this time, with no pressure to rise for at least another 15 minutes?
But that was before I became . . .
Commuting


Melissa Lesbines, A Pianist, Marries
LEAD: Melissa Ann Lesbines, a concert pianist, was married yesterday to John Anthony Cheek, a founding member of the Omni Ensemble chamber music group in Brooklyn and a piano teacher at Concordia College in Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert O'Connor performed the ceremony at Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church in Wethersfield,


Promising Treatment for Skin Wounds
LEAD: MR.
W., a 69-year-old resident of Centereach, has been a diabetic for 20 years.
This year, he has had several diabetic skin ulcers, or surface wounds, on his legs and feet that have resisted healing as a result of the poor blood flow and nerve damage caused by the disease.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Holden Caulfield's Subversive Message Is Distrust of Adults; Patterns of His Mind
LEAD: To the Editor:


Playwriting and the Creative Process
LEAD: ONE morning last month in a rehearsal studio on the campus of Princeton University, a playwright, a couple of actors and a director were sitting around, talking about a scene.
It concerned a retired, widowed teacher on the brink of suicide.
His colleague and best friend, a homosexual, tries to talk him out of it, and offers to move in with him.


Plumbing the Unknown in South Africa
LEAD: AT his inauguration as President of South Africa last week, F. W. de Klerk assured his country and the world that an era of change lay ahead after four decades of apartheid.
President de Klerk cast his inaugural address as a ''message of hope'' to a multiracial constituency whom he defined as ''all sensible South Africans'' and ''all reasonable people'' prepared to join his


Review/Opera; New Staging of 'Lulu'
LEAD: The San Francisco Opera's new production of Alban Berg's ''Lulu'' counts as Lotfi Mansouri's 42d with the company, but his first since he became its new general director.
When he was appointed to the job, he indicated that he would play down stage direction and concentrate on administration.
Given the disappointing flatness of this ''Lulu,'' seen


Brazil Team Captures a World Bridge Title
LEAD: After a day of wildly oscillating play, Brazil won the world contract bridge team championship for the N.E.C.
Bermuda Bowl here this afternoon.
This was the first time in the 40-year history of the event that a third world team has captured the title, though the Brazilians have won other world titles.


Review/Cabaret; Sondheim in Vignettes
LEAD: When Helen Schneider performs ''Broadway Baby,'' the show-stopping centerpiece of her cabaret act, ''Schneider Sings Sondheim'' at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, the tuxedo-clad singer suddenly becomes a doe-eyed flapper flaunting a New York street-moll accent and a mock ingenuousness that only partly conceals a ruthless ambition.


A MANLY MAN THAKES HIS ACT ON THE ROAD
LEAD:  KEEP THE CHANGE  By Thomas McGuane.  230 pp.
Boston:  Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin.


Christopher Who?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Noli Weds Brian Silverman
LEAD: Suzanne Noli, a daughter of Mary Noli of Sayville, L.I., and the late Robert Noli, was married yesterday to Brian Silverman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Silverman of White Plains.
Judge Arthur Kellman of White Plains City Court officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


WILLIE HORTON AND ME
LEAD: I am a black male of a slightly earlier generation than Anthony Walton (''Willie Horton and Me,'' by Anthony Walton, Aug. 20).
I, too, was born of a background of Southern sharecroppers.
My father was able to leave his father's sharecropping home under protest (he was the oldest male and he was, therefore, a valuable resource on the farm).


LOUD AND SILENT
LEAD:  LESSONS IN LAUGHTER  The Autobiography of a Deaf Actor.
By Bernard Bragg as signed to Eugene Bergman.
Illustrated. 219 pp.
Washington:  Gallaudet University Press. $17.95.


HERE COME NORDSTROM
LEAD: As a transplant from the East Coast, I found it hard, at first, making the adjustment to friendly smiles and good service when I moved to Seattle.
Now I'm a ''local Seattlelite''; I wait for traffic lights to change before crossing the street and I'm accustomed to excellent service at Nordstrom.


Hot or Not, Partygoers Dance The Night Away
LEAD: The hottest party of the week, literally, was the New York Philharmonic's opening-night Viennese Ball on Wednesday in a mammoth tent in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
The 1,100 guests, wearing the requested black and white, found themselves in a sumptuous setting without air-conditioning.
The tent's sides could not be rolled up, and the guests started to melt.


Acting Out Conflicts In the Workplace
LEAD: HOW do you boss around a friend?
Not easily, say the experts.
Yet increasing numbers of companies routinely promote employees from within, without realizing that new managers and supervisors need some special training in order to deal with former peers successfully, said Robert M. Steed, whose business is developing training programs for corporate clients.


The U.N., Resuscitated, Feels Like What It Was Meant to Be
LEAD: WHEN President Bush steps up to a green marble podium here Monday to address the United Nations General Assembly, his audience will be listening attentively for signs that the United States now wholeheartedly backs a stronger role for the organization in maintaining peace and resolving problems in the world.


Rapid Rail
LEAD: To the Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:  NONFICTION PARSON'S MILL.
By Timothy Lewontin. (University Press of New England, $14.95.) A delightful, surprisingly absorbing account of a year's labor in a New Hampshire sawmill, ''Parson's Mill'' approaches the gung-ho participatory journalism that George Plimpton performed in his athletic days.


Andre Blumenthal, 85, Textile Executive
LEAD: Andre Blumenthal, a retired textile executive and civic leader, died of cancer Friday at his home in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 85 years old.


TWO YEARS IN A CANOE
LEAD:  PADDLE TO THE AMAZON  By Don Starkell.
Edited by Charles Wilkins.
Illustrated. 319 pp.
Rocklin, Calif.:  Prima Publishing &amp; Communications/  St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


ONCE BITTEN, TWICE SHY
LEAD: GENERAL ELECTRIC HAS UN-leashed Nipper, the terrier that for so many years graced the labels of RCA Records.


DISTORTIONS IN THE GLASS
LEAD:  APPLAUSE  By Carol Muske.  53 pp.
Pittsburgh:  University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $16.95; Paper, $8.95.
DIEN CAI DAU  By Yusef Komunyakaa.  64 pp.
Middletown, Conn.:  Wesleyan University Press.
Cloth, $18; Paper, $9.95.


Sudden Support for National Health Care
LEAD: PROPOSALS that might once have been denounced as socialized medicine or ignored as too costly are now getting serious consideration in Washington, with various plans for insuring America's health receiving the support of labor, industry and the medical establishment.


'Active' Speakers Have Their Needs
LEAD: It may never spark a widespread trend, but a rising number of serious audio fans are opting for loudspeakers that contain their own built-in amplifiers.
Called ''active'' speakers, such designs aim at the specific matching of speakers and amplifiers within a single structural unit.
As one engineer explains it, ''In an active speaker, the amplifier knows the speaker it is driving.


Miss Solomon, Writer, Marries
LEAD: Deborah Solomon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Solomon of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening at the Metropolitan Club in New York to Dr.
Kent Sepkowitz, a son of Dr.
Samuel Sepkowitz of Oklahoma City and the late Enid Sepkowitz.
Rabbi Levy Derby officiated.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:  Out Cold  1988.
HBO. $89.99.
Laser disk, $39.95.
Closed captioned. 1 hour 31 minutes.
R.
Malcolm Mowbray's essentially British comedy, which just happens to be set in California, is about two butchers, business partners and friends, Dave (John Lithgow) and Ernie (Bruce McGill) - Ernie is frozen to death in a meat locker- plus Ernie's dangerously pragmatic wife (Teri Garr).


Don DeLillo Wins Irish Fiction Prize
LEAD: Don DeLillo was awarded the first International Fiction Prize on Monday at a ceremony in Dublin.
The award, worth about $54,000, was presented to Mr.
DeLillo for ''Libra,'' his novel about the assassination of President Kennedy, which was published last year by Viking.


Managing Musical Superstars
LEAD: YO-YO MA SITS IN THE OFFICE OF HIS MANAGER, Lee Lamont, taking notes on a yellow legal pad.
The slim, bespectacled cellist has flown to New York from Boston to talk with Lamont, who has orchestrated his rise to stardom, about his plans for a two-part television special.
Ma reels off a long list of artists to whom he has written, inviting them to appear on the shows, which will explore how music is created and performed.


Insisting On Disaster
LEAD: William Bennett, the Bush drug czar, thinks the United States made a mistake when it repealed Prohibition in 1933.
We would be better off if it were a crime to buy a drink.


Pitchers' Duel Fizzles As Mets Clobber Expos
LEAD: The pitchers their teams acquired at great cost to pitch them to the National League East championship opposed each other yesterday in a game that had no impact on the division race.


Andrea Fry Weds Richard R. Blake In Pennsylvania
LEAD: Andrea Victoria Fry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Fry of Reading, Pa., was married yesterday to Richard Randolph Blake Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Blake of Chestnut Hill, Pa.
The Rev.
Walter Krieger performed the ceremony at the Christ Episcopal Church in Reading.


On Language; Drug-War Lingo
LEAD: IN THE &gt;CRACKDOWN on &gt;crack and other drugs, there may be no &gt;magic bullet, but &gt;drug kingpins, narco-terrorists and even &gt;casual users - not to mention &gt;carpers on the sidelines - can expect &gt;zero tolerance.


A Sweet Jewish New Year
LEAD: ROSH HA-SHANAH, the Jewish New Year, begins Friday evening.
One symbolic food for the holiday is honey, which signifies a sweet New Year.


From the Classical Guitar To a New African Sound
LEAD: THIS season the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society, founded in 1985, has almost doubled its concert schedule, to more than 100 events throughout the greater Hartford area.
As a result, the society is now one of the largest nonprofit guitar organizations in the United States, as well as one of the country's most active presenters of classical guitar concerts.


Gary Killian Wed To Julia Powers
LEAD: Julia Beston Powers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Powers of Weston, Conn., was married there yesterday to Gary Michael Killian, a son of Mrs.
Kenneth Sumwalt of Olmsted Falls, Ohio, and James Killian of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Robert Franklin officiated at St.
Francis of Assisi Roman Catholic Church, assisted by Msgr.


Brewers Use Power and Pitching to Thwart Jays
LEAD: Paul Molitor is hitting better than he has all season at a time when the Milwaukee Brewers have no margin for error, no second chances, no time for hesitation.


Bittersweet Freedom
LEAD: For 250 days he was No. 78900316, housed in the ''celebrity wing'' of the New York City jail on Rikers Island.
Now free, Bernhard H. Goetz hopes to put all that behind him.
Since 1974, when he shot four young men on a subway because, he said, he thought they were going to rob him, Mr.
Goetz has been praised as a hero and condemned as a villain.


McEnroe Praised For Team Style
LEAD: To The Sports Editor:


Caring for Finished Wood Floors
LEAD: FINISHED wood floors are durable and easy to care for.
With regular maintenance and prompt repair when necessary, they will retain their original appearance for many years.


Systematics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systematics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
53,716,000
47,072,000
Net inc
4,254,000
3,652,000
Share earns
.38
.33
Shares outst
11,305,000
11,299,000


Sunday Silence Is Derby Victor
LEAD: Sunday Silence took the lead on the backstretch today, then charged home alone for a six-length victory in the $1 million Super Derby and his first triumph since winning the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness.


Miss Vagelos Weds Dr. W. G. Roberts
LEAD: The marriage of Cynthia Marianthe Vagelos, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
P.
Roy Vagelos of Watchung, N.J., and Dr.
William G. Roberts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce F. Roberts of Purchase, N.Y., took place yesterday.
Rabbi Alfred Landsberg and the Rev.
John Poulos, a Greek Orthodox priest, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N


Outdoors: Fly-Fishing for Atlantic Salmon
LEAD: FROM the porch of the Black Rapids Fishing Lodge, I watched the Miramichi slide seaward in the moonlight and was content.


Haiti Planning to Hold General Election in '90
LEAD: The military Government announced today that Haiti will hold a general election next year, transferring power to a civilian President.


3Com Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 3Com Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
89,113,000
82,047,000
Net inc
1,228,000
7,131,000
Share earns
.04
.25
Shares outst
29,012,000
28,569,000


Furnishings 2000 reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Furnishings 2000
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
117,811,000
108,237,000
Net loss
10,677,000
2,671,000


Lukewarm in the Drug Capital
LEAD: In Medellin, home of Colombia's most brutal cocaine cartel, many people are reluctant recruits in the Government's war on drugs.
Page A8.


Market Place; Nuclear Write-Off To Success Story
LEAD: THE recent history of the CMS Energy Corporation is something of a Cinderella story.
Five years ago the company's main asset, a nuclear power plant under construction in Michigan, became entangled in regulatory and financial disputes and construction problems.
Financial disaster seemed imminent when it abandoned the nuclear plant after spending $4.1 billion on it.


Countrywide Credit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Countrywide Credit Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,788,000
22,051,000
Net inc
3,409,000
3,061,000
Share earns
.20
.18
6mo rev
48,626,000
42,668,000
Net inc
5,906,000
6,321,000
Share earns
.34
.37


France and Australia Kill Pact on Limited Antarctic Mining and Oil Drilling
LEAD: An international agreement reached last year that would have permitted the exploitation of Antarctica's oil and mineral resources has been scuttled by the withdrawal of France and Australia.


Review/Film; 'The Time Guardian': Surviving in 4039
LEAD: ''The Time Guardian'' is an Australian science-fiction film that steals bits of ''The Terminator,'' ''Star Wars,'' ''Star Trek'' and ''Mad Max,'' and ends up being more boring than ''Dune.'' This strange mix begins in the year 4039, when a few pathetic human survivors of ''the neutron wars,'' are threatened by part-human robots that resemble life-size


Erly Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Erly Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
110,786,000
55,887,000
Net inc
210,000
b418,000
Share earns
.08
.18
Shares outst
2,482,057
2,381,000
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $259,000.


Joycelyn Eichler Weds Adam Kenner
LEAD: Joycelyn Margot Eichler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Burton Eichler of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Adam F. Kenner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Kenner of Boonton, N.J., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl and Cantor Helene Reps officiated at Temple Israel in New Rochelle.


Montana Stuns the Eagles
LEAD: With 8 minutes 14 seconds left to play and the Philadelphia Eagles leading the San Francisco 49ers by 28-17 today at Veterans Stadium, the brash, upstart Eagles had not quite begun celebrating a victory.


Operator of Rocky Flats Plant Was Ousted, U.S. Aide Says
LEAD: A Federal official was quoted today as saying the Rockwell International Corporation did not withdraw as operator of the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons but was dismissed because the Government was ''fed up.''


No Signs of Russian Backlash in Baltic States; Occupied Territories
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Drops In Tokyo
LEAD: The dollar tumbled in early trading today in Tokyo after intervention by several central banks, including a rare appearance by the Bank of Canada, dealers said.


Holly Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holly Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
116,661,000
100,147,000
Net inc
8,771,000
6,881,000
Share earns
1.07
.83
Yr rev
381,385,000
385,897,000
Net inc
33,061,000
22,786,000
Share earns
4.01
2.76


Workers Sue Brokerage
LEAD: A group of employees of Thomson McKinnon Inc. filed a $100 million lawsuit on Friday, contending that executives of the Wall Street brokerage depleted an employee trust fund and used company assets to pay for apartments and a yacht.


Chinese Exiles Form Worldwide Opposition Group
LEAD: Chinese exiles and opposition figures from around the world ended an inaugural meeting today establishing the Federation for Democracy in China, an umbrella group that aims to coordinate worldwide opposition to the Beijing Government.


CCA Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCA Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,800,317
2,190,911
Net inc
b267,528
c194,017
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
7,837,933
6,947,533
9mo rev
11,620,084
7,246,117
Net inc
b767,575
c220,161
Share earns
.10
-


Old Red Hunts Another 98 Yards
LEAD: HE'LL be 32 years old on Nov. 19, but Ottis Anderson is running for the Giants as if his age were the same as the number on his uniform.


Let the Death Penalty Be Ended Deliberately
LEAD: To the Editor:


Details Expected on Rescue Bonds
LEAD: The Resolution Funding Corporation, established by the Government earlier this year to help rescue the savings and loan industry, is likely to provide preliminary details this week about how it intends to sell $30 billion worth of securities over the next two fiscal years, credit market analysts said.


A Child and Her Baby Sitter Are Found Dead in Bronx
LEAD: A 41-year-old woman was found beaten to death early yesterday and the 19-month-old girl she had been baby-sitting was found dead in a garbage bag a few hours later in an apartment complex in the Bronx, the police said.


Canterbury Educational reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canterbury Educational
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,947,761
1,451,986
Net inc
142,492
39,681
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo sales
6,941,942
5,460,343
Net loss
168,530
b157,874
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Marshals Seize Apartments Of Suspected Drug Dealers
LEAD: Federal marshals and the city police seized the public housing apartments of two suspected drug dealers during an early morning raid, taking advantage of stronger Federal drug laws, authorities said.


Removal of Asbestos Delays Subway Use For at Least a Week
LEAD: New York City transit officials said yesterday that it will take at least another week before workers finish removing asbestos from a 10-block stretch of the IND Eighth Avenue subway line and before service can be restored to normal.


First Boston Finishes Deal
LEAD: In a move that completes a complex deal to take the firm private, CS First Boston Inc. has told its employees in an internal memorandum that it sold 2.25 percent of the company to two American insurance companies, people at the company said last week.


Commercial International Corp reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial International Corp (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
62,035,914
65,175,032
Net loss
3,666,632
b1,882,647
b-After a gain of $227,000, or 5 cents a share, from a cumulative effect of change in accounting principle.


Signs of Bomb in Cargo Hold Found in Downed French Jet
LEAD: The head of a team investigating the downing of a French DC-10 last week over the Sahara said today that traces of explosives had been found in a cargo hold in the front of the aircraft.


Material Sciences Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Material Sciences Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
38,971,000
44,370,000
Net loss
3,698,000
b2,100,000
Share earns
-
.42
6mo rev
80,821,000
86,117,000
Net loss
2,184,000
b3,993,000
Share earns
-
.80


Ryder Rally Fails U.S.
LEAD: The United States fought from behind and worked into position to win back the Ryder Cup today, but failed to do so because of a series of 18th-hole disasters that befell the team's early finishers.


Pros Still Rule the Courtyard
LEAD: IF the playgrounds in the New York area seemed empty yesterday, it had nothing to do with the locals taking a day off.


Group Plans to Import an AIDS Drug
LEAD: Angered by what they see as the exorbitant price of a major drug used against AIDS symptoms, a New York group is offering to help people fill their prescriptions in England, where the drug is available at a fraction of its cost here.


Lebanon's Truce Holds; Ports Active
LEAD: This city's air and sea ports resumed normal activity today after agreement by Lebanon's warring factions to an Arab-negotiated peace plan.


Lodgistix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lodgistix Inc
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,197,000
4,560,000
Net loss
1,405,000
733,000
Yr rev
16,683,000
20,167,000
Net loss
4,300,000
1,419,000


Speech by Bush To Be Televised
LEAD: Four major broadcasting networks plan live coverage of President Bush's speech today to the General Assembly of the United Nations.


Unassuming Storefronts Believed To Launder Drug Dealers' Profits
LEAD: State banking regulators around the country have found that thousands of small inner-city businesses through which recent immigrants send money to relatives are also being used to launder drug money.
The regulators say these storefront money-transmitting and check-cashing operations are sending billions of dollars to drug dealers in South America and Asia.


Datapoint Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datapoint Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Revenue
78,964,000
88,062,000
Net loss
b8,894,000
c2,617,000
Share earns
-
.02
Yr rev
312,549,000
330,827,000
Net loss
b29,236,000
c7,997,000
b-After extraordinary credits of $199,000 for the quarter and $345,000 for the year.


Topics of The Times; The Carriage Horse Question
LEAD: Mayor Koch has scheduled a hearing for today to help him decide whether or not to sign a measure to protect carriage horses in New York City.
The need for the bill is obvious.


Robert Akin Jr., 85, Hudson Co. Chairman
LEAD: Robert M. Akin Jr., the chairman of Hudson International Conductors, died, apparently of a heart attack, Thursday at his home in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 85 years old.
Mr.
Akin joined the company, which was formerly the Hudson Wire Company and now makes high-temperature conductors, in 1924.
He became president and chairman in 1946 and was president until 1971.


Lisa Berzok and Lance Hanf Marry
LEAD: Lisa Anne Berzok, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Berzok of New York and Atlanta, was married yesterday to Lawrence Porter Hanf, the son of Marilyn H. Buckley of Anchorage and Charles D. Hanf of Berkeley, Calif.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at the New York home of the bride's parents.


Bankruptcy Filing By Lomas
LEAD: Frustrated by creditor talks that had dragged on since June, the Lomas Financial Corporation today became one of the largest financial companies to seek court protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


How Tall? No: How Long?
LEAD: New York City has been trying to rebuild the Coliseum site at Columbus Circle for nearly five years.
The controversial plan has been in and out of court.
A parade of black umbrellas protested the shadows that, many New Yorkers feared, would darken Central Park.
The project's been redesigned twice to meet objections to height and bulk.


A Bicycle Windshield for More Speed and Warmth
LEAD: A products designer who rides his bike to work has invented a windshield that he says will help you cycle faster and stay warmer.


Bridge
LEAD: The victory of Brazil in the world team championship here Saturday was not a big surprise to experienced observers.
Four years earlier a similar but slightly stronger American team beat Brazil on the last board in a semifinal Bermuda Bowl match.


Score Board Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Score Board Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,945,720
1,276,886
Net inc
230,550
c96,600
Share earns
.09
.04
Shares outst
2,679,646
2,660,941
6mo sales
7,305,108
2,712,493
Net inc
b395,112
c313,971
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
2,679,646
2,581,482


FDP Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FDP Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,389,995
3,333,326
Net inc
261,034
96,828
Share earns
.08
.03
Shares outst
3,462,587
3,664,248
9mo rev
10,962,804
9,952,932
Net loss
46,367
b570,365
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
3,410,851
3,650,204


Royalpar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royalpar Industries (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
16,342,054
13,549,135
Net inc
141,465
172,610
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
5,224,363
4,867,724
6mo sales
31,876,348
28,337,607
Net inc
250,196
379,612
Share earns
.06
.08
Shares outst
5,165,373
4,962,654


A Truce in California's Water Wars
LEAD: An end may be in sight for the ancient and treacherous wars over water, the scarce commodity that has long defined the politics of California, divided north from south and turned poor men into rich and rich into poor.


AEL Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AEL Industries Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
29,969,000
35,606,000
Net loss
b4,966,000
2,920,000
6mo rev
60,834,000
70,078,000
Net loss
b4,862,000
2,718,000
b-The company said it plans to invest about $8 million in the development effort of its AEL Defense Corp.


Review/Music; Previous Carnegie Winners
LEAD: The Carnegie Hall International American Music Competition, the finals of which took place yesterday, is designed to foster the performance of American music.
Last week at Weill Recital Hall, there were two concerts by past winners of the event.
The first, on Thursday, was a mixed bill; the second, on Friday, was devoted exclusively to music by Charles


Harding Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harding Associates Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,558,280
11,953,429
Net inc
1,465,965
1,068,788
Share earns
.32
.24
Shares outst
4,645,084
4,355,610
Share earnings were adjusted for 50 percent stock dividend declared earlier this year.


Giants Frustrate Cardinals
LEAD: The Giants' defense lives or dies by the turnover.
Today, as the Giants forced six turnovers in the first half, that defense made plenty of big plays, shut down Gary Hogeboom's passing and Stump Mitchell's running and routed the Phoenix Cardinals, 35-7.


Which Ones Are the Ads?
LEAD: The top two photos show a jacket by Calvin Klein, the bottom two a coat by Ellen Terry.
Which in each pair is an ad and which is an editorial layout?
The answers are upside down below.
The Calvin Klein ad is on the left, the Ellen Terry on the right.


Wide Open Spaces
LEAD: The tectonic plates that underlie the American way of living are making loud, grinding noises.
Something big is going on in the real America that most of us who live inside urban beltways are missing: proximity is losing its power.


Canada Southern Petroleum Ltd reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canada Southern Petroleum Ltd
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,036,188
2,282,916
Net loss
1,181,175
b25,333
Shares outst
11,989,954
11,298,226
b-After an extraordinary credit of $104,000, or 1 cent a share.


California Amplifier reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Amplifier (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,850,000
2,128,000
Net inc
79,000
b74,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
3,977,000
3,943,000
6mo sales
5,290,000
4,458,000
Net loss
45,000
c42,000
Share earns
-
.01


INSIDE
LEAD:  World Economy on Stage  Mexico's top debt negotiator says banks' increased reserve cushions could mean fewer third-world loans.


Yes, Their Students Put Ours to Shame
LEAD: To the Editor:


Effort to Ease Trade Rules
LEAD: In multilateral trade talks last week, negotiators took the first steps toward writing rules to liberalize trade in banking, tourism and other services.


Education and Work: The Missing Link
LEAD: The applause President Bush deserves for taking the dramatic step of convening an education summit meeting with all 50 governors risks being the sound of one-hand clapping unless a prominent connection is made between education and work and competitiveness.


Late Surge by Jets Tops Miami, 40-33
LEAD: Even Dan Marino, even in a Jets-Dolphins game, could not generate two Hail Mary touchdown passes in 60 minutes today.


Maine Fair Promotes Pure Food and Rural Values
LEAD: Egg rolls sold at the Common Ground Country Fair this weekend were stuffed with five organically grown vegetables and wrapped in crisp dough made from whole wheat and unbleached flours.


Eclipse Capital reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eclipse Capital
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,987,921
1,939,777
Net inc
100,905
72,158
Share earns
.02
.02
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Out of the Pool
LEAD: What happens to Olympic swimmers who use up their college eligiblity but still have a year of school until they earn their degrees?


Bennett's Silence on Guns
LEAD: A poster distributed by Handgun Control Inc. shows a handgun painted to resemble the American flag.


Rachel List Offers Ballet Along With Clog Dancing
LEAD: It must delight Rachel List to know that dancing can involve many different kinds of movements.
Every work Rachel List and Company presented Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater had its own kinetic personality.


Remembering a Governor Almost Forgotten
LEAD: A two-day conference to commemorate the 250th birthday of George Clinton closed here today in the city where he took the oath of office as the first Governor of New York in 1777.


Emily Kohlberg, Teacher, Weds A. J. Greenberg
LEAD: Emily Carol Kohlberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Kohlberg of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Andrew Joel Greenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Greenberg of New York, were married yesterday afternoon.
Rabbi Judah Nadich performed the ceremony at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck.


Reader's Digest Names Chiefs for New Groups
LEAD: The Reader's Digest Association Inc. has hired Thomas M. Kenney, who most recently has been an investment banker specializing in buying and selling magazine publishing companies, to be president of a newly formed Magazine Publishing Group.


CHINA PARTY PLANS PARLEY ON ECONOMY
LEAD: The Central Committee of the Communist Party will meet next month to ratify a detailed policy of economic retrenchment that will last through 1991, Chinese officials and foreign diplomats say.


Review/Theater; Vanessa Redgrave in 'Orpheus': Matching Artistic Sensibilities
LEAD: The fusion of Vanessa Redgrave and Tennessee Williams is an artistic explosion that was bound to happen, and the wonder is that we had to wait until Peter Hall's revival of ''Orpheus Descending.'' Williams and Miss Redgrave were made for each other because they are brilliant theater artists in the same way.


Bush as U.N.'s Host With the Most
LEAD: When George Bush was the American representative to the United Nations in the early 1970's, he gave so many cocktail parties and dinners at his Waldorf Towers residence that he became known as ''Perle Mesta Bush.''


Costar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Costar Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Sales
8,649,000
6,923,000
Net inc
490,000
582,000
Share earns
.18
.22
9mo sales
24,515,000
20,081,000
Net inc
1,140,000
b1,292,000
Share earns
.42
.49
b-Included an extraordinary credit due to an accounting change of $89,000, or 3 cents a share.


Thermal Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermal Industries (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
29,500,000
29,400,000
Net inc
47,000
1,397,000
Share earns
.02
.72


New York G.O.P. Chairman's Suit Seeks to Keep His Finances Secret
LEAD: New York State's Republican Party chairman, a possible contender for governor next year, has filed a lawsuit challenging the state ethics law that requires him to disclose his personal finances.


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
170,540,000
173,119,000
Net inc
2,124,000
b4,433,000
Share earns
.14
.37
b-After a loss of $1.4 million from discontinued operations.
Year-ago quarter's results restated to reflect the consolidation of subsidiaries.


A Film Maker's Witty and Poetic Last Word
LEAD: From the start of his career, in the 1920's, to his death last June at the age of 90, Joris Ivens discovered stories hidden in elegant nonnarrative images.
The Dutch film maker's ''Rain,'' the 15-minute silent black-and-white film he made in 1929, is no more or less than scenes of Amsterdam's streets and canals before, during and after a rainstorm.


Dr. Mosenthal Weds Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Anne Charlotte Mosenthal, the chief resident in surgery at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester, and Dr.
Peter Eric Rice, a surgeon at the Henry Heywood Hospital in Gardner, Mass., were married yesterday at the Sherman, Conn., home of the bride's mother, Mrs.
Edward K. Mosenthal.


Winning Violinists Named In Carnegie Hall Contest
LEAD: Michelle Makarski of Santa Barbara, Calif., won first prize, valued at $75,000, in the Carnegie Hall International American Music Competition for Violinists yesterday afternoon at Carnegie Hall.


Readicare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Readicare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,235,000
5,202,000
Net inc
666,000
469,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
7,873,000
8,845,000
6mo rev
10,176,000
9,997,000
Net inc
1,018,000
625,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
7,876,000
9,026,000


U.S. ASKS SOVIETS TO AGREE TO CUTS IN CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: The United States has asked the Soviet Union to consider a proposal under which the two sides would make deep cuts in their arsenals of chemical weapons before a global treaty is reached on banning poison gas.


Advance Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advance Circuits (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
18,532,000
21,218,000
Net inc
2,688,000
b9,256,000
Share earns
.58
-
Yr sales
68,551,000
83,323,000
Net inc
5,358,000
b8,551,000
Share earns
1.12
-


Tijuana Journal; U.S. Athletes Advised: Get Your Steroids Here!
LEAD: As tourists cross the border from San Diego, they are likely to be given fliers urging the aspiring Olympian or All-America athlete to stop by the nearest pharmacy and choose from what is advertised as ''Steroids: Largest Selection Anywhere, at Wholesale Prices!''


Greenest Pastures Are Off the Course
LEAD: Anybody who has watched a modicum of television knows that even an over-the-hill big-name golf pro with no sense of commercial self-restraint can make more money off the course than on.


Adobe Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adobe Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 1
1989
1988
Revenue
30,027,000
25,232,000
Net inc
9,104,000
6,372,000
Share earns
.41
.29
9mo rev
83,655,000
58,218,000
Net inc
23,665,000
14,421,000
Share earns
1.08
.67


Continental Homes Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Homes Holding (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
36,261,000
38,354,000
Net inc
1,365,000
1,186,000
Share earns
.39
.33


Sentex Sensing Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sentex Sensing Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
460,000
378,000
Net inc
108,000
47,000
9mo rev
1,201,000
1,301,000
Net inc
162,000
188,000
The company said that with over 74 million common shares outstanding, per share income remains insignificant.


Though Racial Politics Lurks, It Is Muted in Virginia Contest
LEAD: More than three decades ago, at a secret meeting called by Harry F. Byrd, then Virginia's uncontested political boss, Representative Watkins M. Abbitt helped to plan the state's defiant program of massive resistance to court-ordered school desegregation.


Review/Television; A Musical Reunion, With 60's Pop Stars
LEAD: The new made-for-television movie season slips quickly into familiar habits at 9 tonight on NBC. ''My Boyfriend's Back'' is fact-based, tracing the story of the Bouffants, a singing trio that had a single smash hit back in the 1960's.
The lead roles are filled by popular television stars, Sandy Duncan of ''The Hogan Family,'' Jill Eikenberry of ''L.A.


Zelie Daniels, Actress, Wed
LEAD: Zelie Nina Daniels, the daughter of Col.
Jack Daniels, U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
Daniels of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday to Carl Andrew Pforzheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl H. Pforzheimer 3d of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Judge Miriam Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in New York officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


Electro Scientific Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Scientific Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
22,878,000
17,773,000
Net inc
1,590,000
1,054,000
Share earns
.26
.17
Shares outst
6,125,000
6,031,000


Egypt's Plan Needs a U.S. Shoulder
LEAD: Egypt has ignited hope for a dialogue that might lift the Israeli-Palestinian conflict off the streets and onto the negotiating table.
But President Mubarak can't do the job alone.
The United States has to weigh in, visibly and vigorously.


Another Timely Field Goal Lifts Arizona
LEAD: For the second consecutive Saturday night in Tucson, Ariz., Doug Pfaff became a hero.
His 35-yard field goal, with 1 minute 1 second to play, became the difference in Arizona's 20-17 victory over Washington.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE  LEGAL COMMITTEE


Ilene Lieberman Is Wed
LEAD: Ilene Lieberman, the associate director of development for the New York Philharmonic, and Jon H. Sprance, a restorer of fine art, were married yesterday at the Bird and Bottle Inn in Garrison, N.Y.
Donald McGrath, the town clerk of Cold Spring, N.Y., officiated.
Mrs.
Sprance, 32 years old, graduated from Marymount College in Tarrytown, N.Y., and received a master's degree in performing arts management from Adelphi University.


Steelers' Defense Stops Minnesota
LEAD: Merril Hoge scored the go-ahead touchdown and Pittsburgh's defense, ranked last in the National Football League after two blowout losses, set up a score and shut out Minnesota in the second half as the Steelers stunned the Vikings today, 27-14.


Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
54,859,000
49,500,000
Net inc
3,417,000
3,034,000
Share earns
.36
.32
9mo sales
153,963,000
146,311,000
Net inc
9,035,000
8,212,000
Share earns
.95
.86


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  State banking regulators around the country have found that thousands of small inner-city businesses through which immigrants send money to relatives are also being used to launder drug money.
The regulators say these storefront money-transmitting and check-cashing operations are sending billions of dollars to drug dealers in South America and Asia.


Measurex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Measurex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 3
1989
1988
Revenue
71,968,000
68,329,000
Net inc
10,094,000
9,539,000
Share earns
.54
.50
9mo rev
212,423,000
196,102,000
Net inc
29,929,000
26,228,000
Share earns
1.59
1.38


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Navratilova Beats Seles: Martina Navratilova defeated Monica Seles yesterday to win the Dallas women's pro tournament in Texas.
In the first meeting of the world's No. 2 player and the precocious 15-year-old rookie pro, who are both left-handed, Navratilova took the final, 7-6, 6-3, in 1 hour 21 minutes.(AP)


Campaign Matters; On a Free Ride, Council Leader Bides His Time
LEAD: City Council President Andrew J. Stein, who for many years was criticized by his fellow politicians as overambitious, over-financed by a wealthy father and under-talented, has finally arrived.
He's getting what politicians call a free ride in the general election.


Question Box
LEAD:  Shares for Ex-Mets  Q. It hardly seems likely, but suppose that the Mets and the Toronto Blue Jays were to meet in the World Series, with Lee Mazzilli and Mookie Wilson playing against their former Met teammates.
Suppose also that Toronto were to win the Series, entitling Mazzilli and Wilson to at least some portion of the winners' shares.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday  Auto Sales Mid-Sept.
Tuesday  Durable Goods Aug.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Leading Indicators Aug.


New Test for a Highway Peril, the Drugged Driver
LEAD: Motorists who are stopped for erratic driving have long faced tests to detect alcohol.
Now, more and more, they are being tested for drugs as well.


Last of La Guardia Jetliner Wreckage Recovered
LEAD: Under a blue arch of autumn sky, salvage crews recovered the last sections of a shattered USAir jet from the East River at La Guardia Airport yesterday, as investigators examined the dripping wreckage in a search for the cause of last week's aborted takeoff and crash.


Gorbachev's Anti-Magic; Lionized Abroad Yet Tormented at Home, He Is Falling Short of Soviet Expectations
LEAD: One of the great contradictions of Mikhail S. Gorbachev is that while the outside world grows more and more captivated by his skill and charm, much of his own country seems increasingly immune to the magic.


Swedish Bank Raided
LEAD: The police last week raided the head office of Sweden's largest bank, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken, to seize material in a tax evasion inquiry against its chief executive, Jacob Palmstierna.


Review/Magic; Doing the Classics, but Oversize and Loud
LEAD: Hurricane Hugo did not show up in New York on Friday night, and for all anyone knows, maybe it was Siegfried and Roy, the master magicians who opened at Radio City Music Hall that night, who made it disappear.
After all, they made everything else except the audience vanish in a blaze of brilliant wizardry.


AAR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AAR Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
108,635,000
90,007,000
Net inc
6,570,000
5,523,000
Share earns
.41
.35


Washington Talk; Bush's Travels Show Him as Clumsy and Deft
LEAD: President Bush's travels have been an exercise in salesmanship.
The past week has shown him, in a political sense, at his clumsiest and at his most deft.
Here is one take from the road: The President was pressed by reporters, as he toured a tree farm in Wells, Me., about Federal agents who lured a drug dealer to a park in front of the White House to provide dramatic rhetoric and a prop for Mr.


Swapo Leader Asks Whites' Help
LEAD: More than 50,000 people filled Windhoek's main stadium today to hear Sam Nujoma, the leader of the South-West Africa People's Organization, urge the white minority to join in the Namibian independence process.
It was Mr.
Nujoma's first speech since returning 10 days ago from almost 30 years in exile.


Edmund F. Christy, Priest, 78
LEAD: The Rev.
Edmund F. Christy, a former president of Siena College in Loudonville, N.Y., died of a heart attack yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Passaic, N.J.
He was 78 years old and lived at Sacred Heart Friary in East Rutherford, N.J.


Showcase Cosmetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Showcase Cosmetics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,085,300
438,780
Net inc
43,987
b128,362
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
3,460,000
3,160,000
b-Net loss


Junior Knights at Medieval Festival


Monarch Avalon reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monarch Avalon
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,461,000
1,611,000
Net loss
131,000
108,000


Books of The Times; The Revealed and Hidden Selves of Autobiography
LEAD:  Fabricating Lives  Explorations in American Autobiography  By Herbert Leibowitz  386 pages.
Illustrated.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Applied Solar Energy reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Solar Energy (OTC)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
4,373,000
5,661,000
Net loss
1,301,000
2,184,000
Shares outst
3,382,000
3,378,000
9mo sales
15,545,000
19,950,000
Net loss
2,713,000
2,488,000


Mexico Says Banks' Move Could Reduce New Lending
LEAD: Mexico's chief debt negotiator said during the weekend that the move by three large American banks to increase their cushion against bad third world loans could make it more difficult for some nations to get new loans.


2 Minor Quakes in California
LEAD: A small earthquake jolted downtown Los Angeles on Saturday, about two hours after another minor quake east of the city.
No injuries or damage were reported.
The afternoon earthquake measured 2.4 on the Richter scale, said Hall Daily of the California Institute of Technology; a quake of magnitude 2 is the smallest normally felt by humans.


Charleston Rushes to Preserve Heritage From Waters
LEAD: In this three-century-old city, where appreciation of the past is perhaps the highest civic virtue, the initial exhilaration of surviving Hurricane Hugo has faded as residents realize much work lies ahead merely to repair the storm's damage.


Aztec Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aztec Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,594,000
6,754,000
Net inc
324,000
407,000
Share earns
.06
.08
6mo sales
9,130,000
12,547,000
Net inc
889,000
943,000
Share earns
.17
.19


Ann Vinokur Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Ann Frances Vinokur, a resident in radiation oncology at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx, and Dr.
Bruce Wayne Greenberg, a resident in internal medicine at Booth Memorial Hospital in Flushing, Queens, were married yesterday at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Friedman officiated.


Ellen Shaer Marries Peter S. Krieger
LEAD: Ellen Ruth Shaer, a senior associate in the investment banking department at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Peter Schafmeister Krieger, a financial analyst at W. R. Grace &amp; Company, both in New York.
Justice A. Frederick Meyerson of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, officiated at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City,


Albert A. Marks Jr. Is Dead at 76; Ex-Chief of Miss America Pageant
LEAD: Albert A. Marks Jr., the chairman and executive producer of the Miss America Pageant for 25 years, died yesterday of complications from a heart attack on Sept. 11.
Mr.
Marks, who was 76 years old and lived in Margate City, N.J., died at Shore Memorial Hospital in Somers Point, N.J.


2 Top Officers of American Healthcare Quit as Part of Plan
LEAD: American Healthcare Management Inc., the Dallas-based hospital management company that has been operating in bankruptcy proceedings for two years, has announced that its two top executives and founders, John A. Bradley and David A. Huff, have resigned in keeping with a reorganization plan approved by creditors.


Smith Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,044,000
3,632,000
Net inc
153,000
108,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
13,370,000
13,248,000
9mo rev
12,048,000
11,188,000
Net inc
941,000
735,000
Share earns
.07
.06
Shares outst
13,360,000
13,248,000


Medical Management of America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Management of America Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,547,000
5,906,000
Net loss
b6,906,000
c841,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo rev
11,062,000
15,810,000
Net loss
b7,341,000
c3,150,000
Share earns
-
.26


Goodmark Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodmark Foods Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
34,627,000
31,594,000
Net inc
1,322,000
1,233,000
Share earns
.30
.28


Topics of The Times; Izzy Baline's Century-Plus
LEAD: When Irving Berlin complained that 20th Century Fox paid Rodgers and Hammerstein more for ''Oklahoma!'' than it offered him for ''Annie Get Your Gun,'' the studio argued that he shouldn't care; he was so rich he'd have to give 91 percent to the Government. ''You don't understand,'' Mr.
Berlin explained.


EAC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EAC Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,406,000
8,405,000
Net loss
b597,000
c199,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
15,163,000
14,892,000
Net loss
b939,000
c1,492,000
Share earns
-
.76


A&amp;M Records Confirms Sale
LEAD: In a memo to employees, A&amp;M Records last week confirmed recent reports that it had agreed to sell the record company to Polygram Records.


Lesco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lesco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
27,760,297
22,828,776
Net inc
753,536
371,185
Share earns
.18
.09
9mo sales
73,281,634
65,953,237
Net loss
184,365
b967,352
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income


California's Water Wars May Be Ending


Korea's Snake Imports
LEAD: A demand for health potions has encouraged frog and snake imports to South Korea, a Government report said last week.
An Agriculture and Fisheries Ministry report to the National Assembly on imports of foreign food items said the value of South Korea's imports of snakes in the first half of this year climbed to $380,000, surpassing the $295,000 for all of 1988.


The Crimson Is Diversifying
LEAD: After 117 years in the student newspaper business, The Harvard Crimson plans to diversify into the magazine field this winter with the introduction of Class Act, a publication aimed at college seniors at 150 schools.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 24, 1989:
MONDAY
American Tel &amp; Teleg Co
Unocal Corp
BellSouth Corp
TUESDAY
Bell Atlantic Corp
Montana Pwr Co
Centerior Energy Corp
Nipsco Inds Inc
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt Co
Norwest Corp
Elcor Corp
Penney JC Inc
Harsco Corp
Pope &amp; Talbot Inc
Hydraulic Co
Public Svc Co Colo
Lennar Corp
WEDNESDAY
Central Maine Pwr Co
Raytheon Co
EG&amp;G Inc
USAir Group Inc
Federal Mogul Corp
Washington Gas Lt Co
Iowa Res Inc
Westinghouse Gas Lt Co
Ocean Drilling &amp; Expl Co
WPL Holdings


Measurement Specialties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Measurement Specialties Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,200,000
4,400,000
Net loss
535,000
b626,000
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income


Deal for a Del Monte Unit Said to Be Near
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. was in final talks last night to sell the canned food and processing unit of its Del Monte subsidiary for $1.47 billion to an investment partnership led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, Wall Street sources said yesterday.
An official announcement of the deal is expected today, the sources added.


Financial Officials Fear Global Trade Imbalance
LEAD: In stretch limos and blue pinstripes, the global finance community gathers in Washington this week to try to create a favorable global economic environment in the 1990's.


U.N. Study Says 1 Billion Suffer From Diseases
LEAD: One billion people around the world are in poor health, malnourished or suffering with diseases ranging from malaria and river blindness to AIDS, the World Health Organization said in a report released today.


Jaclyn Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jaclyn Inc (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
67,694,000
85,180,000
Net inc
1,825,000
3,606,000
Share earns
.68
1.34
Year-ago share earnings restated to reflect a 4 percent dividend paid in June 1989.


Barr Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barr Labs (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
17,871,000
14,073,000
Net loss
202,000
334,000
Yr sales
69,068,000
56,564,000
Net loss
3,333,000
b1,236,000
Share earns
-
.16
b-Net income and after an extraordinary charge of $358,000.


Hospitals, Innocent of Beach Pollution, Must Yet Pay the Price
LEAD: To the Editor:


GEAC Computer reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GEAC Computer
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
17,010,000
17,300,000
Net inc
b6,112,000
600,000
Share earns
.27
.03
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $5,650,000, or 25 cents a share, from the sale of the company's Canadian financial products division.


New York's Daily News Prepares for a War With Its Union
LEAD: The Daily News has begun a campaign of tough talk and sophisticated public relations intended to help wrestle far-reaching concessions from its 10 labor unions in negotiations expected to start in about two months.


For a Top Female Runner, Patience Pays in Long Run
LEAD: LIKE a movie star who struggles for years before becoming an overnight success, Gordon Bloch, New York's leading female runner, seems to have suddenly vaulted ahead of the pack.
But she credits a long and gradual development as the underpinning of her recent performances and says road racers must be patient in their hopes for a competitive breakthrough.


Centennial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centennial Group (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
78,800,000
35,200,000
Net inc
334,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.03
.11
Yr rev
118,200,000
104,600,000
Net inc
2,100,000
11,000,000
Share earns
.08
.42


Florio-Courter TV Debate
LEAD: The Republican and Democratic candidates for governor of New Jersey cleared their schedules of public appearances over the weekend to prepare for their first formal televised debate of the general election campaign tonight.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Golf Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., a golf course management company, named Ronald P. Johnson executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Every 100 Years
LEAD: A century or so ago, when a group of major leaguers played a series of games in Britain as part of a barnstorming world tour, the visit produced contradictory reactions.


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CHC Helicopter
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
51,508,000
39,216,000
Net inc
4,774,000
5,426,000
Share earns
.65
.73
9mo rev
100,050,000
80,876,000
Net loss
150,000
b2,223,000
Share earns
-
.30


News Summary A3-12
LEAD:  A plan to cut chemical weapons in their arsenals before a global treaty is reached on banning poison gas has been proposed to Moscow by Washington, diplomats said.
Page A1  President Bush will speak at the U.N. today.
A former delegate there himself, Mr.
Bush feels the organization has failed to live up to its potential, but has an opportunity to enhance its world role.


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunt Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 3
1989
1988
Sales
54,051,000
44,777,000
Net inc
5,146,000
4,346,000
Share earns
.32
.27
9mo sales
148,896,000
130,982,000
Net inc
13,799,000
11,602,000
Share earns
.86
.72


Rite for Colorado Player
LEAD: A memorial service will be given this afternoon in Boulder, Colo., for Sal Aunese, the former University of Colorado quarterback who died of cancer Saturday night.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline Saturday on an article about monitoring of a Vietnamese military withdrawal from Cambodia misidentifed the observer force that the Cambodian Government is seeking.
It would be international, but not sponsored by the United Nations.


Tall People Have a Right to Own Big Cars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Antley Receives Ban From Belmont
LEAD: The Belmont Park stewards said yesterday that they would not permit Chris Antley to ride because of information they had received from the jockey's former agent and from officials of the State Racing and Wagering Board.


In Campaign, Courter Aims To Pin Down His Identity
LEAD: Filled with the confidence born of a lifetime of winning and a faith in self-determination, Representative Jim Courter set out on this last day of summer to begin what he considers crucial in his campaign for governor: telling voters who he really is.


Yankees' Cary Stymies Orioles
LEAD: The day ended when a lazy pop fly dropped into Steve Sax's glove near second base.
A game was lost, another chance suddenly gone.
But almost with a collective shrug, the Baltimore Orioles seemed to dismiss their unhappy fortune.
There was still time.


Syracuse Symphony Ratifies a 3-Year Pact
LEAD: The Syracuse Musicians' Association of the American Federation of Musicians ratified a three-year contract on Saturday, ending a dispute with management of the Syracuse Symphony Orchestra.


Excerpts From Statement on Arms
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement issued on Saturday by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union after two days of talks in Jackson, Wyo.:


Joshua Gotbaum Wed in Brooklyn To Ms. Thornhill
LEAD: Joyce Helen Thornhill and Joshua Gotbaum were married last ev-ening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden by Cantor Raymond Smolover, assisted by the Rev.
Clay H. Turner, an Episcopal priest.
The bride is the daughter of Mrs.
Marvin N. Lougheed of Boones Mill, Va., and Herbert S. Thornhill of Montreal.
Mr.


Cubs Win and Fans Love It
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs survived a furious ninth inning rally today and beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 4-2, to take another giant, albeit shaky, stride toward a division championship.


Sooner Federal S &amp; L reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sooner Federal S &amp; L (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b128,308,000
c14,856,000
b-After an extraordinary writeoff of goodwill of $34.5 million.
c-After an extraordinary gain of $3,639,000, or $1.78 a share, from early repayment of borrowings.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Granato Painfully Recalls First Year
LEAD: He had, with guts and a season's worth of grimaces, endured the sticks across the back and the breakneck crashes into the boards, only to find himself unable to let go of the ache in his chest when it was all finally over.


Freda Corp reports earnings for 13wks to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freda Corp (OTC)
13wks to May 27
1989
1988
Revenue
14,163,335
13,280,305
Net inc
213,304
326,036
Share earns
.12
.18
39wk rev
43,192,149
41,509,241
Net inc
128,223
875,328
Share earns
.07
.48


Valley Federal Savings Bank (Ind.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Federal Savings Bank (Ind.) (O)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
520,247
b186,000
Per share
-
.17
Yr net inc
80,324
971,755
Per share
.08
.85
b-Net income


Leaner Lunches on the Menu For California Schoolchildren
LEAD: In a nation where pizzas and corn dogs are a staple of school lunches, California last week became the first state to require limits on the fat and cholesterol in food served to schoolchildren.


New Schools Chief: An Innovator and Taker of Risks
LEAD: In two years as Superintendent of Dade County Public Schools, Joseph A. Fernandez earned a national reputation as an innovator and risk taker.
He forged links between the business community and the schools, invested schools with more decision-making power and spearheaded a successful drive for a $980 million bond issue to build 49 schools for a woefully overcrowded system.


Cobi Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobi Foods
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
27,239,000
26,822,000
Net loss
1,271,000
2,507,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Micron Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micron Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
103,036,000
113,412,000
Net inc
15,960,000
43,327,000
Share earns
.42
1.27
Shares outst
37,634,145
34,136,795
Yr rev
446,424,000
300,500,000
Net inc
106,103,000
97,981,000
Share earns
2.85
3.38
Shares outst
37,293,096
28,981,039


Solidarity Journalist to Run State Television
LEAD: A Solidarity journalist has been appointed to run Poland's state-owned television and radio, ending the Communist Party's control of broadcasting since the late 1940's.


Executive in China Adjusts to Party Line
LEAD: Employees at China's biggest investment company like to recall that their chairman stood at the window during the big pro-democracy demonstrations in May, gazing at the protesters in a daring sign of support.


Experts See Nuclear Energy as Cure for Global Warming
LEAD: The cure for the greenhouse effect, the warming of the atmosphere that is believed to be caused by the burning of fossil fuels, is a huge shift to nuclear-generated power, speaker after speaker told delegates at a World Energy Conference meeting this week.


Ferruzzi Expects Big Loss
LEAD: Gruppo Ferruzzi said Friday that it could suffer losses of up to $100 million from its commodity trading business this year.


Cambodian Premier Appeals for Truce
LEAD: Prime Minister Hun Sen appealed today to the opposition coalition to agree to a cease-fire in Cambodia and asked China to stop supplying arms to the guerrillas after the last Vietnamese troops leave the country Tuesday.


Computerland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computerland
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,860,000
27,247,000
Net loss
b13,889,000
c2,208,000
9mo rev
92,906,000
80,591,000
Net loss
5,061,000
d6,545,000
b-Included an extraordinary charge of $2,800,000.


Kevlin Microwave Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kevlin Microwave Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,411,861
1,749,292
Net inc
90,098
141,792
Share earns
.03
.05
Shares outst
2,612,181
2,747,958


20 Teen-Agers Held in Attack
LEAD: Twenty youths, 15 to 17 years old, were taken into custody by the transit police yesterday evening after the robbery of a teen-ager at a Brooklyn subway station, the police said.
Ali Hamid, 17, of Brooklyn, was in the Union Street station in the Park Slope section about 6:30 P.M. when 20 to 30 youths began hitting and kicking him, said Sgt.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGI Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,163,000
2,271,000
Share earns
.23
.29
Shares outst
9,429,349
7,724,589
9mo net inc
6,329,000
7,233,000
Share earns
.68
.94
Shares outst
9,296,376
7,723,182


Business and the Law; High Court Faces Antitrust Issues
LEAD: WHEN they return for a new term next week, the Justices of the Supreme Court will have an unusually heavy docket of antitrust disputes.


The Best Way to Fight the Mob
LEAD: For two decades, Federal crimefighters have pursued the mob with 14 regional strike forces that coordinate the F.B.I. and other agencies.
It is an effective way to fight organized crime yet it has aroused the jealousies of the 94 local U.S.
Attorneys.
Now Attorney General Richard Thornburgh, a former U.S.


Barbara J. Meisel, Accountant, Wed
LEAD: Barbara J. Meisel and Martin J. Bienenstock were married yesterday evening at the Pierre in New York by Rabbi Harlan Wechsler and Rabbi Judah Nadich.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Meisel of Great Neck, L.I.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Bienenstock of New York.


Tool Orders Rose 18.8% Last Month
LEAD: Orders for American-made machine tools rebounded in August, advancing by 18.8 percent over the July level as orders from the automotive industry increased significantly, a trade group said in a monthly report to be released today.


San Francisco Journal; Views of Wretchedness By Children Born to It
LEAD: Twelve-year-old Shemika Skipworth had no idea, when she began writing, that she would one day be a guest of honor at a book-publishing party, fingers cramped from signing too many autographs.


Somerset Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Somerset Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
432,000
2,081,000
Share earns
.09
.45
6mo net inc
2,081,000
4,231,000
Share earns
.45
.92
Total reserves for possible loan and specific other real estate owned losses amounted to $8.5 million at Aug.


Yield to Jays? Brewers Refuse
LEAD: Joey Meyer's three-run double broke a sixth-inning tie and the Milwaukee Brewers beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 8-3, today to keep their slim playoff hopes alive in the American League East.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of President Bush's visit to the United Nations, First Avenue will be closed most of today from 34th to 51st Streets.
Portions of the F.D.R.


Appeals Made To Jewish Voters In Mayor Race
LEAD: The two major candidates for New York City mayor spent the day yesterday in aggressive pursuit of the city's Jewish voters, with stops in the Orthodox neighborhoods of Brooklyn and back-to-back appearances at a Shalom Festival in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx.


Arch Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arch Petroleum (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,561,000
829,000
Net inc
411,000
163,000
Share earns
.03
.01
9mo rev
4,173,000
1,811,000
Net inc
1,137,000
207,000
Share earns
.07
.02


Karen Adair Marries
LEAD: The marriage of Karen Graham Adair, a daughter of Michael H. Adair of Bedford, N.Y., and Mrs.
Dennis G. Little of Barrington, R.I., to Mark Charles Schmidt-Fellner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Schmidt-Fellner of Riverside, Conn., took place yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn.


Flame Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flame Industries (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Net loss
10,877
15,302


Milastar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milastar Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
993,000
570,000
Net inc
158,000
61,000
Share earns
.08
.03
Shares outst
2,081,372
2,004,065


Corcoran Board to Meet on Dismissing Director
LEAD: The board of the Corcoran Gallery of Art will meet Monday on whether to dismiss the museum's director, Dr.
Christina Orr-Cahall, whose decision to cancel a photographic exhibition by Robert Mapplethorpe threw the institution into summerlong turmoil.


Allied Security reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Security
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,166,504
20,298,689
Net inc
785,557
361,901
Share earns
1.61
.72
Yr rev
93,194,205
76,205,330
Net inc
1,865,212
1,646,471
Share earns
3.78
3.25


Stadiums Enter Era Of Luxury
LEAD: A FLUSH decade for the businesses of baseball, football, basketball and hockey has sparked a construction and renovation boom in professional sports facilities across the United States and Canada.


Reviews/Dance; At Coney Island, Wind and Commotion
LEAD: There are times when a dance critic begins to feel too old to sit on a windy beach at Coney Island and watch a young woman, torso painted silvery gray, roar fiercely as her mermaid's ''tail,'' a huge slinky tube, stretches out for 10 yards across the sand.


Dinkins Dazed but Not Seriously Hurt in Car Crash
LEAD: David N. Dinkins had his head slammed into a car seat but was not seriously hurt yesterday when his automobile was hit broadside in East Harlem as it rushed between campaign stops.


Bayakoa Captures Ruffian By 3 1/2
LEAD: Bayakoa proved herself the nation's best filly or mare yesterday when she scored a decisive 3 1/2-length victory over a stellar field in the $226,400 Ruffian Handicap at Belmont Park.


Murder Charges Filed in a Car Theft Case
LEAD: A 20-year-old man was charged with murder today after he reportedly stole a car and then deliberately slammed it into a highway guardrail in an effort to shake off a man who was clinging to the outside of the car, the police said.


L.J. Simone Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L.J. Simone Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,449,000
3,688,000
Net loss
203,000
69,000
Shares outst
3,148,148
2,725,000


On Prison Barge, All Hands Battle Drugs
LEAD: In a room so humid that its painted aluminum walls sweated, Eric Lewis bolted to his feet and strode to the center of a circle of men, most of whom are like himself: young, street-hewn and black.
They are also drug addicts on the mend behind bars.


Rams Escape, 41-38
LEAD: Greg Bell rushed for 221 yards and scored twice today as the Los Angeles Rams defeated the Green Bay Packers, 41-38.


Fashion's Faded Editorial/Advertising Line
LEAD: SUMMER is fading, the day is cool and a woman thinks wistfully of new fall clothes.
She gathers September fashion magazines and begins to thumb through them for suggestions.
How will they help her decide what to buy?


A Black Director Views Apartheid
LEAD: Growing up in Martinique, Euzhan Palcy began her career as a director at the age of 12.
Every Saturday night after dinner, before the discerning audience of her parents, Leon and Romauld, she would assemble her four brothers and her older sister to perform another of the plays she had written.


A New Effort to Protect Ozone
LEAD: The battle to save the atmosphere's protective layer of ozone is moving to a new front: the corner auto-repair shop, where an ounce-by-ounce struggle is under way to limit the escape of the vast amounts of air-conditioning fluid handled daily.


Impending U.S. Jobs 'Disaster': Work Force Unqualified to Work
LEAD: David T. Kearns, chairman of the Xerox Corporation, calls it ''the makings of a national disaster.''


Tokheim Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tokheim Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
60,313,000
52,672,000
Net inc
2,212,000
2,471,000
Share earns
.31
.39
9mo sales
160,935,000
145,126,000
Net inc
3,480,000
b9,176,000
Share earns
.51
1.44


Ccair Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ccair Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
17,995,000
12,932,000
Net inc
926,000
1,273,000
Share earns
.19
.28
Yr rev
60,061,000
42,007,000
Net inc
2,094,000
2,668,000
Share earns
.44
.59


Mets Take Tumble After Leading 5-1
LEAD: The Mets gave their fans something to remember on Fan Appreciation Day yesterday: a symbol of their summer of 1989 - the squandered four-run lead, the five-run ninth inning for the other guys.


OPEC Battling to Save Troubled Quota System
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries struggled tonight to save its crumbling production system, as more of its members sent clear signals that they planned to increase output to meet the rising demand for OPEC oil worldwide.


Bakker Is Expected to Testify in His Own Defense
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the former television evangelist, is expected to testify in his own defense this week as his trial on Federal fraud and conspiracy charges nears its close.


No Signs of Russian Backlash in Baltic States; United Europe Model
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grist Mill Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grist Mill Co (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,503,000
9,946,000
Net inc
562,000
645,000
Share earns
.12
.14


IPM Technology Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPM Technology Inc (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
65,366,000
53,937,000
Net inc
293,000
b265,000
Share earns
.11
.10
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $58,000.
The company said the latest year's net included a charge of $615,000 from the settlement of litigation and a charge of $420,000 from fees associated with a merger agreement.


Actidev Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Actidev Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,000,000
6,300,000
Net inc
308,000
370,000
Share earns
.06
.07
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about Bertram D. Tallamy misstated the year he became superintendent of the New York State Department of Public Works.
It was 1945, not 1935.


2-Point Play Gives Momentum to Penn
LEAD: A minor change in the college football rules last year proved to be a major one for Pennsylvania on Saturday in the Quakers' 25-12 victory over Lafayette.


4 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of new issues this week includes today's auction of new three-month and six-month Treasury bills, followed by one for two-year notes tomorrow and a four-year note auction on Wednesday.


Kelly Fires 5 Touchdown Passes as Bills Beat Oilers, 47-41
LEAD: Jim Kelly threw five touchdown passes today, including a 28-yard game-winner to Andre Reed with 6 minutes 18 seconds left in overtime, and the Buffalo Bills beat the Houston Oilers, 47-41.


Peggy Koch Wed To B. S. Palmer
LEAD: Peggy Ann Koch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Koch Jr. of New York and East Orleans, Mass., was married yesterday to Briggs S. Palmer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Palmer of Fort Myers, Fla.
The ceremony was performed at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., by the Rev.
John Buehrens, a Unitarian minister.


Toppling a Tower of Compromise
LEAD: Three years almost to the day after Congress approved the Tax Reform Act of 1986, that monumental legislation, the product of dozens of carefully drawn political and economic trade-offs, seems likely to be torn apart by lawmakers in votes this week.


Review/Television; Connie Chung's 'Saturday' Features James Earl Jones
LEAD: As you may have heard by now, Connie Chung has been converted to stardom in accord with network fashion.
If the title of ''Saturday Night With Connie Chung'' were not enough to get the point across, the array of photographs of pretty Ms.
Chung that began the hour, at 10 P.M.
Saturday on CBS, certified her new incarnation.


D.A. Stuart reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D.A. Stuart
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
22,223,496
15,308,973
Net inc
270,997
350,096
Share earns
.13
.25
6mo sales
43,777,833
30,599,873
Net inc
313,854
1,374,126
Share earns
.15
1.00
Shares outst
2,123,004
1,368,768


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If we continue to let children who are born in poverty fail to get the kind of education that will allow them to participate in our economy and our society productively, then some time in the 21st century this nation will cease to be a peaceful, prosperous democracy.''  -Brad M. Butler, former chairman of the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.


No Signs of Russian Backlash in Baltic States
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ortega Chosen Candidate
LEAD: The governing Sandinista party late today named President Daniel Ortega Saavedra to head its slate of candidates for next year's elections and picked Vice President Sergio Ramirez as his running mate.
Mr.
Ortega, 44, will run against the opposition coalition candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, publisher of the newspaper La Prensa, in Feb.


Horizon Healthcare Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Healthcare Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,223,000
25,819,000
Net inc
b169,000
21,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-After an extraordinary tax credit of $45,000, or 1 cent a share.


In the Drug War, Medellin Is a Reluctant Fighter
LEAD: In the war on drugs, Colombia's most violent city would like to bow out on the ground of conflict of interest.


Chaparral Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chaparral Steel Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
101,525,000
97,210,000
Net inc
7,016,000
9,571,000
Share earns
.22
.31
Shares outst
29,833,000
29,652,000


Belcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belcor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,252,156
5,375,654
Net inc
279,109
277,623
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
18,478,910
15,360,770
Net inc
606,425
670,304
Share earns
.03
.03


Pearson Deal Makes Three In Bargain Book Field
LEAD: For a price of $14 million, what some authors get for a two-book contract, Pearson P.L.C. is about to become the third international publishing conglomerate in the last year to enter the field of bargain books.
In an agreement reached last week, its subsidiary Penguin USA will acquire W. H. Smith Publishers, the second-largest bargain book company.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I only regret that the people of New York may not understand as keenly as I do the extraordinary contribution you have made to upholding the law in this city.''  -Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward, in his letter of resignation to Mayor Edward I. Koch.  [ B4:3. ]


Benefit for Soviet Jews Is to Feature Performers
LEAD: The violinist Isaac Stern and the pianist Vladimir Feltsman are to highlight a benefit at 8 P.M.
Thursday at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The musicians, who are to perform together for the first time, will play the first movement from Franck's Sonata in A major.


Heavy Rains Delay the Vast Cleanup in the South
LEAD: Four days after a hurricane smashed into the coast here, driving winds and rain dumped misery upon misery, hampering cleanup efforts from Georgia to North Carolina.


American Recreation Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Recreation Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,412,000
6,491,000
Net loss
368,000
691,000
Revenue represented operating revenue.
American Recreation's improvement in it results included gains on the sale of assets and reductions in corporate expenses and non-consolidated operating losses.


Ethics Attacks Heat Courter-Florio Debate
LEAD: In a biting exchange of attacks and counter-attacks, the two major candidates for governor of New Jersey tonight charged each other with ethical lapses and portrayed one another as ideological outsiders in this moderate suburban state.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the Ford Motor Company's purchase of a stake in Jaguar P.L.C. referred incorrectly to a British Government regulation issued when the state-owned company was turned over to the private sector.
The Government banned the purchase of more than 15 percent of the company's stock by a single buyer until the end of next year.


Gold and Platinum Rise; Silver Off on Profit Taking
LEAD: Prices of gold bullion advanced yesterday, buoyed by the sharp drop in the dollar's value against major foreign currencies and, to a far lesser extent, weakness in the domestic stock and bond markets.
While platinum prices rose with gold, many silver traders decided to take profits.


Canonie Environmental Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canonie Environmental Svcs (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,450,000
13,511,000
Net loss
235,000
b1,690,000
Share earns
-
.30
6mo rev
15,425,000
25,973,000
Net inc
434,000
3,476,000
Share earns
.08
.62


Our Towns; A Price of Color Is Turning Down A Dream House
LEAD: Funny how the same 80-by-100-foot lot can look so different to two people.


Deal for H.M.S.S.
LEAD: SecoAmerica Inc., a diversified services company that is the American arm of the Secom Company Ltd. of Japan, signed a definitive agreement to acquire H.M.S.S. for $50 a share, or $250 million, and said it would commence a tender offer later this week for the home health-care services company.
H.M.S.S.


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oxford Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 1
1989
1988
Sales
146,709,000
147,546,000
Net inc
3,975,000
3,524,000
Share earns
.40
.35
Shares outst
9,877,482
9,974,010


Studies Confirm Cholesterol-Heart Attack Link; The Fault in the Milk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Neoterik Health Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neoterik Health Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,474,000
2,011,000
Net inc
32,000
74,000
Share earns
.02
.08


Young Koreans See U.S. as Dividing Their Land
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bengals Defeat Browns
LEAD: Boomer Esiason threw three touchdown passes and Jim Skow led a second-half defensive surge as the Cincinnati Bengals beat the Cleveland Browns, 21-14, tonight.


2 Dead and 50 Hurt in Fire on Danish Ferry
LEAD: A fire broke out at dawn today on a luxury Danish ferry in the North Sea while most of its 650 passengers and crew were asleep.
Two passengers were reported killed and as many as 50 injured.


Valley Federal Savings Bank (Ind) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Federal Savings Bank (Ind) (O)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net loss
520,247
b186,000
Per share
-
.17
Yr net inc
80,324
971,755
Per share
.08
.85
b-Net income


Indonesia Takes Steps to Protect Rain Forests
LEAD: Moments after a helicopter lifts off from a forest base camp northwest of here, the scars of development appear among the tumultuous greens of the tropical rain forest: the felled trees, the bulldozers, the bright orange mud of the logging roads, the smudges of smoke alongside, where slash-and-burn farmers have followed the loggers in.


Blue Jays Trying to Avoid Panic
LEAD: It was over a span of days in late July that the Blue Jays began to sense the phenomenon.
Balls that had never made it to the outfield walls of the recently occupied Skydome were now carrying over them.
Home runs consequently abounded, and thus so too did an entire range of speculation, theories embracing metaphysics as well as meteorology.


Chandler Out of Action
LEAD: The Indianapolis Colts' quarterback Chris Chandler will undergo surgery for a torn knee ligament next week and is likely to miss the entire season, but the All-Pro running back Eric Dickerson hopes to play Sunday against the Jets at the Meadowlands.


Partisan Battle Over the Federal Budget Heats Up
LEAD: The war of words between the Bush Administration and Congressional Democrats intensified today as the House of Representatives moved toward consideration of a tax and budget package that has become a critical test for the new Democratic leadership.


Avon Investigates Decline in Sales
LEAD: The chairman of Avon Products Inc., James Preston, said the company was looking for reasons for a sharp downturn in its sales of gifts, decorative and jewelry products, which usually account for 50 percent of the cosmetics maker's sales in the fourth quarter.
He said Avon expected a shortfall in domestic sales for the year of $75 million to $90 million from what it had projected in


Coping in Hugo's Aftermath
LEAD:  Charleston, S.C.: Chilly, heavy rain has impeded relief efforts, slowing work on restoring electricity, although electrical service was restored to hospitals.
The city remained patrolled by the National guard to prevent looting.
A curfew remained in force.
Sumter, S.C.: This community 180 miles from the coast remained without food, water and electrical power.


Mack Has Surgery
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns' fullback, Kevin Mack, underwent surgery for torn cartilage in his left knee yesterday at the Cleveland Clinic and is expected to remain out of action until the Browns' game with Pittsburgh on Oct. 15, a Browns spokesman said.
Mack missed the first three games because of an N.F.L.


HOUSE PANEL TOLD PIERCE IS UNREADY
LEAD: Lawyers for Samuel R. Pierce Jr. warned Congress today that the former Secretary of Housing and Urban Development would not be prepared for a scheduled Tuesday hearing in the House, leaving Mr.
Pierce with ''unpleasant options.''


PHP Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PHP Healthcare (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,839,000
13,991,000
Net loss
284,000
b225,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income  Latest quarter results included an extraordinary expense equaled to 20 cents a share to cover settlement of a lawsuit.


Hungarian Serenade: Wooing Voters and the West
LEAD: The Communist leadership is casting about for ways out of Hungary's deep political and economic predicaments that will appeal to two critical quarters: the West and the Hungarian electorate.


Anderson and Rooney Sent to Utica by Devils
LEAD: How much the Devils have upgraded their team was reflected in today's demotion of two players who were viewed as indispensable last season.


Tiffany's Lure for Japanese Retailer
LEAD: The five models stepped down the runway in Giorgio Armani fashions, swaying to a rock beat, but they finished with a telling flourish: Arrayed around the three-story corporate symbol of the Japanese retailing giant Mitsukoshi, the women dropped their poses and bowed humbly to the audience.


Updating a Hard Disk
LEAD: SHE had a disk problem, and she didn't want a chiropractor. She wanted me.


Corner in Manhattan Named For Citizens Killed in Beijing
LEAD: Despite an objection by the Chinese Government, Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday signed a bill naming a site outside the Chinese Consulate as ''Tiananmen Square Corner'' in memory of the people killed in that square in Beijing earlier this year.


NASA Ends Unmanned Launchings in Florida; Shuttle Damaged
LEAD: After more than 400 liftoffs, NASA today launched an unmanned rocket, the last one it will loft into space here.


The Editorial Notebook; A Sick Man Waits
LEAD: June and Frank, a poor elderly couple I know in West Philadelphia, don't follow Congressional debates.
But this week, their lives may be drastically affected.
The House will decide the fate of the catastrophic-health insurance program.
Plagued by cost overruns and a revolt of upper-income families who pay a disproportionate share of the expense, the program may be repealed.


Ali Hafid, Drummer In 'Zorba,' Dies at 54
LEAD: Ali Hafid, a Moroccan drummer whose onstage performances in the Broadway musical ''Zorba'' enhanced his popularity, died of lung cancer Friday in St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A.&amp;P. Profit Rises by 20.7%
LEAD: The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company posted a 20.7 percent quarterly profit gain on an 11.2 percent increase in sales, it reported today.


U.N. Says Billions Are in Poor Health
LEAD: One billion people around the world are in poor health, malnourished or suffering with diseases ranging from malaria and river blindness to AIDS, the World Health Organization said Sunday.


Strikers Act at Peugeot
LEAD: Strikers at a Peugeot S.A. plant in Mulhouse in eastern France occupied one of its two foundries this morning, a company spokesman said.
The foundry produces components including pistons, but the plant had sufficient stocks to continue working, he added.
It was producing about 50 cars an hour this morning compared with the usual capacity of 80 an hour.


Studies Confirm Cholesterol-Heart Attack Link
LEAD: To the Editor:


East German Leader, Long Absent, Reappears
LEAD: Erich Honecker, the East German leader, reappeared in public today, more than five weeks after undergoing gall-bladder surgery.
But the pressures on his Government continued to mount with the growing strength of a fledgling movement that seeks political change.


Excerpts From Bush's Speech at the Opening of the U.N. General Assembly
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's address yesterday to the United Nations General Assembly, as recorded by The New York Times:


New Board Chooses Head for Falconbridge
LEAD: Falconbridge Ltd., a big Canadian mining company recently taken over by Noranda Inc. and Trelleborg A.B., will be headed by Alex G. Balogh, a seasoned Noranda mining executive.


Howard B. Wolf Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard B. Wolf Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,569,860
2,069,842
Net inc
102,704
95,835
Share earns
.10
.09


Investor's Daily Entering Texas
LEAD: Investor's Daily, a national business newspaper, reached an agreement today to be printed and distributed in Texas by The Dallas Times Herald.


Light-Sensitive Chemicals Join Arsenal of Anti-Cancer Weapons
LEAD: WHERE chemotherapy and surgery have failed, doctors surgeons are increasingly turning to an unusual new weapon in the treatment of cancer: red light.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Barker Sells Two Units
LEAD: Charles Barker P.L.C., a British marketing and communications company, last week sold Charles Barker Ltd., its public relations subsidiary, to Corporate Communications P.L.C., a British public relations concern that is the parent of Donley Communications.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Barker also sold its Ayer Barker unit, a consumer advertising agency, to N.


For the Children, Colombia, Is a Very Scary Place to Be
LEAD: Perched on a school sofa, her white socks and black shoes swinging a few inches from the floor, Catalina, who is 11 years old, remembers setting out with her mother on a recent Saturday to buy a birthday present.


Stocks Fall Broadly as Dow Drops 22.42
LEAD: Stock prices plunged across a broad front yesterday on the heels of a steep decline in the dollar and in bond prices.


Review/Music; In Pete Seeger's Tradition
LEAD: Although contemporary folk music that perpetuates the left-wing populism of Pete Seeger is much less abundant today than in the 1960's, that tradition is far from extinct.
Bright Morning Star, a versatile New England-based sextet, and the Washington Sisters, a folk duo from Columbus, Ohio, who appeared at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday evening in the Voices of


Heilig-Meyers Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heilig-Meyers Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
90,154,000
85,586,000
Net inc
3,811,000
4,407,000
Share earns
.36
.42
6mo rev
189,235,000
177,295,000
Net inc
b11,369,000
10,296,000
Share earns
1.08
.98


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, retained Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. as a financial adviser on whether to sell its Crosby and Harris businesses to reduce debt.


Ground Broken for First School Planned by New Authority


Dalai Lama Meets Jews From 4 Major Branches
LEAD: An unusual Buddhist-Jewish dialogue took place here today between the Dalai Lama, a major spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, and a group of six Jewish scholars.


Grand Jury Inquiry Due in USAir Crash
LEAD: The Queens District Attorney announced yesterday that evidence on last week's fatal crash of a USAir jetliner at La Guardia Airport would be presented soon to a grand jury, raising the possibility of criminal charges against the cockpit crew.


Glamis Gold Ltd reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glamis Gold Ltd
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
14,052,000
13,673,000
Net loss
5,214,000
b1,036,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income  Results are in Canadian dollars.


Bridge
LEAD: Six members of the United States women's team faced major difficulties Sunday in leaving this city because a strike by pilots on Australian domestic lines meant that some of them had to sit about waiting for a plane that might never depart.
But they were all euphoric in the glow of victory.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helene Curtis Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
199,012,000
157,249,000
Net inc
6,605,000
4,978,000
Share earns
.71
.65
Shares outst
9,327,461
7,697,602
6mo sales
359,249,000
295,002,000
Net inc
8,838,000
6,618,000
Share earns
.95
.87
Shares outst
9,306,094
7,557,158


Fear Rises at Site of Bronx Slayings
LEAD: Residents of the Bronx building where a mother of three and the toddler she was baby-sitting were found dead Sunday were watching their children more closely and guarding their doors yesterday, trying to come to terms with the slayings.


Food Lion Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Food Lion Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 12
1989
1988
Sales
1,106,286,000
905,218,000
Net inc
32,269,000
28,685,000
Share earns
.10
.09
9mo sales
3,186,574,000
2,553,124,000
Net inc
92,961,000
78,219,000
Share earns
.29
.24


Rival Lebanese Legislators to Meet in Saudi Arabia
LEAD: Despite a serious violation of Lebanon's four-day-old truce, Christian and Muslim members of Parliament agreed today to meet in Saudi Arabia on Saturday to discuss a charter for national reconciliation.


Charlotte Closes Its Schools In the Slow Work of Recovery
LEAD: More than half of this city of 373,000 people was without electricity today as heavy rains slowed efforts to repair power lines and houses damaged by a weakened Hurricane Hugo.


Books of The Times; The Bell Tolls Again, This Time in Eritrea
LEAD:  To Asmara  By Thomas Keneally  290 pages. Warner Books. $18.95.


Rock Artists Protest Near White House
LEAD: Rock-and-roll and rap musicians rallied across the street from the White House today to protest what they said were efforts to censor their music.


Argentine Chief, at U.N., Presses Falklands Stand
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina strongly reasserted his country's claim to sovereignty over the Falkland Islands today in advance of talks with Britain next month on normalizing relations after the 1982 war over the islands.


Clean Harbors Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clean Harbors Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,123,000
24,705,000
Net inc
1,327,000
1,647,000
Share earns
.15
.22
Shares outst
3,127,000
3,066,000
6mo rev
68,172,000
45,844,000
Net inc
1,748,000
3,012,000
Share earns
.19
.42


WSMP Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 11
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WSMP Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 11
1989
1988
Revenue
14,454,000
14,931,000
Net inc
129,000
344,000
Share earns
.06
.15
Shares outst
2,156,169
2,396,294
6mo rev
29,469,000
32,153,000
Net inc
290,000
b1,355,000
Share earns
.13
.58
Shares outst
2,182,604
2,401,515


Connecticut Lotto to Expand
LEAD: The State Gaming Policy Board, as expected, today approved an expansion of the state's lotto game to 44 numbers, and lottery officials immediately began a promotion of the new game.
The lotto game, in which players pick six numbers from 40, will expand to 44 numbers Saturday.
Lottery officials have said they hope the new game, with its longer odds, will pay off bigger grand jackpots and attract more bettors to reverse slumping ticket sales.


Saber-Tooth Social Life: Primeval Compassion
LEAD: WHEN Fred P. Heald looks into a tray of bits of bone, chocolate brown with the asphalt that has permeated them for tens of thousands of years, he sees packs of saber-toothed cats on the prowl in a violent world but relating to one another with remarkable benevolence.


Otto Kraushaar, 87, Ex-Head of Goucher
LEAD: Otto F. Kraushaar, former president of Goucher College, died Saturday at his home in Baltimore after a long illness.
He was 87 years old.


Dollar Falls As Central Banks Act
LEAD: The dollar dropped sharply today after the United States and its economic allies sent a strong message that they wanted a decline.


Business and Health; Damage Control On Contact Lens
LEAD: THE contact lens industry's chances of reaching $1 billion in sales next year may have been set back by research showing that the risk of contracting serious illnesses increases if the lenses are worn overnight.


Friends and Colleagues Remember Sidney Hook
LEAD: Friends, colleagues and admirers assembled at New York University yesterday to commemorate Sidney Hook, the philosopher, author and social critic who died on July 12 at the age of 86.


Krone and Bravo Suspended for Fight
LEAD: The Meadowlands Race Track stewards last night suspended the jockey Julie Krone for 15 days and the jockey Joe Bravo for 5 days for ''unsportsmanlike conduct'' as a result of their fight after the seventh race Saturday night.
Krone and Bravo exchanged punches after Krone accused Bravo of repeatedly interfering with her mount during the race.


Looting on St. Croix Linked to Island's Tensions
LEAD: As food and other relief supplies poured into St.
Croix today, residents and Federal officials began asking why, of a dozen Caribbean islands devastated by a hurricane last week, only one erupted in widespread violence and looting.


Plexus Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plexus Resources (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
175,000
216,000
Net loss
772,000
422,000
Yr rev
611,000
712,000
Net loss
1,199,000
736,000


Overcoming 18th Hole Determines Winners
LEAD: It creeps over the body - turning the knees to jelly so they wobble, tightening the shoulder and arm muscles so they don't swing easily, drying the throat and soaking the palms, fevering the brow and freezing the brain.
It's the lonely golfer's worst enemy: pressure.


United Illuminating Co reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Illuminating Co (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
524,572,000
512,444,000
Net loss
b99,232,724
c94,264,751
Share earns
-
6.79
b-After a loss of $188,786,768 from a change in accounting principle resulting from the adoption of SFAS 90.


Bees and 'Yellow Rain': A New Explanation
LEAD: GIANT Asian honeybees go on mass defecation flights to keep cool, researchers have reported, in what may be an explanation for ''yellow rain,'' which the United States Government once called a Soviet biological weapon.


Vermont American Bids
LEAD: The Vermont American Corporation said it had received several proposals for its acquisition in response to its previously announced solicitation of buyout bids.
The company said that a special board committee was reviewing the proposals but that there could be no assurance that a transaction would result.


5-Year Probation
LEAD: Southeastern Louisiana University's dormant men's program was placed on a five-year probation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday for recruiting violations.
The school has scuttled its program for 1989-90 because of budget problems.
No players can be signed during this academic year and only seven basketball scholarships can be given for 1990-91.(


Poll Finds Broad Support for Bush but Skepticism About Drugs and Taxes
LEAD: The American public thoroughly approves of the way President Bush is handling his job and supports most of his programs, but doubts whether many of them, including Mr.
Bush's highly publicized plans to fight illegal drugs and clean up the environment, will really work.


Oil-Dri Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oil-Dri Corp of America (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,759,000
17,672,000
Net inc
1,240,000
1,726,000
Share earns
.22
.31
Yr sales
82,596,000
68,131,000
Net inc
5,643,000
6,555,000
Share earns
1.01
1.18


Social Security No Gift
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cubs, Giants Lose but Clinch Ties
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs missed a chance to clinch a tie for the National League East championship tonight when a Montreal pinch-hitter, Jim Dwyer, singled with one out in the 10th inning to give the Expos a 4-3 victory.


65 Senators Urge Baker to Deny Arafat a Visa
LEAD: More than 65 senators have signed a letter urging the Bush Administration to deny a visa to Yasir Arafat if he seeks permission to come to the United States to address the United Nations.


Avery International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avery International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
423,000,000
382,000,000
Net inc
18,900,000
17,100,000
Share earns
.43
.39
9mo sales
1,280,000,000
1,170,000,000
Net inc
63,300,000
56,600,000
Share earns
1.44
1.29


Giuliani Has Taunt for Dinkins: He's a 'Jesse Jackson Democrat'
LEAD: Responding to his opponent's repeated taunt that he is a ''Ronald Reagan Republican,'' Rudolph W. Giuliani said after an appearance at an Orthodox Jewish private school yesterday that he could just as easily call David N. Dinkins a ''Jesse Jackson Democrat.''


U.S. Seeks Information On UAL Buyout Plans
LEAD: The Transportation Department, expressing concern about the role of foreign companies in the acquisitions of United States airlines, said yesterday that it had asked United Airlines for information about a proposed $6.75 billion buyout of its parent, the UAL Corporation, by management, employees and British


Osicom Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osicom Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,959,000
24,352,000
Net loss
1,483,000
b143,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
45,518,000
47,848,000
Net loss
1,978,000
b470,000
Share earns
-
.15


The Orient Express, a Train With a Past
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ward Resigns, Citing Problem With Asthma
LEAD: Benjamin Ward resigned yesterday as Police Commissioner after a tumultuous six-year tenure in which he increased the numbers of minorities and women on the force, raised educational standards for officers and tried to battle an explosion in drug-related crime.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Friday about the Japanese department store chain Mitsukoshi Ltd. misstated its sales.
For the 1988 fiscal year they totaled 643.4 billion ($5.0 billion), and for the 1989 fiscal year 712.6 billion ($5.6 billion).
Figures are calculated at the conversion rates for the end of each February, the last month of the fiscal year.


NEC Shows Color Laptop Computer
LEAD: The NEC Corporation introduced what it said was the first color laptop computer available in the United States.
The company said it expects to start shipping the laptop, the Prospeed CSX, in mid-October.
It will retail for $8,499 to $9,499, depending upon storage capacity.


Tanker Runs Aground in Gulf
LEAD: A tanker loaded with 21.6 million gallons of crude oil from Venezuela ran aground early today in the Gulf of Mexico near an approach to the Mississippi River. ''There's no leak or anything,'' said Chief Petty Officer Michael Robling of the Coast Guard. ''It's aground in the mud and sand down there.


China Factories Ordered Closed
LEAD: China's top leader, Deng Xiaoping, has ordered some rural factories to be closed because they use resources that should go to state companies, the official Economic Information newspaper said today.


Quebec, Rejecting Separatists, Re-elects Liberals
LEAD: Quebec citizens voted decisively today to re-elect the Liberal Government of Premier Robert Bourassa, again rejecting the separatist Parti Quebecois.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Outgrowing A Need to Be Outrageous
LEAD: RICHARD KIRSHENBAUM and Jonathan Bond, the bad boys of American advertising, are growing out - and growing up.


Corcoran Board Delays Vote On Resignation Request
LEAD: The board of the Corcoran Gallery of Art today postponed a vote on whether to ask for the resignation of the gallery's director but decided to appoint a task force to study staff morale.


I.B.M. Sets Joint Deal in Automation
LEAD: Two of the nation's most influential makers of machinery and production systems for the global electronics industry, Texas Instruments Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation, said today that they would seek contracts to automate large factory operations together.


Carolina Freight Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Freight Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Revenue
152,116,654
151,460,076
Net inc
1,076,700
4,647,016
Share earns
.16
.71
9mo rev
459,040,010
442,964,096
Net inc
4,687,498
4,835,666
Share earns
.70
.73


Railroad Power Cut in Bronx
LEAD: Power was cut off in a Bronx section of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad for 35 minutes yesterday evening as the police searched the tracks for a gun used in a shootout.
No weapon was found while the power was off along Park Avenue from East 169th to East 170th Street.
The shooting, in which one man received arm and shoulder wounds, occurred in a nearby lobby on Webster Avenue as two men argued over a woman, said a police spokesman, Officer Edward Feeney.


Gelman Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gelman Sciences Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,500,000
17,144,000
Net inc
721,000
471,000
Share earns
.29
.20
Shares outst
2,503,000
2,351,000
Yr sales
71,087,000
61,735,000
Net inc
b2,371,000
1,176,000
Share earns
.98
.50
Shares outst
2,426,000
2,367,000


Narita Journal; An Airport Is Being Strangled by Relentless Foes
LEAD: Traffic moves briskly to and from Tokyo's international airport here on a glorious afternoon, in keeping with Japan's image of grace and machine-like efficiency.
But as soon as one crosses the guarded, barbed wire boundary into the airport compound, another side to this country emerges.


Panel Votes to Keep Congress Mailings, Reversing Big Votes
LEAD: Senate and House negotiators voted today to continue free Congressional mass mailings, reversing lopsided votes in both houses that sought to end the practice and use the savings to combat illegal drugs.


Whittier Journal; '87 Quake Still Stirs A City's Fears
LEAD: Two years after an earthquake devastated this southern Californian city, Shirley Campbell is still waiting to put her good china back in the glass cabinet in her dining room.


Midtown Steam Pipe Bursts; Asbestos Is Released
LEAD: An asbestos-lined steam pipe exploded under a sidewalk in midtown Manhattan early yesterday, sending a column of steam 300 feet into the air and spraying a block of East 40th Street and part of Madison Avenue with mud and debris, some of it contaminated with high levels of asbestos.


Golden Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Enterprises (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
32,954,669
31,729,480
Net inc
1,231,126
2,039,903
Share earns
.10
.16


Review/Music; A Second Arrangement For 'Arias and Barcarolles'
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein's new song cycle, ''Arias and Barcarolles,'' had its second local performance with the New York Chamber Symphony under Gerard Schwarz.
The first, earlier this month, used Mr.
Bernstein's original scoring for piano-duet accompaniment.
Saturday evening at the 92d Street Y, we heard an arrangement for strings and percussion by Bright


H.E.R.O.  Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H.E.R.O.  Industries
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,332,075
2,133,307
Net inc
105,850
95,451
Share earns
.02
.02
9mo sales
6,736,740
6,221,978
Net inc
362,326
342,417
Share earns
.07
.06
The results are in Canadian funds.


Securities Bill Advances
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed a bill today to increase cooperation between the Securities and Exchange Commission and foreign agencies in investigations of insider trading and other securities fraud.
The bill gives the S.E.C. authority to make sure records from foreign securities agencies get confidential treatment and to disclose information involving foreign authorities.


Hauser Chemical Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hauser Chemical Research Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
687,223
423,742
Net inc
21,767
18,555


Vietnamese Quit Cambodia Today But Face Heavy Burdens at Home
LEAD: For a country about to enjoy what could be its first prolonged period of peace in many decades, Vietnam today displays little sense of celebration.


Another Steam Pipe Explodes in Manhattan


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.50
8.93
8.27
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.82
7.77
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.75
7.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.24
8.90
30-YR.


John E. Hunt, 79, Ex-Jersey Congressman
LEAD: John E. Hunt, a Republican who lost his seat in the House of Representatives to James J. Florio in 1974, died Friday at Underwood-Memorial Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Pitman, N.J.
He was hospitalized two weeks ago for treatment of a heart condition.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Newsweek President
LEAD: Newsweek magazine yesterday named Alan G. Spoon as president.
Mr.
Spoon has been a vice president of Newsweek's parent company, the Washington Post Company, since 1987.
Before that he was a marketing and finance vice president at The Washington Post.


Bush Finds One Israeli Is Never Enough
LEAD: President Bush got caught in the crosswinds of Israeli politics yesterday.


Car Sales in Mid-September Surged Forward by 10.2%
LEAD: Sales of cars built in the United States surged by 10.2 percent in mid-September, as buyers continued to buy 1989 models to beat price increases for the 1990 model year.


What Fate for Remains of a Library's Irreplaceable Collection?
LEAD: To the Editor:


END THE 'SCOURGE' OF CHEMICAL ARMS, BUSH SAYS AT U.N.
LEAD: President Bush, saying it was time ''to rid the earth of this scourge,'' told the United Nations today that the United States would destroy 80 percent of its chemical weapons if the Soviet Union agreed to cut its stockpile to the American level.


Program Trading Up
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that program trading amounted to 10.3 percent of its average daily volume in August of 171.7 million shares.


Steinhardt Reports Bag Maker Stake
LEAD: The New York investor Michael H. Steinhardt has acquired a 5.06 percent stake in the American Western Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Steinhardt said that he had acquired the American Western shares for investment purposes but might consider seeking control of the company.


The Latest for Desktop Publishers
LEAD: THE Seybold Computer Publishing Conference, which drew thousands of graphics arts and publishing professionals to San Francisco last week, often shows expensive and esoteric technology for producing newspapers, magazines, advertisements, and other complex documents.
But, this year's exposition featured some hardware and software products for casual desktop publishers.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Fried Fish  Q.Why don't fish suffer from the high pressures deep in the ocean?
And what prevents fish from being electrocuted when lightning strikes?
A.All fish have internal pressures that are equal to the pressures outside their bodies at their normal depths, said Edward Brinton, a research biologist at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California at San Diego.


Sale of a Del Monte Unit To Investors Agreed On
LEAD: RJR Nabisco said yesterday that it had agreed to sell the processed food unit of its Del Monte subsidiary for $1.475 billion to an investor group led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


Ben Ward, Professional Cop
LEAD: Benjamin Ward had plenty of critics.
At times he seemed to go out of his way to encourage them.
But in nearly six years as New York City's Police Commissioner, Mr.
Ward, who announced his resignation yesterday, built a record of admirable law enforcement leadership.


Seaman and Its Lenders Reach Pact
LEAD: The Seaman Furniture Company, the nation's second-largest furniture retailer, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement in principle with its senior lenders that would allow it to reorganize its debt.


Nine Suspensions By Italian Bank
LEAD: The Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, at the center of a storm over $3 billion in unauthorized loans to Iraq, has suspended nine United States-based executives and obtained emergency financing, bank officials said last week.


Drug Emporium reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drug Emporium (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
119,664,000
98,771,000
Net inc
2,372,000
1,835,000
Share earns
.18
.15
6mo sales
233,608,000
193,802,000
Net inc
4,130,000
3,159,000
Share earns
.31
.28


Lilly Insulin Plant Planned in France
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company said it would build a $115 million plant in eastern France to make genetically engineered human insulin to treat diabetes.
The factory, coupled with a new plant in West Germany, will triple Lilly's capacity to make genetic insulin by the early 1990's.
Lilly is also building a $150 million insulin plant near its


Utah Teachers Boycott to Protest Education Budget
LEAD: Nearly 20,000 Utah teachers boycotted classrooms today to protest what they say is chronic underfunding of one of the nation's most crowded public school systems.


Classical Composers Are in the Spotlight of Films
LEAD: To the rhythm of agitated, driving music, images race by on a television screen: a horse-drawn carriage; a smiling little boy in a powdered wig; a terrified young man at a desk; lightning; a black-hooded figure; flames.


Management Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Management Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,166,000
2,334,000
Net inc
375,000
535,000


Ban on Antley Continues
LEAD: The Belmont Park stewards announced yesterday that they would continue to refuse to allow Chris Antley to ride, pending the completion of an inquiry by the State Racing and Wagering Board.


Film Festival; The Legacy of the Atomic Bomb On One Family in Hiroshima
LEAD: Forty-four years after the fall of the Third Reich, artists in every discipline are still attempting to come to terms with the meaning of the Holocaust.
They will continue as long as the Holocaust survives in memory.
There will always be something more to say.
Some events are not easily reduced to the dimensions of art, which is less a reflection on art than on the capacity of men to stage new


Dick Clark Productions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dick Clark Productions (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,395,000
4,157,000
Net inc
1,019,000
b1,668,000
Share earns
.12
-
6mo rev
25,613,000
21,159,000
Net inc
2,623,000
b2,402,000
Share earns
.32
-


Opposition Parties in India Stage A Huge Rally in Quest for Unity
LEAD: India's political opposition, from the Communist left to the conservative Hindu right, mounted its broadest show of unity today with a huge rally intended to advance its campaign to bring down Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in elections.


Stanley Vogel, 71; Founded Casual Corner
LEAD: Stanley W. Vogel, a retired businessman and co-founder of a chain of 800 Casual Corner clothing stores, died Saturday at the Wintonbury Continuing Care center in Bloomfield, Conn.
He was 71 years old and suffered a stroke in June.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamilton Group
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,450,000
16,440,000
Net inc
777,000
300,000
Share earns
.30
.12
Results are in Canadian funds.


Rival's Connaught Bid Is Topped by Merieux
LEAD: Institut Merieux S.A. made an $800 million (Canadian) takeover offer today for Connaught Biosciences Inc., setting the stage for a bidding war between the French company and a Swiss-American team vying for the Canadian vaccine maker.


Dinkins Gaining Support Among Business Executives
LEAD: New York City's business community, without an incumbent mayor to support for the first time in 16 years, is largely following the public-opinion polls and finding a familiar face in David N. Dinkins, the Democratic nominee.


Where Bush Stands After Eight Months
LEAD: The American public thoroughly approves President Bush's handling of his job, more than it did of his immediate predecessors at the same time in their terms.
But it also doubts whether many of Mr.
Bush's programs will really work, Article, page A26.


13 Justices Nominated, As Leaders Rule Roost
LEAD: New York City Democratic leaders, exercising one of their few remaining prerogatives, quietly ''made'' 13 new State Supreme Court justices in the last week.


Bright Future Predicted For Hispanic Citizens
LEAD: Education Secretary Lauro F. Cavazos has been too pessimistic about the condition of Hispanics in the United States, Linda Chavez, a former staff director of the Civil Rights Commission declared in Congressional testimony today.


Temple Plans Bid
LEAD: Temple Holdings Ltd. said it planned a proxy fight for control of the board of Sea Containers Ltd.
Temple has offered to acquire Sea Containers for $63 a share in cash, or $1.03 billion, but the Bermuda-based ferry and cargo concern has rejected the offer as inadequate.


Insituform East Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform East Inc (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,504,674
4,585,528
Net inc
323,408
494,533
Share earns
.07
.10
Yr sales
21,211,962
19,356,220
Net inc
2,206,056
2,022,356
Share earns
.48
.43


INSIDE
LEAD:  Pierce Is Not Ready For Hearing, Lawyers Say  Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. will not be prepared for a Congressional hearing on Tuesday and will face ''unpleasant options,'' his lawyers said today.
Page A20.
Ward Turns in His Badge  Benjamin Ward said his battle with asthma is forcing him to resign as Police Commissioner as of Oct.


With September's Rains Come Baby Showers
LEAD: ''Teeming autumn, big with rich increase,'' is what Shakespeare called it.
At maternity wards all over the country, it's called chaos.


A Gorbachev Deadline on Armenia Issue
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev warned the leaders of two southern republics today that they have two days to negotiate an end to an extraordinary rail blockade that has paralyzed Armenia.


Home Resales Up in August
LEAD: Sales of existing homes rose 3.3 percent in August to the highest level in six months as buyers took advantage of lower mortgage rates, a real estate group reported today.


Mahamat Soumailia, Chadian Official, 36
LEAD: Mahamat Soumailia, Chad's Minister of Planning and Cooperation since 1987, was killed last Tuesday in the crash of a DC-10 airliner flying from Chad to France.
The plane went down over Niger in a suspected terrorist bombing.
He was 36 years old and lived in Ndjamena, the capital of Chad.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-1  President Bush told the U.N. that the United States will destroy 80 percent of its chemical weapons if the Soviet Union agrees to cut its stockpile to the American level.
Page A1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Worthington Foods Inc. to Partners &amp; Shevack for its Morningstar Farms line of cholesterol-free products, with a budget of $2 million to $5 million.


G.M. to Start '90 Model Year By Offering Large Discounts
LEAD: In a surprising move intended to forestall a drop in retail sales and to spur its dealers to stock cars more aggressively, the General Motors Corporation today applied substantial discounts to its 1990 car and truck lines through cash rebates and subsidized financing.


Mr. Bush's Modest Momentum
LEAD: President Bush, the man who once yearned for the political momentum he called ''big mo,'' yesterday generated some diplomatic momentum toward arms control.
There's somewhat less than meets the eye in his proposal before the United Nations to speed destruction of U.S. chemical weapons.
But it could nevertheless improve the climate for control of these horrifying weapons.


Rivalry in '92 Barcelona Olympics Starts Early
LEAD: Hard-working, prosperous and deeply proud of their Catalan language and culture, the people of Barcelona make no secret of their belief that their city's selection as the site for the 1992 Olympic Games is further proof that they are just a touch superior to other Spaniards.


Orioles And Jays In Fight To Finish
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays ended a skid at two games and assured themselves of remaining alone in first place in the American League East by defeating the Tigers, 2-0, in Detroit last night.


Report Finds Energy Department Liable for Nuclear Plant Penalties
LEAD: An Energy Department report on contracts with the companies that run its troubled bomb plants shows that the Government is liable for criminal fines levied against the companies by state or other Federal agencies.


Investments By Lodestar
LEAD: The Lodestar Group, a New York-based investment fund that specializes in corporate mergers and acquisitions, has acquired an 8.8 percent stake in Marshall Industries and a 6.4 percent stake in ADC Telecommunications Inc.


3 Top Officers Are Quitting Suzuki Unit
LEAD: Plagued by poor sales of its cars and continuing doubts among drivers about the safety of its Samurai sport-utility vehicle, the American Suzuki Motor Corporation announced a management shake-up today.
Four top executives are being transferred or have resigned.


Hialeah's Sad Effort At Mediocrity
LEAD: The John Galbreath family once owned Hialeah Park, the tropical showplace in Miami that is still the nation's most gorgeous racetrack.
This winter, the Galbreath horses are among hundreds from New York that will be barred from stabling at Hialeah, for a most unusual reason: first-class horses are no longer welcome because


Market Place; Buyers Wanted For 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: DEALERS in the battered ''junk bond'' market are preparing for offerings of more than $800 million in new securities this week, and with some traditional investors backing away from the market, Wall Street brokers are working to find new buyers, even among individual investors.


DEAL IS EXPECTED FOR SONY TO BUY COLUMBIA PICTURES
LEAD: Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. has received a $3.4 billion cash offer for the company from the Sony Corporation of Japan, and the board is expected to approve the sale, possibly as soon as tomorrow, a person close to the talks said.


2 Commodity Brokers Sued
LEAD: Two investors in commodity futures options, accusing two brokerages of fraudulent sales ploys, filed class-action suits today for $800 million in losses and damages.


A Peek at New Talent, and the New Spring Season
LEAD: Beaded boleros with the Statue of Liberty, the Eiffel Tower or images from Picasso, Matisse or pop art embroidered in front or back.
Tight stretch-fabric tops, pants of all lengths, short skirts and jump suits.
Crisply tailored jackets and soft, drifty chiffon skirts.


OPEC Talks Hit Snags
LEAD: Negotiations among OPEC members struck snags late today in the effort to reach a new agreement to curb violations of production quotas and put a floor under prices.


By Design; Rajah Regalia
LEAD: This trend is rich.
Nevertheless, the fad for piling on jewelry that might have come from a rajah's trove is becoming a fashion movement, part of the interest in design elements from the East.


Yogi Says It's Over On the Field
LEAD: Yogi Berra announced today that he was getting out of uniform after a career as a star catcher, a manager and a coach going back to 1946.


UTL Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UTL Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,773,694
1,075,324
Net loss
b414,142
c7,688,561
Yr rev
24,101,081
22,965,432
Net loss
b7,470,029
c6,804,943
b-After an extraordinary charge of $203,839 for the quarter for a change in an estimate of costs related to sold real estate, and an extraordinary tax credit of $343,698, or 8 cents a share, for the year.


The Case For Slavery
LEAD: Across the country, a scattered but influential collection of intellectuals is intensely engaged in making the case for slavery.


Strom Relief Effort Organized to Aid Charleston Victims
LEAD: A relief effort to help hurricane victims in Charleston, S.C., and the surrounding area has been set up at the Charleston City Hall.
The phone number for those wishing to help is 803-720-3838.


76ers Sign Payne
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers signed their first-round draft choice, Kenny Payne, to a five-year contract.
The 6-foot-8 Payne, drafted 19th over all, was Louisville's second leading scorer behind Pervis Ellison with 14.5 points and 5.7 rebounds a game. (AP)


Ward's Successor Now Runs Daily Operations
LEAD: Richard J. Condon, who was named Police Commissioner yesterday by Mayor Edward I. Koch, brings to the job skills as a diplomat and negotiator, as well extensive experience in fighting corruption.


With Sun Entry, St. Louis Is 2-Paper Town
LEAD: The St.
Louis Sun began publication this morning, the first time in three years St.
Louis has had two major dailies.


Migrant Job Program Baffles Mexico
LEAD: A new United States immigration program, aimed at preventing potential labor shortages in American agriculture over the next four years, is causing confusion and controversy throughout Mexico, which is expected to supply most of the workers for the plan.


Surgery for Ellison
LEAD: Pervis Ellison, picked No. 1 over all by the Sacramento Kings in last June's National Basketball Association draft, will undergo arthroscopic surgery tomorrow to remove bone spurs from his right foot and ankle.


Radyne Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radyne Corp
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
829,298
1,504,269
Net inc
17,717
165,428
6mo sales
1,193,892
3,510,756
Net loss
282,461
b503,320
b-Net income


If O'Brien Is Hitting His Stride, It's Timely
LEAD: The Jets don't face the Miami Dolphins again until Nov. 12, but Ken O'Brien can't wait that long to prove his revival is real.


Neutralizing Poison Gas
LEAD: In reaffirming American support for a chemical weapons ban from a United Nations podium yesterday, President Bush rejected recommendations by the American military and calls by conservatives that he back away from a treaty banning poison gas.


Pennington's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennington's Stores
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
24,733,000
24,790,000
Net inc
601,000
1,359,000
Share earns
.14
.33
6mo sales
44,724,000
45,654,000
Net loss
230,000
b1,686,000
Share earns
-
.41


What Fate for Remains of a Library's Irreplaceable Collection?; Corporations Favored
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Companies


Morrison Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 2
1989
1988
Revenue
208,204,000
184,730,000
Net inc
6,178,000
6,609,000
Share earns
.36
.37
Shares outst
17,396,000
18,073,000


Laurence Felmus, 82, Professor of Obstetrics
LEAD: Dr.
Laurence B. Felmus, a retired clinical professor of obstetrics and gynecology and a founding member of the faculty of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died of pancreatic cancer Sept. 12 in Scottsdale, Ariz., where he had lived in retirement since 1968.
He was 82 years old.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


T.A.C. Plans For Inquiries
LEAD: Officials of The Athletics Congress met with attorneys for nearly six hours yesterday in Manhattan to discuss the means by which T.A.C. will investigate current and future accusations of the use of performance-enhancing drugs by United States track and field athletes.


2 Killed and 1 Wounded by Bomb At Hotel in Colombian Resort City
LEAD: A bomb exploded tonight in the Cartagena Hilton Hotel on the Caribbean, killing two doctors and wounding another, the chief of the police in that coastal resort said.


Senate Leaders Tentatively Agree To Increase Money to Fight Drugs
LEAD: Tentatively resolving a deadlock over money for the campaign against drug abuse, Democratic and Republican Senators tonight agreed to increase spending to $8.8 million in 1990, a level that is $900 million more than President Bush has requested.


Critic's Notebook; Seeking the Truth Amid a Chorus of Video Voices
LEAD: If VCR's, cassettes, camcorders, satellite dishes and the other paraphernalia of the video age had made their appearance 40 years earlier, George Orwell would not have written ''Nineteen Eighty-Four.'' That is one of the messages left by a recent edition of ''The Koppel Report.'' As Ted Koppel put it, television is ''falling into the hands of the people.


Giants' DeOssie Will Be Out With a Broken Toe
LEAD: For the Giants, it was another victory and another bad injury to the defense.


Review/Theater; A Shaggy-Dog Comedy on a Trip of Digression
LEAD: The approach to global travel taken by Armand, the peripatetic hero of Jeffrey Klayman's ''Indiana Dog,'' is the opposite of that of Phileas Fogg in ''Around the World in 80 Days.'' Fogg wants to move as fast as he can; Armand has a surfeit of time.
As he sees the world, he ages from a young rebel to a veteran of foreign voyages.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sunday about an investigation of two fatal stabbings in Mercer County, N.J., described one slaying incompletely.
The victim, an art teacher and swimming coach at the Hun School in Princeton, was killed in a parking lot in Hamilton Township, not at the school.


Quayle Tries to Quiet Japan's Trade Concerns
LEAD: Rushing through a series of meetings with Japan's leadership, Vice President Dan Quayle brought a message of cooperation and reconciliation to America's biggest economic rival today, declaring that the United States' alliance with Japan should not be overshadowed by trade disputes.


Companies Step In Where the Schools Fail
LEAD: At the huge Motorola Inc. plant here, assembly line workers like Carritha Wells are being paid to learn not about electronic circuit boards or cellular telephones but about how much a pound of grapes would cost if 2Z pounds cost $3.25.


Hooker Corp. Receivables
LEAD: The General Electric Capital Corporation will purchase $75 million of certain receivables of the L.J.
Hooker Corporation, the Australian developer that owns the Bonwit Teller and B. Altman department stores.
Hooker, which had filed in


Axel Johnson Completes Its Search for a Chief
LEAD: Axel Johnson Inc., a privately held industrial company with $580 million in annual sales, has named Paul E. Graf president and chief executive after a search for a new manager.


Herman Malamood, City Opera Tenor, 57
LEAD: Herman Malamood, a New York City Opera tenor who also sang at the Metropolitan Opera and major European houses and had an active career as a cantor, died of cancer Saturday at his Manhattan home.
He was 57 years old.


Interest Widens in Bid To Buy Bloomingdale's
LEAD: Marvin S. Traub, the chairman and chief executive officer of Bloomingdale's, has received expressions of substantial interest from foreign retailers and other investors in his quest to buy the chain he has worked for for almost 40 years.


Oryx Will Sell Energy Properties
LEAD: The Oryx Energy Company has agreed to sell a group of oil and gas interests in Texas, Oklahoma and 10 other states to the Houston-based American Exploration Company for $114 million.
A spokesman for Oryx said the properties, which have combined production equivalent to 10,000 barrels of oil a day and proven reserves of 3 million barrels, were among the company's least profitable operations for a variety of reasons.


Phillies Eliminate The Mets
LEAD: Realistically, the Mets were eliminated from the pennant race days ago.
Mathematically, they were finally eliminated last night.


House Passes Phone Measure
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed a bill today to require independent long-distance telephone companies to identify themselves and disclose their rates to callers.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a caption yesterday about an organic food fair in Maine misstated its location.
It was in Windsor - not Augusta, nine miles to the wes


Data Translation Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Translation Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,409,000
9,952,000
Net inc
146,000
661,000
Share earns
.05
.22
9mo sales
32,031,000
27,665,000
Net inc
1,957,000
1,635,000
Share earns
.63
.53


Chess-Playing Computer Closing In on Champions
LEAD: THE time when a computer wrests the world chess championship from a human being may be approaching.
Last Thanksgiving, Deep Thought, which won the world computer chess championship in May, defeated a human grandmaster, Bent Larsen of Denmark, who is ranked 96th among all chess players in the world.


Park Electrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Electrochemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 27
1989
1988
Sales
34,722,000
34,386,000
Net inc
1,025,000
1,816,000
Share earns
.20
.35
6mo sales
72,774,000
75,294,000
Net inc
2,075,000
b4,103,000
Share earns
.40
.79


BOY GETS 6 YEARS FOR SLAYINGS OF 4
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy has been sentenced to six years in the Rhode Island Training School after pleading guilty to killing four neighbors, three of them over the Labor Day weekend, the other in 1987, when he was 13.


Notebook; Bills Rely on Revitalized Offense
LEAD: Back in August in the Hall of Fame game in Canton, Ohio, after the Buffalo Bills had been dominated by the Washington Redskins, 31-6, many believed the sputtering and boring Bills' offense of 1988 had returned for an encore.
Too much reliance on the run, too little variety in play calling and no featured deep-passing threat meant the


Tree Planted by President Vandalized in Spokane Park
LEAD: A tree planted by President Bush in Riverfront Park last week has been vandalized and is probably unsalvageable, officials said today.


Polish Foreign Minister Pledges No Withdrawal From Warsaw Pact
LEAD: In his first major foreign policy address, the Foreign Minister of Poland said today that his country ''has no intention of destabilizing the existing international order.'' Diplomats said the remark by Foreign Minister Krzysztof Skubiszewski meant that Poland would not leave the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet-led European


Doctor Discloses Hinckley Suicide Try in '83
LEAD: A psychiatrist treating John W. Hinckley Jr. disclosed today that the Presidential assailant tried to kill himself in 1983 and still suffers from severe mental illness that makes him highly dangerous.


Review/Music; Straining Out the Religion
LEAD: The double bill at Town Hall on Friday night, featuring Milton Cardona and his group, Eye Aranla, and Frisner Augustin and his group, La Troupe Makandal, brought up a handful of issues about the meeting of different cultures.
Labeled ''Music of the Spirits,'' the performances, with David Byrne of Talking Heads as host, drew from the Santeria and voodoo religious traditions that were imported to Puerto Rico and Haiti from West Africa.


Suspects in Park Attack Said to Be Giving Details
LEAD: Lawyers for five of the six defendants accused of raping a jogger in Central Park in April expressed unhappiness yesterday with a published report on statements reportedly made by their clients to prosecutors shortly after the attack.


N.Y.U. Names School for Ex-Mayor Wagner
LEAD: New York University announced yesterday that it had received $9 million to rename its Graduate School of Public Administration in honor of former Mayor Robert F. Wagner.


Memories Recalled By Dent's Return
LEAD: It has been 11 seasons since Bucky Dent broke Boston's heart with one unsettling swing of his bat.
The home run that sailed into the afternoon sky and fell gently into the screen above Fenway Park's Green Monster remains a black day to Red Sox fans, an unforgettable memory to Dent.


Bass's Son Tries to Recover Historical Film From Russia
LEAD: It was shot as a home movie in the 1930's, with haphazard scenes from the life in exile of the great Russian bass Fyodor Chaliapin eventually spliced together by his family into a 16-millimeter black-and-white film that lasts under 20 minutes.


Dinkins Urges More Financing Of Drug Centers
LEAD: David N. Dinkins, the Democratic nominee for mayor, yesterday used the backdrop of an East Harlem drug rehabilitation center and the presence of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan to push for more Federal financing for the treatment of crack addicts.


Pantera's Makes Chapter 11 Filing
LEAD: The Pantera's Corporation, owner of the Pizza Inn restaurant chain since 1987, filed for protection last week under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code.
The filing came less than a week after its two largest lenders, Kleinwort Benson Ltd. and Lloyds Bank P.L.C., unexpectedly called in $35.5 million in secured loans made to finance the pizza chain's acquisition.


Careers; Updating The Training Of M.B.A.'s
LEAD: GRADUATE schools of business have been struggling with change in recent years.
Their administrators face problems such as how to make courses more globally oriented, what to do about foreign languages, and how to instill values like leadership and creativity in students.


Digital Equipment Demonstrates Chip Packaging
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation demonstrated technical breakthroughs today that it said would allow the packaging of multiple computer chips at densities up to 30 times greater than is possible with current printed circuit board technology.
Higher densities reduce the time a signal takes to travel between chips.


McClatchy Buys Papers
LEAD: McClatchy Newspapers Inc. announced today that it had signed a $74.1 million agreement to acquire three South Carolina daily newspapers from the Observer Publishing Company of Raleigh, N.C.
The newspapers are The Herald of Rock Hill, the Island Packet of Hilton Head and The Beaufort Gazette.
McClatchy said the transfer of ownership would take place on Jan.


Philips Agrees To Merrill Bid
LEAD: Philips Industries, which makes components for the construction and transportation industries, said today that it had agreed to be acquired by a subsidiary of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company for $25.50 a share, or about $750 million.


MONY Real Estate Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MONY Real Estate Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,285,000
1,354,000
Share earns
.22
.12
b-After a credit of $985,000 due to gains from sale of investments.


Commissioner on Agenda
LEAD: The National Football League said today its club owners would meet Oct. 10 in either Chicago or Dallas to attempt to elect a new commissioner.


Venezuela Eases Stance On Its Debts
LEAD: Trying to revive negotiations with commercial banks, the Government of Venezuela is dropping its demands for 50 percent debt reduction and offering other proposals it believes will be more acceptable to the banks.


Arizona Holiday for Dr. King May Face Ballot Test in 1990
LEAD: A new law in Arizona establishing a holiday honoring the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was challenged today.
Opponents who filed papers with the Secretary of State's office were trying to force a statewide vote on the issue.


Surge in Resources For I.M.F. Forecast; East-Bloc Role Seen
LEAD: The member nations of the International Monetary Fund are likely to agree by the end of the year to increase the fund's resources by as much as 67 percent, or $80 billion, officials said today.


Economists Are Optimistic
LEAD: The economy will continue to grow through 1990, forestalling a recession until at least 1991, top business economists said today.


At Columbia, the Classical Masters Get Some Female Company


Peoples Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Net inc
b626,000
c120,000
Share earns
.27
.05
Yr net inc
b2,368,000
c1,522,000
Share earns
1.06
.69
b-Included a loss from a loan loss provision of $11,000 for the quarter and income from a loss loss provision of $350,000 for the year.


New Jersey Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Jersey Steel
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
32,331,000
35,968,000
Net inc
1,257,000
5,557,000
Share earns
.22
.94
Shares outst
5,784,000
5,885,913
9mo sales
90,160,000
102,350,000
Net inc
8,486,000
17,364,000
Share earns
1.47
2.95
Shares outst
5,759,054
5,877,982


John Frederick Ecker, Stockbroker, 58
LEAD: John Frederick Ecker, a former stockbroker with the Laidlaw and Shields investment companies, both of Manhattan, died of cancer Thursday at McGuire's Veterans Administration Hospital in Richmond.
He was 58 years old and lived in Tappahannock, Va.


Smart as a Sea Otter
LEAD: ALASKAN sea otters apparently know how to tell whether butter clams, their favorite food, are contaminated with the paralyzing poisons that make up red tide.


High Prices In Japan Cited
LEAD: Despite their higher per-capita income, the Japanese have less purchasing power than consumers in other advanced industrial countries because Japan's prices are so high, the nation's Economic Planning Agency said today.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Rentown Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rentown Enterprises Inc
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,341,508
6,687,251
Net inc
1,192,048
717,057
Share earns
.19
.20
Shares outst
8,200,000
4,500,000
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Wiggins Is Signed
LEAD: Mitchell Wiggins, recently reinstated after a ban because of a drug violation, agreed to a one-year contract with the Houston Rockets for a reported $250,000.


New York Fed On Reserves
LEAD: In comments made yesterday to a group of international bankers, E. Gerald Corrigan, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, gave what was interpreted as another official response to the increases in reserves taken last week by three leading American banks.


Presidential Collage at the Met: Rembrandts, Russians, Radiance
LEAD: President Bush made history last night.
He became the first President to visit the Metropolitan Museum of Art since Rutherford B. Hayes opened the Met in 1880.
Not only did he look at a few Rembrandts and Vermeers, he stayed for dinner.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Tumble
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell sharply in light trading yesterday, as a falling dollar and a coming wave of new issues persuaded dealers to sell securities.


PRISON RELEASES A DEFIANT MOTHER
LEAD: A mother imprisoned for 25 months for defying a court order in a child custody case drove out of the District of Columbia jail tonight, stopping briefly to tell reporters and supporters that she was ''happy and very grateful'' that her confinement was over.


Rig Count Rises a Bit
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil in the United States increased last week by two, to a total of 967, continuing a slow but steady rise, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year ago, the count stood at 917.


Surging Criminal Cases Jam Federal Court System
LEAD: Drug-related criminal cases in the Federal courts have increased to the point where they are squeezing out many civil cases, according to the head of the office that runs the Federal court system.


2 Drown in Floods After Florida Downpour
LEAD: A daylong downpour left 30 city blocks with up to 10 feet of water.
Two people drowned in their cars, the authorities said today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Air Express International Corp., Darien, Conn., an air freight concern, named Dennis M. Dolan vice president and chief financial officer.


Review/Art; Examining the Role of the Blues
LEAD: ''The Blues Esthetic: Black Culture and Modernism,'' which is on view at the Washington Project for the Arts through Dec. 9, is a celebration of black culture and an attempt to define Afro-American art.
Its strength is its ability to demonstrate that the blues has played a key role in the art of many black


Visit by Bush Snarls Traffic on East Side
LEAD: President Bush's 12-hour visit to New York City yesterday caused a series of traffic tie-ups, especially on the East Side, officials said.


Yellow Menace
LEAD: Since spring, picnickers and hikers in Washington, Oregon, Idaho and northern California have been plagued by a population explosion of yellow jackets, the aggressive wasp with a painful and potentially fatal sting.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Public Relations Award
LEAD: The widespread scare over tampering with Tylenol pills in 1982 and 1986 posed the ultimate corporate public relations challenge.
Lawrence G. Foster, the vice president for public relations who managed Johnson &amp; Johnson's response to those crises, was awarded the 1989 Gold Anvil Award of the Public Relations Society of America last week.


LTX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LTX Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,469,000
49,762,000
Net loss
9,302,000
b2,418,000
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
9,699,000
10,046,000
Yr sales
141,794,000
174,804,000
Net loss
31,163,000
b6,970,000
Share earns
-
.70
Shares outst
9,702,000
9,951,000


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Sales
2,590,149,000
2,327,956,000
Net inc
35,630,000
29,450,000
Share earns
.93
.77
6mo sales
6,029,740,000
5,331,970,000
Net inc
81,020,000
67,497,000
Share earns
2.12
1.77


Eagle Telephonics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Telephonics
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,378,000
6,334,000
Net loss
b744,000
224,000
9mo sales
14,384,000
16,625,000
Net loss
b1,841,000
792,000
b-Included losses of $169,000 for the quarter and $49,000 for the 9 months, both for inventory writeoffs and other non-recurring items.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in The Home Section on Thursday with the Where to Find It column about out-of-print children's books misstated the telephone number of the Bryn Mawr Book Shop in Manhattan.
Its number is (212) 744-7682.


Witness Describes PTL Deal
LEAD: The Rev.
Jerry Falwell offered Jim Bakker $300,000 and other benefits to remain silent after Mr.
Falwell took over the PTL ministry, the chief builder of the ministry's Heritage USA theme park testified today.


James H. Porterfield, Former Executive, 79
LEAD: James H. Porterfield, a retired public relations executive, died of cancer Sunday at his home in Fort Meyers, Fla.
He was 79 years old.


Major Study Aims to Learn Who Should Lower Cholesterol
LEAD: AFTER years of advising many Americans to lower their blood cholesterol levels to prevent heart attacks, Federal health officials are about to begin a major study to determine whether that advice holds true for women, and the elderly of both sexes.


Emergency Aid in Puerto Rico
LEAD: Officials handed out $300 emergency checks today to people who lost their homes in Hurricane Hugo, which caused an estimated $1 billion damage to Puerto Rico.


Rowe Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowe Furniture (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 3
1989
1988
Sales
19,688,000
20,879,000
Net inc
212,000
233,000
Share earns
.08
.09
Shares outst
2,573,316
2,626,595
9mo sales
62,056,000
64,553,000
Net inc
1,216,000
1,215,000
Share earns
.47
.46
Shares outst
2,576,446
2,628,447


Patterns
LEAD:  Keiko Eclipsed


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There are so many people that have lost a part of themselves, and for them this is something that will last forever.
If we ever saw anything to top old Hugo, we would be gone from the face of the earth.


Mets Kick Counselor, Not Cooler
LEAD: rrWhen Dwight Gooden tested positive for drugs in 1987, he was entrusted to a psychiatrist, Dr.
Allan Lans of the Smithers Alcoholism and Treatment Center.


Red Sox Score 8 In the First
LEAD: All that is left now is to play the final games as if they mean something, even if they don't amount to slightly more than a spring game in Florida.
So the Yankees and the Boston Red Sox met again tonight and trudged through an unsightly nine innings at Fenway Park.


Post Player Killed
LEAD: Fred Kemp, 20 years old, the starting free safety for the C. W. Post football team, was killed early yesterday in an auto accident on the Wantagh Parkway in Nassau County.


Body of Baby Found in Trash
LEAD: A man collecting bottles found a newborn baby's body yesterday in a trash bin alongside the Williamsburg Bridge in Brooklyn, the police said.
No note or other identification was with the baby, who was declared dead at the scene after police were called at 8:27 A.M.


Short-Term HBO Pact Seems Likely for Tyson
LEAD: That ''lifetime'' deal rumored to be in the works between Home Box Office and Mike Tyson is likely to end up merely as an extension until early 1992 of the present seven-fight, $26.5 million deal.


Review/Opera; 'Aida' Shows Its Suitability As Opener for the Met Season
LEAD: ''Aida'' and opening night at the Metropolitan Opera were made for each other.
Verdi provided, in the triumphal scene, not only all the excuses any company needs for spectacular middlebrow fun but also three intermissions.
The breaks allow maximum time for the dress parades and lobby hobnobbing that can reconcile many first-nighters to the necessity of paying close attention to the predicament of the Ethiopian slave torn between love of her country and love for its


Food Notes
LEAD:  Sweet Wines . . .


1 Is Killed and 20 Are Hurt In Fighting at Illinois Prison
LEAD: An inmate was killed and 20 people were injured today when gang-related fighting broke out among more than 300 inmates at the maximum-security prison here, prison officials said.


Economic Scene; Olympians Play, U.S. TV Pays
LEAD: ABC paid $309 million for broadcast rights to the 1988 winter Olympic Games in Calgary, Alberta.
Western European television paid a total of $5.7 million.


'STAR WARS' FUNDS CUT IN THE SENATE
LEAD: The Senate voted tonight to reduce President Bush's budget for the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program by $800 million, reversing a practice of protecting the program from deep cuts sought by the House and opening the way for the first annual budget reduction in its five years of existence.


Survey Says Mid-Sized Companies Debate Leaving
LEAD: One in every five medium-sized businesses in the New York metropolitan area is considering leaving New York, and most of those would move to New Jersey, according to a survey released yesterday by Bank Leumi.


Karlis a Viking
LEAD: Rich Karlis, a barefooted place-kicker who played seven seasons for the Denver Broncos before being released last month after not signing a contract, signed a one-year contract with the Minnesota Vikings yesterday and will be kicking for them on Sunday against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Teddy Garcia, who missed three short-range kicks last Sunday in a 27-14 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers, was waived.(


Drug Penalty for Nunn
LEAD: Freddie Joe Nunn, 27, starting defensive end for the Cardinals, was suspended for 30 days by the National Football League yesterday for violating provisions of the league's substance-abuse policy.
The Cardinals' general manager, Larry Wilson, said Nunn had entered a treatment center in the Phoenix area.(


Lessons
LEAD: Politicians like to point out that it costs at least $20,000 a year to keep someone in prison - the same amount it costs for a year at Harvard.


Ivy League Giving Up Its Army Competition
LEAD: The Ivy League wants no part of Army.
Cornell and Yale have canceled scheduled games against the Cadets in recent seasons, and Army has only two Ivy games left, the first of which will be played Saturday at West Point.


Guilty Pleas in Pentagon Fraud
LEAD: Three men and a Los Angeles-based military contractor pleaded guilty today to bribery or conspiracy charges stemming from a six-year scheme to win contracts from the Marine Corps.


I.B.M. Increasing Speed of PS/2 Computers
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it was preparing to increase significantly the speed of its Personal System/2 personal computers.


Addy Oppenheimer Fieger, Composer, 58
LEAD: Addy Oppenheimer Fieger, a composer whose songs were recorded and performed by Tommy Dorsey, Dean Martin and Sylvia Syms, among others, died of ovarian cancer Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 58 years old.


Washington Talk; On Quayle In Search Of an Image As a Leader
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle arrived in the Philippines tonight to discuss the future of American bases there, and he was confronted by several hundred left-wing demonstrators chanting, ''Quayle go home!''


Court Bars Radja From Playing for the Celtics
LEAD: Comparing the Celtics' signing of a Yugoslav player to poaching, a Federal judge in Boston issued a preliminary injunction yesterday that prohibits Dino Radja, a highly regarded 6-foot-10-inch forward, from playing for the Celtics.


Trains Roll Into Armenia, Ending Blockade
LEAD: Freight trains began rolling into Armenia today, ending a monthlong blockade by the neighboring republic of Azerbaijan, according to official Soviet reports.


Pope Appeals to World's Muslims To Help Save a 'Dying' Lebanon
LEAD: Pope John Paul II issued an extraordinary appeal to the world's Muslims today, urging them in impassioned terms to help save Lebanon, which, he said, ''is dying before our very eyes.''


A's Move to Brink of Title
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics gained at least a tie for the American League West championship last night with a 4-3 victory over the Texas Rangers.
In the American League East, the Toronto Blue Jays drew one step closer to the division title.


Paul Cioffi, 94, Dies; Physicist at Bell Labs
LEAD: Paul Cioffi, a physicist at Bell Laboratories, now A.T. &amp; T. Bell Laboratories, for more than 40 years, died of liver cancer Sunday at his home in Summit, N.J.
He was 94 years old.


Budget Roundup; Bush Raises Ante in Fight to Cut Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: President Bush today upped the ante in his battle to reduce the maximum tax rate on capital gains, vowing to fight Congressional Democrats for it even if the battle prolongs a budget impasse and brings cuts across the board in spending for domestic and military programs.


Books of The Times; 'Antagonists,' but With a Common Purpose
LEAD:  The Antagonists  Hugo Black, Felix Frankfurter and Civil Liberties in Modern America  By James F. Simon  Illustrated. 312 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


3 Workers Are Electrocuted As Wire Touches Scaffolding
LEAD: A 69,000-volt electrical wire touched scaffolding being moved at a construction site Monday, killing three workers and injuring three others.


About New York; From Clear Lake To Manhattan: A Life's Design
LEAD: On Feb. 3, 1937, Lon Whitney began a letter to his family in Clear Lake, Iowa, thusly:


Special Counsel Runs for Post
LEAD: Richard J. Phelan, the special counsel in the House ethics inquiry that led to the resignation of Speaker Jim Wright earlier this year, announced his candidacy for public office today.
Mr.
Phelan, 52 years old, said he would seek the Democratic nomination for president of the Cook County Board.
The office is considered second only to that of Mayor of Chicago in terms of political power in the area.


Bridge
LEAD: Most enthusiasts who do not read this column rely daily on five major syndicated efforts.
The youngest of these is the Aces column, founded two decades ago by the late Ira Corn Jr.
The other four are associated with some the great figures in the early history of the game.


Youth Is Arrested for Selling Crack That Bush Displayed
LEAD: A teen-ager was arrested today on charges of selling the crack that President Bush displayed on television to illustrate the seriousness of the nation's drug problems.


World War II Vatican Role Must Be Recognized
LEAD: To the Editor:


Teen-Ager Charged in Blast That Killed 6
LEAD: An 18-year-old man has been charged with murder and arson in an explosion that killed six Kansas City firefighters at a construction site in November.


Eating Well
LEAD: BREAKFAST entrees offered by fast-food restaurants over the last decade, and more recently by makers of frozen microwaveable products, have expanded the consumer's choices, but the customer may be paying a nutritional price for convenience.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off
LEAD: Yields offered for certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were slightly down during the week that ended yesterday.


Great Kills Favors Koch But Supports Giuliani Bid
LEAD: In Great Kills, S.I., a three-bedroom town house sells for $140,000, but a round-trip drive to Manhattan can cost $10 in tolls.
Well-tended lawns slope gently toward tidy marinas, but the main roads running past them are clogged with cars and flood at the first heavy rain.
It is a place where peace comes at a price.


For Mandatory Siestas
LEAD: To the Editor:


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: ONE great underused resource for home cooks is fish bones, which are readily available and are the foundation for endless soups and sauces.
Most fishmongers happily give them away, and the stocks you make with them can be frozen for a month or more.


Russian Ballet Items On Show at Gallery
LEAD: ''One Hundred Years of Russian Ballet, 1830-1930,'' an exhibition of rare archival material and costumes from the Leningrad State Museum of Theater and Music, will be on view through Oct. 20 at the Eduard Nakhamkin Fine Arts Gallery, 1055 Madison Avenue, at 80th Street.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. And 3 P.M.  Legal Committee - 10 A.M.


New Israeli Thicket; Mubarak's Plan for Palestinian Elections Propels Jerusalem Toward Coalition Crisis
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and the rest of Israel's right wing are pleading, threatening and fighting to kill a peace plan offered by Egypt that every other interested party has enthusiastically embraced.


Grade School Principal Quits Over Ties to Male Prostitute
LEAD: Another man who was involved with the same male prostitute as Representative Barney Frank has resigned as principal of the Chevy Chase Elementary School.


Rate Changes Set By GTE Airfone
LEAD: GTE Airfone Inc. said it planned to revise its rates for airline in-flight telephone service.
Starting Oct. 1, passengers who use the GTE Corporation subsidiary's service will be charged $2 for each minute and a $2 setup fee for each call.
Airline passengers now pay $7.50 for the first three minutes and $1.25 for each additional minute.


Magazine Publishers Look Abroad
LEAD: SEVERAL American magazine publishers whose concerns have been largely domestic have begun to look with increasing interest at foreign lands, especially Europe.


Hugo Food Drive At Ball Games
LEAD: Officials at all five Atlantic Coast Conference schools and at least one Southeastern Conference school have agreed to collect donated canned goods at their games Saturday for victims of Hurricane Hugo.


Guards Quell A Disturbance In Rikers Jail
LEAD: Forty-eight inmates at Rikers Island barricaded themselves in their cell block before dawn yesterday and set mattresses afire before 200 correction officers quelled the disturbance with tear gas, New York City Correction Department officials said.


Robert F. Rogers, 58, Producer at NBC News
LEAD: Robert F. Rogers, a television producer at NBC News, died of cancer on Sunday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 58 years old.
In 1961, Mr.
Rogers joined NBC as a writer for David Brinkley.
He produced more than 40 documentaries on wars, national and foreign affairs and human-interest subjects.


Honda 1992 Target
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company has set a sales target of 2.5 million cars worldwide in 1992, a company spokesman said.
Honda's 1992 North American sales target is one million cars, of which 510,000 will be made in the United States, 80,000 in Canada and the rest imported from Japan.
Honda forecasts 1989 sales of more than 800,000 in North America.


Leo Gottlieb, Lawyer, 93
LEAD: Leo Gottlieb, a lawyer and former president of the New York County Lawyers Association, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93 years old.


Tigers Extend Anderson Pact
LEAD: The Detroit Tigers ended speculation that Manager Sparky Anderson might retire and extended his contract for two years today.
Anderson, only the third manager in franchise history to have 100 or more defeats, will be with the club through 1992.


Presidential Safety, and the Public's
LEAD: No New Yorker wishes the President anything but a safe visit when he comes to town.
But no President ought to wish a day of annoyance, even danger, on a whole city for the sake of his security.
George Bush's trip to New York this week to address the United Nations once again demonstrates the need to reassess procedures for such visits.


Pacemaker Uses Voyager Nuclear 'Battery'
LEAD: To the Editor:





New Step for Clean Air: A Natural Gas Bus
LEAD: The value of natural gas as a clean-burning alternative to gasoline and diesel fuels has long been known, and large numbers of conventional engines have been converted to its use.
Now, in anticipation of increasingly stringent Federal emissions standards for urban areas, at least one manufacturer has developed a mass- transit bus designed from the outset to be powered by natural gas.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Investor Purchases 5.1% Stake in Katy
LEAD: Richard L. Otte, an Illinois investor, has purchased a 5.1 percent stake in Katy Industries.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Otte said that he purchased the shares as an investment.
Katy, based in Elgin, Ill., is a holding company that has interests in businesses ranging from waste-to-energy plants to cookie production.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  B.A.T. said it would sell its vast retailing empire, including the Saks and Marshall Field chains, as part of a revamping aimed at thwarting Sir James Goldsmith's $21 billion hostile takeover bid.  [ Page A1. ]  The Saks and Marshall Field stores are expected to draw substantial interest.


2 Movies Called 'Black Rain'
LEAD: Two movies with the same title, ''Black Rain,'' have arrived almost simultaneously.


Peter Bommarito Is Dead at 74; Led Rubber Workers for 15 Years
LEAD: Peter Bommarito, who headed the United Rubber Workers Union from 1966 to 1981, died of cancer Monday at the Akron General Medical Center in Ohio.
He was 74 years old and lived in Mogadore, on the outskirts of Akron.


Real Estate; Developing City-Owned Marsh on S.I.
LEAD: A REAL estate project on land owned by the people of New York City in an area of Staten Island few of them have ever seen may over the years add millions of dollars to the city's coffers.


Dr. Joseph B. Lenzner, Dentist, 86
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph B. Lenzner, a retired dentist, died of a heart attack yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Producer Likely to Head Sony-Owned Columbia
LEAD: Peter Guber, one of Hollywood's top producers, is expected to replace Victor A. Kaufman as president and chief executive of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., should the Sony Corporation buy Columbia, a person involved in the acquisition talks said yesterday.


Company Gets Founder Back
LEAD: ASK Computer Systems Inc. said today that Sandra Kurtzig, its founder, had returned full time as chairman, president and chief executive.


Sisters-in-Law Killed in Brooklyn
LEAD: Two women were fatally shot and the uncle of one of them was critically wounded yesterday as two children looked on during what the police said appeared to be an attempted robbery by three gunmen in an apartment in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Rickie Lee Jones


Rates Increase At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates at the weekly auction of commercial paper held yesterday by Citicorp were up for the first time in a month.


Review/Music; Early-Music Series Opens Season
LEAD: Music Before 1800, the early-music series presented at Corpus Christi Church (529 West 121st Street), opened its 15th season on Sunday afternoon with a program that veered close to the modern edge of its mandate.
In a joint concert, the Classical Quartet and members of the Mozartean Players gave solid, robust performances of Haydn and


CBS and Turner in Deal On Olympics Coverage
LEAD: CBS and the Turner Broadcasting System announced an agreement yesterday granting Turner the rights to carry some events of the 1992 and 1994 winter Olympics for $50 million in fees.
It will be the first time that a cable network will carry any part of the winter Games.


Nearly Half of U.S. Rural Bridges Found Lacking
LEAD: Nearly half the bridges in rural America are ''structurally deficient or functionally obsolete,'' an Agriculture Department report says.


Surgery for Mitchell
LEAD: Stump Mitchell, running back for the Phoenix Cardinals, had surgery on his left knee yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Phoenix, likely ending his nine-year N.F.L. career.
Mitchell was injured in Sunday's 35-7 loss to the Giants.(AP)


Open Positions on Short Sales Increase by 1.1% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday a 1.1 percent rise in short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended on Sept. 15.


Ravenna Journal; After the Unthinkable, the Sky Show Must Go On
LEAD: He would be less than human, Capt.
Giampaolo Miniscalco said, if he had no second thoughts about what he does for a living.
Any sensible person would, he added, even if most people would probably call his job less than sensible.


Darlington Hoopes, Socialist, 93; Twice Party Choice for President
LEAD: Darlington Hoopes, a longtime leader of the Socialist Party who was its candidate for President in 1952 and 1956, died Monday at the Leader Nursing Center in Sinking Spring, Pa.
He was 93 years old and had been a resident of Reading, Pa.


New York Moves to Help Poorly Rated Teachers
LEAD: ''But what should YOU be doing when the kids are doing the problems from the board?'' Irene Metviner asked the teacher.


U.S. Issues Rebound Somewhat
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly yesterday, rebounding from Monday's big selloff.


Philippine Gunmen Kill 2 U.S. Civilians
LEAD: Two American employees of a United States military base were killed by gunmen at the installation Tuesday afternoon, shortly before Vice President Dan Quayle arrived for a state visit.


Stephenson Retires
LEAD: Dwight Stephenson, 31 years old, the four-time All-Pro center of the Miami Dolphins, announced his retirement yesterday.
The announcement ended his attempt to come back from a severe knee injury suffered in December 1987, when he was hit by Marty Lyons of the Jets as the Jets were returning a fumble.


'91 Shift for Swiss Bonds
LEAD: Switzerland's three big stock exchanges announced plans today to switch bond trading from exchange floors to computer screens in 1991.
If the project gets official approval, bond dealers in Zurich, Geneva and Basel will no longer have to go to the exchanges and can stay at their banks to transact deals on their screens.


Head of CUNY Graduate School Agrees to Retire
LEAD: The president of the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York will retire under an agreement aimed at ending a power struggle between him and the university's Chancellor over leadership at the school, university trustees and administrators said yesterday.


Wine Talk
LEAD: A CASUAL glance at the label and you might conclude that there is yet another new winery in California, one called Silver Birch.
Well, take another look.
This wine is made from the silver birch tree, and is produced here in northern Scotland at what is, so far as anyone can determine, the world's northernmost winery.


Hunting Rembrandt's Skeleton
LEAD: In an effort to recover the bones of one of this city's greatest sons, scientists are peeling away thin layers of soil on the spot where they hope Rembrandt van Rijn was buried more than 300 years ago.


White House Plans to Aid Poland Through I.M.F.
LEAD: The Bush Administration is working on a new ''package of support'' for Poland that relies strongly on the International Monetary Fund to channel money to the new Government in Warsaw as part of a major multilateral effort, White House officials said.


Y.&amp;R. in Deal For Landor
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam said yesterday that it would acquire Landor Associates, a leading corporate identity firm based in San Francisco.
A spokesman for Y.&amp;R. refused to disclose the terms of the deal.


Schools Try to Adjust To a New Job Market
LEAD: For decades, students who dropped out of high school had a kind of refuge.
At a time when industry needed a steady supply of raw labor, they could usually find work in factories.


After Hurricane, Relief Gives Way to Despair
LEAD: Only today did Debra Deas stop and think about what comes next.
After the worst week of her life, the future is the most frightening part of all.


Ward Bids Farewell as 'a Cop's Cop'
LEAD: Hoping he would be remembered as ''a policeman, a cop's cop,'' Benjamin Ward said his public farewell yesterday as New York Police Commissioner in much the same way that he seemed to have run his department for six years - with pride, concern, combativeness, emotion and an edge of humor.


British Conglomerate to Sell Off Saks and Marshall Field Chains
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., the British conglomerate, said today that it planned to sell its vast retailing empire, including the well-known Saks and Marshall Field stores, as part of a dramatic effort to preserve its independence.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Lauder's Lowered Voice
LEAD: Ronald Lauder spent an astonishing $13 million while losing the recent Republican mayoral primary election in New York City.
As the Conservative Party nominee, he now pledges to confine his spending in the general election to $1.5 million.


A Twainlike Twist for Flint, Mich.
LEAD: America has an irrepressible new humorist in the tradition of Mark Twain and Artemus Ward.
He is Michael Moore, the writer, producer and director of the rude and rollicking new documentary feature ''Roger and Me.'' Much in the manner of those 19th-century forebears, Mr.
Moore celebrates the oddities of the American frontier, once defined by the historian F.


Results Plus
LEAD:  TENNIS  Lendl Persists and Wins: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl, ranked No. 1 in the world, survived two tie breakers yesterday to win in the first round of the Bordeaux Passing Shot tournament in Bordeaux, France.
Lendl beat Karel Novacek of Czechoslovakia, 7-6, 6-7, 6-1.(AP)  Rally Helps Yugoslav: Slobodan Zivojinovic of Yugoslavia fought off Leonardo Lavalle of Mexico to score a 7-5, 7-6 victory in the first round of the Volvo of San Francisco tournament on Monday.


2 More Tests of Bomber Cut Short
LEAD: Two more test flights of the Stealth bomber were cut short last week, on one occasion because a crack in an engine gearbox caused a recurring oil pressure problem, the Defense Department said today.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Sept. 22
Sept. 15
Sept. 23
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.1
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.6
Gasoline stocks
220.0
218.6
218.5
Distillate stocks
122.0
121.4
132.2
Crude imports, daily
5.6
6.4
4.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.3
2.1
Crude stocks
330.9
328.9
318.8
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
89.3
89.8
81.2


Mansell Suspended From Spanish Race
LEAD: Nigel Mansell of Britain was suspended yesterday from the Spanish Formula One Grand Prix Sunday by the International Federation of Automobile Sports, the sport's governing body.
Ferrari team officials said they would appeal the decision but would not replace Mansell in the race.


Wells Fargo to Buy California Bank
LEAD: Continuing its expansion in Southern California, Wells Fargo &amp; Company signed an agreement to purchase the Torrey Pines Group of Solana Beach, Calif., owner of the Torrey Pines Bank.
The purchase price will be $31 a share, or about $74.5 million.
Of the purchase price, at least 52 percent will be paid in Wells


Bankrupt and Immoral on Cambodia
LEAD: Vietnamese troops have finally left Cambodia.
But with no agreed transition plan, Cambodians face a stark contest between the Vietnamese-installed Hun Sen regime and the genocidal Khmer Rouge.
And the Bush Administration now has to face the bankruptcy of its policy of backing Prince Sihanouk along with his Khmer Rouge allies and of opposing Hun Sen.


A.T.&amp; T. to Buy Istel In First British Move
LEAD: Moving to expand its international presence in information services, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would acquire Istel Ltd., a privately held information and technology services company based in London, for $280 million in cash.


Schools Trying to Link Good Jobs and Skills
LEAD: Teachers used to tell Gaylon Jefferson he should stay in school if he wanted a good job, but he says he did not see the point then.
He knew too many people who had high school diplomas and were still working at McDonald's.


Market Place; Questions Raised On Bridge Loans
LEAD: WALL STREET investment banks traditionally feared committing large amounts of their own capital to finance a client's deals.
But, in 1985, the firms discovered that sizable short-term loans could bring large profits, and so fear was pushed aside and they began extending bridge loans for corporate refinancings.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture on Saturday with an article about the crash of USAir Flight 5050 at La Guardia Airport was published in error.
It showed William Kerrigan, a Pan American pilot who was a passenger on the plane, not the plane's pilot.


New Sun Gasoline Expected
LEAD: The Sun Oil Company is expected to announce Wednesday that it will begin test-marketing a cleaner-burning gasoline, according to sources in the petroleum industry.


Don't Help Pol Pot. Try Him.
LEAD: Sometimes, nations are compelled to opt for the moral high ground rather than comply with a policy of alleged pragmatism that may produce an ethical abomination.
Such is the situation in Cambodia today.


Herbert J. Buchsbaum, Obstetrics Professor, 55
LEAD: Dr.
Herbert J. Buchsbaum, chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at the Medical College of Wisconsin, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Milwaukee.
He was 55 years old.


Brown U. to Strengthen Rules Against Racism
LEAD: Brown University will tighten its student policies against racism, but will not sell the rest of its stock holdings in companies with ties to South Africa, its president says.


Baseball's Other Hot Contests; Big Hitters Vie for Batting Crown but Might Not Admit It
LEAD: Some players don't like to talk about it or even admit they know anything about it or are part of it.


Once Again, Louisianians Get Chance to Vote on Tax Increase
LEAD: For the second time this year, Louisiana is trying to reinvent prosperity.
The state's voters, who rejected a tax referendum in April, will go to the polls again on Oct. 7 to consider a tax increase intended to lift the state's nearly flat economy.


Courter Wrote to the Army on Wedtech's Behalf
LEAD: Representative Jim Courter, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey, asked the Secretary of the Army to give the Wedtech Corporation ''every consideration for a procurement contract'' in 1981, according to a letter introduced yesterday at the bribery trial of Representative Robert Garcia of the


Tax Exemption Would Boost Blood Donations
LEAD: To the Editor:


Starring Zsa Zsa and the Police
LEAD: ''When he was chasing me I thought of the Gestapo.
I can't help it.
I wasn't scared in Europe.
We had the Nazis, the Russian tanks.
But I was here scared on Olympic and La Cienega.
I didn't believe that an American taxpayer could be treated like this.''


Is Rap Music as Harmful to Black Youth as White Institutions?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Book Notes
LEAD:  Protesting Protesters


Lovers of Greaseless French Fries Take Note
LEAD: DEEP frying is one of the trickier techiques for home cooks to master.
When done incorrectly, it can result in sodden, heavy, indigestible food.
Properly prepared, deep-fried food is light, brittle and greaseless.


Michael Scott Is Dead; Trade Editor Was 65
LEAD: Michael Scott, a publisher and editor of trade publications, died of a heart attack last Thursday at Group Health Hospital in Seattle.
He was 65 years old and had lived in Seattle since 1977.


Cubs Take First Title Since '84
LEAD: Using a measure of self-reliance, a hoped-for assist from the Pittsburgh Pirates and an unexpected late-game boost from the Montreal Expos, the Chicago Cubs won the National League East last night.
They became the first major league team to secure a division championship this season.


It Chills, Freezes and Cooks
LEAD: A new appliance that can chill beer, keep ice cream frozen and cook pizza has been designed to minimize energy use.
The Microfridge, which sells for $429, is a three-piece appliance consisting of a compact refrigerator, a separate freezer compartment and a small microwave oven.


A Federal Grant for Testing Aims at State-by-State Data
LEAD: The Department of Education is giving a $58.5 million grant to the Educational Testing Service to expand its national assessments of student performance to provide state-by-state information for the first time.


Yes on Start, for Now
LEAD: A new myth has suddenly materialized: By hanging tough, President Bush has brought the Soviet Union around to the U.S. positions in the strategic arms talks.
The Soviets did soften their stand last weekend on two of the toughest issues, Star Wars and sea-launched cruise missiles.
But the truth is that they haven't acceded to the U.S.


U.S. and Its Allies Sell Dollars
LEAD: The central banks of the leading industrial democracies sold dollars aggressively again today but the dollar held its ground, after falling sharply on Monday.


General Obligation Bonds Priced by New York City
LEAD: New York City yesterday tentatively priced $700 million in general obligation bonds through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Asa Paul Ruskin, 60, Doctor and a Professor
LEAD: Asa Paul Ruskin, director of rehabilitation medicine at the Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn, died of a ruptured abdominal aneurysm yesterday, his 60th birthday, at Mt.
Sinai Medical Center.
He lived in Manhattan.


Quebec Premier Turns Attention to Charter Accord
LEAD: After winning a landslide re-election over the separatist Parti Quebecois in a provincial election, Premier Robert Bourassa of Quebec turned his attention today to the uphill battle to gain ratification of a constitutional accord cementing Quebec's place in the Canadian confederation.


Lowe Tucker Expected To Announce a Deal
LEAD: Lowe Tucker Metcalf is expected to announce tomorrow that it has agreed to acquire Homer &amp; Durham, a small New York agency.


Side Effects Noted in High Doses of New AIDS Drug
LEAD: Researchers have found that an experimental AIDS drug, dideoxyinosine, or DDI, causes severe side effects at high doses.
They have begun to worry that wide distribution of the drug planned as a major experiment in the Federal drug approval process could produce similar toxic effects among many AIDS patients.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Capital Markets Assurance Corp. said Ram Wertheim, a former associate at the law firm of Simpson, Thacher &amp; Bartlett, had joined it as senior vice president and general counsel.


Meeting on Education Starts Today in Virginia
LEAD: President Bush will face the most important test yet of his pledge to be ''the education President'' here Wednesday when he assembles Cabinet members and the nation's governors to a two-day conference on education.


Taiwan Picks Yonkers Company for Subway Cars
LEAD: A Japanese-owned rail car manufacturer here that has built subway cars for the New York City and PATH systems was awarded a $170 million contract today to build the first 132 subway cars for a new mass-transit system under construction in Taipei, Taiwan.


Lufthansa Orders 20 Airbus A321's
LEAD: West Germany's state-controlled airline, Lufthansa, said its supervisory board had approved orders for 20 twin-engine Airbus A321 airliners.
It also agreed to convert options into firm orders on two more Airbuses and a total of 20 Boeing 737's.


Forecast of Good Weather Sends Some Grains Lower
LEAD: A forecast of ideal harvest weather sent some grain futures prices lower yesterday, but the selloff helped to bolster cattle prices.


With Bush in Elf Land
LEAD: Long ago when radio mattered, ''Let's Pretend'' was a good entertainment show for children.
Now it's the sport of grown-ups, and not the kind of grown-ups you expect to find clowning around either, but grown-ups who become testy when asked why they play ''Let's Pretend'' instead of tending to business.


DELTA AND F.A.A. FAULTED ON CRASH
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board today criticized Delta Air Lines and the Federal Aviation Administration, saying they had failed to tighten discipline among the airline's pilots until after a fatal crash in Dallas in August 1988.


Rosh ha-Shanah Journey To Hasidic Master's Tomb
LEAD: Shortly before his death in 1811, Rabbi Nachman of Bratslav, a Hasidic master known for his mystical teachings, asked his followers to come and pray at his grave each year on Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year.


China Buys More Wheat
LEAD: China has bought an additional 300,000 metric tons of United States wheat for delivery in the 1989-90 marketing year that began June 1, the Agriculture Department said today.
The sales were reported to the department by private exporters as required by law.
The latest sales increased to more than 4 million tons the amount of American wheat that China has purchased for the 1989-90 season.


Mix-Up Exposes Spy in Terror Group
LEAD: A breakdown in communications between police and intelligence officials in West Germany last October compromised a valuable agent inside a Palestinian terrorist group, preventing authorities from obtaining information that might have warned them of the December 1988 bombing of a Pan American jetliner over Scotland,


Excerpts From the Speech by Shevardnadze Before the General Assembly
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the address yesterday by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union to the United Nations General Assembly.
The speech was translated by a United Nations interpreter and recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network. . . .
Yesterday we listened with close attention to the speech of President George Bush of the United States, a statement which in our view contained a number of very important and interesting ideas.


Jens Norgaard, Football Player, 72
LEAD: Jens Norgaard, who played on the University of Iowa's 1939 Ironmen football team and was a decorated pilot in World War II, died Sunday in Burlington, Wis., after a short illness.
He was 72 years old.


British Telecom Names North American Head
LEAD: British Telecom, which has been increasing its activities in the United States, yesterday named Michael L. Ford as the president of its North American unit.


Toys 'R' Us to Open Stores In Japan Within Two Years
LEAD: Toys ''R'' Us, the nation's largest chain of specialty toy stores, said yesterday that within two years it would open several stores in Japan, one of the most difficult markets for American companies to enter.


Pierce Refuses to Answer Questions in H.U.D. Inquiry


COMPANY NEWS;
LEAD: The Tucson Electric Power Company said it would take a $15 million charge against earnings because a unit in the automobile leasing business had been cut off by its creditors.
Tucson Electric said it might suffer additional losses from its $59 million investment in the indirect subsidiary, the Brookland Financial Corporation.


Potatoes Come To Power
LEAD: A NEW guest came to the power lunch last winter: the potato.
For years the power lunch was the dominion of dishes like pasta with wild mushrooms followed by plain grilled fish.
But on Feb. 9 at 1:15 P.M., John Fairchild, publisher of Women's Wear Daily, assumed his accustomed perch in the Grill Room of the Four Seasons in


Dylex Hires Adviser
LEAD: Dylex Ltd. said today that it had retained Financo Inc. to advise it on a possible sale or restructuring of its United States clothing chain, the Foxmoor Specialty Stores Corporation.
The company had previously indicated it would explore a restructuring or sale.
Foxmoor operates 595 women's specialty stores in United States shopping malls.


Mistrial in Beech-Nut Case
LEAD: A mistrial was declared yesterday after a Federal jury said it was unable to reach a verdict in the trial of the former president of the Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation who was charged with selling flavored sugar water as apple juice for babies.


Removing the Hazards in Spray Paints
LEAD: If a gas is compressed to almost the density of a liquid, it often begins to act like a liquid.
The Union Carbide Corporation plans to take advantage of this property to eliminate large amounts of harmful solvents in the paints that are sprayed on automobiles, appliances and furniture.


Fernandez Retains A Hot Arm and Bat
LEAD: On a night when several of his teammates rested, Sid Fernandez did not.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Machinists Said To Spurn UAL
LEAD: In the next few days, the machinists' union will notify the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, that it wants to negotiate a new contract rather than participate in a buyout of the company by its pilots and management, a person close to the union said yesterday.


A Drug War, With Little Ammunition
LEAD: The key to understanding the Administration's national drug strategy lies not in reading President Bush's lips but in reading his proposal's fine print.
The closer one looks, the clearer it is that the budgeteers have gutted the President's and drug czar William Bennett's strategy.


Dallas AIDS Survey Is Begun Amid a Furor Over Its Worth
LEAD: After two years of false starts, Federal officials took the first steps yesterday toward beginning a national survey aimed at finding out how many Americans are infected with the AIDS virus.


Chinese in U.S. Report Harassment by Beijing
LEAD: Chinese students in the United States say they have been harassed by representatives of the Beijing Government and threatened with reprisals if they take part in demonstrations on Sunday to show support for the democracy movement in their homeland.


Soviets, Welcoming Bush's Plan On Chemical Arms, Go Further
LEAD: The Soviet Union today welcomed the United States proposal for immediate cuts in the two nations' chemical-weapons arsenals but suggested going further and banning production of the most advanced types of chemical arms, which Washington wants to retain.


Black-Footed Ferrets Ready For a Comeback in the Wilds
LEAD: The populaton of black-footed ferrets, once believed extinct, is growing in captive breeding, and the first of the animals will eventually be set free near this tiny community in north-central Wyoming.


About Education
LEAD: If President Bush wants to be known as the education President, he competes with Lyndon B. Johnson, his only predecessor with that title.
The way Mr.
Johnson gained that distinction seems relevant to the education meeting that begins today.


Dow Closes Up a Bit After Losing Big Gain
LEAD: Stocks ended slightly higher yesterday after losing substantial early gains on a late wave of futures-related trading.


Helms Hires 1960's Civil Rights Figure as Adviser
LEAD: Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, who has often criticized the civil rights movement, has hired James H. Meredith, who was the first black to enroll at the University of Mississippi, as a domestic policy adviser.


Asbestos Cleanup Continues After Pipe Explosion


Oil and Gas Industry Continues to Contract
LEAD: The nation's oil and gas industry continued to contract last year, as did the value of its known reserves, but companies still operating raised their exploration budgets to the highest level since 1985, according to Arthur Andersen &amp; Company.


Is Rap Music as Harmful to Black Youth as White Institutions?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Science Times yesterday about effects of cholesterol reduction referred incorrectly in some copies to findings of the 1987 Helsinki Heart Study.
There were more gastrointestinal problems among patients treated for high cholesterol levels with the drug gembfibrozil, but the difference was not statistically significant.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  A $660 million aid plan for Hungary and Poland next year was proposed by the European Community.
The figure is double the total already pledged by the industrial democracies this year.
Page A1


Jersey Race May Go
LEAD: The New Jersey Waterfront Marathon, site of the 1988 United States Olympic trials, will not take place next year unless a major sponsor provides about $500,000 before the end of the year, and that is unlikely, said Mike Rowe, general manager for Giants Stadium and Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority took over as producer of the race last year and lost an undisclosed sum.(


A Proposed Soviet Law Limits Press Censorship
LEAD: Three committees of the Soviet legislature have quietly approved a proposed press law allowing any citizen or group to publish newspapers, magazines or books, and forbidding Government censorship of the press before publication.





Suspect Denied Bail in Attack In Bensonhurst
LEAD: A judge yesterday denied bail for the young man accused of firing the fatal shots in the Bensonhurst racial slaying and said that prosecutors had a strong case against him.


3 Networks Gain Viewers
LEAD: Last week was the first of the new season, and viewer interest in what the three major networks had to offer was reflected in a 10-percentage-point increase over the previous week in the number of viewers watching ABC, CBS and NBC during prime time.
The three-network share of the prime-time audience was 72, the highest since February, when CBS broadcast the mini-series ''Lonesome


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the campaign for governor in Virginia misstated a political policy of Senator Harry F. Byrd.
He followed a strict ''pay as you go'' policy on public spending, declining to issue bonds for schools and hospitals.
Gov.
Mills E. Godwin Jr., a Byrd protege, abandoned the policy in 1965.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ACS Industries, Woonsocket, R.I., said its chairman was offering to take the company private in a $5.50-a-share buyout offer.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: DEAR DIARY:  While pushing my year-old daughter in a stroller down Fifth Avenue at the recent book fair, I came across Dr.
Lawrence Balter, a child psychologist.
It seemed like a good opportunity to ask for some expert advice.


George Patterson, 80, Ex-Pipeline Executive
LEAD: George S. Patterson, former chairman and chief executive of the Buckeye Pipe Line Company in Manhattan and the Everglades Pipe Line Company in Port Everglades, Fla., died of pneumonia on Sunday at Bethesda Hospital in Gulfstream, Fla.
He was 80 years old and lived in Gulfstream.


Johnson Fights the Odds In Effort to Stay a Devil
LEAD: The competition for jobs on the Devils is so fierce this season that Mark Johnson, the smallest and second-oldest player on the team, is facing a tough battle to find a place for himself after suffering three injuries last season.


World War II Vatican Role Must Be Recognized; Poles and the Church
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounting Merger Talks Called Off
LEAD: Arthur Andersen &amp; Company and Price Waterhouse said yesterday that they had abandoned their efforts to create the world's largest accounting firm.
The firms would not comment on why they had ended their discussions beyond saying that their ''differences could not be resolved within a realistic time frame.


John Koehler, 85, Former Federal Official
LEAD: John T. Koehler, a former Assistant Secretary of the Navy and acting chairman of the Federal Maritime Board, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 85 years old.


You Spent $100 for Dinner And Ate What? Beef Cheeks?
LEAD: THE menu at Amphycles, a new and already highly praised restaurant in Paris, listed among its main dishes joues de boeuf braisees aux carottes confites: succulent, fork-tender meat with a pleasant suggestion of fibrousness in a rich brown sauce with buttery carrots.
Delicious.
The others at the table were poised for samples and murmured their delight.


Eric Bernard, 57, Dies; Ran Restaurant Chain
LEAD: Eric Bernard, chairman and chief executive officer of Ground Round Inc., a national restaurant chain, and a former president of the Holiday Inn chain, died suddenly Monday in a hotel in Delray, Fla., while traveling.
He was 57 years old and lived in Boston and Palm Beach, Fla.


Kosher Cooking: Goodbye Derman, Hello Sushi
LEAD: SUNDOWN on Friday marks the beginning of Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, when Jewish families across the nation will sit down, as Jewish families have for centuries, to traditional meals of roast chicken, tsimmes, beef flanken and kreplach soup.


Brewer to Fight Stroh Takeover
LEAD: The S&amp;P Companies said it would file suit in Federal District Court to block the acquisition of most of the brands and breweries of the Stroh Brewing Company by the Adolph Coors Company.
S&amp;P is a privately held San Francisco company that owns the Pabst, Pearl, Falstaff and General brewing companies.


Maning Obregon, 50, Illustrator In the World of Fashion, Is Dead
LEAD: Maning Obregon, a fashion illustrator for more than 30 years, died last night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old.


In Memory of a Son: Pension of $2 a Month
LEAD: The family of Tran Van Thiep provides a reminder of the cost of the long Cambodian war to the Vietnamese.


Pierce's Statement to Panel
LEAD: Following is the statement that Samuel R. Pierce Jr. read today to a House subcommittee investigating irregularities at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, as provided by his lawyers.


Pierce Refuses to Answer Committee's Questions
LEAD: Former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. refused today to answer questions from Congress about political favoritism in Federal housing programs, citing his Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination.


British Trade Deficit Lower
LEAD: Britain's merchandise trade deficit eased to $3.69 billion in August from a revised shortfall of $3.99 billion the previous month, but it was still the fourth-largest gap ever, the Government said today.


Football's Minors Try To Survive First Year
LEAD: When the Pocono Mountaineers arrived here at the new City Island Sports Complex two weeks ago for a minor league football game against the Harrisburg Patriots, team officials stared at the modern and well-equipped playing field.


U.S. Delays Milken Case
LEAD: The Government said yesterday that it would miss its Oct. 1 deadline for a new indictment against Michael R. Milken, the former head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s junk bond department, and his brother, Lowell, a lawyer with the company.


Thinking About SETI
LEAD: When the mail brought a big package about the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence, or SETI, my knee-jerk reaction was that first we need to find more terrestrial intelligence.


Free Speech at Tufts: Zoned Out
LEAD: Tufts University is divided, both literally and figuratively.
A new university policy, intended to protect students from harassment, has brought First Amendment rights into conflict with the ideals of an academic community.
The issue is this: Should a university limit free speech to create a proper environment for learning?


For Fuming Motorists, a Memorable Presidential Visit
LEAD: The preparations began shortly before 10 A.M.
Monday, when New York City police officers and traffic agents closed First Avenue and the northbound lane of Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, Manhattan's main traffic arteries on the East Side.


Addenda
LEAD: *
William Wiener, a former executive with BBDO and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, has formed Advertising and Media Advisers, a media strategy concern.


Vermont's Top Court Punishes an Ex-Justice
LEAD: Having found one of its retired justices guilty of misconduct, the Vermont Supreme Court today reprimanded him and suspended him from judicial duties.


Black and White Death Rates Continue to Differ, Study Says
LEAD: Although the health of the overall American population is improving, there is a continuing disparity in the death and illness rates of blacks and whites, with blacks dying younger and having higher infant mortality rates than whites, a Government report released today says.


C. Wallace Floody, 71; Led P.O.W. Breakout
LEAD: C. Wallace Floody, whose heroics in World War II in engineering a tunnel out of a German prisoner of war camp were featured in the movie ''The Great Escape,'' died on Monday after a long illness.
He was 71 years old.


U.S. Judge Backs Extradition Of Accused Terrorist to Israel
LEAD: A Federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that a naturalized United States citizen accused in a 1986 terrorist attack on a bus in the West Bank could be extradited to Israel to stand trial for murder and other charges resulting from the attack.


Review/Recital; A Pianist's Emphasis: Technique and a Good Time
LEAD: Nikolai Petrov is a burly, hearty Russian bear of a pianist who has plenty of technique and sees no good reason why a piano recital shouldn't be an hour of fun.
He plans his programs around unifying themes, but not stern ones like the heroism-and-death cycle a young Greek pianist brought to Lincoln Center a few seasons back.


People
LEAD: *
Thomas Carey has been promoted to executive vice president of the international division of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, a unit of the Omnicom Group, and Peter Rosow and Richard Levenson were named to replace him as joint managing directors of D.M.B.&amp; B./New York.


2 Big Banks In the South Will Merge
LEAD: The Citizens and Southern Corporation of Atlanta, which repelled an unwanted takeover bid earlier this year, yesterday announced plans to merge with the Sovran Financial Corporation, Virginia's largest banking company.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about the new Goh Annex of the phillips Collection in Washington misstated financial help provided by two banks and two foundations.
They are paying for the opening ceremonies, not for the annex, which was financed by other donations from foundations and individuals.


No One Leading Football Cheers For School Team
LEAD: When the Montpelier High School football team takes the field this year, something will be missing: cheerleaders.


First Bank Fills Position
LEAD: The First Bank System, based in Minneapolis, has elevated a director, Richard L. Schall, to acting chairman.
Mr.
Schall, 59 years old, will lead the search to replace DeWalt H. Ankeny Jr., who resigned last week after First Bank said that it expected a large charge-off against its third-quarter earnings and that it might reduce its work force by 20 percent.


Hearty Lamb Dish For Fall's Debut
LEAD: MY family loves lamb - roasted, grilled, sauteed or stewed.
Often we roast or grill the leg, which is less expensive than the rack or chops.
For braising and for stew we sometimes use the breast, a very inexpensive, moist and flavorful cut.


Youth Held in Gun Possession
LEAD: A 16-year-old student was charged yesterday with carrying a loaded handgun after he took the weapon to his Brooklyn school, the police said.
A spokesman for the police said the youth told them he had the gun, a .22-caliber revolver, to protect himself in a bad neighborhood where he worked after school.


Saks and Field Likely to Draw Global Bids
LEAD: The proposed sale of the 46 Saks Fifth Avenue stores and of the 26 Marshall Field &amp; Company stores by B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. is expected to draw substantial interest from domestic and foreign companies, merger specialists and retailers said yesterday.


Is Rap Music as Harmful to Black Youth as White Institutions?
LEAD: To the Editor:


11 Suspensions End
LEAD: The N.F.L. yesterday reinstated 11 players suspended in the preseason after testing positive for steroid use: Sean Docter, Tom Docter and Matt Jaworski of Buffalo; Maurice Douglas of Chicago, Keith Uecker of Green Bay, Mark Mraz of the Los Angeles Raiders, Vince Amoia and Bobby Riley of the Jets, Ron Solt of Philadelphia and Keith Henderson and Rollin Putzier of San


Speed Contra Resettlement, Guatemalan Urges the U.S.
LEAD: The President of Guatemala appealed to the United States today to use the aid it is giving the Nicaraguan rebels in Honduras to speed up their return and resettlement in Nicaragua.


New Jersey Debate: Long on Quips, Loose on Facts
LEAD: New Jerseyans were confronted with a burst of political imagery Monday in the first debate in the race for governor as Representative Jim Courter and Representative James J. Florio painted portraits of each other with pointed quips and dabs of dirt.


Apple Loses Court Appeal
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled Monday that Apple Computer Inc. and its top officers must go to trial on the question of whether its optimistic statements about a office computer disk drive called Twiggy misled investors.


Some East German Refugees, Told They Can Emigrate, Return Home    Later, between 50 and 60 East Germans boarded a bus that reportedly took them to a Prague railroad station for the trip back to East Germany. The others, however, remained at the embassy. (Agence France-Presse)


Review/Television; The Long Fight for China, 40 Years After It Ended
LEAD: Linking fascinating newsreels to remarkable interviews with participants on both sides of China's long civil war, ''China in Revolution, 1911-1949'' makes an absorbing two hours of history.
This admirable documentary, produced by Sue Williams and Kathryn Dietz and being shown tonight at 9 o'clock on Channels 13 and 49, is public broadcasting's observation of the 40th anniversary of the formation of the People's Republic of


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about efforts to import pentamidine, a drug used to treat AIDS symptoms, referred incorrectly to the anti-fungal drug fluconazole.
It is available free for patients who cannot tolerate other therapies or in whom the therapies have failed.


Its Pumps Repaired, San Juan Gets Water
LEAD: Water flowed from the taps of San Juan homes today for the first time since Hurricane Hugo knocked out the city's pumps eight days ago.


U.N. Staff Remembers Its Colleagues Who Have Been Killed or Detained


Explosive Found in Niger Crash
LEAD: Investigators say they have found traces of the powerful explosive Semtex in remnants of the French DC 10 airliner that crashed in Niger on Sept. 19, killing 171 people, two French newspapers reported today.


Harry A. Denehy, Executive, 69
LEAD: Harry A. Denehy, an executive of Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons, died of a heart attack Friday at Huntington (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Huntington.


Tiananmen Killings Not a 'Tragedy,' Chinese Party Chief Says
LEAD: The Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, said today that the army's suppression of the democracy movement in early June, in which hundreds of people were killed, was not a ''tragedy,'' and he refused to rule out more death sentences for the movement's leaders.


With Vietnamese Out, Cambodia Faces Bitter Fight
LEAD: What Vietnam says is its last column of troops in Cambodia began moving through this border crossing early this morning, nearly 11 years after Vietnamese soldiers invaded Cambodia and ousted the brutal Khmer Rouge Government of Pol Pot.


Off-Duty Soldiers Trade Gunfire At a House Linked to Drug Sales
LEAD: A dozen off-duty soldiers from Fort Lewis engaged in a 30-minute gun battle last weekend against a group of alleged drug dealers.


Topics of The Times; Red Dye Sneak Attack
LEAD: Red Dye No. 3 is an artificial color additive that brightens cosmetics, drugs and foods - notably maraschino cherries.
Animal tests show it is also a carcinogen.
Whether the potentially dangerous dye remains on the market will be decided this week when House and Senate conferees complete the 1990 agriculture appropriations bill.


Having Fun With Jack Benny, for Opera's Sake
LEAD: As Bob McGrath explains it, the Ridge Theater troupe, of which he is artistic director, is at its best in developing pieces with a political edge.
But he added that they also enjoy ''taking American pop icons, playing with them and distorting them.''


City Opera Warns Strikers It May Cancel the Season
LEAD: The New York City Opera has warned its orchestra and the union representing its performers that if the musicians' two-week-long strike is not settled by Oct. 8, the company will cancel the rest of the season, scheduled to end Nov. 19.


GREEK LAWMAKER IS SLAIN IN ATHENS
LEAD: A gunman today killed a prominent politician, the son-in-law of the man expected to be the next Prime Minister, and a leftist guerrilla group asserted responsibility.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Soviet Press Freedoms  Soviet legislators are quietly pushing through a draft press law to allow private publishing and forbid Government censorship.
Page A8.
Cubs Clinch Division Title  The Chicago Cubs, who have not won a pennant in 44 years or a World Series in 81 years, won their second division title in five years.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about the Antarctic Minerals Convention, a treaty governing the exploitation of mineral resources, misstated the views of Ray Arnaudo, director of the polar programs division of the National Science Foundation.
He said that while Australia's decision against supporting the treaty was discouraging, the United States continues to support it.


Handicapped Protesters Gain Support, but Demands Remain Unmet    The protesters, however, will be allowed to continue a ''symbolic presence'' at the Richard B. Russell building in downtown Atlanta. (AP)


Durables Orders Jump 3.8%
LEAD: Durable goods orders jumped a surprising 3.8 percent in August for the best gain in eight months, the Commerce Department said today, but fresh signs of weakness in the industrial sector crept into the monthly report.


Top Position at Hytek Is Filled by a Director
LEAD: Hytek Microsystems Inc. said yesterday that Alan W. Baldwin had assumed the position of chairman, chief executive and chief operating officer, effective immediately.
Mr.
Baldwin has been a director since June 1988 and has served as a consultant.


CUSTODY STRUGGLE PRESSED IN CAPITAL
LEAD: A newly freed Dr.
Elizabeth Morgan and her former husband, Dr.
Eric Foretich, played out the conflicting versions of their bitter dispute over the custody of their child before the national press today while related court proceedings remained on hold.


New Jersey Offers Parkway Bonds
LEAD: A $238 million negotiated bond issue by the New Jersey Highway Authority was tentatively priced through a group of underwriters led by Dillon, Read &amp; Company.


New Hewlett Work Station
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company introduced a new computer work station today that is based on its proprietary HP Precision Architecture, which uses reduced instruction set computing, or RISC, for faster operation.
At a base price of $19,375, the HP 9000 Model 834CH is now the least expensive entry in the company's HP-PA line.


Hydrogen Pushed as Motor Fuel
LEAD: Recent advances in the efficiency of cells that convert solar energy to electricity are increasing the possibility of using hydrogen as a practical, low-polluting motor vehicle fuel, according to a new study by two Princeton University physicists that was released here today.


Juno Lighting reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Juno Lighting (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,597,000
15,206,000
Net inc
3,083,000
3,021,000
Share earns
.33
.33
9mo sales
56,157,000
43,335,000
Net inc
9,130,000
b9,058,000
Share earns
.99
.99


Group Offers Money In AIDS Survey Protest
LEAD: A gay rights group that opposes a national survey aimed at finding out how many Americans are infected with the AIDS virus offered $100 today to the first person who refuses to participate in the door-to-door survey.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Magazine Ad Offends Chains
LEAD: Several department and grocery-store chains have removed seven women's magazines from their shelves because the publications contained an ad showing a nude woman.
Wal-Mart Stores, Vons and


HURRICANE DAMAGE SLOWS AID EFFORT
LEAD: Truckloads of food and teams of skilled workers arrived here today, six days after a hurricane swept through this port city.
Thousands of residents of South Carolina's Low Country continued to live in public shelters, and fallen trees hampered the distribution of food and water and the restoration of electric power.


Celtics Plan to Buy a Radio Station
LEAD: A week after disclosing that it had purchased a television station, the Boston Celtics L.P. announced today that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire WEEI, the team's flagship radio station.


American Western In Carlisle Merger
LEAD: The American Western Corporation said it had agreed to be acquired by Carlisle Plastics Inc. for $12.50 a share in cash, a lower price than the companies had agreed upon.
Based on American Western's 5.6 million shares outstanding, the offer has a value of $69 million, but with the assumption of debt, American


Ketema Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ketema Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
47,621,000
-
Net inc
1,243,000
-
Share earns
.28
-
Shares outst
4,406,871
-
6mo sales
99,885,000
-
Net inc
2,317,000
-
Share earns
.52
-
Shares outst
4,404,371
-


Lennar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lennar Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
98,905,000
96,406,000
Net inc
7,010,000
6,743,000
Share earns
.70
.68
9mo rev
265,902,000
262,929,000
Net inc
19,225,000
18,841,000
Share earns
1.92
1.90


DEALS
LEAD:  Baseball  YANKEES (AL) - Obtained Fred Toliver, pitcher, from the San Diego Padres to complete the trade that sent Mike Pagliarulo, third baseman, to San Diego.
HOUSTON (NL) - Announced the retirement of Craig Reynolds, infielder, effective at the end of the season.
Senior Pro Baseball


Downtrodden Cowboys Awaiting Arrival of the Giants
LEAD: When the Giants travel to Dallas to play the Cowboys on Sunday, they will find that America's Team has become America's Nightmare.


Opening in New York
LEAD: The New York Sports Museum and Hall of Fame, the largest regional all-sports museum in the country, will open within two years in New York City, planners said yesterday.


Hershiser's Enemy: Dodger Bats
LEAD: Orel Hershiser already endorses baby shampoo, pizza, soft drinks, watches, underwear and cars.
He should add barometers to his portfolio.


Team Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Team Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,507,000
16,583,000
Net inc
1,070,000
1,138,000
Share earns
.40
.42
Year-ago net earnings results included a gain of $142,000 from investment tax credit and a gain of $283,000 from tax credits.


Jury Is Urged to Order Death For Night Stalker Murders
LEAD: A prosecutor urged a jury today to recommend death in the gas chamber for Richard Ramirez, saying he killed for simple gratification.


Outdoors; A Contest for Callers of the Wild
LEAD: If you cherish the notion that you are a skillful caller of ducks and geese, you might wish to enter the contest that will be part of the Long Island Wildfowl Carvers' annual decoy show, Saturday and Sunday at the Sands Point Preserve in Port Washington.


A Machine to Control PC Network
LEAD: A start-up computer company introduced a set of machines today that analysts and industry officials predicted could open up a new battlefront in the computer industry.


D'Amato Rating Is Down in Poll
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's job approval rating has fallen to its lowest point in more than six years, an independent poll reported today.


Some of Hong Kong's People Get Pledge of Post-'97 British Refuge
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary outlined new proposals today that he said would make it easier for some Hong Kong citizens to move to Britain if China limits their Western-style freedoms after it takes control of the British crown colony in 1997.


Michael Sullivan, 54, A Telephone Executive
LEAD: Michael J. Sullivan, president of the Empire City Subway Company, a subsidiary of New York Telephone, died Monday at Roosevelt Hospital after being stricken on Broadway and 42d Street, on his way to a meeting.
The cause of death has not been determined.
He was 54 years old and lived in White Plains.


Hope and Dissent Blend In Education Conference
LEAD: President Bush opened his education conference with the nation's governors today in an atmosphere of hope tinged with division and uncertainty over how best to improve the nation's ailing schools.


'STAR WARS' FADING AS MAJOR ELEMENT OF U.S. STRATEGY
LEAD: After six years of steadily increasing financial support, the space-based anti-missile program that President Reagan said would make nuclear weapons ''impotent and obsolete,'' is facing a declining budget and a diminishing role in American military planning.


PEN Celebrates Freedoms Gained in Eastern Europe
LEAD: The members of International PEN seemed joyful about the limited return of freedom of expression to eastern Europe when they gathered here this week for the group's 54th annual congress.





Hartmarx Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartmarx Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
317,250,000
289,729,000
Net inc
420,000
5,545,000
Share earns
.02
.30
9mo sales
949,086,000
864,426,000
Net inc
13,305,000
22,680,000
Share earns
.68
1.21


A Self-Taught Film Maker Creates a Comic Hit
LEAD: Judging from the frozen smile on his face, the standing, cheering ovation caught Michael Moore by surprise.
The film maker, a solitary figure wearing a nylon-mesh baseball cap, stood awkwardly before an audience of 500 cheering filmgoers.
They had just seen his first movie, ''Roger and Me,'' at the Toronto International Film


Canada Seen as Major Haven For Laundering Drug Money
LEAD: Canada is quickly becoming a major haven for laundering illegal drug profits from the United States, law-enforcement authorities from both countries say.


The Rolling Stones Add Fifth Concert at Shea
LEAD: The Rolling Stones' ''Steel Wheels'' tour has added a fifth date to its Shea Stadium performances, on Tuesday, Oct. 10, at 7 P.M.
The date, which precedes by two weeks the band's sold-out four-night stand at Shea, became available when the New York Mets were eliminated from the National League East pennant race on Monday.


E. L. Pavlo, 83, Dies; A Designer of Bridges
LEAD: E. Lionel Pavlo, a civil engineer and specialist in suspension bridge design, died Sept. 10 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.


Robbery Suspect Shot By Civilian in Subway
LEAD: A man who pulled a toy pistol on a woman and tried to rob her in a Bronx subway station yesterday was shot three times by an off-duty security guard, the transit police said.


The Warp and Weft of History, on Display
LEAD: A story has it that when Franco Scalamandre - a man who knew more than most about the place of fabrics in history - heard after World War II that atomic power was being considered for peaceful uses, he cried out: ''Hurry up!
Make a split-atom textile!''


Market Place; Earnings Outlook Mediocre to Poor
LEAD: WITH the third quarter drawing to a close, Wall Street is expecting a mediocre to poor profit performance from corporate America and sees little reason to expect that to change in the final three months of 1989.


Samuel S. Haber, 66, Textile Executive, Dies
LEAD: Samuel S. Haber, president of Samuel Haber's Sons, a division of QST Industries, Inc., international distributors of textile linings and other apparel components, died of cancer Sunday at Michael Reese Medical Center, Chicago.
He was 66 years old and lived in Chicago.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: NINE-YEAR-OLD Stacey Pitzrick recently told a playmate about her grandmother and three brothers living in Seoul. ''We don't know if any of what she said is true,'' said Deborah Pitzrick, who, along with her husband, Jerry, adopted Stacey from Korea when she was 8 1/2 months old.


At Armory, Did Serious Mean Better?
LEAD: CRAMMED with a global assortment of period objects, New York's newest antiques fair - its first to be vetted for authenticity - ended a six-day run yesterday with mixed reviews.


Stride Rite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stride Rite Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 1
1989
1988
Sales
128,548,000
106,090,000
Net inc
13,308,000
b10,264,000
Share earns
.49
.37
9mo sales
364,247,000
290,203,000
Net inc
38,012,000
b27,308,000
Share earns
1.41
.99


Johannesburg Acts to Ease Segregation
LEAD: The city of Johannesburg opened swimming pools and recreational centers to all races today and proceeded with plans to desegregate buses.


Toyota Increases 1990 Prices by 1.8%
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Company raised its prices in the United States for the company's 1990 cars by an average of 1.8 percent, or by about $178, from the final 1989 retail price.
The company said the increase was its first since the 1989 models were introduced last fall.
It said the 1990 prices reflected installation of more safety equipment, new-model changes and product upgradings.


Abortion Drug Developer Gets Lasker Award
LEAD: The developer of a drug that brings on abortion early in pregnancy was named yesterday as a winner of the Lasker Award, one of the most prestigious medical research prizes.


Party Treasurer Says Democrats Rebound From Money Slump
LEAD: The Democratic National Committee got a bullish report today from Robert A. Farmer, the party treasurer, who said the party had overcome a slow start in its 1989 fund raising.


Athletics Repeat as Winners in West; Giants Stumble to Title
LEAD: Major league baseball's western division titles were finally settled last night as the season's dominant team, the Oakland A's, captured the American League West running away by trouncing the Texas Rangers, 5-0, in Oakland while the San Francisco Giants clinched the National League West only after the Cincinnati Reds defeated the second-place Padres in San Diego.


Hoffman-La Roche Accord With Cetus
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation reached an agreement with Hoffman-La Roche Inc. to develop pharmaceutical products based on Cetus's research in the field of oncogenes.
Oncogenes are altered versions of normal genes that have been shown to cause cancer.
Under the agreement, Hoffman-La Roche will help finance research and development at Cetus for five years.


Sensormatic Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sensormatic Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,400,000
34,079,000
Net inc
4,700,000
b1,247,000
Share earns
.17
.04
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,653,000.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.  LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


Prime Medical Services reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Medical Services (OTC)
Year to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
13,784,000
13,875,000
Net loss
2,977,000
b29,659,000
Shares outst
8,442,000
7,651,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $14,513,000.


Construction Contracts Off
LEAD: A slowdown in public works projects helped push the value of new construction contracts down 3 percent in August, according to a survey by the F. W. Dodge Group of the McGraw-Hill Information Services Company.


Star Wedtech Witness Takes His Final Curtain
LEAD: Mario Moreno, the Government's star witness in the bribery case against Representative Robert Garcia, was on the witness stand yesterday blandly describing bribes and lies, influence-peddling, slush-fund payoffs, stock manipulation, fake passports and foreign bank accounts.


Pending Issues In Airline Deal
LEAD: HAL Acquisition Inc., an investment group including Peter V. Ueberroth, the former baseball commissioner, that has agreed to acquire Hawaiian Airlines, said today that ''numerous unresolved issues'' remained in its negotiations with the unions of the Honolulu-based airline.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on the Education page on Sept. 20 listing salaries of college chief executives referred incorrectly to the president of Rockefeller University.
He is Joshua Lederberg.
The chart also omitted a source for the figures.
It was The Chronicle of Higher Education.


Fed Approves Banks' Deal
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday approved the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company's purchase of 11 New York-area branches and a public accommodation office from Goldome of Buffalo.


Olco Petroleum Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olco Petroleum Group
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
84,000,000
73,400,000
Net loss
555,000
b191,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  Year-ago figures have been restated.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Farm Credit Issue Totals $2.8 Billion
LEAD: The Farm Credit System Banks yesterday priced a four-part consolidated systemwide bond issue totaling about $2.8 billion.
It is being sold through the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation and a nationwide group of securities dealers and banks.


New Panel to Seek Reforms for Colleges
LEAD: The retired presidents of two universities that emphasize athletic success as well as academic achievement said today they would lead a commission that would seek the causes of the problems plaguing intercollegiate sports and then try to persuade colleges to make changes.


In Son's Slaying, a Father Finds His Mission
LEAD: For Moses J. Stewart, a black security guard whose 16-year-old son, Yusuf K. Hawkins, was surrounded by a gang of young whites a month ago and shot to death, this is a time of bitter reawakening.


Besicorp Group Inc reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Besicorp Group Inc (OTC)
Year to May 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,377,494
4,088,983
Net loss
970,448
b851,994
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
17,559
17,316
b-Net income


Corporate Raider Sentenced to 4 Years


National Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
75,341,000
48,640,000
Net inc
6,459,000
4,339,000
Share earns
.55
.38
The company said the results included a charge of $2.5 million, before taxes, for the accelerated depreciation of certain assets due to the expected restructuring of the company's voice centers in conjunction with the US Sprint contract termination in February 1990.


Mr. Bush's I.O.U. for Poland
LEAD: ''There may be no greater opportunity before us all today than the challenges of Poland and, more broadly, Eastern Europe,'' President Bush said at yesterday's International Monetary Fund meeting.
After months of hesitation, he recognizes the urgency of Poland's needs and acknowledges that the U.S.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Burger King Campaign: 'Break Rules'
LEAD: REELING from years of stagnant growth, the acquisition of its parent company and almost annual changes in advertising agencies, the Burger King Corporation yesterday opened the latest chapter in its marketing melodrama by telling consumers, ''Sometimes you've gotta break the rules.''


Time for Ms. America (and Mr. America)
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quayle Meets With Aquino And Is Hopeful About Bases
LEAD: Although he was hounded by anti-American demonstrations and haunted by the killings of two Americans here Tuesday, Vice President Dan Quayle said today that he was confident the Philippines will renew its bases treaty with the United States.


Tom Bradley Topped Dinkins in White Vote; If Goldin Were Black
LEAD: To the Editor:


Former Top Aide to Pierce Refuses Panel's Questions
LEAD: The former executive assistant to Samuel R. Pierce Jr. refused to answer questions today from a House panel investigating abuses in the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


International Multifoods Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Multifoods Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
493,416,000
455,001,000
Net inc
7,569,000
8,320,000
Share earns
.59
.57
Shares outst
12,837,497
14,559,703
6mo sales
996,327,000
920,079,000
Net inc
12,094,000
16,799,000
Share earns
.94
1.15
Shares outst
12,830,128
14,558,139


Stalled Talks in Phone Strike Due to Resume
LEAD: Officials of the Nynex Corporation and the two unions representing 60,000 of its employees are expected to resume bargaining today for the first time in nearly two weeks.
But spokesmen for each side said they did not expect a quick resolution to the strike, which is in its eighth week.


Gordon F. Miller, 82, a Teacher and Coach
LEAD: Gordon F. Miller, a former teacher, coach and athletic director who was known as Moose to generations of students at the Horace Mann School in the Bronx, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old.


Fairchild Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fairchild Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
80,602,000
77,958,000
Net loss
b12,793,000
c10,244,000
Share earns
-
.57
Shares outst
14,580,000
14,256,000
6mo sales
157,997,000
159,534,000
Net loss
b11,113,000
c15,632,000
Share earns
-
.81
Shares outst
14,495,000
14,191,000


At a Preview, a Steamy Social Bazaar
LEAD: OLIVER BLICKSILVER selected one perfect radish from an array of crudites at the International Antique Dealers Show benefit last week.
He was about to eat it when his fiancee, Margot Manning, waving a zucchini spear, cried, ''Wait!
Is that radish vetted?'' ''Of course,'' Mr.
Blicksilver replied, chomping away.


Keeping the Best Gardens a Joy Forever
LEAD: IN the past decade, not just gardening but garden visiting has become one of America's most popular pastimes.
On Sunday, at an open house here at the Ruth Bancroft Dry Garden, 20 miles east of San Francisco, a new chapter begins in American garden history.
The event will introduce the Garden Conservancy, a national organization devoted to preserving exceptional


Master Joker Who Never Forgets
LEAD: After nearly seven decades in show business, Bob Hope has a joke for every occasion.
In the new fireproof vault in the gatehouse of his six-acre estate, there are 16 filing cabinet drawers filled with folders labeled by categories: golf miscellaneous, golf American Presidents, gambling, gay liberation, dieting, pollution, religion, weather, dude ranches.


Corruption Trial for Papandreou Is Ordered by Greece's Parliament
LEAD: In the same forum where Andreas Papandreou dominated Greek political life for more than a decade, Parliament voted early today to order the former Prime Minister to stand trial on criminal charges, including bribery and receiving stolen funds.


Irving Berlin Is Buried In a Private Ceremony
LEAD: Irving Berlin was buried Tuesday afternoon at a private ceremony in Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx.


INTERNATIONAL AID SOUGHT FOR POLES
LEAD: President Bush called for greater international economic assistance for the new Government of Poland today, pledging that the United States would be ''out in front of this effort'' to insure success.
But he offered few details about what the United States would do.


Review/Dance; Amid Gray Stones, Sadness and a Sense of the Primeval
LEAD: In her haunting new dance solo, ''Requiem for the Living'' the experimental choreographer Molissa Fenley sits, kneels or lies on the floor -always encircled by stones.


New Study Says Diuretics Raise Heart Attack Risks
LEAD: Diuretics, the most widely used class of drugs against high blood pressure, can cause biochemical changes that make people more susceptible to heart attacks, researchers have found.


Court Throws Out Conviction After a Wish of 'a Good Day'
LEAD: A convicted contract gunman and kidnapper must have a new trial because a juror was improperly dismissed for greeting the defendant with ''Have a good day'' during the trial, a state appeals court ruled yesterday.


Benjamin Busch, Lawyer, 77
LEAD: Benjamin Busch, a lawyer and a law professor, died on Sept. 15 at his home in Lakeville, Conn., after a long illness.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Busch specialized in international law.
He was a partner in the Manhattan firm of Katz &amp; Sommerich from 1946 to 1976.
He then became of counsel to Hamburger, Weinschenk, Molnar &amp; Busch in Manhattan.


Soviet-U.S. Fish Net Plan
LEAD: Seeking to protect a declining population of salmon and other fish in the North Pacific, United States and Soviet negotiators have agreed to cooperate in monitoring the use of giant drift nets that sweep up large amounts of sea life, the State Department has announced.


Bridge
LEAD: There are times when opposing activity indicates that a normal contract is undesirable.
On the diagramed deal from the recent world team championships in Perth, Australia, most North-South pairs played in three no-trump and failed by at least one trick.


Summagraphics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summagraphics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,447,294
9,705,372
Net inc
1,131,853
1,315,617
Share earns
.30
.35
Shares outst
3,795,000
3,738,000


Two Mains Rupture, Cutting Water Service
LEAD: A water main broke and flooded the basements of two apartment buildings yesterday in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
The residents were removed.


Apparel America Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apparel America Inc
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,998,000
7,865,000
Net loss
920,000
b86,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
6,323,260
4,711,869
6mo sales
58,760,000
22,375,000
Net inc
2,384,000
2,132,000
Share earns
.24
.45
Shares outst
6,121,104
4,711,869


Slovenes Assert the Right to Secede, but Say They Won't    Federal leaders had sought to delay amendment. (Agence France-Presse)


Cambodian Factions Cry Sham in Hanoi's Pullout
LEAD: A new diplomatic struggle is being waged here over Vietnam's announcement of the withdrawal of its occupation forces from Cambodia, with Cambodian opposition leaders trying to convince the nations of the world that the pullout is a sham.


Luther Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luther Medical Products
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
634,495
449,336
Net loss
31,329
502,226
Yr rev
2,287,407
1,846,753
Net loss
124,186
1,098,708


Swarthmore Journal; Life's Quest Rewarded, 84 Trillion Miles Away
LEAD: ''That's my baby,'' said Prof.


Kollmorgen Move
LEAD: The board of the Kollmorgen Corporation terminated the company's agreement to merge into the Vernitron Corporation after Vernitron decided not to proceed with the transaction.
Kollmorgen said the board had approved a restructuring plan, which contemplated selling its electronic interconnections business.


Fuhr Dismisses Agent
LEAD: Grant Fuhr, a goaltender for the Edmonton Oilers, announced yesterday in Edmonton that he had severed relations with his agent, Rich Winter, after deciding that Winter had not always acted in Fuhr's best interest.
On June 10, Fuhr announced his retirement.
He said he did not want to play because he was not receiving the respect he deserved and said he planned to sell cars.


More Tests for Tritium Reactors
LEAD: In a move that could further delay the production of a scarce gas needed for nuclear warheads, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins today ordered additional testing of the Government's tritium reactors before they are restarted.


Treasuries Dip in Light Trading
LEAD: As dealers struggled to absorb a new $7.75 billion issue of four-year notes, prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped in light trading yesterday.


American League; Jays Maintain One-Game Edge
LEAD: The tightest race in major league baseball drew a notch tighter last night as the Toronto Blue Jays and the Baltimore Orioles won games against noncontending opponents and their battle for the American League East championship came down to a final squeeze in Toronto this weekend.


Prudential Sues Three Law Firms
LEAD: The Prudential Insurance Company of America filed a $31 million lawsuit yesterday against three law firms, arguing that their negligence and legal malpractice had caused it heavy losses.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
9.00
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.83
7.77
7.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.81
7.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.31
8.91
30-YR.


NASA's Reliance on Contractors Is Seen as Eroding Its Capabilities
LEAD: The space agency, long known for its technical expertise, has become so dependent on private contractors that it may be losing its ability to manage its operations, maintain safety and control costs, senior officials say.


Election Fever in Chicago Schools As Parents File for Council Seats
LEAD: In the first test of Chicago's ambitious plan to transfer power from the central education board to parent-led councils at each of the city's public schools, 7,972 parents have declared their candidacies so far.


Hungary's Parliament Backs Free Expression
LEAD: The Hungarian Parliament passed a law today that gives people the right to express opinions or advocate political and social change, further expanding freedom of speech before multiparty elections next year.


Ellison Has Surgery
LEAD: Doctors at University Medical Center in Sacramento, Calif., said yesterday they successfully removed bone spurs on the right foot and ankle of Pervis Ellison, the Sacramento Kings' No. 1 draft choice this year.
Dr.
Richard Marder, the team's orthopedic surgeon, said Ellison was released as an outpatient after the 30-minute operation.


Credit Government Scientists With Developing Anti-AIDS Drug
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chip Sales Seen Rising in '89
LEAD: Sales of the worldwide semiconductor industry are projected to reach $49.1 billion in 1989, up 9 percent from $45 billion in 1988, a trade group reported today.


Image Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Image Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,070,000
6,741,000
Net inc
151,000
171,000
Share earns
.07
.07
9mo rev
26,365,000
19,754,000
Net inc
406,000
767,000
Share earns
.18
.33
Shares outst
2,287,071
2,287,071


Unhappy Birthday
LEAD: Forty years ago this Sunday, from the wall overlooking Tiananmen Square, Mao Zedong declared the establishment of the People's Republic of China.
For the crowd waving red banners in the square, and for millions of Chinese elsewhere, it was a moment of hope for a reborn China, united and democratic.


War: 1 Percent. Drugs: 54 Percent.
LEAD: What do you think is the most important problem facing this country today?


Hasbro to Stop Animal Testing
LEAD: Hasbro Inc. said Tuesday that it would no longer use white rats, rabbits and other animals to test children's cosmetics for safety.


Cement Makers Fault Mexicans
LEAD: A group of seven cement manufacturers has complained to Federal officials that Mexican competitors are unfairly selling cement in the United States at cut-rate prices.


Catholics Meet on Gay Role in Clergy
LEAD: More than 100 people from Roman Catholic institutions in the New York area gathered here today to discuss a subject rarely talked about openly - homosexuality among priests, nuns and religious brothers.


Abortion Opponents Protest at Prosecutor's Home
LEAD: Opponents of abortion demonstrated Tuesday night at the home of a city solicitor, who called the protest an intimidation effort that would not stop him from prosecuting Operation Rescue's leader on trespassing charges.


Antley Surrenders His Jockey License
LEAD: Chris Antley, acknowledging a recurrence of his drug-abuse problems, has voluntarily surrendered his jockey license to the State Racing and Wagering Board and has pledged to seek further professional treatment for his cocaine use.


National Medical Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Medical Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
996,325,000
852,559,000
Net inc
50,020,000
41,114,000
Share earns
.65
.56
Shares outst
78,676,000
73,925,000


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mo Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Utilities (NYSE)
12mo Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,152,576,000
2,020,429,000
Net inc
b221,984,000
b205,504,000
Share earns
2.04
1.89
b-After income from discontinued operations of $8,660,000, or 8 cents a share, for the latest year and $12,018,000, or 11 cents a share, for 1988.


Top Yield Is 7.20% On Texas Bonds
LEAD: The Texas Municipal Power Agency is offering $196.1 million in refunding revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.20 percent for bonds due 2002 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Group Proposes High-Speed Train for Texas
LEAD: A private group today announced a proposal to build what it hopes will be the nation's first high-speed train, similar to those that travel at speeds up to 185 miles an hour in Europe and Japan.
The proposed route would be from Houston to Dallas and the trip would take about 90 minutes.


Palme Case: A Field Day for the Conspiracy Set
LEAD: Three years and seven months after Prime Minister Olof Palme was killed in central Stockholm, and two months after a 42-year-old derelict was convicted of the crime, the Palme case refuses to go away.


Quest BioTechnology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quest BioTechnology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
-
200,000
Net loss
229,805
116,608
9mo rev
505,000
200,000
Net loss
347,187
766,127
The company did not recognize revenues in the latest quarter.


Aska of Japan Buys Stake in Christie's
LEAD: Christie's International P.L.C., the fine art auction house, said the Aska International Company of Tokyo bought the 7.2 percent stake sold by the Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court.
The secretary of Christie's, David N. Allison, said the company was uncertain of Aska's goals in acquiring the stake.


Cabletron Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabletron Systems Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
25,317,000
11,773,000
Net inc
5,783,000
2,538,000
Share earns
.22
.10
Shares outst
26,299,000
24,434,000
6mo sales
47,932,000
21,986,000
Net inc
10,892,000
5,067,000
Share earns
.43
.20
Shares outst
25,366,000
24,434,000


Warriors Send Sampson To Kings for Petersen SPORTS PEOPLE: PRO FOOTBALL; Patriots to Start Flutie SPORTS PEOPLE:PRO HOCKEY; Fuhr Dismisses Agent SPORTS PEOPLE: SPORTS MUSEUM; Opening in New York
LEAD: Ralph Sampson, twice the College Player of the Year and the National Basketball Association's top rookie in 1984, was traded by the Golden State Warriors last night for Jim Peterson, a center-forward for the Sacramento Kings.
The trade is contingent upon both players' passing physical examinations.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Anyone who calls me a racist should be shot in the street like a horse.''  - Jackie Mason.  [ B12:4. ]


Grain Prices Move Down; Livestock and Pork Decline
LEAD: Grain futures prices moved lower on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday.


Groups Taking Donations to Help Hurricane Victims
LEAD: A relief effort to help hurricane victims in Charleston, S.C., and the surrounding area has been set up at the Charleston City Hall.
The phone number for those wishing to help is 803-720-3838.


Koch Orders Hiring Freeze, Citing a $400 Million Gap
LEAD: Facing what he said was a $400 million budget gap, Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday imposed a municipal hiring freeze that is to remain in effect until the budget can be balanced.


Greentree Software reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greentree Software
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
349,288
314,473
Net inc
60,805
182,021
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
6,302,641
6,165,521


FMS and Fidelity to Join
LEAD: The FMS Financial Corporation and the Fidelity Mutual Savings and Loan Association signed a letter of intent on Tuesday pledging to combine operations.
FMS Financial is the holding company for Farmers' and Mechanics' Savings Bank, which has its administrative offices in Burlington Township, N.J., and seven branches throughout Burlington County.


S.A.Y. Packaging Inc reports earnings for Year to June 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* S.A.Y. Packaging Inc
Year to June 3
1989
1988
Revenue
16,765,000
15,502,000
Net loss
1,426,000
458,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bertelsmann Music Group, a music and video production company that is a unit of Bertelsmann A.G. of West Germany, named Joel M. Schoenfeld senior vice president and general counsel.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: ''YOU'RE going to love this,'' a friend said, and handed me a paperback titled ''Suddenly at the Priory.'' She was not referring to the book's literary quality - it has none - but to its subject: a Victorian murder.
I have many books about Victorian murders, none of them fiction and almost all of them about women who may, or may not, have had access to antimony.


Spelling Entertainment Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spelling Entertainment Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,883,000
12,932,000
Net inc
3,461,000
1,211,000
Share earns
.09
.06
Shares outst
33,107,000
18,373,000
Yr rev
143,856,000
119,480,000
Net inc
12,505,000
19,341,000
Share earns
.48
1.05
Shares outst
24,512,000
18,365,000


93 Kilos of Cocaine Seized, Some Labeled 'Bush'
LEAD: Federal investigators confiscated 93 kilos of cocaine in a raid on a house in Great Neck, L.I., yesterday, and the name Bush was written on several of the packages, law enforcement officials said.


Fire Kills an Elderly Woman Who Used Candles for Light
LEAD: A woman in her 80's who used candles to light her junk-filled apartment was killed by a fire early yesterday.


Democrats Propose Major Cuts In Expanded Medicare Program
LEAD: In an effort to avoid total repeal of expanded health insurance for older Americans, House Democratic leaders today proposed eliminating most major features of the program and the surtax that helps pay for it.


Appeal on Guard Ruling
LEAD: Gov.
Rudy Perpich said Tuesday that he was asking the United States Supreme Court to review an appeals court's decision upholding a Federal law that stripped governors of their veto power over National Guard training missions.
Congress enacted the law after several governors, including Mr.
Perpich, had objected to deployment of National Guard personnel on maneuvers in Central America, where the governors felt there was a danger of military involvement.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Hard-to-Slide Doors  Q.Our glass sliding doors have become very hard to open and close.
They slide on an aluminum track at the bottom and are gradually shaving off bits of the track.
Lubrication helps only a little.
The door that slides cannot be easily removed because the outer door is fixed and there are aluminum flanges on the inside that preclude taking the door off from the inside.


Philip Morris Executive To Retire at End of Year
LEAD: John M. Richman, vice chairman of the Philip Morris Companies Inc. and head of its Kraft General Foods division, plans to retire at the end of the year and open a Chicago office for the New York City law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz.


Pepsi-Cola Sets Shift Overseas
LEAD: Pepsi-Cola International, a unit of Pepsico Inc., said yesterday that it was realigning its overseas soft drink operations and had named Christopher A. Sinclair as its president.


Comex to Test Hand-Held Computers to Record Trades
LEAD: The Commodity Exchange Inc. announced yesterday that it would begin floor-testing hand-held computers that are intended to prevent trading abuses of the sort that led to the Federal investigation earlier this year of commodities traders in New York and Chicago.


Penobscot Shoe Co reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penobscot Shoe Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 25
1989
1988
Revenue
4,117,440
5,521,814
Net inc
77,938
490,006
Share earns
.05
.29
Shares outst
1,485,742
1,505,017
9mo rev
10,809,481
14,161,619
Net loss
27,869
b925,141
Share earns
-
.61
Shares outst
1,485,742
1,517,920


Small Business Repays Investor Confidence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sale by Primerica
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation agreed to sell its Penncorp Financial Group of insurance companies to a new company led by the investment concern DJS/Inverness &amp; Company for about $300 million in cash.
Primerica said the transaction must be approved by its board and regulatory authorities, including state insurance commissions.


School Bus Safety Costs 1 Cent a Day per Child
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oracle Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oracle Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
175,490,000
90,639,000
Net inc
11,679,000
7,067,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
136,125,000
134,454,000
The company said that in accordance with SFAS No.


Many Drown in Lake Victoria
LEAD: A boat ferrying 40 fishermen and traders from Mfanganu Island to the Kenyan mainland capsized in Lake Victoria on Tuesday, newspapers reported today.
The Daily Nation said 33 people drowned.


Mubarak's Offer: A Dramatic Test
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak's offer to bring Israelis and Palestinians together for peace talks on Egyptian soil is rational, sober and respectful of Israeli sensitivities.
If such initiatives are blocked by the rejectionism that frustrated peace openings in the 1980's, there will be little to expect beyond the defeat of realism and escalating violence in a region packed with deadly weaponry.


Courter and Florio Favor the Death Penalty, but Differ
LEAD: One major issue between the two candidates for governor is this: The Republican favors the death penalty, and the Democrat . . . favors the death penalty.


Ex-Astronaut to Head General Dynamics
LEAD: William A. Anders, one of three astronauts who circled the moon on Christmas Eve 1968, has been named the next chairman and chief executive of the General Dynamics Corporation, the big military supplier, effective Jan. 1, 1991.


Gelman Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gelman Sciences Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,500,000
17,144,000
Net inc
721,000
471,000
Share earns
.29
.20
Shares outst
2,503,000
2,351,000
Yr sales
71,087,000
61,735,000
Net inc
b2,371,000
1,176,000
Share earns
.98
.50
Shares outst
2,426,000
2,367,000


Morgan's Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan's Foods (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 15
1989
1988
Sales
11,918,000
11,262,000
Net inc
172,000
b300,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
11,632,000
10,131,930
6mo sales
21,907,000
19,771,000
Net inc
251,000
b433,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
10,977,858
10,207,680


Coalition Opposing Charter Revision Starts Its Campaign
LEAD: The public campaign over the future shape of New York City's government began yesterday as a coalition of about 50 elected officials, former officials and leaders of community boards and civic groups said they would work to defeat the proposed City Charter.


Sam Pierce Takes the Fifth
LEAD: Samuel F. Pierce, whose career had been a series of distinguished ''firsts'' and ''onlys,'' this week became a sad third: the third member of a Presidential Cabinet ever to plead the Fifth Amendment before Congress.


Dow Up 9.12 on Late Buying of Blue Chips
LEAD: A late round of futures-related buying pushed blue-chip stocks higher yesterday, but the overall market was mixed on moderate volume.


El Carmen Journal; Blacks of South America Fight 'a Terrible Silence'
LEAD: A high wall separated dusty cotton fields from a cool garden of acacia, bougainvillea and elephant vines coiled around towering palms.
Relaxing on the plantation house veranda, Edilberto Lobaton coiled his fingers around a cold beer and savored the view.


Saks Chairman Plans Buyout
LEAD: Melvin Jacobs, the chairman and chief executive of Saks Fifth Avenue, said yesterday that he and the staff of the 46-store chain ''will definitely try to buy the company and are hopeful that we will win this game.'' Saks and Marshall Field &amp;


Golden Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Enterprises Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
32,954,669
31,729,480
Net inc
1,231,126
2,039,903
Share earns
.10
.16
Shares outst
12,801,800
12,855,039


Sanmark-Stardust Inc reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanmark-Stardust Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
25,662,000
20,941,000
Net inc
42,000
b1,843,000
Shares outst
12,506,000
11,814,000
Yr sales
126,589,000
96,219,000
Net inc
4,755,000
b1,764,000
Share earns
.38
-
Shares outst
12,477,000
12,459,000


Reeds Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reeds Jewelers (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,064,000
9,938,000
Net inc
24,000
b113,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
19,672,000
19,792,000
Net inc
89,000
c395,000
Share earns
.03
.11
b-Net loss


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aircoa Hotel Partners L.P., Denver, a hotel operator, closed the sale of its Kona Village Resort, Hawaii, for $55 million to Kona Village Associates.





AutoInfo Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AutoInfo Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,874,844
1,376,816
Net inc
321,680
84,956
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
6,251,627
6,459,044


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies of Sports Pages on Tuesday, showing a lone golfer after the Ryder Cup matches, misidentified him.
He was Fred Couples, not Mark Calcavecchia.


1980 Soviet Rocket Accident Killed 50
LEAD: The Soviet Union ended decades of secrecy today by opening the world's busiest spaceport to foreign journalists and revealing one of the worst disasters of the space age - an explosion of a Vostok rocket during fueling that killed 50 people in 1980.


Books of The Times; Of the Forgetfulness of a Memory Expert
LEAD: The Bellarosa Connection  By Saul Bellow  102 pages. Penguin Books. Paper, $6.95.


Classical Niche, Modern Refrigerator
LEAD: TIRED of that unsightly refrigerator?
Byron Bell, an architect, came up with a novel solution for Winston and Carole Kulok, who live in a 150-year-old Greek Revival house in Greenwich Village.


Security Tightened for Officials
LEAD: Several senior Government officials have received added security to deter possible attacks by Colombia's drug rings, an Administration official said today.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: BUILDING a small corner closet is not too difficult, even for novice carpenters.
Because the closet walls bear no weight of the ceiling above, they can be made with lightweight materials and they require only minimal fastening.
But it is wise to consult a building inspector before beginning.


Mattresses In Any Size Or Shape
LEAD: AT the factory under the Bruckner Expressway in the Bronx, mattresses, box springs and daybeds have been made in the same manner for 57 years. ''All done by hand, start to finish,'' said Ted Marschke, the president of Charles H. Beckley, a manufacturer of custom bedding.


Agnew Fisher, 82, Cup Races Photographer
LEAD: Agnew Fisher, a photographer who documented the America's Cup races on film for 20 years, died of cancer Monday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


Rise in Disciplining of Doctors Is Reported
LEAD: Disciplinary actions against American doctors have risen steadily in recent years, reflecting more stringent state regulation and news media focus on the misbehavior of doctors, officials of the Federation of State Medical Boards said today.


Federal Paper Board Co reports earnings for 12wk to Aug 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Paper Board Co (NYSE)
12wk to Aug 9
1989
1988
Sales
295,337,000
254,557,000
Net inc
49,099,000
34,708,000
Share earns
1.19
.85
36wk sales
888,850,000
748,280,000
Net inc
147,590,000
85,423,000
Share earns
3.59
2.07


David Rowe, 65, a Management Consultant
LEAD: David Knox Rowe, a retired management consultant, died of heart failure yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Money-Fund Yields Stable
LEAD: Yields of money market mutual funds surveyed by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were unchanged to slightly higher for the week that ended yesterday.


Arnold Johnson Is Dead at 84; A Leading American Communist
LEAD: Arnold Johnson, a member of the national leadership of the Communist Party for many years, died Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital after a long illness.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.


A Historic Florida Pool Is Renewed
LEAD: IN 1924 the artist Denman Fink and the architect Phineas Paist transformed a coral rock quarry into what Florida postcards soon called ''the most beautiful outdoor swimming pool in the world.'' With its green lagoons, shady porticoes, vine-covered loggias and tile-roofed towers, the ''Venetian pool'' in Coral Gables became the perfect backdrop for William Jennings Bryan and others expounding the virtues of


Review/Opera; Stratas as 3 Heroines in 'Trittico'
LEAD: The words opera and drama do not necessarily add up to an oxymoron, even if nights when they may seem to contradict each other are all too common.
The second evening of the Metropolitan Opera's season, on Tuesday, proved the point triumphantly with Puccini's ''Trittico,'' a triple bill in which the leading soprano role in each work was assumed by Teresa


Latest Pentagon Report Lifts Shadow of Soviet Menace, a Bit
LEAD: It is not quite a paean to perestroika.
But the Pentagon issued a new report on the Soviet military today that is a far cry from the catalogue of the Soviet empire's evils published annually by the Reagan Administration - and even a bit more muted than the public statements of Defense Secretary Dick Cheney.


Angeion Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Angeion Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
768,149
520,027
Net loss
207,997
b11,440
Shares outst
7,210,763
4,925,598
Yr sales
2,863,743
1,519,159
Net loss
424,747
142,078
Shares outst
6,840,887
3,370,642


Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
1,777,000
1,486,000
Net loss
388,000
b110,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
4,625,000
5,278,000
6mo sales
3,831,000
3,317,000
Net loss
286,000
b351,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
4,625,000
5,196,000


Mets' Finishing in Turmoil on Field and Off
LEAD: The Mets made more news off the field yesterday than on it.


Taxi Panel Rejects Plan for 400 New Medallions
LEAD: A proposal to issue 400 new yellow-cab medallions, the first since 1937, was rejected yesterday by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Opponents argued that the city did not need more taxis than the 11,787 it already has.


Appealing To Younger Tigers
LEAD: THE ambiance of many of New York City's beleaguered university clubs is defined by overcooked food and underdone interiors.
Seeking to update its image and attract younger alumni (including women), the Princeton Club, at 15 West 43d Street, has embarked on a $7.5 million transformation with Robert


United Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Foods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,025,000
33,929,000
Net inc
b1,084,000
c2,377,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr rev
73,719,000
71,890,000
Net inc
b2,147,000
c1,743,000
Share earns
.16
-


CBS News Is Investigating Charges It Used Staged Film
LEAD: CBS News said yesterday that it was investigating allegations that the film it used purporting to show events during the war in Afghanistan in 1984 was staged and misrepresented by a freelance photographer.
The film was carried on the ''CBS Evening News'' with Dan Rather.


3 Soldiers Killed by Wild Shell
LEAD: Artillery fire at a practice range overshot its target today and struck a group of about 80 soldiers standing in formation, killing 3 and injuring 23 others, officials said.


Inquiry Finds Rudder Flaw In Jet Crash
LEAD: Examination of the USAir jetliner that plunged into the East River last week on a takeoff from La Guardia Airport shows a rudder misalignment that has drawn major attention from investigators.


New Airport for Denver Gains Final Approval
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration today gave final approval for a new airport outside Denver and signed a $60 million grant to help get the project under way.


Henley Group Plans To Become 2 Concerns
LEAD: The Henley Group Inc. said today that it planned to separate into two public corporations: a real estate concern called Henley Properties Inc. and a new industrial company, the Henley Group Inc.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-12  Canada is becoming a money haven for drug profits as traffickers try to avoid American banking laws intended to curb money laundering, law enforcement officials say.
Page A1


Bilzerian Gets 4 Years in Jail And Is Fined $1.5 Million
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida investor who became one of the wealthiest corporate raiders of the 1980's, was sentenced yesterday to four years in prison and fined $1.5 million for nine counts of violating securities laws, conspiracy and other crimes.


Carter Hawley Hale Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter Hawley Hale Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to July 29
1989
1988
Sales
624,635,000
594,541,000
Net loss
b8,250,000
c9,012,000
Yr sales
2,787,393,000
2,617,143,000
Net inc
b13,470,000
c17,660,000
Share earns
.62
.72


Calendar of Events; Folk Art and Photos
LEAD:  History and Folk Art, New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; 212-873-3400.


VWR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VWR Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
142,192,000
158,490,000
Net inc
816,000
1,786,000
Share earns
.15
.33
6mo sales
292,293,000
311,878,000
Net inc
1,800,000
3,701,000
Share earns
.34
.68


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the Advertising column of Business Day yesterday about magazine publishers beginning publications abroad omitted the end of a comment from Paul DuCharme of Grey Advertising.
His comment, on the sale of international advertising packages in magazines, was: ''If we look at it on a discount basis, we'd expect to get that space for free.


Northwest Deal Seen Changing
LEAD: The Secretary of Transportation has persuaded the group that acquired Northwest Airlines to reduce the investment of a foreign airline in the deal, and is expected to use the case as a precedent for a new policy on how much equity a foreign carrier can put up in the buyout of a domestic airline, an airline-industry official said yesterday.


Cavaliers Sign Mokeski
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers yesterday signed Paul Mokeski, a 7-foot free agent center-forward with nine seasons of experience in the National Basketball Association.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
The 32-year-old Mokeski played for the Milwaukee Bucks for the last six and a half seasons.(AP)


MDS Health Group Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDS Health Group Ltd
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
56,641,000
52,067,000
Net inc
2,610,000
2,846,000
Share earns
.30
.33
9mo rev
162,326,000
153,557,000
Net inc
7,072,000
10,177,000
Share earns
.82
1.17


3 More Airports to Get Advanced Bomb Detectors
LEAD: Detroit, Washington and Frankfurt have been added to the list of cities receiving the first new bomb detectors the Federal Aviation Administration is installing at domestic and foreign airports, the agency said yesterday.


Chrysler Buyback Plan to Continue
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said it was continuing its stock repurchase program to reduce its outstanding common stock to 200 million shares from about 232 million shares.
Chrysler said it was making the statement in response to inquiries regarding its sale last week of about 45 percent of its holdings in the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation of


Campaign Matters; Are Debates An Opportunity Or a Minefield?
LEAD: rrHistory is fickle when it comes to declaring the winner in political debates.
Victory, it turns out, does not always go to those who score the most debating points, but to those candidates, like Abraham Lincoln in 1858 or John F. Kennedy in 1960, who have the most to gain and the least to lose.


Maxwell Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxwell Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,715,000
16,387,000
Net inc
1,193,000
811,000
Share earns
.49
.31
Yr sales
71,768,000
66,104,000
Net inc
3,557,000
3,431,000
Share earns
1.43
1.30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; First Nationwide Bank Gives Account to Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: During a week in which its New York headquarters were closed for a day by a steam-pipe explosion, Young &amp; Rubicam has found solace in San Francisco.
Yesterday, the agency's office there was awarded the advertising account of First Nationwide Bank.
Y.&amp;R. edged out J. Walter Thompson and Wells, Rich,


Canseco's Lukewarm 900 Line
LEAD: rrIn baseball, 900 has never been much of a number.
Henry Aaron and Babe Ruth didn't hit that many homers.
Tris Speaker didn't even hit that many doubles.
Cy Young didn't pitch that many victories.
No team has ever had that high a winning percentage.
Nobody ever made a fuss over a 900th hit or a 900th strikeout.


Former Aide Says Helmsley Took Millions
LEAD: A former Helmsley company executive, who seeks million of dollars in damages, has asserted in a lawsuit that Leona Helmsley illegally took tens of millions of dollars from her husband, Harry B. Helmsley.


Fearing Dickerson, Jets Shake Up Defensive Line
LEAD: With a league low of one sack, the Jets revamped their defensive line today.
The three players they moved to the line may not be any better at chasing quarterbacks, but they can stop runners.


Who Lost Gorbachev?
LEAD: The most resentful political question asked by American conservatives after World War II was ''Who lost China?'' The imputation was that Western irresolution, inspired by subversives in high places, enabled Mao to seize control from Chiang.
Liberals hotly replied that China was never ours to lose, but the accusation-laden question bedeviled them for a decade.


On-Line Software International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* On-Line Software International (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,021,000
18,665,000
Net inc
b344,000
c185,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
5,957,000
6,345,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $151,000 related to the reacquisition of debt.


Sony Has High Hopes For Columbia Pictures
LEAD: By the time Norio Ohga left Sony headquarters here tonight, certain that his quest for one of Hollywood's hottest properties was finally successful, he was well on his way to transforming the company that more than any other has symbolized the breakthroughs of Japanese business in the decades since World War


Clarcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarcor Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
35,484,000
34,363,000
Net inc
b2,650,000
c5,182,000
Share earns
.36
.65
9mo sales
107,800,000
95,504,000
Net inc
b11,289,000
c14,395,000
Share earns
1.45
1.81


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Patricia Stewart and Alan Saperstein have been named executive vice presidents of Campbell-Mithun-Esty/ New York.


Cabano Expeditex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabano Expeditex Inc
Qtr to July 22
1989
1988
Revenue
33,997,000
37,556,000
Net inc
b1,661,000
c403,000
Share earns
.15
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $804,000, or 7 cents a share.
c-Net loss


Personal Health
LEAD: Knee braces are fast becoming the most widely used ''crutch'' among American athletes, both recreational and professional, even though evidence for their effectiveness remains scarce.


Compromise Is Proposed on Helms Amendment
LEAD: A possible compromise emerged today as a House-Senate conference committee met for the first time to consider the so-called Helms amendment to restrict Federal grants for obscene or indecent art.


Israeli Faces Prison For Meeting Arafat
LEAD: An Israeli prosecutor today demanded a prison term for the longtime peace campaigner Abie Nathan for meeting Yasir Arafat last year in violation of an Israeli terrorism law.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Corrections
LEAD: The On Stage column in Weekend on Friday misidentified the holder of a Fulbright Fellowship.
He is Lloyd Richards, director of ''The Piano Lesson,'' not the playwright August Wilson.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Charter Battle Begins


Tom Bradley Topped Dinkins in White Vote; Peace and Harmony?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Weakness In Prices Widespread
LEAD: Across the country, companies are reporting difficulty in raising prices - providing strong anecdotal evidence that inflation, for the moment, is not a problem.


At Milan Fair, There's Vitality If Not Practicality
LEAD: ALTHOUGH only Italian manufacturers exhibited, there was an international flavor; although the fair was held at Milan's sprawling, outlying fairgrounds, dozens of openings, exhibits and ambitious events drew visitors to the center of the city.
The 29th Salone del Mobile di Milano, the Milan furniture fair, and Euroluce, the lighting fair, from Sept.


A Brooklyn Home Aglow With Time
LEAD: THE Austrian-born artist David O'Clock will not reveal his real last name (It is ''unpronounceable,'' he says), but it is safe to say that the former stage designer is obsessed with time.


Isco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Isco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,814,489
8,253,042
Net inc
595,002
1,053,530
Share earns
.14
.25
Yr sales
31,787,482
29,972,978
Net inc
3,697,706
4,054,809
Share earns
.89
.98


Perennials: The Fancy Isn't Fleeting
LEAD: THE passion for perennials continues.
Gardeners hate to admit that fashions in plants wax and wane, but it seems that no one is wearying just yet of this extraordinary group, whose renaissance began a decade ago.
And since the planting and transplanting of perennials traditionally continues through autumn, gardeners have time aplenty to alter their gardens and dreams.


Recognition Trial Opens
LEAD: A Dallas company tried to win a $400 million contract to build mail-sorting equipment by buying a member of the United States Postal Service's board of governors, a Federal prosecutor said today.


OPEC Meeting Fails To Set New Quotas
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries came close today to dismantling its system of quotas, ending a meeting without agreement on how much oil each of its members will produce in the final quarter of the year.


Film Festival; A Sanskrit Epic About Gods, Warriors and Magic
LEAD: ''The Mahabharata'' is above all a great yarn about a family feud.
In reacting to American performances of Peter Brook's nine-hour theatrical interpretation of the Sanskrit poem that is India's national epic, critics tended to gloss over its raw narrative power.
In the film version, however, the story is everything.


Correction
LEAD: Lloyd N. Cutler's article Monday misidentified the sponsor of a Senate bill to control automatic assault weapons and a provision of the bill.
The sponsor is Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona.
The bill would bar the domestic sale (not the manufacture) of such weapons.


Dollar Ends Slightly Lower On Selling by Central Banks
LEAD: Central banks sold dollars for a third straight day yesterday, pushing the currency lower after an agreement last weekend that it had risen too much in recent months.


Sale to Sony Approved By Columbia Pictures
LEAD: The board of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. yesterday approved the sale of the company to the Sony Corporation for $3.4 billion in cash.


Grow Group Pact
LEAD: The Grow Group Inc., a maker of paints and other coatings, reached an agreement with a group of dissident shareholders that had said it owned 9.4 percent of the company.
Grow said that the group had withdrawn its proposal to elect three directors at the company's annual meeting and that the company would increase the size of its board to 10 directors from 9, adding a designee of the group, James J.


Cognos Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognos Inc
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
29,112,000
24,430,000
Net loss
6,193,000
b1,376,000
Share earns
-
.13
6mo rev
49,931,000
46,661,000
Net loss
10,158,000
b1,852,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


LOSS OF $4 BILLION IS FOUND IN AUDIT OF MORTGAGE FUND
LEAD: An independent audit of several Federal funds that insure mortgages shows that they had a record loss of $4.2 billion last year.


Mont Saint-Sauveur Intl Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mont Saint-Sauveur Intl Inc
Qtr to July 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,890,000
4,973,000
Net inc
b188,000
b643,000
Share earns
.02
.06
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $338,000, or 3 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $276,000, or 3 cents a share, for year-ago period.


Terrell Says End Is Near, But Wins
LEAD: Walt Terrell knows this feeling.
He knows it because he has sensed it before, in New York with the Mets, then in Detroit and San Diego.
And now here.


New Coach, Same Result; Johnson Is Gone but Miami Is Still Winning
LEAD: Art Kehoe thought he owed Dennis Erickson, the new coach at the University of Miami, a warning.
So earlier this month, Kehoe, who is an assistant offensive line coach at Miami, told his boss to be prepared: there might be a touch of lunacy at the final practice before the opening game against Wisconsin.


Braniff Halts Flights Amid Cash Squeeze
LEAD: Braniff Inc. canceled most of its 150 flights yesterday afternoon amid a growing cash squeeze.


Triple Play Not Enough To Stop Cubs
LEAD: One night after celebrating the clinching of the National League East title, the Cubs kept their momentum going with a 7-2 victory tonight over the Montreal Expos despite hitting into a triple play for the second time this season.


Fuller (H.B.) Co (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuller (H.B.) Co (O)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
189,868,000
176,695,000
Net inc
3,798,000
5,846,000
Share earns
.40
.60
Shares outst
9,588,257
9,583,630
9mo sales
563,752,000
504,125,000
Net inc
10,620,000
16,276,000
Share earns
1.11
1.69
Shares outst
9,581,334
9,596,286


Ann Honeycutt, 87, Former Radio Producer
LEAD: Ann Honeycutt, an author and radio producer, was found dead on Tuesday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and had been ill for some time after a stroke.


Perseverance Pays Off for 49er Cornerback
LEAD: Joe Montana, Jerry Rice, Roger Craig and Ronnie Lott are often mentioned first on a team loaded with Pro Bowl players.
But several others are also integral parts of the San Francisco 49ers' machine-like operation, and a key cog is Darryl Pollard, who describes his being with the Super Bowl champions as ''a miracle.


Roadway Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 9
1989
1988
Revenue
625,294,000
498,1558,000
Net inc
23,612,000
20,563,000
Share earns
.60
.51
9mo rev
1,802,718,000
1,442,931,000
Net inc
65,581,000
48,446,000
Share earns
1.67
1.20


Swissair And S.A.S. Link Seen
LEAD: The Scandinavian Airlines System and Swissair said yesterday that they would hold simultaneous news conferences today in Stockholm and Zurich, and industry experts said the two had probably agreed to buy small stakes in each other and reached a joint marketing arrangement.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Harry A. Denehy, an executive of Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons who died Friday, misstated his age.
He was 59 years old, not 69.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nantucket Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 26
1989
1988
Sales
9,724,362
7,139,613
Net inc
359,584
b2,104,928
Share earns
.15
.80
6mo sales
21,870,694
14,740,439
Net inc
975,213
b1,590,758
Share earns
.40
.60


Review/Television; 'Lost Angeles,' a Bleak Story of the Homeless
LEAD: During the summer of 1987, the City of Los Angeles moved about 600 homeless people from the streets to a temporary tent city and promised them help in getting jobs.
Tom Seidman, a young documentary maker, brought camera and sympathy into this urban camp ground; his painfully close-up report, ''Lost Angeles: The Story of Tent City,'' can be seen tonight at 10 o'clock on Channel 13.


RJR Nabisco Offices
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. announced yesterday that it would make its permanent headquarters at 1301 Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan.
RJR Nabisco said in April that it was planning to move from its suburban Atlanta headquarters to New York, and the company's top executives have been operating out of temporary offices in New York for several months while maintaining an office in Atlanta.


Giuliani Drops Comedian Over Remarks
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the comedian Jackie Mason would no longer have a role in his mayoral campaign, after a newspaper quoted Mr.
Mason as making racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews.


Orbit Instrument reports earnings for Year of June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orbit Instrument (OTC)
Year of June 30
1989
1988
Sales
50,689,000
37,970,000
Net loss
b2,724,000
c4,165,000
Share earns
-
.44
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,674,000.
c-Net income and included a loss from discontinued operations of $907,000 and an accounting adjustment gain of $400,000, or 4 cents a share.


State Farm Claims
LEAD: The State Farm Insurance Company said Tuesday that it expects damage claim payments from Hurricane Hugo to exceed $500 million in the Carolinas and Virginia, more than three times what the company has ever paid out for a single disaster.
State Farm said payments in South Carolina alone would be more than $400 million.


Results Plus
LEAD:  CYCLING  Longo Sets World Record: Jeannie Longo of France set a world record for five kilometers yesterday, covering the distance in 6 minutes 14.135 seconds at Mexico City.
The record surpassed the mark of 6:14.813 she set on Sept. 16, 1987, in Colorado Springs.(AP)  BOXING  Griffin Advances: Eric Griffin of Houston scored a victory last night in the world amateur championships at Moscow and moved within one victory of a gold medal in the 106-pound division.


Youth Is Arrested for Selling Crack That Bush Displayed
LEAD: A teen-ager was arrested Tuesday on charges of selling the crack that President Bush displayed on television to illustrate the seriousness of the nation's drug problems.


Haas Proposal Is Rejected
LEAD: The Commercial Intertech Corporation, a maker of hydraulic and other products in Youngstown, Ohio, said today that it had rejected an unsolicited buyout offer of $27.50 a share, or $355 million, from Haas &amp; Partners Inc., a buyout group.


I.B.M. Sees Shortfall In Profits
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings would be sharply lower than expected because of delays in introducing products, the effects of a stronger dollar and a switch by some customers to leasing, rather than buying, its products.


10 Die as Plane Crashes On Grand Canyon Tour
LEAD: A sightseeing plane crashed into a wooded hill near the Grand Canyon Airport here today, killing 10 people and injuring the 11 others aboard.


Computer Chip Starts Angry Debate
LEAD: A computer industry conference in San Jose, Calif., last week might well be remembered for the way discussions on a dry technical subject were transformed into a passionate dispute over whether the balance of power in the computer world will soon shift.
By the time the conference on chip design had ended, the debaters had called each other liars and invoked on their behalf everything from a plea for the welfare of a generation of children to a warning not to sully the good works of legendary computer designers.


Senate Votes $9.4 Billion for Drug War
LEAD: After a week of deadlock, the Senate agreed today on a $9.4 billion financing plan for President Bush's anti-drug strategy, more than $1 billion above the amount requested by Mr.
Bush.


East Europe: Superpowers Quietly Shake Hands
LEAD: The Bush Administration and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union appear to have come to at least a tacit understanding about how their countries should relate to the Eastern Europe now emerging from the cold war.


Party Decor Native To America
LEAD: TOTEMS of the times: at a benefit at the Columns gallery for the American Indian College Fund last week, the decor matched the message.
The gallery's 12 columns were transformed into contemporary totem poles.


U.N.A.  Corp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.N.A.  Corp (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,567,000
5,097,000
Net loss
16,000
b404,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
5,957,053
5,877,812
Yr rev
6,424,000
22,060,000
Net inc
374,000
c76,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
5,935,583
5,877,812


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carnival Cruise Lines Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
405,200,000
157,600,000
Net inc
84,400,000
56,300,000
Share earns
.63
.42
Shares outst
134,635,366
134,613,116
9mo rev
921,600,000
469,300,000
Net inc
172,300,000
154,300,000
Share earns
1.28
1.15
Shares outst
134,636,873
134,618,822


Consul Restaurant Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consul Restaurant Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,636,000
21,651,000
Net inc
776,000
716,000
Share earns
.06
.06
Shares outst
13,382,000
12,328,000


Cypress Opposes U.S. Memories Concept
LEAD: Cypress Semiconductor Inc. said today that its president, T. J. Rodgers, had offered an alternative to the proposed joint venture that is intended to revive production in the United States of the most commonly used memory chips.


LEARNING JUST WHAT PLANTS DO
LEAD: To children growing up in New York City, it may seem that fruits and vegetables are grown in supermarkets, that trees are street decorations set 30 feet apart on the sidewalk and that plants are native to small ceramic pots dotting the windowsill.


Less Than Frank About the Mail
LEAD: With great bravado, the Senate earlier this month voted to eliminate free postage for Congressional mass mailings and to use the money saved to help drug-addicted pregnant women.
The House, not to be outdone, ringingly endorsed the idea this week by a vote of 245 to 137.


Rochester Community Savngs Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Community Savngs Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,374,000
3,590,000
Share earns
.39
.26
9mo net inc
13,390,000
11,237,000
Share earns
.97
.81
Figures for 1988 have been restated to reflect an accounting change.


AFP Imaging Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AFP Imaging Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,535,505
12,798,256
Net loss
26,639
b322,412
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
4,680,000
5,254,000
Yr sales
45,449,978
43,369,748
Net loss
191,962
b671,172
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
4,584,000
5,258,000


Keystone Chief Says Buyout Is 'Feather in Career Cap'
LEAD: George S. Bissell, who 10 years ago acquired the Keystone mutual funds for the Travelers Corporation, is now part of an investment group that is buying the mutual funds from the insurance company.


Tom Bradley Topped Dinkins in White Vote
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Philip Morris Exceeds $2 Billion in Ad Spending
LEAD: With the added expenses of its newly acquired Kraft Inc. subsidiary, the Philip Morris Companies last year became the first company to spend more than $2 billion in advertising and promotions, according to an annual list published by Advertising Age magazine.


Matco Mart reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matco Mart
Qtr to July 31
1989
1988
Sales
14,000,000
14,000,000
Net inc
328,000
510,000
Share earns
.09
.14
9mo net inc
b75,713
638,073
Share earns
.02
.17
b-After an extraordinary credit of $247,110, or 7 cents a share.


Patriots to Start Flutie
LEAD: Coach Raymond Berry, saying the slumping New England Patriots need a spark, benched Tony Eason as his starting quarterback yesterday and replaced him with Doug Flutie.
Eason, struggling to rebound from two injury-plagued seasons, played poorly in losses to Miami and Seattle after doing well in a 27-24 season-opening victory against the Jets.


Thomas Mulroy, 84, Chicago Civic Leader
LEAD: Thomas R. Mulroy, a lawyer who was a former president of the Chicago Crime Commission, died Monday at Lakeland Hospital in Elkhorn, Wis., after suffering a stroke on Saturday.
He was 84 years old and lived in Lake Geneva, Wis.


Gadgets Taken to Cambodia Ease Strain of Foreign Press
LEAD: The invasion of at least 250 representatives of the foreign press here to report what Vietnam and Cambodia say is the final withdrawal of Hanoi's troops has strained the resources of this isolated country, which is still recovering from the depredations of Khmer Rouge rule.


Offering by New York City Is Repriced to Lower Yields
LEAD: New York City's issue of $700 million in general obligation bonds, which was initially priced on Tuesday, has been revised and repriced to offer slightly lower yields in the longer maturities.
Serial bonds running from 1990 to 2002 remained unchanged.


Emerson Electric Pact With Bosch
LEAD: The Emerson Electric Company of St.
Louis and Robert Bosch G.m.b.H. of Stuttgart, West Germany, said they would form a joint corporation to acquire Vermont American, a Louisville, Ky., maker of power and hand tools and lawn and garden products, for approximately $440 million.


Maxicare Health
LEAD: Maxicare Health Plans Inc. said it had reached an agreement with its creditors on terms of the health maintenance organization's plan of bankruptcy reorganization.
The company said it would file the plan in United States Bankruptcy Court in Santa Ana, Calif., in October.
While terms will not be disclosed before then, the company said it would distribute varying amounts of ''cash, debt and-or equities'' to creditors and shareholders.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hertz Account To Wells, Rich
LEAD: Wells, Rich, Greene scored a major victory yesterday, winning the Hertz Corporation's advertising account.
The account, worth $25 million to $30 million, had been at Scali, McCabe, Sloves.


Corn Leads Grains Higher On Talk of Soviet Buying
LEAD: Corn futures prices rose sharply yesteday on the Chicago Board of Trade, leading other grain and soybean futures higher on speculation that the Soviet Union was shopping for up to three million metric tons of American corn.


5 NWA Officers Quit As Checchi Takes Over
LEAD: In an executive upheaval at NWA Inc., the parent of Northwest Airlines, Steven Rothmeier, chairman, and four top executives resigned yesterday.
Alfred Checchi, who recently bought the airline, named himself chairman of the parent company and the airline unit as well, in consultation with his investing partners.


Victim and Sentence: Resetting Justice's Scales
LEAD: After a 28-year-old drifter pleaded guilty last February to murdering Robin Smith and dumping her battered body in the wooded foothills of Mount Rainier, the woman's mother, Edna Smith, stood in court during sentencing to talk about her 21-year-old daughter.


Senator D'Amato's H.U.D. Connections
LEAD: The deeper that investigators dig into the mess at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the more questions arise about the role of Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York.
His declarations that he remained distant from the agency have never been plausible.
The latest revelations make them simply unbelievable.


Annenberg Giving Met $15 Million for Acquisitions
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum of Art said last night that Walter H. Annenberg, the publisher and a former Ambassador to Britain, was giving it $15 million for acquisitions.
Mr.
Annenberg is also giving $5 million for acquisitions to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. and $5 million to the Philadelphia Museum of


Baryshnikov Quits as Head Of American Ballet Theater
LEAD: Mikhail Baryshnikov abruptly quit as artistic director of American Ballet Theater yesterday after a bitter dispute with the company's management and board over the troupe's finances and the removal of one of his staff members.


Review/Film; A Bittersweet Homecoming For a Soldier, 17 Years Late
LEAD: In ''Welcome Home,'' Kris Kristofferson plays Air Force Lieut.
Jeremiah (Jake) Robbins, shot down in Cambodia and long presumed dead but now returning to his family after an absence of 17 years.
His reappearance triggers the expected round of jaw-dropping, but beyond this it sets off surprisingly few sparks.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Pop/Jazz; A Sound Of Healing From Marrakesh
LEAD: As the sun sets on the Jamaa el-Fna, the main square in Marrakesh, the bleached light slowly changing to a golden wash, musicians, storytellers, snake charmers and acrobats descend.
Food vendors, their stalls piled high with herbs, spices, meat and chocolate, start cooking and the aroma of food mingles with the intense sound of drumming and singing.


Here's the Joker in the Catastrophic-Care Pack; Deficit Secret Weapon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush and Governors Agree on Need to Overhaul Nation's Education System


Review/Theater; A Mad and Busy Day In Ludlam's First Venture
LEAD: In Act II of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's ''Big Hotel,'' a bellhop starts sobbing over esthetics. ''I've lost the thread of the narrative!'' he cries over and over, and no wonder.
Wandering about the Big Hotel in his call-for-Philip-Morris costume, the bellhop has stumbled upon a crucifixion.


Poindexter Asking Access to Reagan Notes
LEAD: A lawyer for John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser who is now facing trial in the Iran-contra affair, has asked a Federal district judge for access to any private notes that were kept by President Ronald Reagan and any kept by George Bush while he was Vice President.


Suspect Suffers Heart Attack
LEAD: A 47-year-old Queens man who apparently suffered a heart attack after his arrest Wednesday night on a drug charge died early yesterday at Woodhull Hospital, the police said.
The man, James Howa, of 17-12 Harman Street, in the Ridgewood section, had been charged with criminal possession of a hypodermic needle.


Milken Taped By Boesky
LEAD: Ivan F. Boesky, the stock speculator, secretly tape-recorded three conversations with Michael R. Milken, the indicted ''junk bond'' financier, in 1986 shortly before Mr.
Boesky was publicly named as a Government informant, court documents reveal.


TV Weekend; Elizabeth Taylor's Star Turn as Williams's Aging Star
LEAD: Princess Alexandra Del Lago in Tennessee Williams's ''Sweet Bird of Youth'' is an aging movie legend seeking a comeback after a seven-year absence from the screen.
Imperiously demanding, she submerges her fears of growing old in alcohol, drugs and sex.
She is what Williams called, not without affection, something of a monster.


Borden to Cut 7,000 Jobs And 65 Plants
LEAD: After a three-and-a-half-year buying binge in which it spent $1.7 billion and more than doubled the number of its plants, Borden Inc. reversed course yesterday.
The nation's No. 1 dairy company said it will close or sell 65 of its 265 plants in the next two or three years and cut worldwide employment by 7,000 people, bringing its payroll down to 39,000.


New York Selects a Design for Its Korean War Memorial    The design for a memorial was shown yesterday by its designer, Mac Adams. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)


Senate Debating Helms Amendment
LEAD: A surprise debate cropped up in the Senate tonight when Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who wrote an amendment to restrict Federal grants to art considered ''obscene,'' took the floor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


A Race for Women
LEAD: A five-kilometer race walk for women is to be held 9:30 A.M.
Sunday in Central Park.
Sponsored by Park Walkers, the race begins and ends at 90th Street and Fifth Avenue.
There is a $7 registration fee.
Information: 628-1317.


Nicaraguan Indian Leader Is Home After Exile


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Scofield in a Trio John Scofield, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Barrow Street (242-1785).
John Scofield, a brittle, often brilliant guitarist, has found his ideal working situation in a trio.
His long, harmonically ambitious lines reel and course through the tumult of the drums, with the bass giving just hints of the background harmony.


Airline Reservation Accord
LEAD: Delta Air Lines, Northwest Airlines and Trans World Airlines said today that they had have a preliminary agreement to combine their computerized reservation systems into an Atlanta-based worldwide operation.


Kyocera and AVX Agree To Merge in a Stock Swap
LEAD: Two of the most important companies in the manufacture of ceramics for high technology, the Kyocera Corporation of Japan and the AVX Corporation, which is based on Long Island, announced yesterday that they had agreed to merge in a deal worth about $531 million.


Roll-Call Vote in House on Bill to Cut Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 239 to 190 by which the House of Representatives today approved a capital gains tax cut backed by President Bush and rejected a Democratic alternative.
A ''no'' vote was against an alternative proposal and for the lower tax rate.
Voting ''yes,'' - for the alternative proposal - were 189 Democrats and 1 Republican.


Our Towns; At Testing Lab, Tomorrow's Gum Is Today's Secret
LEAD: Stella Rieger answered immediately. ''My favorite experiment?
The nonstick chewing gum.
We got paid to sit here and chew gum.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Members Only Offers New Anti-Drug Drive
LEAD: The policeman on the beat is the focus of a new advertising campaign by Members Only.
Since 1986, the men's apparel manufacturer has devoted its entire advertising budget to anti-drug advertising.


Peter Freudenthal, 55, Former Con Ed Official
LEAD: Dr.
Peter C. Freudenthal, former director of air- and land-use programs and environmental affairs for Consolidated Edison, died Wednesday at his home in Allendale, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 55 years old.


Sales by Imperial
LEAD: The Imperial Corporation of America, a San Diego-based savings-and-loan holding company, said it had sold more than $700 million of assets in the third quarter as part of an effort to shed $2 billion in assets by the end of the year to meet new regulatory requirements.
The company said it sold $235 million in corporate bonds and $260 million in auto leases.


The Infinite Variety of Velazquez at Met
LEAD: ''VELAZQUEZ'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is a show that no one ever expected to see.
The first exhibition ever to be devoted to Velazquez, whether in Spain or anywhere else, it includes many great paintings by the pre-eminent master of the Spanish school.
From the tiny head and shoulders of the poet Gongora (done when Velazquez was only 23 years old) to the tranquil mix of landscape, narrative and sainted portraiture in ''St.


R. P. Harriss, Journalist, 87
LEAD: R. P. Harriss, the dean of Baltimore's working journalists, whose last column for The Baltimore Sun appeared Sunday, died of cancer Tuesday at Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 87 years old and lived in Baltimore.


N.H.L. Acts on Fighting
LEAD: The National Hockey League yesterday strengthened penalties against players who commit fighting infractions.


Uniformed Workers' Unions Endorse Dinkins
LEAD: Supported by New York City's major public-employee unions in the primary campaign, David N. Dinkins, the Democratic nominee for mayor, is now winning endorsements from unions representing the uniformed forces and using them to challenge his opponent's claim to be the law-and-order candidate.


Corrections
LEAD: An brief article in the Sports People column on Tuesday about the suspension of two jockeys at the Meadowlands Race Track cited their fines incorrectly in some editions.
Julie Krone was fined $500, not $1,500; Joe Bravo was fined $200, not $500.


Arthur A. Singer, 73, Founder of Exporter
LEAD: Arthur A. Singer, a founder and retired president of the Singer Products Company, an exporter of machine tools and battery equipment, died of complications from a stroke Sunday at the Great Neck (L.I.) Plaza Nursing Home.
He was 73 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  READINGS BY WRITERS


Aid Drive Grows
LEAD: The Ohio-Louisiana State game has been added to the list of college football games across the Southeast tomorrow at which fans will be able to help in relief efforts for victims of Hurricane Hugo.


Soldier in the Wall
LEAD: The Prime Minister of Poland is strolling about his office, looking.


U.S. Weighs New Delay in Nuclear Waste Project
LEAD: Energy Secretary James D. Watkins has told a Senator from Nevada that the Government is considering a delay of at least two years in the start of underground work at a proposed nuclear waste dump there.


Restaurants
LEAD: If stars were awarded for the food's altitude on the plate, Gotham Bar and Grill would have no serious rivals.
Alfred Portale, the I. M. Pei of contemporary American cooking, brings new meaning to the term haute cuisine with his skyscraper salads, towers of twirled pasta, high-rises of french fries and soaring desserts.


Senate Votes More Money for Anti-Missile Program
LEAD: In a tactical move aimed at strengthening its bargaining position with the House, the Senate on Thursday reversed a decision it made Tuesday and voted to restore part of the money it cut from the anti-missile program.


Anderson Hoping To Trim Eagles
LEAD: No matter how much Neal Anderson simply wanted to be Neal Anderson last season, the Chicago Bears tailback was the player filling Walter Payton's shoes.


Groups Sue to Stop Shuttle Flight Because of Radioactive Payload
LEAD: Three private groups filed a suit in Washington yesterday to stop the next space shuttle mission, which is to take aloft a nuclear-powered space probe that the three groups say could cause thousands of deaths by cancer if it is involved in an accident.
The probe's power source is radioactive.


Chevrolet's Incentive Plans
LEAD: Trying to unload its 1989 cars to make room for new models, the General Motors Corporation's Chevrolet division expanded its incentive plans today and added rebates to move its inventory of cars and trucks from the expiring model year.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Company News pages of Business Day in some editions on Wednesday misstated the ownership of Celestial Seasonings Inc.
It is independent, having been sold by Kraft Inc. late last year.


Washington at Work; Democratic Chief Faces Uphill Battle in Effort to Rouse a Troubled Party
LEAD: At a Democratic fund-raising event Wednesday night, when the singer Paul Simon was introducing his last song, ''An American Tune,'' he noted gently that he had sung the song for Jimmy Carter's inauguration and said, ''I don't think you guys have been in there since.''


Pitt Is Feasting on Opponents As Young Quarterback Emerges
LEAD: For 99 years, football at the University of Pittsburgh has had a cyclical history of feast or famine.
And now the banquet table is set again.


Sony Buys Guber-Peters
LEAD: Just a day after it spent more than $3 billion to buy Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., the Sony Corporation today paid $200 million for the Guber-Peters Entertainment Company, the producers of ''Batman,'' ''Rain Man'' and ''Flashdance.''


Singers and Dancers Of Eritrea to Perform
LEAD: The first performance in the United States of an ensemble of singers and dancers from Eritrea takes place today during a varied seven-hour program sponsored by the Eritrean People's Liberation Front.


Du Pont, Merck Set Drug Pact
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company and E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company announced a long-term research and marketing agreement yesterday to develop a class of drugs to compete in the $6 billion market for heart treatments.


Kenneth Brozen, 62, Houseware Designer Known for Plastics
LEAD: Kenneth Brozen, a product designer and merchandising consultant, died of acute leukemia on Wednesday at Sloan-Kettering Memorial Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


USAir Passenger Denies Tie to Plane's Pilots
LEAD: A passenger who has been publicly linked with the pilot and co-pilot of the USAir jetliner that crashed at LaGuardia Airport last Wednesday night denies he told investigators he was with the crewmen in the hours before the fatal crash, the passenger's lawyer said yesterday.


Union Warns Fernandez on Proposals
LEAD: The union that represents New York principals and assistant principals has found itself thrust into the spotlight with its warning that the incoming Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, would be foolish to try to duplicate the innovations he instituted in Miami.


Weighing Abortion Restrictions
LEAD:
Opinion of adults ...
nationwide
in Florida
Views about abortion as a right
Do you think abortion should . . .
. . . be legal as it is now
43%
51%
. . . be legal only in such cases as
rape, incest, or to save the life
of the mother
40
36


Greek Coalition Is to Resign; Elections Are Set for Nov. 5
LEAD: Just hours after Parliament voted to try former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou for corruption, Greece's conservative-Communist coalition announced today that it would resign by next week and that elections would be held Nov. 5.


Baseball's Final Days: The Best
LEAD: Will it be a dazzling catch, or a last-inning home run, or good pitching stopping good hitting, the way it often happens in baseball?
What will we remember from this weekend in Toronto?


On Forging Relationships By Electronic Intermediary
Video monitors preside eerily over virtually every scene in the Canadian director Atom Egoyan's ''Speaking Parts,'' giving the film its chilly, high-tech cachet.
In a board room, an absent film executive dominates his employees by means of a giant screen.
In her solitary apartment, a spooky, lovelorn woman makes her VCR the centerpiece of a shrine.
An ambitious actor says one thing while beside him, on a monitor playing his audition tape, he is seen and heard saying something else.
In a very modern mausoleum, a woman mournfully watches the deceased on videotape.
The characters in Mr.
Egoyan's earlier ''Family Viewing,'' shown as part of the New Directors/New Films series in 1987, also allowed their thoughts of love and sex and death to be shaped by ever-present video technology.
But since then, without sacrificing his formidable pretensions, Mr.
Egoyan has developed a much more engaging style.
His sleek, somber, technology-mad ''Speaking Parts'' creates a perfectly controlled enviroment in which even the tiniest gestures harness their own shallowness by appearing to take on great import.
The editing determinedly suggests mystery regardless of whether it really exists.


Soviet Side Offers Plan to Narrow Differences on Limiting Aircraft
LEAD: The Soviet bloc formally presented a new proposal in Vienna today that narrows the differences between the two sides on limiting aircraft, the main barrier to an agreement cutting conventional forces in Europe.


Bankruptcy Petition By Braniff
LEAD: Braniff Inc., the nation's 15th-largest airline, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, caught between the high cost of an aggressive expansion and the difficulty of securing financing in a troubled ''junk bond'' market.


Ambiguous Bronze Sculptures by Ronald Jones
LEAD: Ronald Jones's latest sculptures are very elegant and very ugly.
His show at Metro Pictures consists of five shiny bronzes that seem to mimic the curvaceous abstractions of Jean Arp, all of them perched on wood and stone pedestals directly copied from Brancusi.
Mr.
Jones once used the word suave to describe these objects and that is precisely what they appear to be.


Books of The Times; A Cast of Characters Afloat On History's Indifferent Sea
LEAD:  A History of the World in 10 1/2 Chapters  By Julian Barnes  307 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Film Series to Feature Issues of 1950's and 60's
LEAD: A film series reflecting the politics and social issues of the late 1950's and early 60's is to begin at 2 P.M. tomorrow with a screening of ''Dr.
Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb'' at the Queens Museum, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Flushing.
To run the next five Saturdays, the film series coincides with an exhibition on the 1964-65 World's Fair; both the series and the exhibition will run through Oct.


F.D.A., in Big Shift, Will Permit Use of Experimental AIDS Drug
LEAD: In a major departure from their usual cautious approach, Federal health officials said today that they would permit an experimental AIDS drug, DDI, to be widely distributed while it is still being tested to determine if it is safe and effective.


Afghan, at U.N., Says Rebel Campaign Has Failed
LEAD: Afghanistan's Foreign Minister told the General Assembly today that the American-backed guerrillas had lost any chance of winning a military victory against his Government this year as the summer fighting season draws to a close.


Review/Cabaret; Taking Pop Songs Apart
LEAD: It's pretty safe to assume that no cabaret act had dreamed of juxtaposing ''Welcome to the Jungle'' by Guns 'n' Roses with Stephen Sondheim's ''Weekend in the Country'' until the trio that calls itself Chris Durang and Dawne came up with the idea.


Film Festival; A Blissful 'Mystery Train' From Jim Jarmusch
LEAD: It's a slow night at the Arcade Hotel in Memphis ($22 a night for a double).
Says the bellboy, as he reads from a tabloid, to the night clerk, who presides over a majestic account book, ''At the time of his death, Elvis Presley would have weighed 648 pounds on Jupiter.''


Jets Preparing for Colts With '88 Defensive Line
LEAD: The Jets and the Indianapolis Colts were outclassed in their first two games this season and now each team has finally won.
Comeback victories make a team feel better, even victories over teams without defenses: the Colts beat the the Atlanta Falcons, the Jets the Miami Dolphins.


Prices Ease, and Trading Is Light
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds eased slightly in thin trading yesterday, as dealers reacted to the sale of a large list of mortgage-backed securities by selling Treasury issues.


Recent Soviet Offerings May Get Ratings by S.&amp;P.
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, which does not now rate any debt obligation of the Soviet Union, is studying the possibility of including such a rating in its sovereign assessment service as a result of a flurry of Soviet international bond issues.


AIDS, Drugs, Need and Greed
LEAD: Is there something wrong with the way drugs are developed?
The extortionate price of AIDS drugs suggests a system with serious faults.
Drug companies, far from boldly accepting high risk for high reward, have to be cajoled with subsidies and monopolies into taking a chance.
Once they hit a winner, they use their monopoly position to charge sky-high prices.


Here's the Joker in the Catastrophic-Care Pack; Nursing-Home Front
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maverick's Battle Is Uniting His Enemies
LEAD: This northern Fairfield County town of 22,000 people has gone head to head with the state in opposing the construction of a new state jail, with the charge led by a 42-year-old lawyer named Roderick J. MacKenzie Jr.
The problem is that Mr.
MacKenzie, who is also First Selectman of Newtown - the town's top elected official - seems to have about as many enemies as the jail.


Market Place; Is Stock Swap Good for AVX?
LEAD: THE ''go go years'' of the late 1960's may be coming back, but with an Asian flavor.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day yesterday about the removal of magazines by grocery and department-store chains, because the October issues show a nude woman in an advertisement, mentioned one magazine incorrectly.
The magazine, Elle, does not carry the ad and has not been removed.


Drivers Are Shot In Two Holdups At a Bronx Park
LEAD: A gunman in a ski mask shot two people in separate cars late Wednesday night in a parking lot near the Van Cortlandt Park stables where couples often go at night, the police said.


Gillette Settles Case on Product Cancer Risk
LEAD: The Gillette Company, maker of the Liquid Paper typewriter correction fluid, agreed today to remove a cancer-causing ingredient from it and to pay $300,000 in penalties and costs to settle a legal action by environmentalists.


Bush and Governors Set Education Goals
LEAD: President Bush and the nation's Governors agreed today on the need to overhaul the nation's education system by creating a set of goals that will focus on eliminating illiteracy, reshaping curriculums and holding teachers accountable for their performance.


Swissair and S.A.S. Announce Pact
LEAD: Swissair and the Scandinavian Airlines System agreed today to acquire up to 10 percent of each other and to unify some traffic routes and travel services.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Amtrak's Crescent Derailed  A passenger train from New York to New Orleans hit a fire truck at a crossing in Virginia, killing at least three people.
Dozens suffered injuries, mostly minor.
Page A10.
Suit Seeks to Bar Launching  Three groups sued to stop the next space shuttle, charging that its cargo poses a cancer threat in the event of a launching accident.


Hirohito Death Cut Sales, Amway Says
LEAD: The illness and death of the Japanese Emperor, Hirohito, cut into the Amway Corporation's sales growth for the fiscal year that ended Aug. 31, company officials said.
William Nicholson, Amway's chief operating officer, said commerce in Japan accounts for 35 percent of the company's business.


New York Sues Job Agencies In Bias Case
LEAD: Four large Manhattan employment agencies have discriminated against job applicants who are black, Hispanic, female or deemed too old to hire by systematically steering them away from jobs that had been ''reserved for whites,'' the New York State Attorney General charged yesterday.
He said the scheme was uncovered in an undercover investigation with the New York City Human Rights


New Computer Can Read Handwriting
LEAD: In a development that may make computers accessible to people not accustomed to working on keyboards, a subsidiary of the Tandy Corporation introduced a 4.5-pound portable computer today that can read printed handwriting.


Dining Out Guide: Pre-theater Dining
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Chantal Cafe  * (July 14, 1989), 257 West 55th Street (246-7076) - Chantal Cafe is a modest and moderately priced little bistro where the key to enjoyment is staying with house standards like rack of lamb with rosemary, and steak pommes frites.


Corrections
LEAD: The Pop Life column on Wednesday misidentified the rock group on the recording ''Blind Man's Zoo.'' It is 10,000 Maniacs, not the Beastie Boys.


Bush Is Heard Too Well
LEAD: Ronald Reagan was periodically embarrassed by saying things when he thought the microphone was off.
It was President Bush's turn today.


For Children
LEAD:  For Children  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''THE TOY FACTORY,'' the Royal Toysmith of the Castle will show children how to construct toys and games (participants should bring at least two tin cans the same size), 1 P.M. tomorrow, at the Belvedere Castle by Turtle Pond and the Delacorte Theater, near 79th Street, in Central Park.


Deals
LEAD:  Baseball


Review/Film; From Denmark, a Fairy Tale for Adults
LEAD: Line Kruse, who plays the 11-year-old title character in the new Danish film ''Emma's Shadow,'' exudes an easygoing, mercurial charm that is the mark of a natural child actor.
Portraying the neglected only child of an upper-class Copenhagen family in the 1930's, she has an expression that shifts from innocent curiosity to imperiousness with just a slight raising of the chin and narrowing of the eyes.


Top 2-Year-Old Colts Lost for Big Weekend
LEAD: This weekend was supposed to be a crucial one for this year's 2-year-olds, with Red Ransom running in New York and Summer Squall in Chicago, heading toward an inevitable showdown for the juvenile title.


Anheuser Is Buying Parks From Harcourt
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies, the nation's largest brewer, said today that it would pay $1.1 billion in cash to acquire four Sea World theme parks and other properties from Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc.


14 Nations Take On New York Harbor
LEAD: The boating season may be drawing to a close, but the biggest flurry of the racing season is planned for New York Harbor this weekend.


Sun to Begin New-Fuel Tests
LEAD: The Sun Company announced this week that it would begin testing a series of reformulated fuels and gasolines in hopes of lowering harmful emissions by 1993.


Hydraulic Product Maker's Stock Up
LEAD: The stock of the Commercial Intertech Corporation, a maker of hydraulic products, soared today in over-the-counter trading, despite a statement by the company that it was not interested in being taken over.
A company formed by Hass &amp; Partners on Wednesday offered $27.50 a share for Commercial Intertech, but the company said it was not for sale.


25 Disabled People Held in Atlanta Bus Protest
LEAD: Twenty-five disabled people who blocked more than a dozen Greyhound-Trailways buses to demand that wheelchair lifts be installed in them were arrested and put on Police Department buses that did have the devices.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: Della Femina McNamee WCRS/ Boston will create a pro bono advertising campaign for the Scleroderma Association.
Scleroderma is a life-threatening chronic tissue disease whose primary symptom is a hardening of the skin.


Campeau Halts Dividends
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation's board said yesterday that it would not pay dividends scheduled to be paid tomorrow on the company's series B preference shares, series C preference shares, series D preference shares and convertible subordinate shares.


Mozart at St. Paul's
LEAD: Tashi, a flexible chamber group that includes the clarinetist Richard Stoltzman, the cellist Fred Sherry, the violinists Ida Kavafian and Theodore Arm, and the violist Steven Tenenbom, will perform the Mozart Quintet for Clarinet and Strings (K. 581) in a free concert at St.
Paul's Chapel, Broadway and Fulton Street, today at noon.


Air New Zealand Plan
LEAD: Air New Zealand plans to sell or lease its new Boeing 747-400 without ever using it after failing to reach a deal with pilots to fly the aircraft, the carrier's chairman, Bob Matthew, said today.
The plane is scheduled to leave Boeing's Seattle plant in the next few weeks and Air New Zealand had planned to put it into service later this year.


Associates Sets Credit-Card Deal
LEAD: The Associates Corporation of North America said its affiliate, Associates National Bank of Pleasanton, Calif., had agreed to buy a national credit-card portfolio with outstanding balances between $425 million and $475 million from the First Interstate Bancard Company N.A.


Congress Votes Sharp Increase In Storm Relief
LEAD: Congress approved $1.1 billion in emergency aid for hurricane victims in South Carolina, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands today amid bitter arguments over whether the Government was responding effectively to the storm's destruction.


UKRAINE REMOVES ITS PARTY LEADER
LEAD: The Communist Party in the Ukraine today ended the 17-year-rule of its party boss, whose firm control of the second-largest Soviet republic had been shaken by rising nationalism and coal miners' unrest.


At Least 3 Are Killed in Amtrak Crash
LEAD: An Amtrak passenger train bound from New York to New Orleans struck a fire truck and derailed tonight near Warrenton, Va., killing three firemen and injuring scores of people, the authorities said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Hopefully, friends and detractors alike will look beyond the man to see what he stood for -his vision, his compassion and his total love of country.''  - Ferdinand E. Marcos Jr.  [ B7:1. ]


Outings for Shoe-Leather Sightseers
LEAD: NEW YORK is a city best seen while on foot.
Bird's-eye views may be inspirational - a chance to judge the celestial mighty mountain made by man - but it is the pedestrian who learns more quickly how it was all put together, how man makes the place run and even how the place makes man run.
It is the comparative leisureliness of a walk that leaves the mind and imagination free to absorb the stunning contrasts that are the hallmark of New


U.S. TO PARE AID IN NICARAGUA VOTE
LEAD: The Bush Administration moved today to scale down its $9 million plan to help opposition groups in Nicaragua, after Republican and Democratic members of Congress sharply criticized the proposal.


Few Choices for Braniff Ticket Holders
LEAD: Travelers stuck with tickets for Braniff flights face an array of difficulties now that the airline has filed for bankruptcy protection and canceled most flights.


Drug Move By Canada
LEAD: Canada's Finance Minister said yesterday that the Government had asked Canadian banks to set up procedures voluntarily to detect illegal drug profits.


Review/Art; Mario Merz Works Complement the Guggenheim
LEAD: It isn't often that a museum building seems tailor-made for an artist's work.
Still less often is the structure in question as eccentric as Frank Lloyd Wright's implicitly organic Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, with its spiraling ramp measured off in shallow bays, its great open well and its ribbed and rounded glass roof.


In U.S. Exile, A Colombian Is Fearful Still
LEAD: Monica de Greiff is pretty sure that Colombia's drug traffickers do not know where she and her family are living now.


Soviets Stripping Brezhnev Of Top Military Decoration
LEAD: The Soviet Government pushed former President Leonid I. Brezhnev further into disgrace today by stripping him of the country's highest military honor.


C.I.A. Mounts Drive to Defeat Plan for an Outside Inspector
LEAD: The Central Intelligence Agency is mounting a determined drive to defeat a Senate proposal that would create a Presidentially appointed inspector general with enhanced power to investigate wrongdoing in the agency.


Mayoral Rivals in New York Juggling the Jackson Factor
LEAD: A full-page advertisement for Rudolph W. Giuliani this week in The Algemeiner Journal, the nation's largest Yiddish newspaper, declares, ''Let the people of New York choose their own destiny.''


Palestinians Express Doubts But Don't Reject Egypt's Plan
LEAD: Prominent Palestinians from the occupied territories expressed serious doubts about Egypt's 10-point peace plan today, but stopped short of rejecting it.


Harvard Plans to Close a Public Service Placement Office
LEAD: The new dean at Harvard Law School, the first law school to set up a separate placement program to help students find jobs in public service, plans to close the office, The plan by the new dean, Robert C. Clark, has led to protests by students worried that the school will abandon its commitment to support public interest law.


Smoky Subway Fire Delays Lexington Ave. Line Service
LEAD: A smoky fire on the Lexington Avenue subway line south of the Brooklyn Bridge station affected the travel plans of 40,000 people yesterday but caused no injuries, the Transit Authority said.


Freddie Mac Sets A Note Program
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, yesterday announced the establishment of a medium-term note program that it hopes will give it more flexibility in issuing debt securities.


Mortar Accident Kills 2 Soldiers in Georgia
LEAD: The second major accident on an Army base in less than 24 hours killed two soldiers yesterday.


Marvin Warner Case
LEAD: Final approval of the $16 million bankruptcy settlement plan of the Ohio financier Marvin Warner was delayed Wednesday because of questions over court costs, a family trust and interest on back taxes.
Judge George Proctor of Federal Bankruptcy Court set a Nov. 19 deadline to solve the problems.


On Stage
LEAD:  Teamwork, Relationships, Etc.


RESULT PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF


Oh, Go Fly a Kite
LEAD: Wind permitting, a kite-flying demonstration is planned on Sunday at 1 P.M. in the Great Lawn in Central Park, at 81st Street.
The free event, called Fall Fling, is sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation and will also feature zydeco music by Loup Garou.
Information: 360-8126.


Russian Jews Come to U.S. In Big Group
LEAD: The largest group of Jewish refugees to arrive in the United States in a single day since the end of World War II touched down at Kennedy International Airport yesterday.


Henry E. Griffith, 74, a Plastics Executive
LEAD: Henry Evans Griffith, a plastics industry executive, died Tuesday at the Rivercrest Nursing Home in Concord, Mass.
He was 74 years old and lived in Concord.


Giants Want to Avoid Being Overconfident
LEAD: The biggest danger the Giants will face Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys is not Troy Aikman or Herschel Walker or Jimmy Johnson or Elizabeth Taylor's coin flip.
The main thing the Giants must contend with is overconfidence.


Dollar Closes Mostly Up; Central Banks Still Active
LEAD: The dollar moved mostly higher yesterday although central banks again put pressure on the currency, acting on a belief that the dollar's advance this year could have unpleasant economic consequences.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Hyatt Hotels, San Francisco, and Fisher Mountain Bikes, to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, with a combined budget of more than $1 million.


Developer's New Gift Unwanted in Newark
LEAD: Nobody at City Hall denies that Harry Grant has been generous to the city of Newark: He paid to gild the dome of City Hall with 24-karat gold, put up flagpoles and lay a fancy new sidewalk in front and last year, he donated a five-story Christmas tree.


Stock of AMR Soars by $4.75
LEAD: Stock in the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, soared $4.75 on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, to $83.75, on speculation among investors that management might seek a buyout in cooperation with Donald J. Trump.
Traders said that Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, which has worked for Mr.


Ku Klux Klan Chapter Wants To Adopt Part of a Highway
LEAD: A Ku Klux Klan chapter has applied to take part in North Carolina's Adopt-a-Highway litter program, in which volunteers get a stretch of road to keep clean and a road sign with their name on it.


Auctions
LEAD:  Mid-Season Sales


Neighbor Held in Killing of Two in the Bronx
LEAD: A part-time security guard from the Bronx was charged early yesterday with killing a child and her baby sitter last weekend.


Sports People: AUTO RACING; Mansell to Appeal
LEAD: Nigel Mansell of Britain, saying he never saw the black disqualification flag that ordered him out of the Portuguese Grand Prix on Sunday, said yesterday that he would appeal to the world body the $50,000 fine imposed on him and his suspension from this Sunday's Spanish Grand Prix.


East Germans Swell Embassy in Prague
LEAD: A new rush of East Germans onto the grounds of the West German Embassy in Prague has prompted a major new crisis in the drama of the East German mass migration that began this summer.


Beaune Journal; In Burgandy, Bacchus Is the God of Affluence Too
LEAD: As far as the eye can see, small groups of grape pickers dot the hillside, hunching over the three-foot-tall vines to gather the dark purple pinot noir grapes and the gleaming green chardonnays that are so plump they seem ready to burst.


Empire of America
LEAD: The Empire of America Savings Bank, which has struggled with recent operating losses, said it had a negative net worth and was anticipating a huge third-quarter loss.
Kent Davis, chairman and chief executive, said the bank anticipated a third-quarter loss of about $150 million.
The savings bank said it would continue to operate normally and that the projected losses would have no effect on its customers, employees or vendors.


Kodak to Reorganize 11 Units Into 3 Groups
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company, which has been hurt by sliding earnings this year, announced yesterday that it would reorganize 11 business units into three operating groups.


Max Schreiber, 79; Served Housing Agency
LEAD: Max Benjamin Schreiber, a former director of design and chief architect for the New York City Housing Authority, died of a brain tumor yesterday at the Calvary Hospice in the Bronx.
He was 79 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Scout Describes Ordeal in Abandoned Mine
LEAD: Joshua Dennis, a 10-year-old Boy Scout, was rescued Wednesday after five days in an abandoned mine near Salt Lake City.
Joshua's mother, above center, was hugged by friends and relatives after rescuers found the boy on a ledge some 2,000 feet inside the mine, where he got lost during a scouting expedition.


Dunkin' Donuts Weighing Buyout
LEAD: Dunkin' Donuts Inc. said it was considering a leveraged buyout as an alternative to the $45-a-share offer from the Unicorp Canada Corporation and Cara Operations Ltd.
The Randolph, Mass., chain said its franchise owners had offered to help finance a management buyout to keep the company in friendly hands.


The Post Drops Real Estate
LEAD: The weekly real estate section of The New York Post, established with much fanfare in 1987, has been canceled.


U.S. TELLS ISRAEL IT PLANS TO SELL SAUDIS 300 TANKS
LEAD: The Bush Administration has told Israel that it intends to sell Saudi Arabia about 300 United States Army battlefield tanks and will take steps to meet Israel's security concerns if Jerusalem does not actively oppose the sale, American officials said yesterday.


Review/Opera; 'Porgy and Bess': Catfish Row at the Met
LEAD: The contemporary world does not often intrude on the Metropolitan Opera, but there it all was on Wednesday evening: a hurricane battering Charleston, S.C.; a cocaine dealer plying his trade on the street; racially biased police officers; sex, violence and evangelism flourishing side by side . . . but, of course, you have guessed that the opera was ''Porgy and Bess,'' Gershwin's tuneful investigation of the folkways of Catfish Row in the 1930's.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF TECHNICAL COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - 11 A.M.


Feminism Brings Truce to Battle of Sexes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 468 money market mutual funds increased by $191.6 million, to $349.23 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 141 institutional funds decreased by $453.6 million, to $83.76 billion.
The assets of the 231 general-purpose funds were up by $199.1 million, to $113.4 billion.


Big Pine Journal; Dusty Harvest Is Near After Long Water Wars
LEAD: In the bitter water wars of California, there have been big winners and big losers.
The Steward family has won some and lost some, but now the end seems near.


Here's the Joker in the Catastrophic-Care Pack
LEAD: To the Editor:


Group Offers Money In AIDS Survey Protest
LEAD: A gay rights group that opposes a door-to-door survey aimed at finding out the extent of infection with the AIDS virus offered $100 Wednesday to the first person who refuses to participate in it.


CBS Officials Promise to Rebut Afghan Charges
LEAD: Reports that faked battle film was broadcast during coverage of the fighting in Afghanistan in 1984 will be answered ''point by point'' as soon as CBS News completes its investigation, network executives and employees said yesterday.


Future Of Mets' Manager Unresolved
LEAD: Senior executives on the Mets acknowledged yesterday that they were deliberating Davey Johnson's future as manager of the team, but insisted that the decision had yet to be made and was not expected to be made for a week or so.


Annenberg Gives Met A Gift of $15 Million
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum of Art said last night that Walter H. Annenberg, the publisher, was giving it $15 million for acquisitions.
Mr.
Annenberg is also giving $5 million to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., and $5 million to the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


G.M. Closing Extended
LEAD: Continued slow sales of Chevrolet pickup trucks will add another week's layoff to the two-week shutdown at the General Motors Corporation's Moraine assembly plant.
A company spokesman said Wednesday that the previously announced layoff of 2,500 workers will be extended until Oct. 23.
The plant makes Chevrolet S-10 and S-15 pickup trucks.


LIMITS ON ABORTION SEEM LESS LIKELY
LEAD: Although new poll data indicate a high level of concern among supporters of abortion rights, political developments in half a dozen states suggest that pressure for restrictive legislation has eased, partly because abortion rights supporters have fought back effectively.


Bringing Back the Bridges
LEAD: The forced closing of the Williamsburg Bridge in April 1988 dramatized the effects of prolonged scrimping on routine maintenance.
It is hardly the only New York City bridge to suffer such neglect.
Now New Yorkers can applaud the start of a widespread rebuilding effort.
An event last week in Brooklyn, the reopening of the Carroll Street Bridge over the Gowanus


William Post Jr., 88; Film and Stage Actor
LEAD: William Post Jr., an actor, died of a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Tuesday in Presbyterian Hospital in Oklahoma City.
He was 88 years old and lived in Granite, Okla.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.25
9.00
8.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.89
7.83
7.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.84
7.84
7.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.37
8.35
8.86
30-YR.


Bail Denied Again in Bensonhurst Slaying
LEAD: A second State Supreme Court judge refused yesterday to set bail for the young man accused of firing the fatal shot in the Bensonhurst racial slaying.


Recital at St. Thomas
LEAD: Gerre Hancock, the organist and choirmaster at St.
Thomas Church, 1 West 53d Street, will play a recital at St.
Thomas on Sunday afternoon at 5:15.
The program includes music by Nicholas de Grigny, Johann Sebastian Bach and Max Reger.
Admssion is free.
Information: 757-7013.


AIDS Plan For Center Is Rejected
LEAD: A proposal to develop a nursing home for people with AIDS in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, which had met vigorous opposition from community leaders, was turned down yesterday by the New York City Board of Estimate.


Review/Film; AIDS In a World Without Warnings
LEAD: A morality tale about a young man named Kurt who spends his nights picking up women in a dance club and who dies of AIDS, ''On the Make'' is likely to be much more interesting to producers and agents than to general viewers.
Filmed for a pittance -$120,000 - it is full of promise and talent, but not much drama or depth.


Activity in the Final Hour Pushes Dow Up 21.85 Points
LEAD: Stocks rose sharply in the final hour of trading yesterday on moderately higher volume.


Roger Howell, 53, Ex-President of Bowdoin
LEAD: Roger Howell Jr., president emeritus of Bowdoin College and a professor of the humanities there, died of heart failure Wednesday at the Maine Medical Center in Portland, Me.
He was 53 years old and lived in Brunswick, Me.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL; Stipanovich Retires Because of Bad Knee
LEAD: A knee injury so bad he ''can't even cut the grass'' forced Steve Stipanovich of the Indiana Pacers to announce his retirement yesterday.


Court Issues Order Against Vernitron
LEAD: The Kollmorgen Corporation said the Superior Court of Connecticut had issued a temporary order enjoining the Vernitron Corporation from acquiring the electric motor maker or any of its shares.


Sports People: BOXING; Beating the Drums
LEAD: George Foreman was talking about his fighting weight.
In his current comeback, Foreman, who once held the heavyweight title, has won 19 straight bouts.
He has performed at weights running north and south of 250 pounds and once even at a figure somewhere in the svelte 230's.


Aquino Rejects Latest Callsfor Marcos Burial in the Philippines
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino said today that she would not allow the body of Ferdinand E. Marcos to be brought here for ''the safety of those who would take the death of Mr.
Marcos in widely and passionately conflicting ways.''


Fairs and Festivals
LEAD:  Tomorrow  BOOK SALE, 702 Greenwich Street, at 10th Street; sponsored by the West Village Committee.
Tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Proceeds benefit the Jane Street Garden.
Information: 243-0762.
Sunday  WEST BROADWAY FESTIVAL, West Broadway, between Park Place and Walker Street.


Review/Film; Indian Uprising in Montana
LEAD: Franc Roddam's overheated action-adventure film ''War Party'' imagines an American political explosion that has not yet detonated: a group of young American Indians rises up violently against its redneck oppressors in the rugged high plains of Montana.


Carolina Isles After Storm: Salvaging the Shattered Past
LEAD: For years, residents of this barrier island wondered what would happen if a powerful hurricane struck at high tide.


Democrats Vote to Rescind Part of Dukakis-Jackson Pact
LEAD: Seeking to increase its influence in the Presidential nominating process, the Democratic National Committeevoted today to rescind part of a compromise on party rules that was worked out between Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson at the 1988 convention.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Sette Mezzo


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Sondheim by Schneider


REPORT ON PRIEST ASSAILS UNIVERSITY
LEAD: A committee of the American Association of University Professors says the Catholic University of America violated the Rev.
Charles E. Curran's academic freedom by barring him from teaching theology after his published views on subjects like birth control and homosexuality were censured by the Vatican.


Atlanta Magazine Sale
LEAD: The American Express Publishing Corporation said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to acquire Atlanta magazine from Metrocorp.
Terms were not disclosed.
Metrocorp, which also publishes Manhattan,inc., Philadelphia and Boston magazines, had acquired the Atlanta publication in 1987.
In a memorandum to the staff, D.


Anne M. Lindsey, A Student, Weds
LEAD: Anne Marie Lindsey, a daughter of Richard A. Lindsey of Lafayette, Ind., and the late Pearl Lindsey, and Michael Roy Penn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley W. Penn of New York, were married yesterday at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Associate Justice E. Leo Milonas of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, First


Review/Film; A Little Plastic Surgery In the Cause of Revenge
LEAD: Because ''Johnny Handsome'' is a film by Walter Hill (''The Warriors,'' ''Streets of Fire''), it crams the following things into its first five minutes: gunfire, screeching brakes, a drug-popping hoodlum, a moll in black leather, a violent robbery, one murder, sinister masks, shattering glass.
But because this is Mr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; U S Sprint's Street-Corner Marketing
LEAD: THE U S Sprint Communications Company has achieved remarkable success by using advertising and marketing as a one-two punch.
First, it spent tens of millions of dollars on advertising intended to portray itself as a technologically sophisticated alternative to A.T.&amp;T., then it enlisted a growing army of part-time salespeople to promote its long-distance service at busy street corners, county fairs, shopping malls and just about any place where people have gathered.


Edelman Sued On Datapoint
LEAD: A suit was filed yesterday against Asher B. Edelman contending that the veteran takeover specialist had improperly purchased 30 percent of the shares of the Datapoint Corporation, a computer networking company, in an effort to thwart a bid to oust him from the Datapoint board.


THE LAW: At the Bar; Legal preserve opening its door to personal ads as search for romance (and profits) begins.
LEAD: Can a young prosecutor slip and fall for a personal injury lawyer?
Can a conservative corporate lawyer find romance with a public defender?
Can a mergers and acquisitions specialist make a tender offer to a law professor?
Soon some answers to these questions may emerge.


Apology by Jackie Mason For Campaign 'Insensitivity'
LEAD: A day after he refused to apologize for racially charged remarks about blacks and Jews that forced his disassociation from the mayoral campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the comedian Jackie Mason issued a formal apology yesterday ''for my insensitivity.''


Giants Can Win One for Merkle
LEAD: And now, after 81 years, the Giants will get a chance to avenge Fred Merkle.


Managua Party Chief Splits From Coalition
LEAD: An important opposition leader broke away from a 14-party coalition tonight, further weakening a fractious bloc that seeks to unseat the ruling Sandinistas in next year's elections.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company News report in Business Day on Tuesday gave an incorrect location for a plant of Eli Lilly &amp; Company.
It is in Fergersheim, near Strasbourg, France.


HOUSE, 239 TO 190, VOTES BILL TO CUT CAPITAL GAINS TAX
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved a reduction in the capital gains tax rate, giving President Bush a significant legislative victory that wounded the new Democratic leadership.


Machine vs. Mind
LEAD: Chess playing is a notable accomplishment of the human mind.
But computer programs have steadily improved and are now outwitting even the best human players.
Is that a victory or defeat for human intelligence and creativity?


Today's Immigrants Learn English as Fast as Yesterday's Did
LEAD: To the Editor:


Feminism Brings Truce to battle of Sexes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Autocrat With a Regal Manner, Marcos Ruled for 2 Decades
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos was as tough as he was debonair, and he came to rule the Philippines with an iron hand before popular unrest forced him to flee in 1986 after two decades in power.


Blue Jays and Orioles To Square Off Tonight
LEAD: Cito Gaston, manager of Toronto, and Frank Robinson, manager of Baltimore, were both early believers.
Now they get to test their faith as the Blue Jays and the Orioles prepare to settle the American League East in a three-game weekend series.
It begins tonight at the Skydome in Toronto with the Blue


For Pregnant Addicts, a Clinic of Hope
LEAD: Amid brightly colored posters exclaiming the benefits of good nutrition and regular medical checkups, an educational video about pregnancy repeats itself endlessly on a television set in a living room-sized reception area where a dozen Harlem women await their obstetrician's call.


Israelis in Colombia Are Acting on Their Own
LEAD: To the Editor:


At the Movies
LEAD:  'Johnny Handsome'


Panel Told Agencies Risk Abuse in Yielding Purchase Controls
LEAD: Two Cabinet agencies have given up their control over billions of dollars in contracts by turning over purchasing and management to private contractors and other agencies, the internal inspectors of the departments told a Senate panel today.


Track Athletes Call for Drug Inquiry
LEAD: Disturbed by recent allegations linking American track and field athletes to the use of performance-enhancing drugs, a ranking group of athletes today called on The Athletics Congress to appoint an independent investigator to look into the drug problems in the sport in the United States.


Reviews/Art; An Interweaving of German and French Strands
LEAD: All six paintings in Gregoire Muller's new show were done in La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland, a small city between Zurich and Geneva, where this Swiss-born artist has been living since 1987.
They are at the same time softer and harder than the paintings he exhibited before leaving the United States.


Brokerage Is Suspended
LEAD: A Philadelphia brokerage accused of manipulating the price of a publicly traded stock has been fined $50,000 and suspended from the National Association of Securities Dealers.


Fraternity Ousted by Ole Miss
LEAD: The University of Mississippi has banned a fraternity for leaving two members naked and painted with racial slurs at Rust College, a mostly black school 25 miles north of here.
Gerald Turner, the university's chancellor, said Wednesday that he had accepted a hearing panel's recommendation to ban the 90-member Beta Theta Pi chapter for three years, and had given the fraternity a week to close its house.


Ferdinand Marcos, Ousted Leader Of Philippines, Dies at 72 in Exile
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos, who ruled the Philippines for 20 years until he was ousted in 1986, died in exile here today at St.
Francis Medical Center after a long battle with heart, lung and kidney ailments.
He was 72 years old.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Medical International Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., said its shareholders had tendered about 40.4 million shares through Tuesday under a $28-a-share tender offer by IMA Acquisition Corp.
The offer had been scheduled to expire Wednesday but was extended through Oct. 11.


U.S. Agent Says Garcias Overdrew Bank Accounts
LEAD: Representative Robert Garcia and his wife overdrew their bank accounts by thousands of dollars in the months before prosecutors contend they asked for bribes from the Wedtech Corporation, a Government witness testified yesterday.


News Summary A3-9
LEAD:  InternationalA3-9  The U.S. has informed Israel that it intends to sell Saudi Arabia about 300 tanks and to take steps to meet Israel's security concerns if Jerusalem does not actively oppose the sale, American officials said.
Page A1  Palestinians criticized Egypt's plan for peace in the occupied territories, but stopped short of rejecting it outright, an approach similar to that of the P.L.O.


International Bankers Told of Soviet Reforms
LEAD: The Supreme Soviet is about to take up legislation giving the State Bank of the U.S.S.R., or Gosbank, authority to issue foreign-exchange licenses to domestic banks, Yuri Ponomorev, a board member of the bank, said at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank here today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Balfour Maclaine Corp., a commodity exchange and brokerage firm, said Phillip L. Fondren had joined the firm as senior vice president.


A Generic Drug Fails F.D.A. Test
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration today told the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company that it had failed to demonstrate that its generic version of the anti-high-blood-pressure drug Dyazide was biologically equivalent to the original product.


Cool, Geometric Paintings Of Robert Mangold
LEAD: Sometimes it seems appropriate to think of Robert Mangold as a late - a very late - Renaissance painter.
Of course, Mr.
Mangold is no such thing; he's a contemporary American abstractionist who has been known since the end of the 1960's for eccentrically shaped monochrome surfaces that play host to cryptically outlined triangles, squares and circles.


Economic Scene; A Champion Of Fiscal Principle
LEAD: WITH the showdown in Congress over the proposed cut in the capital gains tax fast approaching, Joseph A. Pechman, the economist who for four decades was regarded by both liberals and conservatives as the nation's leading authority on fiscal policy, was not here to play his usual role as ''happy warrior'' in the final phase of the battle.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL; Petrovic's Prognosis
LEAD: Drazen Petrovic of the Portland Trail Blazers should recover faster than expected from back surgery, a doctor said yesterday.


Odds Favoring Terreri For Devils Backup Spot
LEAD: Coach Jim Schoenfeld of the Devils said after tonight's 5-3 exhibition triumph over the Islanders that a decision had been made on who would be the backup goaltender to Sean Burke.


Tim Wengerd, 44, Choreographer And Ex-Martha Graham Dancer
LEAD: Tim Wengerd, a leading dancer in the Martha Graham company until 1982, a choreographer and a founder of the Repertory Dance Theater of Utah, died of AIDS on Sept. 12 at his home in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 44 years old.


Red Sox Win on a Walk
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox have at least tied for third place in the American League East by defeating the Milwaukee Brewers, 5-4, tonight when a reliever, Chuck Crim, walked Rick Cerone with the bases loaded and two out in the bottom of the ninth inning.


Under Attack, Giuliani Calls His Ads 'Fair'
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday angrily defended his criticism of David N. Dinkins's association with the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and said their economic policies and support for unions would bankrupt New York City.


Review/Music; Columbus Home Fom New World as Opera
LEAD: On the towering pedestal that interrupts the flow of traffic along the Paseo de Colon stands a statue of Christopher Columbus, his right arm outstretched.
On Sunday evening that one raised finger seemed to be pointing in the direction of Pittsburgh.


A Call for a Corcoran Resignation
LEAD: Just hours after the trustees of the Corcoran Gallery of Art named a committee to decide the fate of its director, the president of a major museum fund-raising group called for her resignation.


Bolar Hypertension Drug to Remain
LEAD: the Bolar Pharmaceuticals Company said yesterday that its generic hypertension drug would be allowed to remain on the market despite a downgrading of the drug's status by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
On Thursday, the F.D.A. informed Bolar that it had downgraded the generic high-blood-pressure drug because it lacked the data to determine whether it was the therapeutic equivalent of


Sylvia Traube, Psychiatrist, Is Dead at 79
LEAD: Sylvia Gould Traube, a physician and psychiatrist for almost 40 years, died Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.
Dr.
Traube graduated from Boston University's medical school in 1950, after taking time out from her studies to work in the defense industry.
She was an intern at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn and a psychiatric resident at the Veterans' Administration Hospital in Montrose, N.Y.


INSIDE
LEAD:  China's Line Hardens


Zabriski Triumphs in Dodge Open
LEAD: Bruce Zabriski of Oyster Bay, L.I., who played on the PGA Tour without much success last year, is developing a habit this year of winning golf tournaments in New Jersey sponsored by automobile manufacturers.


Prices Paid To Farmers Decline 0.7%
LEAD: Prices farmers received for raw products dropped seven-tenths of a percent from August to September, leaving the monthly average also seventh-tenths of a percent below the level a year earlier, the Agriculture Department said today.


Leading Indicators Post 2d Consecutive Increase
LEAD: A Government index used to forecast the nation's economic course rose three-tenths of 1 percent in August, the second consecutive monthly gain, the Commerce Department said today.


Service on A Trains Is to Resume Tomorrow
LEAD: After spending $1.6 million to remove tons of asbestos-tainted debris, the Transit Authority will resume A train service through midtown tomorrow morning.


Jesse Silberstein, Advocate for Elderly, 77
LEAD: Jesse Silberstein, an advocate for the elderly, died of cancer Wednesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.


Arizona Court Ends Mecham Bid for Office
LEAD: Former Gov.
Evan Mecham today lost a bid to have the Arizona Supreme Court restore him to office and to order the state to pay him more than $600,000 in legal fees and back pay.


Rebels Say They Will Reject Salvadoran Cease-Fire Offer
LEAD: Representatives of guerrillas fighting the Government of El Salvador said today they would not accept even an unconditional cease-fire offer without guarantees for safety and political opportunity for the rebels.


Australian Boys' Choir
LEAD: Two vocal groups from Australia -the Australian Boys' Choir and the Vocal Consort - will make their New York debuts on Oct. 10 at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, 146 West 46th Street.
The Boys' Choir, which celebrates its 50th anniversary this year, has 30 singers from 8 to 14 years old; the 12 members of the Vocal Consort are alumni of the Boys' Choir.


Hispanic Groups Organizing Drive for a Full Census Count
LEAD: In the largest effort ever undertaken by Hispanic Americans to gain political power, advocacy groups are organizing a campaign to turn out the highest possible count in the 1990 census.


Judge Proposes Compromise on Banned Film
LEAD: A judge has said that a 22-year-old ban on the public showing of a film that depicts brutality in a state prison hospital for the mentally ill may be lifted if the faces of many of the inmates are blurred.


Dolphin Suspended
LEAD: Mark Brown, a Miami Dolphins linebacker who expressed bitterness toward management when he ended a two-month contract dispute Tuesday, was suspended without pay yesterday by Coach Don Shula. ''I felt that in the days he's been here, he hasn't given the effort in our practices,'' Shula said. ''This was obvious not only to me but to the defensive coaches as well.


Shopping Center Groups Combine
LEAD: General Growth Management Inc. agreed to acquire the Center Companies in a deal that would create the fourth-largest shopping center management company in the United States.
Terms were not disclosed.


Control Data Searching for A New Chief
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation's chairman and chief executive, Robert M. Price, said yesterday that the company's board had established a committee to select his successor as chief executive - a position he plans to give up in the next three months.


Books of The Times; Two Accounts of What It Means to Be Disabled
LEAD:  Seeing Voices  A Journey Into the World of the Deaf  By Oliver Sacks  Illustrated. 180 pages.
University of California Press. $15.95.
I Raise My Eyes to Say Yes  A Memoir  By Ruth Sienkiewicz-Mercer and Steven B. Kaplan  Illustrated. 225 pages.
A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin. $17.95.


Reading Between Lines Of Toy Warning Labels
LEAD: A toy producer is poised to start warning that one of its products might pose a choking hazard to young children, signaling a major change in the way toys are labeled.


Chilly Days for East Germans Outside Embassy in Prague
LEAD: The rain has gone, giving way to crisp and cold weather, and there is no sign of a resolution to the case of 2,500 or so East Germans camped out on the grounds of the West German Embassy in Prague.


Tracking the Life and Art Of Thelonious Monk
A recurrent image in Charlotte Zwerin's remarkable documentary, ''Thelonious Monk: Straight, No Chaser,'' is of the jazz pianist slowly spinning around in what appear to be deliberate attempts to disorient himself.
Although the film offers no explanation for this penchant, the picture of the pianist whirling like a child playing games with himself is an apt metaphor for his revolutionary piano style.
As the abundant musical soundtrack illustrates, his spare, knotty pianism, with its restless stop-start rhythms and percussive insistence, maintained a perspective on life and art that was defiantly off-center, obsessively exploratory and deeply personal.
The core of the 90-minute movie, which will be shown at Alice Tully Hall tonight at 7 P.M. and which begins its commercial run on Sunday at the 57th Street Playhouse, is taken from 14 hours of black-and-white film shot in the late 1960's by Michael and Christian Blackwood for a cinema verite television special about Monk.
Broadcast only once, in West Germany, the program was never shown again.
The film resurfaced in 1981 when Mr.
Blackwood and Bruce Ricker, the co-producers of ''Straight, No Chaser,'' teamed up with Miss Zwerin.


Review/Film; Antiques Dealer Finds Love and Trouble
LEAD: ''The Girl in a Swing'' has nothing at all to do with the ''The Girl in the Red Velvet Swing,'' the vivid 1955 melodrama about Stanford White's and Harry Thaw's lethal passion for Evelyn Nesbit.
This film is also supposedly about deadly passions, but it is most memorable for all the inexplicable omens and dangling ends that linger after the movie is over.


Overlooked in Virginia: Little Kids
LEAD: As he stood at the conference on American education this week, President Bush saw only dimly the one need that stands out most sharply on the horizon: the youngest children.


Pope's Words on Jews Reverse No Doctrines
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the ''Washington at Work'' article yesterday, about Ronald H. Brown, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, referred incorrectly in some copies to Representative Dan Rostenkowski.
He is from Illinois.


Simmons Raises Stake in Lockheed
LEAD: Harold C. Simmons, the Dallas financier, has raised his stake in the Lockheed Corporation to 10.43 percent from 9.46 percent.


The Uses of Celebrity
LEAD: Jackie Mason is a professional, a gifted comic who has earned considerable celebrity.
What got him into trouble this week was trying to spend that celebrity as an amateur on a very different kind of stage: politics.


Saturday News Quiz
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 46.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a proposal for a Presidentially appointed inspector general for the Central Intelligence Agency referred to Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma incorrectly in some editions.
He is a Democrat.


Thomas Keller, Rowing Official, 64
LEAD: Thomas Keller, president of the International Rowing Federation since 1958, died of a heart attack Thursday night in Monte Carlo.
He was 64 years old.


2d Murder Charge In Hernandez Killing
LEAD: A man described by the police as a middle-level heroin dealer was indicted Thursday in the killing of Maria Hernandez, the Brooklyn woman who fought along with her husband to rid her block of drug dealers.


Review/Film; Soldiers Haunted by Events Of a Forgotten Battlefield
LEAD: ''Shell Shock,'' the term that gives Yoel Sharon's earnest little docudrama its title, isn't a strictly accurate name for an ailment that the Israeli film examines with a studious tenderness.
Gideon (Asher Tsarfati) and Micha (Dan Turgeman), the two Israeli soldiers at the center of the story, both suffer from what is now known clinically as post-traumatic stress disorder.


Metrotech Agrees to Pay $2 Million to Aid Tenants
LEAD: In a settlement that keeps one of New York City's largest real-estate projects on schedule, developers of the Metrotech project in downtown Brooklyn said yesterday that they had agreed to pay $2 million in benefits to a group of tenants who are being displaced.


New Baseball League Receives a Warning
LEAD: Squabbling over players has broken out between major league baseball and the proposed new league, which apparently does not yet have any teams or stadiums.


From the Algonquin, a Talk Show on the Arts
LEAD: In an unusual forum to be heard weekly on public radio in New York and Los Angeles, people in the arts like Jules Feiffer, Edward Albee, Larry McMurtry, Wendy Wasserstein and Vartan Gregorian will discuss various topics in the Rose Room of the Algonquin Hotel.


Senate Vote On the Arts
LEAD: Here is the 62-35 roll-call by which the Senate early this morning tabled and effectively killed an amendment by Senator Jesse Helms supporting a ban on Federal aid for obscene art.
A yes vote was a vote to table and thus kill the amendment, while a no vote was a vote to sustain the amendment.
Voting yes were 43 Democrats and 19 Republicans.


Top-Grade Issues Gain on Wall St.
LEAD: Declining interest rates made Wall Street a fertile environment in the third quarter for American companies seeking to borrow, so long as their bonds were investment grade.


How the G.O.P. Can Nail Down the Black Vote
LEAD: In 1985, New Jersey's Governor, Thomas H. Kean, won 62 percent of the black vote in his re-election bid.
He swept the state's urban areas and crept close to carrying the cities of Newark and Camden.
Was this an aberration or the beginning of a trend that will dissipate the Democratic Party's monopoly on black votes?


Spelling TV Concern May Be Put Up for Sale
LEAD: Spelling Entertainment Inc., responsible for such hit television series as ''Dynasty'' and ''Love Boat,'' said today that it might put itself up for sale.


Prosecutor Bores In as Bakker Testifies
LEAD: Four weeks after suffering a ''panic attack'' that forced a brief halt in his trial, Jim Bakker took the witness stand today to give his version of the meteoric rise and calamitous fall of his religious empire.


Surgery for Belcher
LEAD: Tim Belcher of the Los Angeles Dodgers, who pitched his eighth shutout of the season Wednesday night, had surgery Thursday to remove a bone spur and cartilage chips from his pitching hand.


ICN Biomedicals
LEAD: ICN Biomedicals Inc. of Irvine, Calif., said it would acquire the biomedical business of Flow General Inc. for about $41 million.
ICN will also assume about $25 million in debt.
The biomedical business manufactures and distributes products to research laboratories, pharmaceutical companies and biotechnology companies.


51 Lebanese Legislators Fly To Peace Talk at Saudi Resort
LEAD: Lebanese Christian and Muslim members of Parliament headed for Saudi Arabia today to take part in an Arab-sponsored peace conference in the latest attempt to end their country's 14-year civil war.
But there is skepticism here that they will succeed.


In Carolina Fishing Hamlet, Tired Cleanup Amid Doubts
LEAD: A heavy fog lifted late this morning, and weary townspeople once more began hauling furniture out in the sun to dry and taking up shovels and hoses to remove the muck from their homes.


U.S. Forest Harvest Is Nothing Like the Tropics; Federal Land Habit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gabor Convicted of 3 Charges In Confrontation With Officer
LEAD: A Municipal Court jury today convicted the entertainer Zsa Zsa Gabor of three misdemeanor charges resulting from her confrontation with a police officer who stopped her car last June.


Bridge; World championship play forced the Americans and Canadians to face the 'Multi.'
LEAD: When the world team championships were played recently in Perth, Australia, the American and Canadian players constantly found themselves having to counter the ''Multi,'' a convention that is barred in almost all events controlled by the American Contract Bridge League.


Your Money; Gains-Tax Sales: Caution Advised
LEAD: Thanks to the House of Representatives, investors across the country have visions of capital gains windfalls dancing in their heads.
But before selling any assets in the expectation that gains will be subject to a more favorable tax treatment than under the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which taxes them as ordinary income, investors are well advised to consider the economics of holding versus selling.


Blue Jays Win in 11th and Lead Orioles by 2
LEAD: Lloyd Moseby moved slowly up the line to first base, his eyes on the ball he had just launched toward the ceiling of the Skydome.


The Setback for Advanced TV
LEAD: Proponents of a national effort to make American companies competitive in future television manufacturing are scrambling to regain lost momentum after a decision by the Commerce Department to abandon its plans for a focused initiative on HDTV, as the new technology is called.


Clash on Inspector Is Latest of Many
LEAD: The dispute between Congress and the Central Intelligence Agency over the C.I.A. inspector general's office stems from fundamentally different views of how best to root out wrongdoing and mismanagement at a clannish, fiercely protective agency in which some employees are trained in the art of deception.


Inquiry Seeks Cause of Amtrak Crash    Twelve of the 16 cars and both locomotives were derailed in the accident. (AP)


SENATE DEMOCRATS WORKING TO DEVISE THEIR OWN TAX CUT
LEAD: Democrats in the Senate are searching for a less sweeping reduction in the capital gains tax than the one approved Thursday by the House of Representatives.


Letter: On Ecology; Help Brazil Preserve the Amazon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ford Incentives
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company announced that it would offer cash incentives on certain 1990 car and truck models.
Ford follows the lead of two of its competitors, the General Motors Corporation and the Chrysler Corporation, both of which already offer cash rebates on a variety of 1990 models.
The new plan offers cash rebates varying from $600 on Tempo sedans to $1,250 on the Bronco II sports utility vehicle.


Agents Seize 20 Tons of Cocaine In Raid on Los Angeles Warehouse
LEAD: Breaking a $6 padlock on an unguarded warehouse in the San Fernando Valley, drug agents seized a cache of at least 20 tons of cocaine and more than $10 million in cash today in what they said was the biggest drug haul in history.


In Quest for Pennant, a Racial Milestone
LEAD: Baseball has had its share of thrilling races over the years, but never before have two black managers met on the final weekend, with one of them about to become the first black manager in a league championship series.


Plunk And Yanks Shake the Ho-Hums
LEAD: The fact is, the last three games had a kind of ho-hum feeling to them, creating an urge to watch between yawns and a hope not to get hit by a foul ball.
But in the midst of last night's nothingness at the Stadium, there were some noteworthy events.


Bush Defends Carolina Relief Efforts
LEAD: President Bush today defended his Administration's handling of relief efforts for hurricane victims as he traveled past a vista of wrecked buildings, shattered pine forests and mangled vehicles in this state.


Imperial Ties Loss To Savings Bill
LEAD: Elaborating on a statement made Thursday, the Imperial Corporation of America said new savings and loan legislation forcing it to write down the value of its ''junk bond'' portfolio would mean a net loss in the third quarter of $75 million to $80 million.


This Little Piggy Got None
LEAD: September, and the sun vanishes early.
Chill comes with night, and furnace wants oil, gas, electricity, money, money, money.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cooper Life Sciences Inc., said it had notified Cooper Development Co., Menlo Park, Calif., a developer of health-care products, that because of a delay in reaching an overall settlement with Cooper Cos.
Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., a maker of surgical products, it would re-evaluate its proposed merger with Cooper Development.


Queens Drug Kingpin Reportedly Pleads Guilty
LEAD: In an unusual secret court proceeding, Lorenzo (Fat Cat) Nichols, once described as the dominant power in heroin and cocaine distribution in southeastern Queens, has pleaded guilty to two Federal racketeering-related murder charges, law-enforcement authorities said, adding that Mr.
Nichols is cooperating with investigators.


CHINESE CHIEF SETS HARD POLICY LINE
LEAD: In its most sweeping declaration of policy since leadership changes in June, the Communist Party acknowledged some mistakes today but called for vigilance against what it described as efforts by the West to subvert the Chinese Government and institute capitalism.


Baker Says U.S. Wants Jerusalem To Decide Now on Peace Proposal
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d indicated yesterday that the United States felt it was time for Israel to decide whether or not it stood behind its own peace proposal.


Excerpts From Arts Debate in Senate
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Senate debate Thursday night and early this morning on a proposal to prohibit Federal support for obscene or indecent art.
The comments of Senator John C. Danforth were provided by his office; the other Senators' comments were transcribed by The New York Times through the facilities of C-SPAN.


August A. Busch Jr. Dies at 90; Built Largest Brewing Company
LEAD: August Anheuser Busch Jr., the master showman and irrepressible salesman who turned a small family operation into the world's largest brewing company, died yesterday at his home in suburban St.
Louis County, Mo.
He was 90 years old and had recently been hospitalized with pneumonia.


Trying to Fulfill Some High Expectations
LEAD: The season began with so much expectation and flair, and perhaps too much promise.
There was Frank Baur from little Lafayette College on the cover of Sports Illustrated.


Gradco Systems
LEAD: The chairman of Gradco Systems Inc., Keith B. Stewart, said Thursday that he was ''actively pursuing'' a leveraged buyout of the Irvine, Calif., office automation company.
Mr.
Stewart said no proposal had been submitted to the board of directors and there was no assurance a transaction would occur, but he made the announcement in response to unusual trading activity in the company's stock.


Susumu Yamashita, 84, Mitsubishi Director
LEAD: Susumu Yamashita, a retired director and corporate secretary of Mitsubishi International Corporation, based in Manhattan, died of cardiac arrest Tuesday at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Mendham, N.J.


Big Winnings On 3 Long Shots
LEAD: Three long shots added up to a trifecta payoff of $92,799.40 in the fourth race tonight at the Meadowlands.


Harcourt Brace Stock Plunges
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. stock plunged today amid warnings that the $1.1 billion paid for its theme parks would do little to relieve the publisher's debt.
Harcourt's stock price dropped almost 25.4 percent on the New York Stock Exchange, falling $4.125 a share, to $12.125.
It was the most active issue on the Big Board, with more than 3.6 million shares traded.


No Headline
LEAD: Quotation of the Day


Why Give Times Sq. Precedence Over Other Deteriorating Sites?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Wednesday, showing counties in the Carolinas that had been declared disaster areas after Hurricane Hugo, misidentified a South Carolina county.
It is Horry County, not Norry.


Reviews/Music; A Miniaturist Takes On Beethoven, With Boldness
LEAD: The first two weeks of the New York Philharmonic season at Avery Fisher Hall have offered a curious melange of music.
The music itself wasn't so curious, but instead of two discrete groupings of repertory in two subscription programs, there have been bits and pieces from last week's opening-night gala mixed in with new selections.


Flyers Trade 2, Maybe
LEAD: In what might turn out to be a shrewd piece of maneuvering, the Philadelphia Flyers traded Pete Peeters, a goaltender, and Keith Acton, a center, to the Winnipeg Jets on Thursday for future considerations.
Both players might return to the Flyers as early as Tuesday as the future considerations, although both general managers denied on


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Credit-Card Rates
LEAD: Interest rates on bank credit cards are up an average one-quarter of a percentage point since the beginning of the year, despite the glut of cards in the marketplace.
To retain card holders as rates rise, banks have extended periods for interest-free payments to make their cards more attractive, and many have eliminated annual fees.


U.S. Weighs Dismissing Bloch But Has an Evidence Problem
LEAD: The State Department is weighing the dismissal of Felix S. Bloch, the diplomat under suspicion of espionage, but has run into difficulty because a vital piece of evidence may not be usable in a personnel decision, officials said today.


Hope for Hong Kong
LEAD: Following the bloodbath in Tiananmen Square and the ascendancy of hard-liners in Beijing, British citizens in Hong Kong worried about what might happen to them after the scheduled 1997 reversion of the Crown Colony to Chinese control.
Their anxiety threatened to turn into panic when Margaret Thatcher's Government greeted their plight with indifference and racist declarations.


A New Razor For Gillette
LEAD: The Gillette Company, bruised in recent takeover battles, plans to introduce a new razor next week that the company is touting as a ''revolutionary new shaving system.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.50
9.50
8.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.90
7.89
7.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.87
7.84
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.37
8.76
30-YR.


Dinkins Praises Koch's Police Commissioner


U.S.-China Falling-Out: Much Smoke but No Fire
LEAD: At almost every opportunity, Chinese officials like Teng Teng, the Deputy Minister of Education, like to fulminate about American interference in China's affairs.


Conflict Arises On Jet's Rudder In USAir Crash
LEAD: The flight recorder from the USAir jet that crashed at La Guardia Airport last week shows that the plane's rudder was severely misaligned long before the ill-fated takeoff attempt, Government officials said yesterday.


Reviews/Music
LEAD: The Melodies Of Zimbabwe


Woman Stabbed While Sleeping In Parked Van
LEAD: A New Jersey woman was stabbed in the throat early yesterday morning as she slept in the rear of her van in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, then died as she was driving in search of help, the police said.


Long Drought, Then a Flood
LEAD: An 86-year-old woman whose Social Security files had been lost, depriving her of increased benefits that she should have been receiving for 17 years, received a check for $19,000 in back payments Thursday.
Asked how she would spend the money, the recipient, Irene O'Neil, said: ''I haven't any idea.


Review/Music; From Bits of Jack Benny, a Quasi Opera
LEAD: Some composers struggle for recognition, achieving it only after years or not at all.
Others seem to leap effortlessly to prominence.
Something like that latter career trajectory may be the happy fate of John Moran, a 24-year-old from Lincoln, Neb., who had the good fortune to be befriended by Philip Glass and other New Yorkers and who now finds his ''Jack Benny,'' an hourlong quasi opera, ensconced at the La Mama experimental theater, 74A East Fourth Street, through Oct.


Israelis Cut Jail Terms of 3 Who Beat an Arab to Death
LEAD: The Israeli Army today cut short by three months the jail terms of three soldiers convicted in the fatal beating of a Palestinian in custody.


Heroin Smuggler Is Given 27 Years
LEAD: A man described by prosecutors as one of the world's largest heroin smugglers was sentenced yesterday to 27 years in prison with no possibility of parole.


Chen Boda, 85, Leader of Chinese Purges in 60's
LEAD: Chen Boda, a senior aide to Mao Zedong who was convicted in 1981 of crimes during the Cultural Revolution, died on Sept. 20 at his home in Beijing, the Hong Kong press reported Thursday.
He was 85 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about a series of lectures on olive oil at the Mid-Manhattan Library misstated the telephone number for information.
It is (212) 340-0944.


Ewing's Blocks to Help A Children's Charity
LEAD: Patrick Ewing of the Knickerbockers, whose annual income reportedly exceeds more than $3 million, will divest himself of part of that fortune by donating $100 to the Children's Health Fund every time he blocks a shot during the regular National Basketball Association season.
The 7-foot center from Georgetown University blocked 281 shots in 80 games last season and has averaged about 230 a season in his four years with the


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 14.


Bogota Chief, at U.N., Asks U.S. to Curb Drug Demand
LEAD: President Virgilio Barco Vargas of Colombia called on the United States and other nations today to curb the demand for drugs and to cut other assistance that he said the countries were giving to drug producers in the third world.


Explosion Disrupts Service On Seventh Avenue IRT Line
LEAD: An explosion behind a circuit breaker room in the Seventh Avenue IRT line in lower Manhattan last night cut subway power lines, disrupting service for almost three hours between Chambers and 96th Streets, Transit Authority and Fire Department officials said.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping; With Broken Electronic Equipment
LEAD: Does it pay to fix dead or ailing electronic gear when the warranty has run out?
Even though repair prices tend to be high, the cost can be worth it if the circumstances are right.
Each problem is individual.


Stocks Mixed on Decline in Dollar
LEAD: Stocks ended mixed yesterday, restrained by a softer dollar.


Noviye Gromyki Journal; Once Again, Chernobyl Takes a Toll
LEAD: Reaping the whirlwind of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster is proving a far more harrowing task than the farmers of Byelorussia first feared.


Patents; Producing Hormones In Farm Animals
LEAD: Scientists affiliated with the Salk Institute of Biological Studies, a nonprofit research organization in San Diego, have patented a method of producing hormones in genetically engineered farm animals.


Catherine CosentinoMarried in Phoenix
LEAD: Catherine M. Cosentino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Cosentino of Massapequa Park, L.I., was married yesterday in Phoenix to Robert F. Boyer Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boyer of Oaklandon, Ind.
The Rev.
Robert Skagan officiated at St.
Thomas the Apostle Roman Catholic Church.


Aquino Is Resolute on Marcos-Burial Ban
LEAD: Rejecting new appeals from newspaper editorials and many politicians, President Corazon C. Aquino reiterated today that the family of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos would not be permitted to bring his body to the Philippines for burial.


Dollar Falls On Selling By Allies
LEAD: After a week of relentless effort to lower the value of the dollar, the United States and its economic allies succeeded yesterday in forcing the currency below key levels against the West German mark and the Japanese yen.


U.S. Forest Harvest Is Nothing Like the Tropics; Cathedral Pines
LEAD: To the Editor:


Free chamber Music Series
LEAD: A free series of Friday chamber music concerts sponsored by the Juilliard School begins on Oct. 13 at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center.
The concert will feature the Cardinal Brass Quintet in a program of works by Malcolm Arnold, Britten, Mozart and Franck.
Concerts in the series are scheduled through May 2.


Adm. Crowe Takes His Last Salute as Top Military Official


A New Pepsi Adds Caffeine
LEAD: The Pepsi-Cola Company next month will begin test-marketing Pepsi A.M., a cola drink with about 28 percent more caffeine an ounce than regular Pepsi but 77 percent less than coffee or tea.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5  Are free rides hurting Argentina?
Although subsidies and favors have become a cornerstone of Argentine life, they are being scrutinized for cuts by the new Government.
Page 1


Judge in Garcia Trial Made Faces And Ruled Unfairly, Lawyer Says
LEAD: Representative Robert Garcia's lawyer complained Thursday that the Federal judge who is presiding over Mr.
Garcia's bribery trial made faces during defense presentations to the jury and ruled unfairly against the defense, according to a court transcript released yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Evernden Beats Chang: Kelly Evernden of New Zealand scored the biggest upset of his career yesterday, beating second-seeded Michael Chang, 6-0, 6-1, to move into the semifinals of the Volvo of San Francisco tournament.
It was the worst defeat the 17-year old French Open champion has suffered in his pro career.


Kevin Roche Honored For Redesign of Zoo
LEAD: The architect Kevin Roche has been awarded the Brendan Gill Prize for his redesign of the Central Park Zoo.
The award, sponsored by the Municipal Art Society, is the second given for contributions to the quality of life in the city; the recipient last year was Rudolph Burckhardt, a photographer and film maker.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 1989
LEAD:  The Economy


Treasury Issues Recover After Early Drop
LEAD: Many banks borrowed excess reserves, also known as Federal funds, from other banks and institutions yesterday, to show lower liabilities on their third-quarter statements, sending the Federal funds rate well above 9 percent briefly.
That, along with a weaker dollar, depressed the prices of Treasury securities early in the day, dealers said.


Wheat at 3-Month Highs; Corn and Soybeans Retreat
LEAD: Wheat futures prices climbed to three-month highs yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after a United States Department of Agriculture report indicating United States wheat stocks were about 80 million bushels below market expectations.


Thornburgh Loses Court Ruling on Secrets in Iran-Contra Case
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Richmond ruled today that the Attorney General may not seek a review of decisions on the disclosure of classified information that were made by a trial court in an Iran-contra case.


A GUILTY VERDICT FOR ABORTION FOE
LEAD: The director of an anti-abortion group today was found guilty of trespassing and illegal assembly in a demonstration at an Atlanta abortion clinic during the 1988 Democratic National Convention.


Tennessee and Auburn Have Something to Prove
LEAD: Johnny Majors, an all-America tailback at Tennessee from 1954 to 1956, was gleefully welcomed home to Knoxville in 1977 as the anticipated savior of a downtrodden football program.
The coach arrived fresh from leading undefeated Pittsburgh to the top national ranking in 1976.


Curbs on 'Medicaid Mills' Draw Criticism
LEAD: At a doctor's basement office in Washington Heights, a line of 50 people stretched up the stairs and out onto Broadway.
Medicaid records indicate that the doctor spends an average of less than two minutes per patient, diagnosing nearly everybody as suffering from the same form of hypertension and needing a $45 prescription.


Campeau Stores Deny Crisis Reports
LEAD: Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores, the two American retail subsidiaries of the Campeau Corporation, said yesterday that they were paying for merchandise with cash from operations and borrowed money and that they should be able to meet their needs through the end of the year.


Savimbi Is to Urge U.S. To Join Talks on Angola
LEAD: The Angolan guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi, who is to visit Washington next week, intends to ask the Bush Administration to mediate an end to Angola's 14-year civil war.


Texas Insurer May Bar Stake
LEAD: Rosewood Financial Inc. and its president, Mark W. Hobbs, said yesterday that they hoped to raise their stake in the First Executive Corporation to a commanding 29.7 percent from 9.7 percent, but analysts said the insurer's chairman, Fred Carr, would probably try to block the attempt.


Soviet Troops Exposed to Atomic Test in '54
LEAD: "After the atomic strike, there were not only no landmarks left on the terrain, but the area itself became unrecognizable," the newspaper said.


Patents; Quigg Is Resigning
LEAD: Donald J. Quigg announced this week that he was resigning as Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher had previously been reported to have decided to replace Mr.
Quigg, who became commissioner in 1985.
Attorneys close to the Patent Office believe the White House will nominate Harry F.


Not-So-Petite Foot Is Not Alone
LEAD: Are American feet getting bigger?
Apparently they are.
Stores are carrying larger shoe sizes than ever before.
And now a woman who wears a size 11 can find stylish footwear in most department stores.
Why are feet growing?
Anatomists, physicians and manufacturers say Americans are getting taller and heavier, and feet come in proportion to body size.


Looking for the New Among 1990 Cars
LEAD: ''New'' and ''improved,'' two of the most overused words in automotive parlance, are being invoked once more this autumn as manufacturers dangle their 1990 models before a driving public that may be less expectant than ever before.


Environmentalists' Boat Arrives in New York


Low-Smoke Cigarette
LEAD: Philip Morris, the largest American cigarette manufacturer, introduced a cigarette Thursday that it said emitted 70 percent less smoke from the lighted end than most comparable brands.


U.S.-Style Personnel Moves Are Jolting Japanese Banks
LEAD: Japanese financial institutions, having developed American-style merger specialists, are suddenly finding themselves the targets of American-style personnel shake-ups.


NEIGHBORS THWART NARCOTICS CLINICS
LEAD: Neighborhood opposition has eclipsed shortages of money as the biggest obstacle to opening drug-treatment clinics in New York, treatment experts say.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Sports People column yesterday about the George Foreman-Gerry Cooney heavyweight fight on Jan. 15 misstated the site.
It is Convention Hall in Atlantic City.


Anne S. Loftus, Community Board Manager, 64
LEAD: Anne S. Loftus, district manager for Community Board 12, which covers the area from 155th Street to the northern tip of Manhattan, died of a heart attack Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 64 years old.
Mrs.
Loftus, a native New Yorker, had held the post since October 1980.
She was in charge of monitoring the delivery of city services and conducted monthly meetings with the representatives of city agencies to discuss neighborhood needs.


Sonics and Gaze Agree on Contract; Mullin Stays a Warrior
LEAD: Andrew Gaze, whose long-range shooting helped Seton Hall University climb to within a point of winning the national collegiate basketball championship last April, will sign a professional contract with the Seattle SuperSonics next week.


Dickerson Emerges on 50-50 List
LEAD: For the first time in Eric Dickerson's career, the star runner is going into a game listed as questionable, or 50-50 to play.


T.A.C. Urges Cooperation
LEAD: The president of The Athletics Congress said yesterday that the recommendations of its Athletes Advisory Committee, including the idea of appointing an independent investigator to look into drug use, were similar to ideas favored by the T.A.C. leadership.


Submarine Runs Aground
LEAD: A new nuclear submarine, the Pennsylvania, ran aground early this afternoon as it was entering Port Canaveral, but no damage was reported and tugs freed the craft about two hours later, the Navy said.
The 560-foot 16,600-ton vessel, equipped to fire Trident missiles, was commissioned Sept. 9 in New Groton, Conn.


Northwest Deal Reached, but KLM Objects
LEAD: Bowing to pressure from the Bush Administration, the investment group that has taken over Northwest Airlines agreed today to reduce the equity held by KLM, the Dutch airline, and to restrict KLM's power on Northwest's board.


Kremlin Confronted on Baltic Recruits
LEAD: The Lithuanian Legislature today called on the authorities in Moscow to allow Lithuanian military recruits to do their mandatory service in their homeland.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Pulaski Day Parade, Fifth Avenue between 26th and 52d Streets will be closed tomorrow from noon to 4 P.M.


Bennett Chastised for Comments on 'Pap'
LEAD: The White House chastised William J. Bennett today for speaking his mind about what he called the ''pap'' delivered by some of the nation's governors at their education conference with President Bush this week.


Fixed-Rate Mortgage Up
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.16 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
That rate was up from a rate of 10.03 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.70 percent this week, the same rate as the week before, Freddie Mac said.


Fiery 'Aida' at the Met
LEAD: Some unexpected excitement flared in the fourth act of ''Aida'' at the Metropolitan Opera House Thursday night, when one of the enormous braziers perched on tripods on either side of the stage flamed up like an outdoor grill with too much charcoal lighter fluid.


For Argentines, the Free Ride Is Very Much the Way of Life
LEAD: Soon after Alberto Trezza was named president of the Argentine railroad system, he took the overnight train to Bahia Blanca, the country's main port city.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 4 about the nomination of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro for president in Nicaragua described the Somoza family's assumption of power incorrectly.
The United States Marines withdrew from Nicaragua in 1933 after helping to install Gen.


Senate Would Speed Reparations To Survivors of Internment Camps
LEAD: After an emotional debate, the Senate voted today to speed and guarantee the payment of reparations to Japanese-Americans who were interned during World War II.


Review/Music; Debut of Violin-Piano Duo
LEAD: Lucie Robert, a violinist, and Jeffrey Cohen, a pianist, are married, are both on the faculty of the Manhattan School of Music, and have been performing as a concert duo since 1981.
At their New York debut performance on Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, it was evident from the outset that they were not a violinist and accompanist, but a true chamber music duo.


During Public Wake, the Un-rich Honor Marcos
LEAD: When Ferdinand E. Marcos fled Manila three and a half years ago for exile here, his presidential briefcase was empty but for a Philippine flag.


Compromise Reached on Spotted Owl
LEAD: A House-Senate conference committee today approved a compromise meant to protect the spotted owl while allowing the logging that endangers its habitat in the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest.


Navy Reports Encounter With a Soviet Ship
LEAD: A Soviet warship fired in the direction of a United States fighter plane last week in the Mediterranean, the Navy said today, describing the incident as purely accidental.


About New York; Wagner Dynasty Is Inspired By Service Ideal
LEAD: ''I'll tell you a funny story,'' the Mayor said.


Man Shot in Subway; Suspect Is Arrested
LEAD: A Manhattan man was shot yesterday when he tried to stop two men from stealing his wife's handbag, the police said.


Withhold Aid to Somalian Government
LEAD: To the Editor:


Restored Nyack Theater Named for Helen Hayes
LEAD: The Tappan Zee Playhouse, a historic turn-of-the-century theater in Nyack, N.Y., that was severely damaged by several fires in the late 1970's, will be restored and reopened by early 1991 as the Helen Hayes-Tappan Zee Performing Arts Center.


Patents; Advances In Conductor Materials
LEAD: ResearcherS at the International Business Machines Corporation have won patent approval for superconductor materials that are said to operate at higher temperatures than any other materials developed thus far, as well as for the process to make the superconductors.


Conferees Reject Helms Proposal To Restrict Financing of the Arts
LEAD: A House and Senate conference committee today rejected a proposal to prohibit Federal financing of art that violates broadly defined moral standards.


Why Give Times Sq. Precedence Over Other Deteriorating Sites?; Try Movable Facades
LEAD: To the Editor:


Teachers Praise Bush's Effort to Set a New Education Agenda
LEAD: School superintendents, union leaders and teachers were virtually unanimous yesterday in praising the efforts of President Bush and the nation's governors in setting a national agenda for education.


Mets Make Late Dash for Second
LEAD: The Mets, maligned and mauled lately, made a late dash toward second place tonight and passed some personal milestones on the way as they swept a doubleheader from the Pittsburgh Pirates behind the powerful pitching of Frank Viola and David Cone.


In Scarsdale, an After-Dinner Speech on Golf and Racism
LEAD: When Earl G. Graves, the editor and publisher of Black Enterprise magazine, was asked to help begin this year's local United Way drive, ''we were hoping for an evening of interest and excitement,'' said Florence David, the chapter's executive director.


Why Give Times Sq. Precedence Over Other Deteriorating Sites?; Not Porn Theaters
LEAD: To the Editor:


