POSTINGS: 46 Stories on East 88th; High There, New Neighbor!
LEAD: The apartment building that General Atlantic Realty is erecting on the former site of the Children's Aid Society will be tall.
Not Twin Tower tall, not even Trump Tower tall, but its 46 stories will make it a giant for the southwest corner of the 88th Street-First Avenue intersection.


Simple, Sophisticated Tuscan Fare
LEAD: ALTHOUGH he has two successful restaurants to his credit, Pino Luongo maintains that the best Italian cooking is found at home.


3 Die in Explosion at Brazilian Diplomat's House
LEAD: Three teen-agers were killed and another youth was critically injured today in a garage explosion at the home of a Brazilian Embassy employee, the police said.


Susanna N. Gioia,Design Assistant, To Wed in May
LEAD: The engagement of Susanna Natalia Gioia to Anthony Giordano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Giordano Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J., has been made known by her parents, Iris Gioia and Emilio Gioia, both of New York.
A May wedding is planned.


Wary Walsh Runs Down His Checklist
LEAD: Bill Walsh has made his list and checked everything twice, yet he still cannot escape the haunting feeling that maybe his San Francisco 49ers ought to try Plan B instead of A, or maybe even C or D or E. San Francisco (10-6) will play the Minnesota Vikings (11-5) on Sunday in Candlestick Park (4 P.M., Channel 2 in New York) in a National


Many Metals Are Becoming Precious
LEAD: WHEN the National Association of Business Economists reported recently that its members were pessimistic about near-term business growth and fearful that inflationary pressures were building, they confirmed something that the Quality Plumbing and Heating Company in St.
Paul, Minn., had been feeling for months.


U.N. Council Unable To Adopt Guidelines For a Namibia Force
LEAD: The Security Council today failed to agree on guidelines for a peacekeeping force to supervise elections in Namibia.
The deadlock was seen as a setback to hopes for a smooth transition to independence in the territory, also known as South-West Africa.


Martha B. Weyl,Librarian, Weds E. W. Kenworthy
LEAD: Martha B. Weyl of New York, a former librarian and bookbinder, was married yesterday to Edwin W. Kenworthy of Washington, a retired reporter for The New York Times.
The ceremony took place at the Fifteenth Street Friends Meeting House in New York.
The couple were attended by their children and grandchildren.


In Washington Today, There's No Dodging The Tax Issue
LEAD: ALTHOUGH President-elect Bush has repeated his ''no new taxes'' pledge so often and so categorically as to give pause to even confirmed cynics, the assumption among many Republicans and Democrats in Congress is that before 1990 he will find himself signing legislation that does in fact raise taxes.


Leaders Trade Smiles On U.S. and Soviet TVSection 1;
LEAD: In his third and final exchange of televised New Year's greetings with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Reagan will tell the Soviet people that "the world is safer than it was a year ago."


DOWNTOWN, WHERE THE ACTION WAS
LEAD:  UNION SQUARE  By Meredith Tax.  437 pp. New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: Kirk Gibson.
He inspired a wounded team to win the World Series over the heavily favored Oakland Athletics.
JOSH HOWLEY  Short Hills, N.J.


Long Island Interview: Ralph Donnelly; A Movie Impresario Assays Changing Tastes
LEAD: RALPH DONNELLY of Merrick is considered one of the pre-eminent experts on the art and science of showing motion pictures.
During the last 35 years he has booked films for some of the country's largest theater chains.
He is the executive vice president of City Cinemas, which owns 14 movie houses in Manhattan, including Cinemas 1 and 2, the Paris Theater, the 68th Street Playhouse, the Festival Theater and the 86th Street East


The Man With the Blue Velvet Voice
LEAD: Two years ago, when Bruce Springsteen inducted Roy Orbison into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame, he paid the Texan-born star the ultimate compliment. ''In '75, when I went into the studio to make 'Born to Run,' '' Mr.
Springsteen said, ''I wanted to make a record with words like Bob Dylan that sounded like Phil Spector, but most of all I wanted to sing like Roy Orbison.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


Rona Pinkus Marries Joseph Forstadt
LEAD: The marriage of Rona Lefkowitz Pinkus to Joseph Lawrence Forstadt took place last night at the couple's home in New York.
Rabbi Gunter Hirschberg officiated.


Regulations May Better Environment
LEAD: Two new regulations intended to improve New York's environment will go into effect with the New Year.


Julian Sebastian Bell To Marry Justin Day
LEAD: Justin Chappell Day, an associate director of the Industrial Bank of Japan International Ltd., and Julian Sebastian Bell, a manager of international stockbroking at SG Warburg &amp; Company Ltd., both in London, are planning a spring wedding.


Violent Racism Attracts New Breed: Skinheads
LEAD: There are four of them, and they dress in a manner best described as bristling: hair close-cropped, heavy boots with trousers bloused, black leather jackets and epaulets.
They wear ties, and the look is neat, but a little Germanic, circa 1939.
Two have earrings, but they say that is not part of the look, the skinhead look.


POSTINGS: Architectural Roots; 11 Hotels For Budapest
LEAD: When did your architect grandfather leave Hungary for New York City? asked the Gotham-centric questioner.
Richard Roth, the architect, laughed.
Imri Roth left his homeland in the 1880's and headed straight for Chicago.
The Second City, Richard Roth explained, was preparing for a World's Fair.
Only in 1897 did Imri - by then Emery - arrive in New York to establish, in 1902, Emery Roth &amp;


Miss Amiot, Employment Manager, To Wed Robert Stuart Hull in July
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Amiot Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., have made known the engagement of their daughter Stephanie L'Abbe Amiot to Robert Stuart Hull, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd N. Hull of Greenwich.
The couple plan a July wedding.
Miss Amiot, a graduate of Denison University, received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Columbia University.


Pilgrim Reactor Restarted After 3-Year Shutdown
LEAD: The Pilgrim nuclear reactor began low-power testing Friday after receiving final Federal clearance nearly three years after it was shut down and labeled one of the country's worst-run power plants.


Bondholder Insurance Against Takeover Loss
LEAD: To the Editor:


CLOSING OF BASES IS AN OPENING SHOT
LEAD: If the independent commission on military bases has its way, the closing of bases it has just recommended will be only the beginning of a long process to close or consolidate many more bases.


Some Dental Hygienists Seek Incentives
LEAD: LINDA BAER has been a dental hygienist for 30 years, but she spends most of her time now selling advertising for a newspaper.
According to Ms.
Baer and other members of the Westchester Dental Hygienists' Association, a component of the American Dental Hygiene Asociation, the field of dental hygiene - which they love - lacks incentives.


Legal Maneuvers Delay New Rules on Pesticides
LEAD: New state regulations requiring public notice when pesticides are applied will not be enforced for the time being because of legal complications, according to the State Department of Environmental Conservation.


North Subpoenas Face Fight by White House
LEAD: The White House and the Justice Department have begun drafting court documents seeking to overturn subpoenas issued to President Reagan and Vice President George Bush for their courtroom testimony in the Iran-contra conspiracy trial of Oliver L. North, Administration officials said today.


Days of Wine And Moses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Black-Eyed Peas For the New Year
LEAD: A STAPLE of traditional Southern cooking, like grits and corn meal, black-eyed peas are heavily seasoned with myth and memories.
This is one reason why many Southerners keep explaining their appeal to people who never asked. ''They're just so satisfying and good,'' a Kentuckian said, ''Each pea is like a tiny, juicy pork chop!


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  JOHNNY APPLESEED  Retold and illustrated by Steven Kellogg.
Unpaged.
New York:  Morrow Junior Books. $12.95.


Santa On the Steps
LEAD: To the Editor:


Telling the Tales of Siena's Golden Age
LEAD: ''Painting in Renaissance Siena: 1420-1500'' at the Metropolitan Museum is a glorious affair.
Even in a season that has seen one great exhibition after another, worldwide, this one is a nonpareil.
Moreover, the art that we see there is in the highest degree an unstandardized art - one that keeps us continually on the alert, thinking new thoughts, dreaming new dreams and on fire with speculation.


ACROSS THE BORDER AND WORLDS APART
LEAD: LIMITS TO FRIENDSHIP  The United States and Mexico.
By Robert A. Pastor and Jorge G. Castaneda.  415 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Mother Is Seized in Attempt To Kill Her Children, 5 and 2
LEAD: A Windham woman has been charged with trying to kill her two young sons in a series of incidents that took place last month, the police said.


Jet Set Helps Bring a Business Boom To Argentina's First Family of Polo
LEAD: It may be impolitic to recount this now, but there is a well-founded story that Prince Philip of Britain once expressed a willingness to trade the Falkland Islands to Argentina for two great polo players.


Leaky Reactor Pool Called Risky
LEAD: A leaking pool of water containing highly radioactive fuel at the Nine Mile Point 1 nuclear plant could lead to a major accident, a consumer group has charged.


Why Rolls-Royce Loves Its Bentley Photos of Malcolm Hart, director of sales and marketing of Rolls Royce Motor Cars, with a Bentley Turbo R (NYT/Jonathan Player); working at the bottom of a car at the Crewe factory, which turns out Bentley and Rolls-Royce models; checking the hides (NYT); graph of number of Bentleys sold, 1970-1988* (*Estimate) (Source: Company reports)
LEAD: The automotive accolades - ''hot,'' ''sporty,'' ''an incredible driving experience'' - are usually showered on the likes of Ferrari, Lamborghini and Porsche.
But now, in auto magazines and among car enthusiasts, the praises are being heaped on a Bentley, long considered the stately first cousin of the Rolls


Reserves of Canniness
LEAD:  BELLMAN AND TRUE  Starring Bernard Hill (at center in photo), Kieran O'Brien, Richard  Hope (right), Ken Bones (left).
Directed by Richard Loncraine. 1987.
Cannon.  121 minutes. $79.95.
Rated R.


Readers Speak Out on N.F.L. Parity
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Mission: Hospital Care For the Poor
LEAD: A last-minute agreement by Governor Kean with Senate and Assembly leaders on a two-year extension of New Jersey's Uncompensated Care Trust Fund has averted a crisis for many inner-city hospitals.
This trust fund helps pay the hospital bills of poor and uninsured people by spreading the cost among the 89 acute-care hospitals in the state through a surcharge on all hospital bills.


Dragons, Tiny Treasures and Pasmore
LEAD: IN New Haven, there is ferment on both sides of Chapel Street, with the Yale University Art Gallery host to two traveling exhibitions and the Yale Center for British Art the scene of a retrospective that will also travel.
The magnum opus at the Art Gallery is ''In Pursuit of the Dragon: Traditions and Transitions in Ming Ceramics,'' which comes from the Idemitsu Museum of Arts in Tokyo.


Readers Speak Out on N.F.L. Parity
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Police Switch to Baton
LEAD: THE police force here is replacing its nightstick with a more sophisticated plastic baton, as part of what Deputy Chief Stephen A. Poloka calls ''an effort to build a new relationship with the community,'' after a summer of tension between residents and the police.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  STAGING TURGENEV  ''Nothing Sacred,'' the third adaptation in the last five years of Turgenev's ''Fathers and Sons,'' may be seen at the Hartford Stage Company from Friday to Feb. 4.
A version by Brian Freel was produced last year at Long Wharf in New Haven under the original title, and Constance Cox's version, ''Spring at Merino,'' was performed at the Ivoryton


Milwaukee Seeks N.H.L. Franchise
LEAD: Mayor John Norquist has said one of his priorities for 1989 will be pushing National Hockey League officials to put a team in Milwaukee.


N.C. State Tops Iowa
LEAD: Tyrone Jackson ran for two touchdowns as North Carolina State exploded for three quick second-period scores today, then held off Iowa for a 28-23 victory in the Peach Bowl, a game marred by 14 turnovers, 7 by each team.


Jersey Fears Another Year of Mud As It Awaits the Race for Governor
LEAD: After the nasty political campaigns of 1988, is it possible for a dozen politicians running for Governor of New Jersey to stick to the issues and avoid slinging mud?


CONCOCTING A FORMULA OF PAPER, TYPE AND COLORS
LEAD: Whenever a magazine publisher and editor decide to redesign, they usually do it to keep a step ahead of the competition or to make a distinctive mark. ''One reason to redesign is when the raw materials you are using are old-fashioned,'' said Jan White, a communications design consultant based in Westport, Conn.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 1, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Bantam, $5.95.) A bond trader caught in
the jungles of New York.
2
7
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King.
(Signet/NAL, $5.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt
to unearth mysterious artifacts causes havoc.


3 Concerts Compete to Open New Year
LEAD: HOW about a New Year's resolution that somebody devise a clearinghouse for cultural events?
Of course, it is impossible to avoid all scheduling conflicts at the height of the season.
But time and again one is forced to choose between programs simply because no one thought to present them on different days or even at different hours.


TALKING: Storage Bins; Personal Spaces Gaining
LEAD: THE communal basement storage room - the apartment dweller's version of the attic - is undergoing a radical transformation.
The traditional mountain of worn trunks, rusty bicycles and other household ephemera is giving way to a neater, more carefully supervised alternative - the personal storage bin.


Miss Egbert to Wed R. W. Brokaw 3d
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Cook Egbert of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Huntting Egbert to Roberts Wyckoff Brokaw 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brokaw Jr. of Greenville, Del.
The couple plan to marry next month.


Court Declines to Intervene In UMass Election Dispute
LEAD: A judge has declined to become involved in a dispute over the election of a Communist as a student leader at the University of Massachusetts.


India and Pakistan Sign Agreement


Busy Hands In Different Ways
LEAD: Poor Mrs. Tilley (''Model's Success Is in Her Hands,'' Nov. 27).


When It Is Important to Be the First
LEAD: ANY hobbyist can be a No. 1 collector, and today would be a good day to start planning.
The reference, of course, is to the first stamps issued by each postal authority.
Such a collection is a popular area and, with imagination, need not be expensive.


U.S. Fines Robertson Campaign $25,000 for Election Law Breach
LEAD: Pat Robertson's Presidential campaign committee has agreed to pay $25,000 in fines for violations of Federal election law, the Federal Election Commission says.


Venezuela Suspends Payments of Debt Principal
LEAD: Venezuela, the fourth-biggest debtor in Latin America, announced today that it was suspending principal payments on nearly all of its $30.3 billion in foreign debt.


Brown-Bagging It to Buckingham
LEAD: MY INTENTION WAS TO become a great novelist, not a foreign correspondent, so naturally I never expected to end up in Westminster Abbey covering the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.


As A Tree Is Razed, Memories Are Plucked From Each Branch
LEAD: THE Christmas tree stayed up until Jan. 12.
It is my nostalgic duty to take it down each year and I postpone it always.
It is so beautiful.


STREETSCAPES: The Studebaker Building; Just Off Times Square, A Car Factory With Offices
LEAD: BUILT for the venerable carriage manufacturer as it was entering the automobile business in New York in 1902, the Studebaker Building recently lost its elaborate cornice and with it, almost certainly, any possible landmark protection against demolition.


PINS Laws Don't Make Sense
LEAD: In ''Letters to the Long Island Editor'' (Oct. 30), I read letters concerning the PINS laws.
As I understand it, a child 16 or older cannot be forced to live at home or attend counseling or therapy program regardless of where or how the child is living.
Yet, the parents of this child are financially responsible for it until said child reaches 21.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Credit Card Widens Plan For Car Renters


DATABANK: January 1, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,009.4
$3,988.4
$3,831.1
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.0
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
169.1
$162.7
$149.5


To the Editor:
LEAD: Apropos of your symposium, please relay to Alice Adams that there does exist a female '' 'Quixote' enthusiast.'' I number ''Don Quixote'' among my favorite books.
Since I too am an avid fan of Chekhov, please suggest to her that maybe if she read more than ''a page or two'' of Cervantes, she might change her mind.


Nintendo Fans
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Truth About Clara Bow
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chilean Military Vows to Try To Halt Trials of Journalists
LEAD: Chile's military Government said Friday that it would seek to put a rapid end to the trials of about 40 journalists who face charges before military and other courts.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Houston
LEAD: Visitors who haven't been back to Houston since the giddy boom years of the early 1980's may be surprised by how much has been added to the city in its lean years.


Moving Beyond Patter and Persistence Photos of Tyrone Howze, a salesman for Nabisco Brands, checking inventory at a Michigan supermarket (NYT/Peter Yates); Gary Johnson, a sales representative for the Perceptron Corporation of Farmington Hills, Mich., with a computerized measuring system he sells (NYT/Peter Yates); Kristin Haser, who sells paper products for the Arnold Corporation in Pittsburgh, leaves a customer a holiday case of beer (NYT/Scott Goldsmith)
LEAD: For years, it was mostly a matter of amiability, portability and motivation.
But these days, the job of the ''traveling salesman'' is undergoing some subtle but important changes.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  UNDERCOVER: The Secret Lives of a Federal Agent.
By Donald Goddard. (Times Books, $19.95.) Michael Levine was a big, tough, streetwise kid from the Bronx.
With a penchant for settling arguments with his fists, he could easily have found a permanent home in one of New York's finer penal institutions.


Financiers Sense an Opportunity In the Savings Industry's Distress
LEAD: Many of the nation's most troubled savings institutions are being rescued these days by many of the nation's savviest and most aggressive financiers, corporate executives and takeover experts.


For Miami News, 92, It's 'Farewell'
LEAD: What may have been the last issue of The Miami News rolled off the presses this morning, no last-minute deals having been made to keep the city's oldest daily newspaper alive.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: The best performers were Dave Winfield, Jose Canseco and Frank Viola.
Also: Patrick Ewing, Darryl Strawberry and Mario Lemieux.
ALPHONSE MAZZINA  Union City, N.J.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Maine Band Wins An Invitation


A Year of Projects: When to Do What
LEAD: FOR most homeowners, household maintenance and improvement are perpetual activities, as there always seems to be something that needs doing.


KNAVES IN THAILAND
LEAD:  THE PARADISE EATER  By John Ralston Saul.  270 pp.
New York:  McGraw-Hill Book Company.


A Big Week
LEAD: Last week's National Basketball Association player of the week and the league's seventh-leading scorer found a nice little break in the schedule.
So Clyde Drexler, the Portland Trail Blazer guard, went back to New Orleans, the city where he was born, and on Friday married Gaynell Floyd, an attorney he met on a blind date last winter.


Starting the New Year
LEAD:  Debuts at the Pierre


'HERE I AM, BLACK AS YOU SEE ME'
LEAD:  BALM IN GILEAD  Journey of a Healer.
By Sara Lawrence Lightfoot.
Illustrated. 321 pp.
New York:  A Merloyd Lawrence Book/  Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $18.95.


Budd Has No Regrets
LEAD: Although she said she would like to run again for Britain, Zola Budd, the world-class middle-distance runner, said she would never denounce apartheid despite pressure from opponents of the racial-separation laws of her native South Africa.


Swing and Sway
LEAD: The New York Swing Dance Society presents swing dancing to a live orchestra Sundays at 8 P.M. at the Cat Club, 76 East 13th Street.
Among the groups that will perform this month are the Stan Rubin Band, Spanky Davis and the Jimmy Ryan Allstars, and the Widespread Jazz Orchestra.
Information: 713-5148.


Turkey Takes On The Guise ofYear-Round Fare
LEAD: TRADITIONALLY turkey is either roasted or served as leftovers, in a sandwich, a salad or casserole.
That is no longer the case.


FICTION
LEAD:  SNOWSTORMS IN A HOT CLIMATE.
By Sarah Dunant. (Random House, $15.95.) First published in Great Britain, this psychological thriller travels well.
While American readers may not find the settings - cramped, gritty New York City and the vast, sparkling California coast, among others - particularly exotic, they will find the writing refreshingly economical and astute.


In New Jersey, the State Tries to Rein In Local Sprawl
LEAD: NEW JERSEY, the most densely populated state, is also one of the most fragmented.
This is one reason why so much attention is being paid to the state's attempts to coordinate the activities of all 567 towns and cities and devise a comprehensive vision of the state's future.


Taking the Pulse of New American Architecture
LEAD: In some ways Minneapolis at this moment may be the best place in which to ponder the essence of Los Angeles.
No, it is not a matter of using sub-zero weather to instill a proper respect for palm trees and smog, but the fact that the Walker Art Center here, just two years after initiating a magnificent retrospective of the work of Los Angeles's pre-eminent architect, Frank Gehry, has now mounted an exhibition of the work of Franklin D.


An Easy Approach To the New Catalogues
LEAD: TIME off for a Happy New Year.  A Bit of Everything


Going Home Again: But Where Is 'Home'?
LEAD: MY parents moved to Long Island in the spring of 1960.
With little deliberation, they rented a house in Commack.


Potpourri
LEAD: If there is one common thread that promises to run through this year's fashion, it is constantly increasing prices.
Aside from that, the looks and directions will be diffuse.
Here are just a few examples.


Shoreham Impasse: Suggested Solutions
LEAD: As the new year begins, a solution to the Shoreham impasse seems likely to emerge from secret discussions among the Long Island Lighting Company and representatives of Governor Cuomo and Suffolk County.
Before the parties sat down to negotiate under prodding from Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein, the Long Island Weekly asked several people for suggestions on ending the Shoreham problem.


Yousuf Karsh And the Art of Friendly Persuasion
LEAD: It began with Winston Churchill's cigar.


Tracking a Foreign Presence In U.S. Military Contracting
LEAD: AS Congress considers the military spending bill that is near the top of its 1989 agenda, it will do so amid growing concern over the sharp rise in foreign takeovers of American military suppliers.


Qaddafi Denies Role In Sabotage of Plane
LEAD: The Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, said today that he believes that sabotage caused the explosion and crash of a Pan Am jet in Scotland, but he denied that either his country, Iran or Syria had a role in it.


Deborah Lafer to Wed Dr. Howard I. Scher
LEAD: Deborah Ann Lafer and Dr.
Howard I. Scher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles I. Scher of New York, plan to marry in April, her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Fred S. Lafer of Wayne, N.J., have announced.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  FAMILY SKIING SPOT


Orchestras Are Playing to Their Future: Children
LEAD: YEARS ago, many children learned about the symphony orchestra while squirming through an occasional Young People's Concert somewhere.
Others were dragged to a Friday afternoon subscription concert, where the jangling of bracelets often drowned out the ringing of triangles.
Either way, it was a nonparticipatory experience and often a boring one.


'89 Tip-Off Foes Are Selected
LEAD: The president of the Basketball Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic says Villanova and Michigan will meet in the official opening game of the 1989 intercollegiate season.


BLUES GIVE THEIR COACH A SPECIAL NIGHT
LEAD: It was a special night for the St.
Louis Blues' coach, Brian Sutter, and his players didn't want to spoil it.


All Eyes On Elusive Harris
LEAD: This was a moment that all of West Virginia had waited for: the first quarter of the game against Penn State, a picture-postcard autumn afternoon in Morgantown, the Mountaineers moving into Nittany Lion territory, the ball on the 26-yard line, and Major Harris running the option.


A REMINIST JOURNAL FINDS THAT LOOKS COUNT AFTER ALL
LEAD: Redesigning a 16-year-old institution can be daunting.
But that was the task facing Anne Summers, new editor of Ms. magazine, after Matilda Publications, an Australian company, acquired Ms. in February from its founders, Gloria Steinem and Patricia Carbine.


Joseph K. Miller, Accountant, 56
LEAD: Joseph K. Miller, a lawyer and accountant active in Jewish concerns, died in the crash of Pan American World Airways Flight 103 Dec. 20 in Lockerbie, Scotland.
He was 56 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.


Sports of The Times; Some Postcards From 1988 Season
LEAD: When 1988 began, a wandering journalist looked forward to new postmarks from South Korea in September while bracing himself not to daydream through the first two-thirds of the year.
Fat chance.
The usual suspects kept making news no matter what geographic or anticipatory state one was in.


WHAT'S NEW IN MAGAZINE REDESIGN
LEAD: Magazine readers may have to search harder to spot their favorite title on the newsstand.
Within the past year a number of well-known consumer and trade journals redesigned their styles and formats.
The year 1988 marked the redesign of Ms. (February), Esquire (March), H.G.(March), Mademoiselle (May), Good Housekeeping (July), Glamour (July), Fortune (August) and most recently, Self (December) to name a few.


Deep Shadows
LEAD:  THE SPIRIT OF THE BEEHIVE  Starring Ana Torrent.
Directed by Victor Erice. 1973.
Connoisseur Video.  98 minutes. $79.95.
In Spanish, with English subtitles


Correction
LEAD: A caption today in the highlights section on page 40 of the Television section (distributed in the New York region) misstates the time and cable station for the movie ''Looking for Mr.
Goodbar.'' It will be shown on Thursday on TBS at 10:35 P.M.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  CONCERT FOR PEACE Pete Seeger, the folk singer, will perform ''A New Year's Concert for Peace on Earth'' Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton.


Planfor First Mall Divides a Town
LEAD: SHOPPERS hunting for post-Christmas bargains are not the only ones obsessed with malls these days.
A proposal to build a shopping mall on a 34-acre site in Hamden has been the subject of emotional debate among residents as local officials prepare to decide on its fate.


Readers Speak Out on N.F.L. Parity
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Who Was Dick Dudgeon?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Endings Can Really Finish a Movie
LEAD: If you have friends and would like to keep them, try never to talk about movie endings.
No greater breach of cinema-related etiquette exists, unless it's recommending a comedy by retelling its jokes.
Endings are sacrosanct for obvious reasons, and also because a viewer's opinion of a film is usually formed long before the ending comes along.


DESTINY UNCLUTTERED BY PRINCIPLES
LEAD:  THE FOUNDER  Cecil Rhodes and the Pursuit of Power.
By Robert I. Rotberg with the collaboration of Miles F. Shore.
Illustrated. 800 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $35.


Contra Leaders Disagree on Peace Plan
LEAD: Contra leaders, who have argued bitterly among themselves during the last year, are apparently about to split over a new peace offer that one faction is making to the Sandinista Government.


Dolphin Dissection: Serious Subject
LEAD: A story Dec. 11  [ ''Cutting Up Flipper,'' Long Island Journal ]  serves as a source of great consternation to the students, faculty and administration of Bayport-Blue Point High School.
The title blithely implies that a friend (Flipper) was brutalized by our students via dissection.
The tone gives reason to suspect that people may have been running about in a confused state of nausea, looking for relief.


Technology Is the Generation Gap's Great Divide
LEAD: THE generation gap, we are told, has always existed.
Teen-agers have for centuries thought that their were parents old-fashioned, their ways conservative - even backward - their values when it came to sex, religion or money, downright neanderthal.


Philcox Enjoys Blue-Ribbon Season
LEAD: In the plethora of holiday bowl games, scores of players block and tackle on national television and some even can say, ''Hi, Mom,'' on camera.
But others never get to play because someone else is better.
They are the forgotten.


Germans Accused of Helping Libya Build Nerve Gas Plant
LEAD: The United States has concluded that a West German company played a central role in designing and constructing a huge chemical plant in Libya, a discovery that has prompted diplomatic protests to the highest levels of the Bonn Government, Administration officials say.
The Administration says the plant is for producing chemical weapons, a charge denied by Libya.


Diagnosis Confirmed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choosing Cultural Life
LEAD: A KIND of cultural brainstorming will take place in the county in the next two weeks as seven public meetings are held across Westchester to gather ideas for improving community cultural life.


IT'S NOT OVER UNTIL THE SOPRANO DIES
LEAD:  OPERA, OR THE UNDOING OF WOMEN  By Catherine Clement.
Translated by Betsy Wing.  201 pp.
Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press.
Cloth, $35.
Paper, $13.95.


A June Wedding for Susan Lierle And G. W. Birrell
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Burton Lierle of Ann Arbor, Mich., and Delray Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Buchanan Lierle, to G. William Birrell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Andrew Birrell of Greenwich, Conn., and Wilmington, N.C.
The couple plan to wed in June.


Aluminum House Is Dismantled
LEAD: ARCHITECTURE students on Long Island have completed dismantling and storing a three-story, five-room aluminum house.
The house is being kept at the New York Institute of Technology in Central Islip until it can be reconstructed on the school's campus next spring.


POSTINGS: S.I. Corporate Park; Culture Goes West
LEAD: Four years ago, Everything Yogurt decided the cramped Wall Street area was no place for a growing frozen-confection franchise.
It opted instead for the relatively open spaces of the east shore of Staten Island and renovated a former bank building in Port Richmond for its headquarters.


James B. Potash And Sally J. Scott Wed in Delaware
LEAD: The marriage of Sally Jenney Scott, a daughter of Mrs.
Marshall West Jenney of Cochranville, Pa., and the late Josiah Marvel Scott of Wilmington, Del., to James Bennett Potash, a son of Vella Potash of Pompano Beach, Fla., and Dr.
Michael Potash of Owings Mills, Md., took place last evening at the Vicmead Hunt Club in Greenville, Del.


Elegant Showcase For Jamaican Crafts
LEAD: SET well back from the bustling junction of Waterloo Road and Hope Road near the center of Kingston is the grande dame of Jamaican architecture, Devon House.
The sprawling mansion, which resembles a classic 19th-century American plantation house, is surrounded by manicured lawns.
Gravel paths lead visitors past formal gardens and fountains watched over by smiling cast-iron cherubs.


After 40 Years, Let's Ratify U.N. Bill of Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Twyla Tharp: Turning Sharp Corners
LEAD: ''This year is an extraordinary set of circumstances.
It's what I think of as a shakedown,'' says the choreographer Twyla Tharp, who for the first time in 23 years, is without a dance company that bears her name or her singular stamp.
This past July, Ms.
Tharp announced that she was disbanding the modern-dance troupe she began in 1965 and accepting the invitation of American Ballet Theater's artistic director Mikhail Baryshnikov to join A.B.T.


'Lenin: The Novel'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Nina M. Hill To Wed in April
LEAD: The engagement of Dr.
Nina Marie Hill to Walter Francis Raquet, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Raquet of Tequesta, Fla., has been made known by her parents, Ilda Kleiner of Delray Beach, Fla., and Peter Hill of New York.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Life in the Underworld: When a Tunnel Is Home
LEAD: Beyond the subway platform exists an underworld known only to the most desperate New Yorkers and the transit police teams who search for them.


3-Year-Old Saves His Mother
LEAD: A 3-year-old boy, using the telephone for the first time, saved his ill mother's life by calling the operator and asking her to reach his father at work.


Laurie K. Sutton To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Sutton of Southbury, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laurie Kimball Sutton, to Michael Patrick O'Brien, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. O'Brien of Cos Cob, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


THE WORLD: A Reminiscence: The Killing Fields; Could the Vietnamese Withdrawal Bring Back Cambodia's Nightmare?
LEAD: A decade ago, Jan. 7, 1979, a group of moderate rebels in the Khmer Rouge, led by Heng Samrin and supported by Vietnamese troops, seized power in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, from the extreme left Khmer Rouge led by Pol Pot and Khieu Samphan.


Bears Roll Past Eagles as Fog Rolls In
LEAD: To the 65,534 spectators at Soldier Field and the millions who watched the game on television, this is confirmation that the Bears soundly defeated the Philadelphia Eagles, 20-12, today in either the Fog Bowl or the National Football League playoffs.


WRITES OF PASSAGE
LEAD:  SAFE AT LAST IN THE MIDDLE YEARS  The Invention of the Midlife Progress Novel:  Saul Bellow, Margaret Drabble,  Anne Tyler, and John Updike.
By Margaret Morganroth Gullette.  186 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $19.95.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: In an Olympics mired in controversy and riddled by scandal, Greg Louganis held tight to this ideals, kept his goals in focus and successfully completed the task at hand.
His ability to continue after a near-tragic accident and capture the gold medal is a testament to his desire, discipline and, most of all, his courage.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:  Darkest Antarctica


POSTINGS: Jersey Ski Homes; From Macs To Moguls
LEAD: All that remains of the old apple orchard on Glenwood Road in Vernon Township stands around the sales office of the Pointe at Old Orchard Farm.
Last fall the staff picked a few bushels and set them out for home shoppers to munch as they browsed.


Stretching the Weekend: The Pre-Dawn Monday Commute
LEAD: EVERY Sunday afternoon, at our weekend place in North Haven, just outside of Sag Harbor, my wife and I ask each other the same question.
Should we return to Manhattan later that afternoon or leave early Monday morning?
This question and the discussion surrounding it involves a variety of factors - the weather, our fatigue, and our adherence to a well-known principle of physics -that a body at rest tends to remain at rest.


Beef Dispute: Stakes High In Trade War
LEAD: As foreign trade goes, the loss of $130 million a year in exports is a minor matter.
But beef industry executives and Federal agriculture officials say the stakes are far higher in a shrill trade dispute that has erupted with Europe over the presence of hormones in American beef.


Lydia F. Emmet To Marry in June
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Barton Hepburn Emmet of Santa Barbara, Calif., of the engagement of their daughter Lydia Field Emmet to Richard Winkeller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Winkeller of Newtonville, Mass.


Sports of The Times; How the Bills Came In From the Cold
LEAD: At a Buffalo Bills practice not long ago, Jim Kelly tossed a pass to Ralph Wilson.


Europe's Old Colonies Are Getting Anxious as 1992 Nears
LEAD: WESTERN EUROPE'S march toward a unified market by the end of 1992 is sending jitters through 66 former European colonies in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific.


The Decor Is Just Fine, But After That?
LEAD: NO. 16 Elm Street in Huntington Village is a familiar address to those who dine out frequently.
First it was French, then seafood and now Italian: from Peche Mignon to Steve's Lighthouse to the present Villa Adriano.


What's In, What's Out, What's What; People
LEAD: Celebrities bewitch us with fantasies of glamour, wealth and fame.
Their scandals tittilate; their excesses stupify.
Who's in and who's out for the new year?


Loose Talk
LEAD: The statement was mild and qualified, but when Mayor Hitoshi Motoshima of Nagasaki, Japan, suggested that Emperor Hirohito bears some responsibility for World War II, it brought editorials, petitions and death threats.


Bradshaw Mintener, 86; Helped Eisenhower in Presidential Race
LEAD: Bradshaw Mintener, a Washington attorney and former Government official who helped in launching both Hubert H. Humphrey and Dwight D. Eisenhower into national politics, died of cancer yesterday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 86 years old and had lived in the capital since joining the Eisenhower Administration in 1954 as Assistant Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare.


Deborah Faber Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jack H. Faber of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Gail Faber, to Charles Michael Flock, a son of Mrs.
Charles Flock of Garden City, L.I., and the late Mr.
Flock.
Miss Faber, a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University, and her fiance, a principal of Cone Software in Upland, Pa., plan to marry in May.


NO ONE STAYS CLEAN IN WASHINGTON
LEAD:  JACK GANCE  By Ward Just.  279 pp.
Boston.
A Richard Todd Book/  Houghton Mifflin Company. $17.95.


Drexel's Deal: Crime and Punishment, Costs and Benefits
LEAD: SINCE Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has agreed to settle the largest securities fraud case ever brought by the Government, the question on Wall Street is what kind of deal the investment bank has made.


Albany Backs Camera Use To Catch Traffic Violators
LEAD: New York City has received approval to start a technological attack on people who ignore traffic lights, using computer-controlled cameras, below-pavement road sensors and a new traffic ticket that will chase scofflaw motorists home through the mail.


C. R. Cachera to Wed Laura G. S. Farrand
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Farrand of Watch Hill, R.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter Laura G. S. Farrand to Charles Rene Cachera, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jean-Paul Cachera of Paris.
A May wedding is planned.


Life With 'The Boys Next Door': Dignity Despite Disabilities
LEAD: TOM GRIFFIN'S comedy-drama, ''The Boys Next Door,'' at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, depicts life for the residents of a group home for the developmentally disabled.


The Big Renouncement
LEAD: DEEDS, NOT WORDS, are what count, we are repeatedly reminded.
And Shakespeare's Hamlet, with his sighing dismissal of ''Words, words, words,'' gave the word &gt;words a cast of inaction if not meaninglessness.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  REFLECTIONS ON THE WAY TO THE GALLOWS: Rebel Women in Prewar Japan.
Translated and edited by Mikiso Hane. (University of California/Pantheon, $22.50.) In the Japan portrayed in this book, from the late 19th century up to World War II, young girls work 12-hour shifts in textile factories, poor farmers sell their daughters to brothels, police arrest anyone suspected of socialist sympathies and women are prohibited by law from participating in political activities.


Tea for Two (or More): A Sampling in London
LEAD: IN London, one does not have tea.
One does not merely drink tea.
One takes tea, like one takes a holiday, or a calming constitutional, or a medicine that puts one's health to rights.
English teatime is a social ritual, made fashionable in the 1840's, but it is a quiet and relaxing social ritual.
As Michael Twomey, manager of the Palm Court of the Ritz Hotel in London, says, ''In the middle of the afternoon, when your batteries run down, it is a very nice thing to take tea.


Review/Opera; 'Fledermaus' in First Appearance of Met Season
LEAD: When we confuse weight with significance, we cloud our judgment of comedy.
By most thinking, for example, ''Parsifal'' must be greater art than ''Die Fledermaus'' because its themes of suffering and redemption sit more heavily on our consciousness.
One must admit, moreover, that ''Die Fledermaus'' - which returned to the Metropolitan Opera on


Turkey Takes On The Guise ofYear-Round Fare
LEAD: TRADITIONALLY turkey is either roasted or served as leftovers, in a sandwich, a salad or casserole.
That is no longer the case.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The 1989 Bob Jones Award winner for distinguished sportsmanship, determined by the United States Golf Association, is Chi Chi Rodriguez, who won eight tournaments on the PGA Tour and is now a star on the senior tour.
He started and still supports the Chi Chi Rodriguez Youth Foundation, a Florida center which helps abused and disadvantaged youths.


Vermont Official Urging Helmets for Skiers
LEAD: Most of the skiing fatalities in Vermont in the last 10 years were due to head injuries and might have been prevented if the skiers had been wearing helmets, a state medical examiner says.


A Year of Projects: When to Do What
LEAD: FOR most homeowners, household maintenance and improvement are perpetual activities, as there always seems to be something that needs doing.


CRIME
LEAD: ''A great many writers have been trying to steal him from me for fifteen years or more,'' Raymond Chandler noted, more than 30 years ago, about certain sticky-fingered admirers of his private-eye hero, Philip Marlowe. ''And they have never made it yet,'' he added.


Agents vs. Alumni
LEAD: The sports agent whose conviction for game tampering was thrown out by an Alabama appeals court Friday said agents have to pay college athletes in order to compete with alumni who are also paying them.


Irenee du Pont May Jr. Is Married To Lynn S. Ginter in Pennsylvani
LEAD: The marriage of Lynn Shields Ginter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence U. Ginter of West Chester, Pa., to Irenee du Pont May Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
May of Greenville, Del., took place yesterday at the Cadet Chapel of the Valley Forge Military Academy in Wayne, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
William D. Hess, a


Bah, Humbug
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.50
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.52
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.20
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.59
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
17.25
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: Steffi Graf.
Being in shape, staying healthy, playing at the top of your game, keeping mentally tough from the Australian Open in January to the French Open at the end of May is a season in most sports.
But Graf still had Wimbledon, the United States Open and the Seoul Olympics to go.
Graf's Grand Slam and Olympic gold medal is the best performance of 1988.


Nestle's Time to Swagger
LEAD: For Nestle S.A., the world's largest food company, there is trouble in this Alpine paradise.


FICTION
LEAD:  PEACHTREE ROAD.
By Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper &amp; Row, $18.95.) The prologue of ''Peachtree Road'' promises a sweeping chronicle of wealthy Atlanta gentry ruined by their privileged destinies, a formula for blueblood decay.
The plot is jammed with incest, arson, suicide, gang rape - cardinal components of the great Southern saga.


For Grim Soviet Consumers, The New Year of Discontent
LEAD: The Soviet Union is facing the brightest holiday on its calendar in the grimmest mood anyone can remember, primarily because of food and consumer-goods shortages that seem to grow more acute by the day.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Organizing Against Israel


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Americans seem to be rediscovering the Soviet Union and we are rediscovering America.''  - Mikhail S. Gorbachev.  [ 11:1. ]


The Miniatures Industry Grows - By Inches, Naturally
LEAD: Maria Moll, a 36-year-old schoolteacher who lives in the Bronx, has a mighty generous boyfriend.
For Christmas, he turned her loose in a store on Manhattan's Upper East Side with enough money to buy a bed, dresser, desk, mirror, table and sideboard, plants and plant stand, gilded bird cage, furniture for a baby's room, curtains, rugs, and assorted odds and ends, including a New York


The Original Appeaser
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo's Words, Shoreham Deeds
LEAD: In attempting to ride roughshod over the New York State Legislature, Governor Cuomo and his ''court jesters'' demonstrate petulant, childish behavior when the Governor's judgment is found wanting.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article in the Long Island Weekly today about the Shoreham nuclear power plant misidentifies John V. N. Klein.
He is a former Suffolk County Executive.


Ms. Conklin Wed To R. G. Nassau
LEAD: The wedding of Alice Louise Conklin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger E. Conklin of Kewanee, Ill., to Robert George Nassau, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul David Nassau of New York and Stockbridge, Mass., took place yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Kewanee.
The Rev.
David Kniker performed the ceremony.


Police Officer Is Slain Despite Protective Vest
LEAD: A policeman was fatally shot through the armhole of his bulletproof vest as he tried to serve an arrest warrant, and the suspect was in critical condition today after a second shootout with the police.


Airport Security Intensified


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Durham, N.C.; Adieu, Tobacco, Hello Drugs
LEAD: THIS city, which has been looking for a new economic base since the tobacco industry began dying out some 20 years ago, seems to have struck gold.


In Yonkers, the 'World Is Round'
LEAD: THE world is coming apart in the Hudson River Museum, at Yonkers.
Its fragmentation is the result, not of an explosion, but of the search by 22 artists for another angle on reality.
The findings by these artists, called ''The World Is Round: Contemporary Panoramas,'' were organized for the museum by a guest curator, Marcia Clark, but they have only just arrived there, having spent the last year touring other galleries in the Northeast.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Converting a Warehouse; Factory Outlet Plan in Chelsea Gives Way to Office
LEAD: AFTER several years of trying to allay community opposition, a development team is abandoning efforts to turn a Manhattan warehouse on the Chelsea waterfront into an enormous factory-outlet shopping center - opting instead for 500,000 square feet of new office space.


Thomas Lias, U.S. Official, 54
LEAD: Thomas L. Lias, an official in three national administrations, died Thursday at his home here of complications that developed from a stroke he suffered three years ago.
He was 54 years old.


Review/Dance; Three Jazzy Offerings By the Ailey Company
LEAD: The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater made choreographic use of jazz in all three works it presented Friday night at the City Center Theater.


Recalling The Needy Stirs Spirit Of Season
LEAD: IT seems easy to feel happy during the Christmas and Hanukkah holidays.
A tiny candle is lighted on a menorah and children eat chocolate coins by the handful.
Christmas trees glitter and presents are placed under a tree with love.
Everyone seems to be living the American dream.
But I recall a week after Christmas when


Hudson Valley - Second Home to Many
LEAD: NORMAN ANDERSON is a bass baritone with the Metropolitan Opera who lived in Manhattan.
Diane Perlmutter is a marketing consultant who lives in Manhattan on and off.
Ralph Cardone is an official of the New York City Department of Correction who lives in Queens physically but not necessarily emotionally.


Elizabeth P. Billings To Wed M. F. Sacca
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
Franklin S. Billings Jr. of Woodstock, Vt., have made known the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Preudhomme Billings to Michael Francis Sacca, a son of Mrs.
Gregory F. Sacca of Gloucester, Mass., and the late Mr.
Sacca.
A summer wedding is planned.


CHINA POLICE SAID TO BEAT AFRICANS
LEAD: Police officers attacked 140 foreign students with truncheons and cattle prods today in five hours of unrest near a house where the foreigners, mostly Africans, were isolated after a week of racial violence, witnesses said.


Yachting; U.S. Trailing in Race for Cup
LEAD: There is growing concern among American yachtsmen that the United States may be losing ground in its ability to defend the America's Cup.


THE NATION: Darman's Task; The Time Is Coming To Design a Budget And Freeze Flexibly
LEAD: AS a Presidential candidate in 1980, George Bush deployed an economist friend, Paul W. MacAvoy, to ridicule Ronald Reagan's proposals for the economy as ''voodoo.'' Eight years later Mr.
MacAvoy, the dean of the business school at the University of Rochester, calls Mr.
Bush's proposed ''flexible freeze'' to balance the budget ''bunk-o'' - a combination of bunkum and bunco.


Elizabeth Barlow Marries Robert Dodge
LEAD: Ann Elizabeth Barlow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Stanley Barlow of Leonia, N.J., and Robert I. Dodge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Dodge 3d of McLean, Va., were married yesterday at the Palisades (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
The bride's father performed the ceremony.


Escape From M.I.T.
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Year of Projects: When to Do What
LEAD: FOR most homeowners, household maintenance and improvement are perpetual activities, as there always seems to be something that needs doing.


DRESSING DOWN
LEAD: Relaxed formality, fashion's buzzword for the 1980's, was a phrase broad enough to encompass a multitude of trends.
It covered the advent of the ''big suit,'' a wide-shouldered, loose-fitting hybrid of Italian and Yankee tailoring, as well as the return of the double-breasted jacket.
But the final years of the decade that ushered in such hyper-refinements as brocade vests for daytime may have suffered from fashion overkill.


Health-Care Costs Rise and Workers Are Paying
LEAD: EMPLOYERS throughout Connecticut will find the costs of employee health insurance going up as the New Year comes in, and they intend to have the workers bear part of the burden.


CRUSADER ON THE BEACH
LEAD: In 1952, while my Marine Corps husband was stationed at Camp Lejeune, N.C., we stayed on Topsail Island while waiting for military housing (''Crusader on the Beach,'' by Barnard L. Collier, Dec. 4).
The wait ended in September, about a week before the water of the sound met the water of the ocean in the middle of the island during a hurricane.


After Bills' Era of Mediocrity, Success Is Sweet for Smerlas
LEAD: Years of frustration, second-class citizenship and a sense of anonymity will end for one of two teams today at Orchard Park, N.Y.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The threads on the outside filler pipe for my oil tank are worn out, so when the cover is put on it does not form a watertight seal.
When it rains, water seeps in, causing the oil burner to fail.
The oil company wants to put in a new pipe, but this is expensive.
Is there a less expensive way to fix this?


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: The best performer in 1988 was Florence Griffith Joyner, for her three gold medals and a silver in the Seoul Olympics.
MIKE WINFIELD  Brooklyn


Afghans Await the Holy Warriors With Some Trepidation
LEAD: ONLY weeks before time is scheduled to run out on Afghanistan's present agony, the first act of its next drama has not yet been written.


A Year of Projects: When to Do What
LEAD: FOR most homeowners, household maintenance and improvement are perpetual activities, as there always seems to be something that needs doing.


Pocketbooks and Pouches to See And Be Seen With
LEAD: Bags for personal belongings - coins, keys, notes, cards and knickknacks - reveal much about the manners and mores of people, including their views of money.
This makes the exhibition ''Purses, Pockets, Pouches'' at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 92d Street, one that almost everyone can relate to - if not for the stitchery shown, then for the sociology that can be inferred.


Dorsett Pleads Guilty
LEAD: After originally being charged with drunken driving, Tony Dorsett of the Denver Broncos pleaded guilty Friday in Aurora, Colo., to a reduced charge of driving while impaired with alcohol.
Geraldine Allan, an Arapahoe County judge, told Dorsett he could face up to 100 days in jail and a $500 fine.
She ordered him to undergo an evaluation for alcoholism before his sentencing on Feb.


Spare Sparkle
LEAD: Historical objects sparingly placed in cool, modern settings - that is the dominant direction for 1989.
Off-whites and muted shades are de rigueur.
So are antique fabrics, or new ones made to look old.
This season's lighting fixtures and surface materials range from somber, industrial-sleek to those as colorful as confetti.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Portland, Me.; Slow Market Trips Builders
LEAD: MAINE'S residential real estate market, which for seven years has grown rapidly, has softened in recent months, leading many developers to restructure loans or file for reorganization under Federal bankruptcy laws.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


A Crowded Train, A Glimpse of Knee, A Turn of Events
LEAD: We are a society: an army over 200,000 strong sharing the daily commute from the suburbs to the city and back.
Our customs and structure support one goal: perpetual motion.
Although we see with blank eyes and speak volumes with our silence, we are the most intimate of strangers.
We even know that sometimes the sight of a dimpled knee is more important than a seat on a crowded train.


Will Reagan's Luck Outlast Reagan?
LEAD: Ronald Reagan, who knows something about scripts, is busily writing one of his own to guide future historians.
They are likely to ignore it.
His simplistic gloss does little justice to eight years full of contradiction and surprise.


'36 Fillette' Eyes The Teen-Age Temptress
LEAD: If American movies tend to present coming of age primarily through young male protagonists, French films devote more attention to female puberty.
Catherine Breillat's controversial ''36 Fillette,'' about a 14-year-old girl's troublesome rites of passage, is part of a tradition that includes Diane Kurys's ''Peppermint Soda,'' Jeanne Moreau's ''Adolescente,'' Roger Andrieux's ''Petite Sirene,'' Raphaelle Billetdoux's ''Femme-Enfant'' and Bertrand Blier's ''Beau Pere.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: The Los Angeles Dodgers.
Their emotion and unity enabled Tommy Lasorda's underdogs to rise to new heights.
DEBBIE WEISS  New York


1988 Was, at Long Last, the Year of the U.N.
LEAD: THE United Nations enjoyed a spectacularly successful 1988, surprising its critics with its effectiveness as an international peacemaker.
But with that success comes a new challenge for 1989: strengthening world confidence in the organization so it can keep up the momentum.


Jennifer Chamberlain and Thomas Olsen Marry
LEAD: At St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York, Jennifer Ann Chamberlain, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Monroe Chamberlain of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Thomas Gibson Olsen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Olsen of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
Andrew J. W. Mullins performed the ceremony.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: Florence Griffith Joyner.
Her athletic accomplishments speak for themselves: 10.49 in the 100 meters and 21.34 in the 200 at the Seoul Olympics.


Keeping Up With Jones Beach
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bah, Humbug
LEAD: To the Editor:


Another Vote For Shoeless Joe
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Girl Gets O.K. To Play Basketball
LEAD: AN 11 year-old's membership on the 78th precinct's bantam basketball team in Brooklyn was challenged in early November by an opposing team.
The opposing team's coach did not want the 11-year-old in the game because she is a girl.


After 40 Years, Let's Ratify U.N. Bill of Rights; Draft Declaration
LEAD: To the Editor:


Farms Use Benefits to Lure Workers
LEAD: Joe Wedge makes only $4 an hour, but the benefits are good.
He gets a house, free heat, electricity, beef and all the milk his family can drink.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 18 listing placement agencies for nannies gave an incorrect telephone number for Kare for Kids in Hackensack.
The agency's number is (201) 666-9539.


Surviving the Holiday Spirit
LEAD: MOST of us think there is something wrong with us if we don't have all the qualities espoused in the songs, television specials and advertisements of the holiday season.


Venezuela Orders 20 Arrests In Killing of 14 Fishermen
LEAD: A military court ordered the arrest of 20 members of a Government task force on Friday in the killing of 14 Venezuelan fishermen in October.


Chefs Hunt Up a Delicious Time in Chester
LEAD: IN the small kitchen of the Restaurant du Village in Chester, meat juices sizzled on the stove, the air smelled of herbs, and several men were talking and laughing.
And cooking.


Donna Gresser Wed To James Harper Jr.
LEAD: Donna Lee Gresser and James Lovett Harper Jr., 1983 graduates of Lawrence University, were married yesterday at Headquarters Plaza in Morristown, N.J.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi F. Dworkin and the Rev.
James Harper, the father of the bridegroom, who is also the rector of St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Bonita Springs,


Ready for 1989


Unwrapping the New Year
LEAD: It's easier to wrap up the old year than unwrap the new.
Still, the difference between them is only some arbitrary celestial point in the zodiac, picked long ago by a committee of Babylonian astrologers.
On the principle of continuity, the near future will look a lot like the recent past.


Q and A
LEAD:  Low Countries


Pondering Profits, Problems and the Future
LEAD: As the new year begins, many of the old economic troubles remain - the budget and trade deficits, for instance.
In addition, both the leading economic indicators and home sales are sharply down.
Business Forum editor Joel Kurtzman talked to 12 leaders in business and labor, who expressed concern, optimism and a commitment to work to solve national and business problems.


Taxing Spirits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan Slips in Smokestack America
LEAD: Prospects for reviving the beleaguered National Steel Corporation seemed bright in 1984, when the Nippon Kokan K.K.
Corporation acquired a 50 percent interest in the nation's sixth-largest steel producer.
With deep pockets and technical prowess surpassing that of any American steel maker, NKK, Japan's No.


The Whitney Today: Fashionable to a Fault
LEAD: In an art world ever more eager to share the glamour of rock music, the swagger of big business and the seasonal values of fashion, the new has become increasingly hard to resist.
Among many contemporary artists, critics, collectors and dealers, there is an unending search for art that is of the moment, that partakes of the spirit of the age, that leads to the heart of the Zeitgeist.


Spain's Paradors: Inns With a Touch of History
LEAD: SOMEWHERE between luxury hotels and bad boarding houses are the paradors of Spain, the Government-owned hotel system.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The threads on the outside filler pipe for my oil tank are worn out, so when the cover is put on it does not form a watertight seal.
When it rains, water seeps in, causing the oil burner to fail.
The oil company wants to put in a new pipe, but this is expensive.
Is there a less expensive way to fix this?


Turkey Takes On The Guise ofYear-Round Fare
LEAD: TRADITIONALLY turkey is either roasted or served as leftovers, in a sandwich, a salad or casserole.
That is no longer the case.


At European Airports, More Searching and More Questioning
LEAD: Intensified airport security in European cities produced no major delays in flights to the United States yesterday, but travel was light on the final day of 1988 and the full effect of the measures was not expected to be felt until early in the new year.


September Bridal For Ms. Mendley
LEAD: The engagement of Diana Elizabeth Mendley to Lewis Steven Ingall has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Mendley of Bronxville, N.Y.
Her fiance is a son of Dr.
David Ingall of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Edith Roth Ingall, and a stepson of Carol Kreeger Ingall.
The couple plan to marry in September.


Health-Care Cures
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE ODDS ARE YOU'RE INNUMERATE
LEAD: Innumeracy, the mathematical analogue of functional illiteracy, afflicts far too many literate people, even widely read and articulate men and women who might cringe if words such as ''imply'' and ''infer'' were confused.
They generally react without a trace of embarrassment, however, to even the most egregious numerical solecisms.


Ethiopia Is Leaning Westward Again
LEAD: WEARY of supporting Col.
Mengistu Haile Meriam and his endless civil war, the Soviet Union is quietly encouraging Ethiopia to re-establish relations with its old ally, the United States.
For a Government that prides itself on Marxist-Leninist purity, the rapprochement is bound to be difficult.
So far, Ethiopia's gestures toward reconciliation have often come wrapped in socialist rhetoric, apparently intended to show that there is really no deviation from the revolutionary ideals that toppled Emperor Haile


Increasing Rapes on Campus Spur Colleges to Fight Back
LEAD: College and university officials, concerned over an apparent steady increase in rapes on campuses, are strengthening campus security and reinforcing freshman orientation with programs on how to avert rape.


Lesley Flood to Marry Robert H. Dial in June
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Flood of Bethesda, Md., of the engagment of their daughter Lesley Ann Flood to Robert Hastings Dial, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas A. Dial of Wyckoff, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in June.


India-Pakistan Ties Enter a New Era
LEAD: Prime Ministers Rajiv Gandhi of India and Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan today ended three days of talks that South Asian leaders hope will mark the start of a new relationship between the two nations.


In Alleys of Nablus, Yes to Talks, Yes to Resisting
LEAD: Deep in the narrow, twisting stone alleys of the casbah, the local underground leader of the intifada, the Palestinian uprising, had little hesitation when asked what he thought of the Palestine Liberation Organization's recent moves to recognize Israel, renounce terrorism and begin talks with the United


Don't Insult Pilots With Weapons Screenings
LEAD: To the Editor:


About Cars; Some Leftovers That Bear Reheating
LEAD: The holidays are a good time for leftovers, and 1988 has more than its share.
Here are some of them, along with a helping of late-breaking notions.


Faye Levin Is Engaged
LEAD: Faye Deborah Levin, an associate at the Manhattan law firm of Taub &amp; Fasciana, and Dr.
Harvey Mark Levin, a dentist in Washington, plan to be married in June.
Dr. and Mrs.
Norman L. Levin of Brooklyn have announced their daughter's engagement to a son of Gertrude Levin of the Bronx and the late Harry Levin.


Second-Guessing Sophisticates
LEAD: To the Editor:


Roseanne Is No Cousin to Archie Bunker
LEAD: Class, that useful word for a combination of wealth, position, education and style, is one of the dirty nonsecrets of American life.
We are flattered by Alexis de Tocqueville's observation on his first visit to America that ''the entire society seems to have melted into a middle class.'' Yet, who can fail to see the unmeltable divisions within the great middle class itself?


Keep Moviegoers Moving
LEAD: To the Editor:


Not Just Black vs. White
LEAD: The stormy politics of South Africa since the emergency decrees of 1985 reaches most of us in single, incendiary images from news reports.
Yet the reality of life under apartheid is far more complex than simple distinctions like black versus white, writes David C. Turnley, a photojournalist, in WHY ARE THEY WEEPING?


4 Hurt in Jersey Plane Crash
LEAD: Four people were injured, two critically, when the twin-engine plane they were flying in crashed today as the pilot tried to land at Somerset Airport, the police said.


Sincere Study Sought on Blacks
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Coptic Artistry And Tradition In Old Cairo
LEAD: EGYPT, in the course of its nearly six thousand years of civilization, has seen cultures come and go: between the earliest Pharaohs and President Mubarak, that ancient land has supported many rulers and quite a number of religions.
For the lover of the ancient world, the Nile valley is full of treasures; for those whose favorite period is that of the Roman emperors, there are the admirable Faiyum portraits; some of the best Muslim art and architecture anywhere is to be found in Cairo; but, squeezed in between are the


Dear Old Golden Tour Days Don't Have to End
LEAD: IF you are a graduate of a sizable college, you probably have been offered the chance to take a trip with academic overtones.
Alumni tours are big business, often providing an opportunity to learn while you travel.
But perhaps your fellow alumni aren't going where you want to go, or maybe their trip is focused on wildlife when you're more interested in archeology.


Advance Obituaries
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stefanie Gross to Marry Stephen Shanck in April
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Gross of Armonk, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Stefanie Faye Gross to Stephen E. Shanck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Shanck of Boca Raton, Fla.
An April wedding is planned.


Readers Speak Out on N.F.L. Parity
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Praise Makers Seem to Be Calling the Tune
LEAD: Concert program books are not ordinarily the place to look for objective evaluations of performers.
By hallowed tradition, the sketches they contain are allowed to be effusive, as in this recent Carnegie Hall biographical blurb for a young violinist: ''Just as diamonds are forever, so are the art and appeal of Anne-Sophie Mutter.


Heritage Village Is Not Summer Camp
LEAD: I READ with interest and considerable dismay the article on Heritage Village (''Where the Residents Are Busy Doing What They Want to Do,'' Nov. 20).
The article describes a perpetual summer camp for adults in which play is the primary activity, almost as a reward for all those years working in the big, bad city.


Head Lice Infestation Found In Library of Congress Rooms
LEAD: Officials at the Library of Congress have at least one problem in common with the lowliest elementary school librarian in the land - head lice.


China Celebrates 10 Years Along the Capitalist Road
LEAD: THE winter air was filled with rumors and anticipation in December 1978, as Communist Party leaders from across China gathered in the capital for a showdown.
Yet almost no one could have imagined that this meeting would give birth to the sweeping economic and political upheaval that changed China and set the


Lemieux's 5 Goals Set Penguin Mark B
LEAD: The irrepressible Mario Lemieux of the Penguins displayed the abundance of his hockey talents again this afternoon in an 8-6 triumph over the Devils.


DATA UPDATE: January 1, 1989
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Nov. 88
Oct. 88
Nov. 87
Nation
$87,900
$88,100
$85,000
Northeast
142,500
144,400
134,500
Midwest
66,700
67,400
64,400
South
80,300
80,500
79,200
West
122,300
122,900
115,400
*3*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


BEST SELLERS LIST: January 1, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
Q (Morrow, $19.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a
struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque
separatists.
2
2
22
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom
Clancy.


Ownership
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Easy N Dirty Scores: Easy N Dirty edged Nostalgia's Star by a half-length yesterday to win the $80,550 Display Handicap at Aqueduct.
Easy N Dirty, ridden by Jorge Velasquez and carrying 113 pounds, raced two and a quarter miles in 3:53 2/5 on the fast track for his second victory in 11 starts in 1988.


IN QUOTES
LEAD:  ''A lot of sins were swept under the rug during the good times.
We're having to look closely at the economics now.''
Hardwick Simmons
chairman of Shearson Lehman Hutton,
on the belt-tightening on Wall Street.


CRUSADER ON THE BEACH
LEAD: I was sorry to read that Orrin Pilkey opposes the plan of the Army Corps of Engineers to save the homes on Dune Road in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
His singularly financial analysis of the situation ignores the human element involved.
My family, along with many others, owns a home beyond the erosion.
It is currently inaccessible because of the shoreline damage.


MILITARY TO READY LASER FOR TESTING AS SPACE WEAPON
LEAD: After heated internal debate, the Pentagon has decided to modify its most powerful laser so it can be fired at old United States satellites to see how effective attacks against satellites can be, military officials and Congressional experts said last week.


Tending Teen-Agers, 2d Time Around
LEAD: WHEN my wife and I retired to Florida from Long Island 10 years ago, we reassured our married daughter who lives in Woodmere that we would always be there for her, just a phone call away, should she ever need us.
A decade later she called in her marker.


The Year's Innovations A Review of the Year's Innovations Innovations in Film and Related Equipment
LEAD: NOW that 1988 is history, it's time to recap what transpired in the world of cameras, film and related equipment in the 12 months past.
Though much in photography remained essentially the same, a handful of innovative new products offered at least the promise of better pictures in the new year.


Vandalism Renews Fight on Shelter
LEAD: With cold weather moving into the nation's capital, a long-simmering dispute between advocates for the homeless and the city's subway system has heated up.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The threads on the outside filler pipe for my oil tank are worn out, so when the cover is put on it does not form a watertight seal.
When it rains, water seeps in, causing the oil burner to fail.
The oil company wants to put in a new pipe, but this is expensive.
Is there a less expensive way to fix this?


Medieval Festivals and Irving Berlin
LEAD: THE tradition of serving boar as the first dish at feasts may stem from the Roman Empire.
In Norman England ''the boar was the sovereign of the forests, a menace to man and a symbol of evil,'' said David Conrad of Connecticut Public Television. ''By the 12th century, the serving of the boar's head at Christmastide had become symbolic of the triumph of Christ over Satan.


In Britain, a Proliferation of Prosperos
LEAD: ''The Tempest'' has always been one of Shakespeare's most popular plays.
It also possesses a mythical power that seems to inspire other artists.
As the Shakespearean scholar Anne Barton points out in the New Penguin edition, Mozart sketched out an opera based upon it, Hollywood plundered its story for a science fiction film (''The Silent Planet''), T.S.


SO WHAT HAPPENED?
LEAD: More things get started than get finished, and thus the notion of process carries with it a whiff of uncertainty.
Ambition, dreams, vision - these are great human motivations.
But, of course, between motivation and achievement a lot can happen.


Kathleen Daly to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Daly of Pleasantville, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Mary Daly to Joseph Alphonsus Emerson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emerson of Milton, Mass.
Miss Daly, a graduate of Providence College, is studying for a master's degree in teaching at Simmons College.


Third World Center In Harlem Stirs Again
LEAD: A BROCHURE prepared for visiting foreign dignitaries gives the location of a planned $200 million office complex as ''west of Lenox Avenue in Harlem, U.S.A.'' For the Harlem Third World Trade Institute, which produced the booklet, placing the proposed International Trade Center in New York City clearly was not as important as identifying it with what has become, for many parts of the third world, an unofficial capital.


THE WORLD: Will Pan Am Crash Be a Factor?; In Mideast Policy, U.S. Isn't Pausing For Transition
LEAD: CONVENTIONAL wisdom and precedent suggest that American policy toward the Middle East should be in a state of suspended animation during a transition from one President to another.
Instead, the last seven weeks have seen a startling amount of activity, illustrating the continuity between the Administrations of President Reagan and George


Quarterbacks Deserve Safety
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Admitted Westies Killer Who Informed Is Free
LEAD: Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, an admitted killer who turned informer, has won his freedom, largely in return for testifying against his former associates in a violent gang called the Westies.


Pitching InTo Move A Library
LEAD: SOME came because a clerk at the local supermarket had put a ''Help'' flier along with the groceries in their shopping bags.
Some had read the sign on East Broad Street that carried the same message.


Not a Zero-Sum Game
LEAD: Anything that responds to Palestinian feelings must be bad for Israel.
That is the unstated premise of the new Israeli Government's condemnation of the American dialogue with the P.L.O. and of all that has followed.
In other words, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a zero-sum game, one in which any gain for one side must be an equal loss for the other.


THE SOULS OF THE NEW MACHINES
LEAD:  MIND CHILDREN  The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence.
By Hans Moravec.
Illustrated. 214 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $18.95.


Why Call Them Artists?
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  A Spacious Kiss&gt;


Punctuation Puzzle
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE ONE WHO CAN'T GET SICK
LEAD:  HIDDEN ILLNESS IN THE WHITE HOUSE  By Kenneth R. Crispell and Carlos F. Gomez.
Foreword by Birch Bayh.
Illustrated. 267 pp.
Durham, N.C.:  Duke University Press. $27.50.


Cheers in Charlotte At Knick Expense
LEAD: The headline spread across Page 1 of The Charlotte Observer yesterday read: ''Hornets Sellout a Blowout.''


3 Held in Dispute Over Care for Jehovah's Witness
LEAD: Three people were arrested Friday evening at a Suffolk County hospital when a group of Jehovah's Witnesses sought to prevent a critically ill member of their group from receiving a blood transfusion, the police said.


New Yorkers, Indifferent to the Blind, Descend Into the Maelstrom
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Little Luck Helps a 'Poor' Slam
LEAD: A DECADE ago China had a handful of bridge enthusiasts.
Although the number is not known now, it is likely to be second only to the United States in terms of tournament players.
A team event in Shanghai early this year attracted more than 700 teams and would have broken the world record for a single event if some players had not been excluded by lack of accommodation.


Bench Helps Louisville Rout Kentucky
LEAD: Pervis Ellison scored 20 points to pace a balanced attack today as Louisville used its superior depth to beat Kentucky, 97-75.


Taking Solace In the Caring Of Strangers
LEAD: When Susan Cohen learned that her only child, Theodora, had died on Pan Am Flight 103, she was so distraught that on the way to the airport she twice tried to throw herself from the car onto the highway.


A Holiday Seson Tradition: Counting Westchester's Birds
LEAD: AS most of Westchester slumbered through a Monday holiday last week, Paul M. Saraceni stood on a frozen Hudson River bank gazing at the mass of seagulls soaring in the stiff breeze, the first rays of the sun glinting on their wings.
Mr.
Saraceni watched their ascent carefully, searching for any white wings or other unusual species.


A FACE LIFT FOR A YOUNGER LOOKING SELF
LEAD: When Anthea Disney, who is credited with the successful redesign of Us magazine, took over as editor of Self magazine in July, she planned a redesign. ''Self will be 10 years old in March 1989, and every year our reader grows up,'' said Ms.
Disney.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  ASAD, THE SPHINX OF DAMASCUS: A Political Biography.
By Moshe Ma'oz. (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, $19.95.) Moshe Ma'oz, a professor of modern Middle East history at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, has set out to write what he calls ''a political biography of an outstanding ruler of modern Syria,'' President Hafez al-Assad.


Miss Porter Is Planning A September Wedding
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mrs.
John H. Porter of Dublin, N.H., of the engagement of her daughter Patricia Stuart Porter to Gifford Combs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson G. Combs of Berkeley, Calif.
The couple plan to marry in September.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: Who was the best performer in 1988?
Robin Givens.
Who could possibly top her performance?
DAVID SMITH  Morristown, Tenn.


Urban High Schools Step Up Recruiting of Students for Jobs Program
LEAD: URBAN high schools throughout New Jersey are intensifying their efforts to recruit seniors for the first phase of a state-sponsored program that promises to place 10,000 high school graduates in full-time jobs in private industry by 1992.


Entering 1989, Utility's Woes Lead the List Of Concerns
LEAD: THE two-decade struggle over the Shoreham nuclear power plant, which seemed to hit new heights last year, shows no sign of slowing in early 1989.


Sipping With Dignity At a London Oasis
LEAD: AGATHA CHRISTIE, in ''At Bertram's Hotel,'' describes the hostelry of the title as dignified, unostentatious, and quietly expensive.
That homage also aptly fits Brown's Hotel, the inspiration for Bertram's.


I.B.M.'s New System Is Put to a Test
LEAD: You have been a good customer at the bank for 10 years, and now you want to apply for a mortgage.
There are forms galore.
Taking pen in hand you scribble answers to questions about your credit history, questions that the bank has asked many times before.
A half-hour later the loan officer shakes your hand and says you will get an answer in three to four weeks.


Outdoors; Quiet Comeback for Snowshoeing
LEAD: The closest thing to walking on water is plodding across a field covered in 10 feet of snow with a pair of snowshoes.
You won't sink above your ankles if the size of the snowshoes is right.
And you have the freedom to walk almost anywhere.


WOOING NEW ADVERTISERS BY WOOING NEW READERS
LEAD: Magazine redesigns are not aimed only at garnering new readers; the reaction from advertisers is equally important.
For those who advertised under the old format, there is the question of whether the magazine will be accepted by existing readers.
Then there are advertisers who have never placed pages in the magazine; they are watching to see if the magazine attracts new readers who would be interested in their wares.


Recalling the Best of 1988
LEAD: NINETEEN EIGHTY-EIGHT will be remembered as the year that Thai cooking found its way to Connecticut.
While the number of Thai restaurants is still small, the cuisine brings a welcome spiciness and variety to the state's restaurant scene.


Of Men, Women And Money
LEAD: I would like to add a thought to the article on the complex subject of the impact of women's opportunities and attitudes in the workplace and academia during this century (''Now Is Not the Time to Put Women on Hold,'' Opinion page, Nov. 27).


U.S. TO HAVE ROLE IN SALES OF WATER
LEAD: For most of the century the Interior Department's Bureau of Reclamation has built dams for the arid West, but under a new policy, the bureau will be acting as a broker of water.


As Neighborhood Sinks, Residents Wait to Leave
LEAD: When hundreds of residents were told they would have to leave their houses in the Logan area of the city, the structures already posed a hazard: the row houses listed at angry angles, sidewalks were crumbled and the ground seemed no more steady than the nerves of the residents.
It was a situation, city officials said, that could only get worse.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  OUT ON THE RIM, by Ross Thomas. (Mysterious Press, $4.95.) This ''nimble international thriller'' about a terrorism expert named Booth Stallings and his dealings with Filipino guerrillas plotting against the Aquino Government is an ideal book to read on a long flight, Marilyn Stasio said here last year.


'Barnum' Review Missed the Point
LEAD: Shame on Leah D. Frank's review of ''Barnum''  [ Dec. 11 ] , applying Broadway standards to denigrate it.
Considering the limited resources of Theater Three - small theater, local talent - the production was almost seamlessly delightful.
My wife and I saw it and enjoyed it immensely.
Some of the acting, singing and dancing and stage business was so professional as we've seen anywhere, and carried along the story line, not just ''a loose confederation of scenes.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: The legal holiday for New Year's Day is tomorrow.
Below are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Turkey Takes On The Guise ofYear-Round Fare
LEAD: TRADITIONALLY turkey is either roasted or served as leftovers, in a sandwich, a salad or casserole.
That is no longer the case.


Ever So Humble
LEAD: A platter holding a tower of lobsters, shrimp, oysters and clams (called, appropriately, a shellfish extravaganza) and another bearing a flaming baked Alaska zipped through the renovated Rainbow Room in Manhattan.
But that was last year.
The restaurants born in 1989 - and the food served in them - will be decidedly more humble.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Dec. 17  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $232,500  177 West 10th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op in a brownstone; windowed, large kitchen, fireplace, hardwood floors, original moldings; maintenance $619, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: William B.


Yuli M. Daniel, a Russian Writer Tried as a Dissident, Is Dead at 63
LEAD: Yuli M. Daniel, a Soviet dissident and satirist whose conviction in 1966 for publishing anti-Government writings abroad drew international attention, died at his home in Moscow on Friday after a stroke.
He was 63 years old.


Nintendo Fans
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Pressure Forces Guilty Pleas
LEAD: The decision of Drexel, Burnham, Lambert Inc. to pay $650 million in fines and restitution as part of an agreement to plead guilty to six counts of mail, wire and securities fraud demonstrates the coercive power of Federal prosecutors.
Obviously, if one of the most powerful investment banking firms in


Q and A
LEAD:  Rent Delinquency


NEW FEDERAL LAWS TAKE EFFECT TODAY
LEAD: Dozens of changes in Federal laws and regulations go into effect Sunday, including a vast expansion of Medicare to cover financially devastating illnesses, faster pension fund vesting that will benefit millions and tax changes reducing the Government's subsidy of purchases on credit.


Newcomers to Region Donate To the Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: Michael and Mary Ann Bode, who moved to New York City in June from San Francisco, have made their first contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Hormone-Treated Beef Termed Generally Safe
LEAD: Although the European Community has acted to ban imports of beef from cattle treated with growth-stimulating hormones, most experts in the United States insist that when the hormones are properly applied, the beef is safe to eat.


Exploring Islamic Cairo
LEAD: CAIRO comes at you like an assailant, or a persistent vendor of dubious wares.
It teems and hustles, bursts with energy, oozes decay, collapses under its own frustrations.
But it will not be denied.
On the banks of the Nile, the impressions tumble, willy-nilly: noise and dust and the strangled calls of street hawkers; awesome sunsets, chaos, traffic, polluted air; the click of croquet mallets on the pampered lawns of the Gezira Sporting


Tamara Jaycox to Wed L. M. Kessler
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Edward V. K. Jaycox and Victoria Holt Jaycox of Chevy Chase, Md., of the engagement of their daughter Tamara LaForge Jaycox to Lewis Maier Kessler, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Kessler of Pittsburgh.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: RESOLUTIONS?
In 1989?
One year before the 1990's?
Eleven years before the 21st century?
A dozen years before 2001?
On the brink of a who-knows-what-kind of world awaits us out there, are people still making New Year's resolutions?


Two TV Veterans March Into the Late-Night Fray
LEAD: Trailer 24, on the back lot of Paramount Studios, is an exciting place to work these days.
The modular office block, headquarters of ''The Arsenio Hall Show,'' fairly vibrates with optimism: confident-looking executives navigate its stark corridors; lanky, black-sneakered comedy writers wisecrack happily as they shamble, in convoy, from production meeting to production meeting; the office walls of Marla Kell Brown, the show's producer, are papered on three sides with dozens of 5-by-7 index cards, each bearing the famous name - Barbara Walters, Clint Eastwood, Oprah Winfrey, etc.


For Yuppies on Stage, a Time for Reflection
LEAD: In the theater, as in life, people have been discovering that the fast track can be a treadmill.
They are forced to confront what could be called the Yuppie Trauma: early success leading to young-life crisis.
If you rise to the top of a profession before you are 30 - as stockbroker, movie producer, publisher, theater director - burnout may result when you are 30 something.


PAT SAJAK LATE NIGHT
LEAD: Pat Sajak, whose new late-night talk show is scheduled to go up against Carson, says he will eschew Johnny Carson's introductory monologue to avoid the ''millisecond'' of ''panic'' he sees in Johnny's eyes after a failed joke (''The Good Fortune of Pat Sajak,'' by Diane K. Shah, Dec. 11).
He says he will avoid David


In Switzerland, Wild Roses And an Elegy
LEAD: Jan 2, 1917, was a sparkling cold winter day in Raron, a small Swiss town surrounded by snow-covered Alps in the Valais.
On a rocky ledge high above the town in a churchyard a cluster of people gathered somberly around an open grave listening to one of the mourners recite: ''Of course, it is strange to inhabit the earth no longer,/to give up customs one barely had time to learn,/not to see roses and other promising things/in terms of a human future.


Getting Through
LEAD: 'I'm hoping that people will look back and say that in that difficult period, he got the ship through the storm.
Maybe the captain got thrown overboard, but the ship got through.' - Paul T. Gentile, District Attorney of the Bronx, who has been in office only 14 months and is now yielding the job to Robert T.


1988 Was, at Long Last, the Year of the U.N.  A String of Successes
LEAD: Here are seven achievements of the United Nations in 1988:  Afghanistan.
After seven years of peace talks led by a United Nations mediator, the Soviet Union agreed on April 15 to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan by Feb. 15.
But the Soviet Union and the United States have continued arming their allies in the civil war, and no political solution is in sight.


What's a Fair Price for Weakness?
LEAD: One of the most interesting judgments a player is called upon to make is whether inducing a weakness in the opponent's pawn position is worth the lost tempo that the probe and retreat require.
The conflict is between structure and time.


Dooley Gets Political Tip
LEAD: If Georgia's head football coach Vince Dooley wants to run for governor, James Blanchard of Michigan is willing to be there to coach him.


THE REGION: Licenses and Tests; The Making of the Principals In New York City Schools
LEAD: PRINCIPALS are often remembered as models of stern rectitude who could hush an auditorium of caterwauling children with the slight elevation of an eyebrow.


Mary Ann Knauss Is Wed To Rep. Hamilton Fish Jr.
LEAD: The marriage of Mary Ann Tinklepaugh Knauss, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce for intergovernmental affairs, to Representative Hamilton Fish Jr. of Millbrook, N.Y., took place yesterday at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church-in-the-Highlands in Garrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Francis Hartley Geer and the Rev.


A June Wedding For Ms. Jaroslow
LEAD: The engagement of Elizabeth Davis Jaroslow to Marc Allen Lipsett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Lipsett of San Francisco, has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Jaroslow of Sands Point, L.I., parents of the bride-to-be.
A June wedding is planned.


Seeking Out The Surrealism in Balanchine Ballets
LEAD: It's not easy to label George Balanchine.
Because he used traditional ballet technique as the basis for his choreography, he is often called a classicist.
Yet, his ability to adapt, develop or even distort traditional steps as he saw fit has also led him to be called a neo-classicist.
However, recent revivals of two rarely performed ballets by


Loose Ends
LEAD: In the decade that he has been Mayor of Washington, Marion S. Barry Jr. has fought off reports of drug and alcohol abuse, always insisting that they were politically inspired.
Last week, the Justice Department said it would investigate a visit the Mayor paid to an acquaintance suspected of selling drugs.


Pan Am Blast: An Inquiry in Hot Pursuit
LEAD: In a dozen nations on both sides of the Atlantic, an intense and sophisticated investigation is under way into the downing of a Pan Am jumbo jet with 259 people aboard.


Readers Speak Out on N.F.L. Parity
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Little Davey, Not Slingin' Sammy
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Garden City  $405,000  4 Birch Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old center-hall colonial; fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.
Hempstead  $220,000  21 Clark Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; fireplace in living room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $3,250.


Revenue Bonds Proposed for Airport Terminal
LEAD: UNDER a new proposal, construction of a passenger terminal and parking garage at the County Airport would be financed by airport profits, rather than by county taxpayers, through a nonprofit organization consisting of the County Executive and the Board of Legislators.


Baseball Notebook; New Arbitration Crop Not Likely to Produce Bumper Salaries
LEAD: A year ago the Dynamic Dozen watched their salaries soar toward the stratosphere on 24-carat dollar signs.
They were young players eligible for salary arbitration for the first time, and the results of their foray were dramatic.
Their collective incomes nearly tripled, climbing from $3,586,000 to $9,544,000.


How to Live With Looming Higher Interest Rates
LEAD: AS rising interest rates gather momentum, many business executives would expect Connecticut's light manufacturing and service-oriented economy to slow down proportionately.


Hello. Yes, It's Your Dial-a-Mom.
LEAD: I watched them cut the umbilical cord when each of my three children was born.
But the telephone cord - now that's a different story.


Loos's 'Blondes' Revived
LEAD: FOR celebratory and commemorative purposes, the timing for the Coachlight Dinner Theater production of ''Gentlemen Prefer Blondes'' is just right.
The new year marks the 40th anniversary of the Broadway musical version of Anita Loos's 1925 classic, which was first a straight play and film.
And 1988 was the centenary of Ms.


Rangers Assisted By Leetch
LEAD: Brian Leetch's left foot, broken bone and all, is still swollen and painful.
It hurts him to put on skates, hurts him to stand in them, hurts him when they are taken off.
As a result, he is forced to tape his foot with care before a game and ice it afterward.


New Year Brings States a Host of New Laws
LEAD: Starting today, new state laws will impose harsher penalties on drunken drivers, allow certain convicts to serve sentences at home and increase testing for AIDS.


Jackets for the Slickest City Slickers
LEAD: IN its latest wrinkle, the jeans jacket has dropped its good ol' boy image and gone and got itself all duded up in what might be called a bright lights, big city blue denim motif.


The Processed Word
LEAD: To the Editor:


40,2&gt;Hispanic Groups Seek A Voice in Perth Amboy
LEAD: NEARLY seven months after the shooting death of a Mexican immigrant and the wounding of his brother by an off-duty police detective here, a quiet revolution is taking place in this city of 42,000 people.
Hispanic residents are beginning to organize and demand a voice in government, police affairs and even the naming of streets that is more in line with their numbers, which account for at least 40 percent of the population.


Homeless Center Faces a Vote
LEAD: NINE HUNDRED Upper East Side residents, during a bitter community board hearing last June, spent hours speaking, cheering and booing plans to open a drop-in center for homeless people in their neighborhood.


Poorhampton No More: Bridgehampton Is Upscale Now Too
LEAD: WHEN I moved to Bridgehampton 25 years ago, it might as well have been called Poorhampton.
Nearly every store on Main Street was vacant.
Potato farmers were worried that their crop was worth less than the land on which it grew.
Golden nematode disease impaired what potatoes they could grow.
They were in hock to the local banks as they used their machinery as collateral to get through the winter.


Question Of the Week; Who Was The Best Performer Of 1988?
LEAD: In the 1980's has anyone been able to carry such an average team to such a lofty accomplishment as Orel Hershiser did in '88?
DAVID J. EDELSTEIN  New York


Bless You, Marty
LEAD: O.K., SO 1988 WASN'T PERFECT.
We had a drought, a flood, a record-breaking heat wave.
A hurricane, a forest fire and, in Bloomsburg, Pa., a roller coaster stalled midloop, suspending 20 riders upside down for more than an hour.
Planes fell apart, people ate flowers, grilled tuna meat half raw.
A large hole spread in the ozone layer, nightmares washed up on beaches and voracious pear thrips ate Vermont's sugar maples.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  VICTORIAN DOLL HOUSE  When Joan Farrell was a little girl growing up in Sag Harbor, she always wanted a doll house.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Friday Night; RUTGERS STREAK ENDS IN ROUT BY LADY VOLS By IAN O'CONNOR
LEAD: Only 10 minutes into the game with Tennessee, it was clear that the Rutgers women's basketball team was about to receive some harsh lessons it wouldn't soon forget.


BENGALS DEFEAT SEAHAWKS
LEAD: By the time the Cincinnati Bengals' offense sputtered today, it had already scored 21 points.
The defense made sure that was enough.


FICTION
LEAD:  FAMILY: Family and Borghesia.
Two Novellas.
By Natalia Ginzburg.
Translated by Beryl Stockman. (Seaver Books/Holt, $15.95.) At the conclusion of ''Family,'' a character on his deathbed reviews his life and can recall nothing but a kind of exalted trivia, a ''whole pile of random detailed impressions, that were hazy, but light as a feather.


Sonic Youth's Chrome-Framed American Gothic
LEAD: These aren't the most revolutionary times, and Sonic Youth, who recently released their seventh album, the double disk ''Daydream Nation'' (Enigma/Blast First 7 754003-1; all three formats), are deeply and self-consciously aware of that fact.
Like other artists who have come to the realization that modernist ideas of esthetic rebellion are old-fashioned and ineffective, they've developed their own set of postures.


A School Offers a Model for Ulster Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


'I FEEL HAPPY BECAUSE I AM A POET'
LEAD:  NICARAGUAN PEASANT POETRY FROM SOLENTINAME  Translated by David Gullette.  211 pp.
Albuquerque, N.M.:  West End Press.
Paper, $11.95.


THE NATION: Boom in Spy Craft; The Military Has A Fleet of Satellites In Line for Takeoff
LEAD: NOW that the space program is back on track, the American military is looking to 1989 as the year that heralds its return to prominence in the heavens.
Encouraged by last year's revitalization of the shuttle and the successful launching of a series of unmanned rockets, the Pentagon plans to greatly increase its arsenal of orbiting spacecraft and to pioneer a generation of powerful rockets.


Jean Quinn Married to Dr. R. M. Alley
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Albany, Jean Quinn, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Brian O'Malley Quinn of Albany, was married yesterday to Dr.
R.
Maxwell Alley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph D. Alley of Loudonville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Paul Tartaglia performed the ceremony.


Health-Care Cures
LEAD: To the Editor:


V. M. Lopez-Balboa to Wed Ms. Huber
LEAD: The engagement of Linda Susan Pickens Huber to Victor Manuel Lopez-Balboa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Enrique Lopez-Balboa of Montclair, N.J., has been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Harley L. Pickens of Princeton Junction, N.J., the parents of the bride-to-be.


DEALS
LEAD:  Basketball


Business Leaders See Continued Growth
LEAD: WHAT do Westchester business leaders see in store for the New Year?
In contrast to the national uncertainty about the strength of the economy, Westchester observers are anticipating that this year the local business climate will favor economic growth in the county.
There is concern, however, that the lack of affordable housing and of adequate public transportation and the shortages of entry-level workers may pose problems.


Joseph A. Adorno Dies; Retired Judge Was 76
LEAD: Joseph A. Adorno, a retired Superior Court judge and former state treasurer, was killed Friday in a traffic accident on Route 66 here.
He was 76 years old and lived in Middletown.


Tight Ship
LEAD: Anyone who thinks New York City co-op boards are fussy might consider the case at the Viewpointe, an adults-only condominium complex in Margate, Fla.
The Viewpointe board has set a deadline of Jan. 10 for Jamie Swartz, 9 years old, to leave the apartment owned by her father and stepmother, who took the girl in several months before her mother died of cancer.


Eugene M. Gervasi, 51, Author of Nonfiction
LEAD: Eugene Michael Gervasi, an author and former public relations director, died Friday at University Hospital in Richmond, after a long illness.
He was 51 years old and lived in Richmond.


A Green-Eyed Poet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Audio Unites Art and Science
LEAD: Entering a new year is a bit like playing hopscotch.
Here too, we jump the dividing line.
We cross a threshold in time - a marker in our planet's spin around the sun - without ever really touching that evanescent border between past and future.


Miss Key Is Wed To an Art Dealer
LEAD: Alexandra Lenoir Key, a daughter of David M. Key Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mrs.
Charles R. Leonard Jr., was married yesterday to Eugene Ledogar Oakes Jr., the son of Mrs.
Edward C. Rutherford of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Oakes.
The Rev.
Allan B. Ramirez performed the ceremony at the Brookville (L.I.) Reformed


Sophie Carpenter To Marry in June
LEAD: The engagement of Sophie Carre Carpenter to Russell Frazier Speidel 2d, has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Chapin Carpenter Jr. and Bowie Robertson Carpenter, both of Washington.
A June 24 wedding is planned.
Miss Carpenter, a graduate of the National Cathedral School in Washington, graduated from the University of Virginia, where she expects to receive a master's in May from the School of Education.


Marla Kirsh Plans Wedding
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Martin Kirsh of Lyndhurst, Ohio, of the engagement of their daughter, Marla Kirsh, to Dr.
Brian David Gale, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Gale of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Ms.
Kirsh is an associate at the New York office of the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.


2d Investigation Touches Capital Mayor
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., already under investigation by the Justice Department for his visits to a hotel room occupied by a suspected drug dealer, faces still other problems from a separate investigation, this one by the Interior Department.


U.S. Bank Board Adds Nine More Troubled Savings and Loans to Its Pile of Bailouts
LEAD: Closing out the year with a rapid-fire series of savings and loan bailouts, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board announced nine transactions today and late Friday that will require the Government to inject more than $5.8 billion of assistance over the next 10 years.


Sanders in Spectacular Form Again
LEAD: Barry Sanders's final act in the Holiday Bowl was one of mercy.


Prospects; The Christmas Indicator
LEAD: Consumer spending is an important indicator of future economic activity.
While many analysts predicted a lackluster holiday selling season, consumers emptied their pocketbooks in the last 48 hours before Christmas, pushing holiday sales 5 percent to 6 percent beyond last year's levels.
Four experts assess the future economic impact of strong consumer demand.


Don't Worry, Make Music
LEAD: This holiday quite a few teen-agers lobbied for and received the very latest musical equipment -computerized keyboards that, with push-button ease, supply harmony and rhythm backup to a four-note ditty or electronic saxophones that convert desultory humming into bluesy wailing, no lung power or fingering required.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Mr.
North  Starring Anthony Edwards, Robert Mitchum, Lauren Bacall, Harry Dean Stanton, Anjelica Huston, Mary Stuart Masterson, Virginia Madsen, Tammy Grimes, David Warner, Christopher Durang.
Directed by Danny Huston. 1988.
Virgin Vision.  90 minutes. $89.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated PG.


Budget Crisis Awaiting '89 Assembly
LEAD: WHEN Gov.
William A. O'Neill enters the chambers of the State House of Representatives on Wednesday and formally convenes the General Assembly's 1989 session, he will present the lawmakers with one of their most formidable challenges of the decade: finding $882 million to balance next year's budget.


For Michelle Pfeiffer, It Was a Very Good Year
LEAD: ''Michelle,'' the voice coach said, ''this time, don't think out the words as you sing them: just think of yourself as that girl in 'Casablanca' who's getting on the plane and may never see her man again.''


Parking Rules for Holidays in 1989
LEAD: The New York City Transportation Department has issued its parking-rule changes for 1989.
ALTERNATE-SIDE PARKING RULES SUSPENDED


UNIMAGINABLE CHAOS
LEAD:  THE COMING QUAKE  Science and Trembling on the  California Earthquake Frontier.
By T. A. Heppenheimer.
Illustrated. 290 pp.
New York:  Times Books. $17.95.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  TWELFTH NIGHT


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. The threads on the outside filler pipe for my oil tank are worn out, so when the cover is put on it does not form a watertight seal.
When it rains, water seeps in, causing the oil burner to fail.
The oil company wants to put in a new pipe, but this is expensive.
Is there a less expensive way to fix this?


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-11


It Takes Two to Weigh All Sides of Prokofiev
LEAD: In one of history's ironies, Serge Prokofiev died on March 5, 1953, the same date as Stalin.
The Soviet press, of course, played up the dictator's demise to the virtual exclusion of the composer's.
Even in death, Stalin and his Bolshevik state cast a shadow over Prokofiev's career - as, indeed, they did over all Soviet composers' lives.


Singers Join in a Lament About Rising Pitch
LEAD: Altitude may be a common metaphor for success, but not with opera singers.
They are complaining with increasing stridency that international standards of pitch have broken disastrously free of their moorings and that the direction they are headed is up.


Taking Stock of Investment Clubs
LEAD: If one of your New Year's resolutions is to get back into the market, you might want to consider joining - or even starting - an investment club.
Generally organized by 15 or so friends in the form of a partnership, the clubs offer a way to pool investment money and knowledge while at the same time lessening the anxiety level.


TV Notes
LEAD:  New Soap Opera


Daniel Curley, Novelist And Story Writer, 70
LEAD: Daniel Curley, a novelist and short story writer, died Friday night of injuries suffered when he was struck by a car while vacationing in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 70 years old and lived in Urbana, Ill.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Hole in the Story
LEAD: Patrick J. Leahy, chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, was reading a preliminary Federal report on the nation's forestry prospects for the next 50 years when he was struck by an ''inexplicable omission.''


Nicholas Calas, a Poet And Art Critic, Was 81
LEAD: Nicholas Calas, an art critic and poet who directed attention in his writings to young artists and new art movements, died of heart failure Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Brazil's Economy Slows
LEAD: The Brazilian economy, plagued by an inflation rate of more than 900 percent, showed hardly any growth this year.
Brazil's gross domestic product rose only four-hundredths of 1 percent in 1988, the national statistics office said Friday in its first estimate for the year.
The stagnant economy contrasted sharply with growth of 2.9 percent a year earlier and an 8 percent rise in 1986.


Lotto Prize to Be $26 Million
LEAD: No one picked the six correct numbers in Saturday's Lotto drawing, making the first jackpot of 1989 worth $26 million, state Lottery Division officials said today.
A division spokesman, George Yamin, said if someone picks the correct six numbers in Wednesday's drawing, the winner - or winners -will receive the fourth-highest Lotto jackpot in state history.


San Diego Fights a Utility Takeover
LEAD: Municipal leaders in San Diego are mobilizing to block what they view as a blow to the city's pride and pocketbook -the $2.5 billion takeover of their largest local corporation, the San Diego Gas and Electric Company.


New Owners and Chief For J.&amp;W. Seligman
LEAD: When Shearson American Express Inc. acquired the Lehman Brothers investment firm four years ago, William C. Morris did not stay with the firm.
Instead of working for the newly acquired organization, the investment banker became a private investor.


Couple Found Slain In Bedroom of Home
LEAD: A couple were found dead last night in the master bedroom of their home in this affluent Westchester County village after a relative discovered a break-in at the residence, the police said.


Fischbach Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischbach Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
232,701,000
278,657,000
Net loss
10,554,000
17,507,000
Yr rev
930,138,000
1,102,663,000
Net loss
b3,397,000
36,047,000
b-After a gain of $10,433,000 from a change in accounting for income taxes.


Computerland Court Ruling
LEAD: A California appeals court has upheld a jury verdict granting a large minority stake in the Computerland Corporation to a group of investors.


John Paul Issues a Plea for Minority Rights
LEAD: Pope John Paul II today called on ''all men of good will'' to help build a world of peace and justice in 1989, and the Pope emphasized the need to defend the rights of members of minority groups.


Public Radio Begins Business Program
LEAD: A public-radio ''business magazine'' program begins today on roughly 80 stations nationwide, the most widely distributed entry in a growing field.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 1, 1989:
TUESDAY
Central Vt. Pub Svc
Nevada Pwr
Houston Inds
Pacific Ent
WEDNESDAY
Mercantile Stores Inc
Rite Aid Corp
THURSDAY
Amax Inc
James River Corp Va
American Wtr Wks Inc
Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt
General Pub Utils
Sun Inc
FRIDAY
Health Care Ppty Invest
Travelers Corp
Lubys Cafeterias Inc
U S West Inc
Snap-On Tools Corp


Bridge
LEAD: An interesting way for players of intermediate strength to sharpen their bidding skills is provided by a new monthly venture called ''Mike's Newsletter.'' It is written by Mike Lawrence, a former world champion with the highest credentials.
Subscriptions, addressed to him at 131 Alvaredo Road, Berkeley,


Upstart Fiesta Bowl Growing Into the Biggest Party of All
LEAD: EVERY year at about this time, the people who live and work in the Valley of the Sun heard about these great parties going on from coast to coast.


We May Be Asking Too Much of Our Presidents; Civil Rights Challenge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Even in Fog, Finish the Game
LEAD: EVER since the Buffalo Bills emerged as a Super Bowl contender, pro football people wondered what the weather would be like here on Jan. 1 for a playoff game.
Surely zero degrees.
Maybe snow.
But yesterday turned up sunny and warm.
At least sunny and warm for Buffalo at this time of year: 33 degrees at the kickoff with hardly any wind.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: Horse Racing  Cagey Exuberance Wins Handicap: Cagey Exuberance, the favorite in the field of eight and carrying high weight of 121 pounds, rallied through the stretch yesterday to score a two-length victory in the $87,150 Interborough Handicap at Aqueduct.
The triumph in the race for fillies and mares 3 years old and up was the third of the day for Richard Migliore, Cagey's Exuberance's jockey.


Ad Ban Might Help Cigarette Makers
LEAD: Does advertising increase cigarette smoking?
Representative Michael Synar, Democrat of Oklahoma, thinks so, and is pressing for legislation to end tobacco promotion.


Memo Contradicts Government Reports On Uranium Leaks
LEAD: Uranium emissions in 1961 at a federally owned processing plant were much greater than the Government has acknowldeged, a recently discovered memorandum shows.


Doors Open for Only Some Soviet Dissidents
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burnishing Detroit's Faded Image
LEAD: The Motor City is trying to mount an auto show that will help it burnish its faded image as the car capital of the world.


Teheran Finds War Was Easier to Make Than a Stable Peace
LEAD: Five months after Iran embraced a cease-fire in the eight-year Iran-Iraq war, the regime is struggling over how to rebuild its economy and recast its goal of ''war until victory'' to an ideology suited to peace.


Camden Journal; In Struggles of the City, Children Are Casualties
LEAD: Except for a couple blocks of downtown, Camden looks like a war zone, with block after block of burned buildings, collapsing buildings, half-gutted buildings, boarded-up buildings and a staggering succession of lots covered with rubble.


Sinn Fein's Leader Criticizes I.R.A. on Killing of Civilians
LEAD: Gerry Adams, leader of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, has criticized the I.R.A. for killing civilians in a string of botched attacks in 1988.


Lynn Sara Glickman Wed To Eli M. Moore, a Lawyer
LEAD: Lynn Sara Glickman, a certified nurse-midwife at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, and Eli Max Moore, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, were married last evening at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Rabbi Irwin Feldman, an uncle of the bridegroom, and Rabbi Ephraim Buchwald performed the ceremony.


Many Facing New Laws And Rules In New Year
LEAD: Like resolutions, New Year's predictions tend to haunt those who make them.
But some milestones can already be discerned in 1989 because of laws, rules or other government actions that will change the physical and social landscape in and around New York City.


We May Be Asking Too Much of Our Presidents
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thatcher Opposes Revenge for Bomb
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said today that no revenge should be taken for the bombing that destroyed a Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland with 259 people aboard.


The Thrift Approach
LEAD: It has been 20 years since the Kansas City Royals began their baseball academy to discover and develop prospective players.
The academy passed out of existence long ago, but its purpose has not left the mind of its original director, Syd Thrift.


Tax Watch; Buyout Incentives Of '86 Legislation
LEAD: WHEN Congress holds hearings on leveraged buyouts later this month, the nation's tax laws are going to come under scrutiny to see whether tax incentives are being given to the wrong people.
To certain academic economists, the answer is a clear yes.


Bengals Eager to Move Along
LEAD: The Cincinnati Bengals have already beaten the Buffalo Bills once this season.
And the Bengals are 9-0 at home.


Craig Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Craig Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
877,000
755,000
Net inc
2,163,000
699,000
Share earns
1.01
.36
Shares outst
2,135,000
1,944,000
Yr rev
-
-
Net inc
-
-
Share earns
-
-
The company has changed its fiscal year to end Sept.


School, Police and Employee Groups Pool Money to Give to the Neediest
LEAD: With the pressure of year-end exams, the Baruch College Coffee Klatchers did not have much time to think about giving, said Carol Robbins, director of Evening and Graduate Services.


Hurricanes Have Eyes On the Top
LEAD: If the campaign works, Jimmy Johnson's next job might be in politics, working as a spin doctor for one of the candidates in the next Presidential campaign.
The University of Miami football coach has apparently planted a seed of doubt about whether the winner of the Fiesta Bowl game on Monday in Tempe, Ariz., between unbeaten Notre Dame and West Virginia, should automatically be voted the No.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL REPORT  The Canadian-American free trade agreement will bring cheaper ice skates and skateboards, fur coats and auto parts to many Americans.
Canadians may find bargains in skis, furniture, computers and telephone handsets under the tariff cuts that took effect at midnight on Dec.


10 PEOPLE KILLED IN MINNESOTA FIRE
LEAD: A fire swept quickly through a house north of here today, killing eight children and the two adults who were baby-sitting for them, the authorities said.


Washington Talk: Congress; Banking Chairmen Show Sharp Contrast in Styles
LEAD: One wears Kelly green sport jackets, the other pin-striped suits.
One has decorated his office with political memorabilia dating back 30 years or more; the other prefers modern art.
One held a two-hour press conference earlier this month, exhausting reporters.
The other mostly speaks not for attribution Meet the new chairmen of the House and Senate


North Korean Invites South to Get Together
LEAD: President Kim Il Sung of North Korea invited his South Korean counterpart, Roh Tae Woo, and six other political and religious leaders to a political conference, the official North Korean press agency reported today.


Portugal Raises Wages
LEAD: Portugal, the poorest country in the European Community, raised the minimum wage for industrial workers on Friday by 10 percent, to 30,000 escudos, or $204, a month.
The Government also said the minimum wage for agricultural workers would rise by 14.5 percent, to 28,400 escudos, or $193, a month.


B. Smith's Restaurant Has Marriage on Menu
LEAD: G. Keith Alexander first met his wife, Sharrell, at a crowded midtown Manhattan restaurant.
He was making a telephone call; she was sitting at the bar.
Their eyes met.
They married nine weeks later.


INSIDE
LEAD:  49ers and Bills Win  The San Francisco 49ers routed Minnesota, 34-9, and advanced to the National Football Conference final.


At Least 51 Die As Party Vessel Capsizes Off Rio
LEAD: At least 51 people drowned and another 30 to 40 were believed to be missing when a boat carrying party-goers to watch a New Year's fireworks display along Copacabana Beach sank at the entrance to the bay of Rio de Janeiro a few minutes before midnight Saturday.


Canadian Rail Tunnel
LEAD: Canadian Pacific Ltd. said Friday that it had completed the longest railroad tunnel in North America as part of a $420 million ($500 million Canadian), four-year project to ease the gradient for westbound freight trains crossing the Canadian Rockies.
A limited number of trains are using the 9.1-mile tunnel.


Conference Thrives by Cultivating Fans and Teams
LEAD: When Dave Gavitt conceived the idea of an East Coast basketball league, his plan was to link teams in major media markets.


New York Pedestrians Are on a Suicide Mission
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shut Military Units May Go to Homeless
LEAD: Two hundred thirty housing units in 12 Connecticut communities used by off-base military personnel could be converted to homeless shelters under a 1987 Federal law.


The Video News Release: Let the Viewer Beware
LEAD: WHEN the ''CBS Evening News With Dan Rather'' reported Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s settlement of Federal securities-law violations two weeks ago, it included a clip of Frederick H. Joseph, Drexel's chief executive, talking about how he felt about the agreement.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Construction Spending Nov.
Wednesday  Factory Orders Nov.
Thursday  New-Car Sales Dec.
Friday


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I do not think an eye for an eye or a tooth for a tooth is ever valid.
I can understand the anger.
We feel the anger very deeply.
The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track down these people so that they are brought to justice.''  - Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, on the crash of Pan Am Flight 103.


The Phantom Old-Age Vote
LEAD: Birthdays do not dictate the politics of American citizens.
Nevertheless, when Congress and the President-elect Bush get around to attacking the Federal budget deficit, it's a safe bet they will be intimidated by all the usual assumptions about the elderly vote.


Holiday Today
LEAD: Today is the legal holiday for New Year's Day.
Below are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Sunday rules in effect.


Big Board Seat $625,000
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said Friday that a seat on the exchange had been sold for $625,000, up $5,000 from the previous seat sale on Dec. 21.
The bid price for a seat is $600,000 and the offering price is $640,000.


Val d'Isere Journal; On to Olympian Glory, but at Too Steep a Price?
LEAD: When Jean-Claude Killy thinks about the year 1992, he doesn't have in mind the European Community's ambitious deadline for creating a frontier-free market of 320 million consumers.


Maloney Absorbs Week Full of Pain
LEAD: For Don Maloney, the week began and ended with broadsides, painful bookends to the most emotionally packed seven days of his life.
The first changed his career; the second ruined much of the rest of his season.
Maloney never saw either coming, and only in the last 24 hours have his vision and throat cleared enough for him to talk coherently about it all.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, headlines on the Outdoors and About Cars articles were transposed yesterday in some copies of the Sports section.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


From Tempe to Tampa to Your TV
LEAD:  Sunkist Fiesta Bowl  Notre Dame (11-0) vs.
W.
Virginia (11-0)  Kickoff 4:30 P.M., at Tempe, Ariz., NBC-TV.
Ranking Notre Dame: A.P. 1, U.P.I. 1, Times 1.
West Virginia: A.P. 3, U.P.I. 3, Times 6.
Coaches Notre Dame: Lou Holtz.
West Virginia: Don Nehlen.
Probable payoff per school $3 million.


A Writing Workshop
LEAD: The director and lyricist Martin Charnin is to teach a five-session workshop, ''From Page to Stage: Lyric Writing and Directing for the Musical Theater,'' at 7:30 P.M. on consecutive Thursdays, beginning next week, at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue.
The fee is $85.
Information: 996-1100.


Shift at Paper In Los Angeles
LEAD: C. Shelby Coffey 3d became editor of The Los Angeles Times today, succeeding William F. Thomas, who retired after 17 years with the paper.


India Says 2,000 Troops Will Leave Sri Lanka
LEAD: India announced today that it would withdraw about 2,000 troops from Sri Lanka in the next few days, and officials said further troop reductions would follow.


MSI Electronics reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MSI Electronics (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,418,303
1,509,273
Net loss
214,612
71,666


Steinberg and Myerson Trials: 2 Cases Provoke Many Books
LEAD: Publishers have already spent more than a million dollars on advances to authors writing about Manhattan's two most talked-about current courtroom dramas: the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg and the corruption trial that ended in the acquittal of Bess Myerson, a former Miss America and New York cultural commissioner.


Irving Bank Deal Completed
LEAD: The longest-lasting bank takeover finally came to an end Friday when the Irving Bank Corporation was legally merged into the Bank of New York Company.


The German Problem
LEAD: Can it be that the ''good Germans'' are at it again - claiming to know nothing about the participation of some of their countrymen in a power-maniac's plans for his own Final Solution?


Airline Profits Seen Surging To Post-Regulation Record
LEAD: On the strength of higher air fares and modest growth in traffic, airline profits in the United States are soaring to their highest level since the industry was deregulated 10 years ago.


Dam Break Forces Evacuation
LEAD: An earthen dike broke early today, forcing the evacuation of an estimated 1,500 people for several hours and closure of a major interstate highway, the authorities said.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-8  An Israeli austerity plan to rescue the troubled economy was unveiled by Finance Minister Shimon Peres.
It includes major budget reductions and would call for the layoff of thousands of Government employees.
Page 1


Moscow Curbs Exports of Scarce Goods
LEAD: In the midst of the worst shortage of consumer goods in recent memory, the Soviet Government announced today that foreigners would soon be prevented from taking such scarce locally produced items as caviar, coffee, television sets, children's clothing, refrigerators or washing machines out of the country.


Debt-Equity Swaps Draw Latin Criticisms
LEAD: As the incoming Bush administration prepares to take its promised new look at Latin America's foreign debt crisis, the one well-tried method of reducing the region's payments - through conversion of debt into equity - is coming under fire in several countries.


Consul Restaurant Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consul Restaurant Corp
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,781,000
18,179,000
Net loss
520,000
274,000
6mo rev
40,417,000
37,819,000
Net inc
b196,000
b427,000
Share earns
.02
.04
b-After tax credits of $70,000 for the latest 6 months and $160,000 for the year-earlier period.


Overhauling School Decentralization
LEAD: New York City's school decentralization law was born in the educational, political and racial crisis of 1968 that nearly tore the city apart.
Issues of teacher accountability, union power and community control were dramatically contested in the streets.
The resulting legislation was a rough political compromise, not a coherent educational vision.


Farmers' Trade Debate: To Fight or to Negotiate
LEAD: On the brink of a trade war with Europe, America's farmers find themselves divided.


Honduran Drops His Threat To Boycott Summit Meeting
LEAD: President Jose Azcona Hoyo of Honduras has apparently removed the last obstacle to a meeting of Central American presidents set for Jan. 15-16 in El Salvador.


Irvine Sensors Corp reports earnings for Year to Oct 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irvine Sensors Corp
Year to Oct 2
1988
1987
Revenue
2,971,600
1,479,200
Net loss
937,800
1,956,500


Leigh Ann Wilcoxson Weds
LEAD: Leigh Ann Wilcoxson, the daughter of Nancy Stade of Salisbury, Md., was married there yesterday to Harlan Adam Eagle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Eagle of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Cantor Alvin Donald officiated at the Sheraton Salisbury.
Mrs.
Eagle, a graduate of Salisbury State University, is an exercise specialist at the Dorchester General Hospital in Cambridge, Md.


Israel, Hardly the Monaco of the Middle East
LEAD: The recent definitions of Palestinian attitudes will not ''solve'' the Middle Eastern crisis or bring a negotiation with Israel into early view.
But all attempts in Israel and the United States to portray them as worthless or fraudulent have incurred total failure.
Moreover, it is absurd to suggest, as many of Israel's friends have, that the American decision to talk to the Palestine Liberation Organization theatens Israel's very survival.


Islanders Reflect a Positive Image
LEAD: In defiance of a recent trend toward decrepitude, the Islanders have been victorious twice in the space of a week, and Saturday's 6-4 domination of the Washington Capitals suggests that their transformation from chumps to challengers may finally have taken place.


20 Years Ago, Three Men Circled the Moon
LEAD: To the Editor:


BATTLES BEGINNING IN RACE TO PATENT SUPERCONDUCTORS
LEAD: Patent battles now beginning could determine which organizations and even which nations control the rights to new high-temperature superconductors, materials that could revolutionize fields like computers and electricity generation.


Facing Wall Of Silence; Tompkins Goal Is Making Police Talk
LEAD: Last week, nearly five months after New York City police officers called to Tompkins Square Park clubbed and kicked scores of bystanders, 400 officers and 40 sergeants who had been there that night stood accused of a new offense: stonewalling investigators from the Civilian Complaint Review Board.


Two Old Rivals Meet in Pasadena
LEAD: Bo Schembechler has mellowed so much that he is no longer impatient with silly questions.
He even finds amusing ways to answer them.


It's a Rare Sport That Bush Doesn't Like
LEAD: George Bush has taken some time out since the election for sedentary activities like picking a Cabinet and preparing a plan to govern.
But mostly he has kept up a grueling schedule of shooting, casting, jogging, putting, pitching, lobbing, boating, diving and body surfing.


Tomczak Vows He'll Be Back
LEAD: The Bears received good news today about Mike Tomczak, their starting quarterback.
They learned that his shoulder injury was not as bad as expected, and they said he might play next Sunday.


Reagan and Environment: To Many, a Stalemate
LEAD: When President Reagan took office, environmentalists feared the worst from the man who once said trees cause pollution.
They expected him to dismantle environmental regulation and give away public lands and resources.


Legalized Migrants Flock Home for Holidays
LEAD: Santiago and Gloria Rodriguez have been married for eight years, but neither has ever met the other's parents, his in Mexico, hers in Guatemala.
As immigrants living illegally in California, the couple dared not, until now, leave the United States for fear they might not ever be able to slip back across the border.


Compumed Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compumed Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,933,000
7,381,000
Net loss
5,618,000
b540,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $246,000 on the settlement of disputed claims.


Infant Is Discarded With the Trash
LEAD: A 23-year-old woman was charged with manslaughter after reportedly discarding her newborn infant with the trash sometime early last week, the Gloucester County Prosecutor said yesterday.


Bancroft Convertible Fund Inc reports earnings for As of Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancroft Convertible Fund Inc (AMEX)
As of Oct 31
1988
1987
Assets
40,103,065
-
Per share
22.60
-
Assets represent net assets.
The fund said it changed its fiscal year-end from March 31 to Oct. 31; year-ago results are not available.


Youth Shot by Police Is a Hit-Run Suspect
LEAD: A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth, who the police later learned was a suspect in a fatal hit-and-run accident in June, was shot early yesterday morning by a police officer during a routine stop for a minor traffic violation, a police spokesman said.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Vietnam, which is rolling back tight state control to revitalize its economy, said it would put some inefficient state enterprises into private hands next year to increase production and exports.
Radio Hanoi said a National Assembly resolution on the economic plan for 1989 envisaged a 10 percent increase in industrial output, a 15 percent rise in the value of exports and a 6 percent rise in gross national product over 1988 levels.


Courageous Men
LEAD: Vince Newsome of the Los Angeles Rams was Ed Block's kind of guy.
Newsome has never whined or complained in the past two seasons, which were full of stress and strife for him.
Now he is in a position to win the Ed Block Courage Award.


Hospitals See (Relatively) Calm New Year
LEAD: The ambulance was speeding toward St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan, carrying a 21-year-old college student who had been hit on the head as he stood in Times Square, the waning minutes of 1988 ticking away.


Thirty Years of Fidel Castro
LEAD: Thirty years ago on New Year's Day, Cubans acclaimed Fidel Castro as the youthful liberator who felled the corrupt tyranny of Fulgencio Batista.
Today the 62-year-old Mr.
Castro himself resembles one of those crabbed caudillos in the novels of his Colombian friend, Gabriel Garcia Marquez.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cardinal Technologies Inc., Los Angeles, a holding company, said Martin J. Salvin was named a director, increasing the board to five members.


Navy Calls the Deployment Of a Carrier Group 'Routine'
LEAD: A 13-ship aircraft carrier battle group that left Norfolk, Va., on Friday for the Mediterranean was sent on a ''routine deployment,'' a Navy spokesman said today.


Reviews/Television; Tantalizing Tidbits About 'Gone With the Wind'


Shiite Rivals in Beirut Battle for Second Day
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militiamen today fought running street gun battles in southern Beirut for the second straight day, defying appeals from Shiite leaders to end months of violent confrontation.


Old Fashion Foods Inc reports earnings for 13wk to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Fashion Foods Inc (OTC)
13wk to Nov 26
1988
1987
Revenue
5,070,000
4,861,000
Net inc
85,000
179,000
Share earns
.07
.15
Shares outst
1,197,745
1,220,051
26wk rev
9,980,000
9,482,000
Net inc
142,000
b562,000
Share earns
.12
.46
Shares outst
1,197,745
1,220,422


Delmar Karlen, 76, N.Y.U. Law Professor
LEAD: Delmar Karlen, a professor emeritus of the New York University School of Law and a former director of its Institute of Judicial Administration, died of a heart attack Friday at his home in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 76 years old.


Review/Cabaret; June-Moon-Croon, in a Classical Way
LEAD: What do the vintage hit songs ''Don't You Know?,'' ''Strange Music,'' ''Tonight We Love,'' ''There's No Tomorrow'' and ''Full Moon and Empty Arms'' share?
All are pop songs that borrowed their melodies from themes by classical composers.
In most cases, the pop lyrics attached to them were Broadway and Tin Pan


Clement A. Smith, 87, Professor of Pediatrics
LEAD: Clement A. Smith, professor emeritus of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and a past president of the American Pediatric Society, died Saturday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 87 years old.
Dr.
Smith conducted studies on the prevention of deaths of babies.
He was a recipient of the Howland Award, the highest honor of the pediatric society, and a chair in pediatrics at the medical school was named for him.


Southern Co reports earnings for 12mo Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Co (NYSE)
12mo Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,239,065,000
7,150,949,000
Net inc
806,685,000
611,302,000
Share earns
2.60
2.04
The year-ago 12 months' results included an after-tax charge of $229 million to cover cost over-runs at the Vogtle Nuclear Plant.


Cuba's 30 Castro Years: Pluses, Minus the Gaiety
LEAD: Thirty years ago today Cubans poured into the streets of Havana, cheering and honking car horns, to celebrate the collapse of a brutal dictatorship and the promise of a better way of life.


The Super Bowl's Perfect 22
LEAD: Many startling and dramatic events took place in 1988, but followers of the Super Bowl stock market theory got no surprises.
It came through with flying colors for the 22d year in a row.


Harding Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harding Associates Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
13,032,412
9,199,562
Net inc
824,320
500,102
Share earns
.28
.17
Shares outst
2,903,740
2,918,130
6mo rev
24,985,841
18,722,828
Net inc
1,893,108
b1,626,220
Share earns
.65
.65
Shares outst
2,903,740
2,491,269


Outdoors: Fundamental Steps for Using Decoy Ducks
LEAD: THERE is no one way to decoy ducks successfully, but knowledge of a few fundamentals will save you time and put more birds in your freezer.


Canada Television Deal
LEAD: MacLean Hunter Ltd. said Friday that it had agreed to sell a television station in Hamilton, Ontario, to the Blackburn Group for about $57.4 million, or $68.5 million Canadian.
MacLean Hunter said the station, CHCH-TV, had belonged to Selkirk Communications Ltd., which MacLean Hunter acquired earlier this month.


Israel Expels 13 Palestinians Accused of Aiding Uprising
LEAD: Thirteen Palestinians accused of leading the uprising in the occupied territories were deported to Lebanon today, and residents of the West Bank and Gaza Strip celebrated the 23d anniversary of the first attack against Israel by Yasir Arafat's Fatah guerrilla group.


Even if You Agree, Don't Honk Your Horn
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peru Plans to Seek Loans
LEAD: Peru, which has taken a hard-line stance on its foreign debts, has announced that it plans to hold talks with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank about obtaining new loans from the international agencies.


Key Co reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Net loss
2,930,000
b1,311,000
Yr sales
31,797,000
46,028,000
Net loss
5,793,000
1,507,000
b-Included the loss from the company's discontinued leasing operation of $1,277,000.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Long, Sad Year
LEAD: The death of Steven Butler aboard Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland on Dec. 21 brought to six the number of Peace Corps volunteers who died in 1988. ''It has not been a good year,'' said a spokesman for the corps.


Georgia Wins Gator Bowl
LEAD: Wayne Johnson threw three touchdown passes and Rodney Hampton ran for 109 yards and scored three times tonight as Georgia gave Coach Vince Dooley a 34-27 Gator Bowl victory over Michigan State in his final game.


Tariffs Lifted By Venezuela
LEAD: Venezuela on Friday sharply increased the import tariffs on about 500 consumer goods, including liquor and electronic items, to curb imports and stem a drain of foreign reserves.


Review/Music; Solos and Duets
LEAD: Marilyn Horne was the hostess for Carnegie Hall's concert party this New Year's Eve, and singing was the main course served - the only course, in fact, aside from the fluent and elegant accompanying of Martin Katz.
Neil Rosenshein, Barbara Daniels, Hakan Hagegard and Barbara Bonney - all fresh from the Metropolitan Opera's ''Fledermaus'' the night before - were joined by Samuel Ramey and Miss


Correction
LEAD: A listing in the Company News column in Business Day on Friday about Tiffany &amp; Company misstated when the company most recently sold shares to the public.
Tiffany, which was taken private in a leveraged buyout in October 1984, made a public offering of shares in May 1987.


OPEC Ready To Begin Output Limits
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries appeared ready to begin curbing oil production under an agreement that took effect today.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Flash! No Failures!
LEAD: Closing 1988 on a hopeful note, L. William Seidman announced Friday: ''The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is pleased to announce that no F.D.I.C.-insured banks failed this holiday week anywhere in the United States.''


Brown Wants to Lead Party He Once Spurned
LEAD: Once hailed by some as the most inspired politician of his generation and disparaged by others as ''Governor Moonbeam,'' Edmund G. Brown Jr. is attempting a comeback by running for the unlikely post of chairman of the state Democratic Party.


Critic's Notebook; Are Books Becoming Relics?
LEAD: In her biography ''Private Demons: The Life of Shirley Jackson,'' Judy Oppenheimer describes how Miss Jackson and her husband, the critic and teacher Stanley Edgar Hyman, accumulated great quantities of books.


P.L.O. Flag Flies High in Saudi Arabia


S&amp;L Deals: Did Taxpayers Lose?
LEAD: Are all the latest costly savings and loan bailouts more costly to taxpayers and depositors than necessary?
Federal regulators now face heavy criticism for a spate of year-end multibillion-dollar deals, in which private investors have agreed to take over bankrupt savings institutions.


A Test Of Polls In Light Of Bowls
LEAD: Once the football teams from Notre Dame and West Virginia produce a result Monday afternoon, the 18th Fiesta Bowl will either demonstrate that polls and the bowl system can combine to produce a consensus national champion, or create another complex case of lobbying and haggling.


Red Eagle Resources Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Eagle Resources Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,828,000
4,183,000
Net loss
199,000
b111,000
Yr rev
14,574,000
17,568,000
Net inc
631,000
777,000
Share earns
.05
.06
Shares outst
14,022,000
11,977,000


Reviews/Television; How Washington Works, as Seen From Inside
LEAD: Like Hedrick Smith's knowing book from which it is derived, ''The Power Game'' is a shrewd observer's account of the movings and shakings of Washington's shakers and movers.
Tonight's opening hour, on Channel 13 at 9 and Channel 49 at 8, deals with Congress, especially members who came in during the ''power earthquake'' of 1974, as anti-leadership, pro-reform insurgents.


Tibet Students Said to Hold Anti-Chinese Rally in Lhasa
LEAD: Hundreds of Tibetan students demonstrated in Lhasa, demanding that the Chinese authorities respect their culture and stop carrying weapons, Western witnesses said today.


Talks With Soviet Team
LEAD: The spirit of negotiation promulgated under Mikhail Gorbachev was everywhere in evidence as the Soviet Union's top hockey team, Central Red Army, spent three days on Long Island last week as part of their seven-game Super Series.
Coach Viktor Tikhonov, who arrived irritable and weary after a daylong trip from Quebec that started in a breakfast squabble with the National Hockey League translator, Anna Udovicic, initially waved off reporters with a terse ''nyet.


Wide Effect Seen From Trade Pact
LEAD: Tariff cuts that took effect at midnight on Dec. 31 under a Canadian-American free trade agreement will bring cheaper ice skates and skateboards, fur coats and automobile parts to many Americans.


Marci International Imports reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 13
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marci International Imports
Qtr to Oct 13
1988
1987
Sales
3,184,798
3,315,252
Net loss
520,292
160,476
6mo sales
6,835,463
6,170,294
Net loss
1,250,005
173,642


Two Alternatives to the Situp
LEAD: THIS is a celebration of strong abdominal muscles and flat stomachs, but particularly strong lower backs.
So try this test.


41 Minutes Into '89, City Records First Homicide
LEAD: A 19-year-old Queens man who was killed in a dispute shortly after he left the raucous New Year's revelry in Times Square was the city's first homicide victim of 1989, the police said yesterday.


49ers Swamp Vikings, 34-9; Bills Beat Oilers, 17-10; Rice, Montana, Craig All Excel
LEAD: Jerry Rice had heard the sniping.
He had listened to the comparisons of him and Anthony Carter, how he had produced a dazzling 23-touchdown season last year only to be shut out in the playoffs.
Carter was the beauty in post-season play, Rice the beast.


G.O.P. Leader Expects Tax Rise in Budget Bill
LEAD: Representative Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, said today that a tax increase would probably be part of a bipartisan budget compromise in 1989 despite President-elect George Bush's pledge to oppose higher taxes.


You Can Swing While You Swim
LEAD: SWIMMING laps in a pool is a mainstay of many people's fitness regimen.
But laps can be tedious.


ISRAEL PUTS FORTH AN AUSTERITY PLAN TO REVIVE ECONOMY
LEAD: Finance Minister Shimon Peres unveiled a stringent austerity plan today to rescue Israel's troubled economy.


Foreign Stock Gains Outpaced U.S. in 1988
LEAD: The Bund and the Bourse.
Tokyo and Madrid.
Rome and Oslo.
They are nowhere near Wall Street.
But they are where Americans should be buying many of their stocks, a growing number of analysts say.


Swamped by Drug-Related Cases, Connecticut Frees Convicts Early
LEAD: Overwhelmed by an increase in drug-related arrests, Connecticut prison officials are seeking to ease overcrowding by releasing scores of convicts early.


Metro Matters; A Look Back At Some Stories Still Unfolding
LEAD: Some matters that were subjects of this column in 1988 continued to unfold after they were first reported.
Here's an update.


Washington Talk: Briefing; In Memoriam
LEAD: Honoring another victim of the Pan Am crash, the Criminal Division of the Justice Department has decided to dedicate its law library to a colleague who was aboard Flight 103.


New Scandal in French Art World Over Purchase of a Painting
LEAD: In France's latest art controversy, a French court has ruled that the city of Strasbourg and its Museum of Decorative Arts defrauded a 73-year-old widow in the purchase of a 17th-century canvas, possibly done by Simon Vouet, the official court painter of Louis XIII.


2 Dead in Los Angeles After Holiday Gunfire
LEAD: Gunshots fired on New Year's Eve struck police cars, knocked out electricity and left one man dead, and another man was killed by officers who said he had fired at an unmarked patrol car, the police said today.


Crown Andersen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Andersen Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,533,244
3,184,673
Net loss
1,977,517
177,524
Yr rev
27,609,764
11,993,478
Net loss
1,538,182
72,783


Books of The Times; The Links and Rifts Between Fathers and Sons
LEAD:  First Acts  A Memoir  By B. L. Reid  Illustrated. 243 pages.
University of Georgia Press. $16.95.
Spellbound  Growing Up in God's Country  By David McKain  257 pages.
University of Georgia Press. $18.95.


Korea Surplus With U.S. Dips
LEAD: The national trade surplus with the United States in the first 11 months of this year decreased to $7.61 billion, down $890 million from a year ago, the Korea Foreign Trade Association reported Friday.
Under American pressure, Korea has eased import curbs and taken other steps in efforts to reduce the trade excess.


H.W. Zancanata Dies; Rocket Builder Was 70
LEAD: Harold W. Zancanata, a scientist who developed some of the first rockets for testing the atmosphere, died of a heart attack Wednesday at Florida Medical Center.
He was 70 years old.


Top Avnet Executive Adds Chairman's Post
LEAD: Avnet Inc., the nation's largest semiconductor distributor, has elected Leon Machiz chairman and chief executive officer.
He succeeds Anthony R. Hamilton, who died of cancer on Dec. 22.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: When Babe Ruth hit 60 home runs for the Yankees in 1927 to set a major league mark, what was the National League record and who held it?


Citizen Reagan Won't Be a Retiree
LEAD: His new neighbors will breathe a sigh of relief, his old friends will throw glittering parties, and the mashed-potato circuit will have a new star attraction.


We May Be Asking Too Much of Our Presidents; Keep Electoral College
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unimed Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unimed Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,285,780
4,160,078
Net loss
1,448,166
523,556


Bookstores Look to Instant Ordering
LEAD: Customers who order an out-of-stock title from a bookstore would be well advised to settle down with another book while awaiting delivery -something on the order of ''War and Peace.'' While book publishing has modernized some production methods, the process of getting books from the warehouse remains mired in antiquity.


Talk by Maurice Sendak Begins a Writers' Series
LEAD: The author and illustrator Maurice Sendak is to be the opening-night speaker at the Hudson Park branch of the New York Public Library, 66 Leroy Street, on Jan. 12 at 6:30 P.M., when the library begins its fifth series of discussions titled Village Writers Meet Their Neighbors.


Armenia Prints Warning to K.G.B.; Called Fake
LEAD: An Armenian Communist Party newspaper has published what purports to be an anonymous ultimatum to the K.G.B., threatening to use American-made Stinger missiles in a campaign of ''mass terror'' if jailed Armenian nationalist leaders are not set free.


49ers Swamp Vikings, 34-9; Bills Beat Oilers, 17-10; Kelly Leads Buffalo
LEAD: This was how Jim Kelly remembered the way football should be played: you throw.


Review/Music; The Philharmonic's Toast to Old and New Years
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic closed its books on 1988 with a festive Pension Fund Benefit concert on New Year's Eve at Avery Fisher Hall.
For the occasion, the orchestra was considerably enlarged and played under a canopy of colorful streamers, interlaced with microphone cables.
The latter were used both for the ''Live From Lincoln Center'' broadcast, which piped the proceedings into living rooms across the country, and by CBS Records, which recorded the concert.


Chief Justice Urges Increase In Federal Judges' Salaries
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, warning that current salaries for Federal judges threaten the quality of the judiciary, today urged President Reagan and Congress to accept the substantial pay increases proposed last month by a special commission.


Eligibility Question
LEAD: A British track official said yesterday that an inquiry into Zola Budd's eligibility for international competition would be reopened if the South African-born runner attempts to return to her adopted country.


BAKKERS ARE BACK IN NEW TV SHOW
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the defrocked minister, and his wife, Tammy, were back on the air today with a new version of their religious talk show, two years to the day after a sex and money scandal forced him to shut down their popular PTL television program.


Our Towns; A Pair of Angels Who've Earned Their Wings
LEAD: Kim Thornton is the youngest of seven children.
The others looked out for her.
They had to; their parents were alcoholics.
When Kim was 8, her mother and father got bad.
Her father sold the house for cash and announced he was driving them to Arizona.


Rome Journal; How Is Marcus Aurelius? As Right as Acid Rain
LEAD: They have made it more difficult to toss even one coin into the Trevi Fountain, let alone the Hollywood allotment of three.


'Computer Virus' Joins the Lexicon
LEAD: The term ''computer virus'' spread into use like, well, a virus during 1988, but the outbreak came too late to make the latest editions of Merriam-Webster dictionaries.


Economy Is Bolstered By Exports
LEAD: Fueled by an increase in exports, the nation's economy grew in December at its highest rate in five months, the National Association of Purchasing Management said in its monthly report, which is scheduled to be released today.


Talking Business with Schwab, the discount broker; Hard Competition Seen for Brokers
LEAD: Many stockbrokers will remember 1988 as a year they would like to forget.
After the crash of October 1987, a steady stream of money from individual investors became only a trickle.
Nearly every brokerage firm reported sharply lower profits, and many cut their staffs in an effort to compete in a tough new environment.


Careers; Educating Managers In Hungary
LEAD: BULGARIA last week stopped jamming radio programs broadcast from the West, a demonstration of openness.
Hungary also moved in that direction with the announcement in November that an International Management Center had been opened in Budapest.


Still Bullish, With Fingers Crossed
LEAD: Fear hung over the stock market early last year as investors worried that the October 1987 crash would be followed by a 1930's-like depression and market decline.
But the market turned in a remarkably strong performance, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing 11.8 percent, ending the year at 2,168.57.


India-China Statement Angers Tibetan Exiles
LEAD: A little-noticed paragraph recognizing Chinese sovereignty over Tibet in a statement signed by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi on a recent trip to Beijing has aroused alarm and resentment among Tibetan exiles in India, a spokesman for the Dalai Lama said here today.


Sara Lee Sells Two Subsidiaries
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation said it had sold its Lyon's Restaurant chain and the Peck Food Corporation to two separate buyers.
Terms were not disclosed for either sale.


Ghana, Once 'Hopeless,' Gets At Least the Look of Success
LEAD: More than five years ago, when the World Bank decided to make the state-dominated economy here a model for free-market innovations in Africa, Ghana was in the grip of stagnation.
Since then, Ghana has boasted Africa's highest consistent growth rate, an average of 6 percent a year since 1983.


Business Week's Move
LEAD: Business Week magazine has named Ray Hoffman to replace S. G. (Rudy) Ruderman as its lead radio announcer.
Mr.
Hoffman was Business Week's No. 2 announcer.
Mr.
Ruderman last year pleaded guilty to trading stocks based on his advance knowledge of Business Week stories.


No Big Airline Tie-Ups
LEAD: Heavy new security measures at European airports last week produced no major passenger snarls at check-in counters or delays in flights to the United States over a long New Year's weekend of light but growing trans-Atlantic air traffic.


Delayed NASA Missions Prepare for Takeoff
LEAD: AFTER a decade in the doldrums, grounded by budget cuts and the space shuttle accident, planetary exploration by the United States is primed for a big leap forward this year.


What Gandhi and Bhutto Didn't Discuss: Kashmir
LEAD: As the young Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan met for the first time Thursday, raising hopes for less bitter dealings between the two powers of the Indian subcontinent, a small motorcade drove up out of history with a cautionary message: Remember Kashmir.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the world's oldest bridge clubs, the Studenterforeningen Bridge Club in Copenhagen, marked its 60th birthday recently with an international pairs event.
The diagramed deal won a Swedish player the prize for best-played hand, and the Swedish expert Sven-Olov Flodqvist suggests it would probably have won a prize for the best-bid hand, too, if such a prize had existed.


Hurricanes Try Harder and Rout Nebraska
LEAD: The proclamation came shortly after the Orange Bowl game ended tonight and, like much of what Jimmy Johnson says, it was not intended to win friends or soothe anyone's feelings.
The Miami coach felt his team had a point to prove against Nebraska and did so emphatically.
Now, he was ready to boast.


Philadelphia Killer Critical After Tranquilizer Overdose
LEAD: Gary Heidnik, who was convicted of murdering two of six women he abducted and kept shackled in the basement of his home in Philadelphia, took an overdose of anti-psychotic medicine he stockpiled in prison and was hospitalized in critical condition, his psychiatrist said today.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Partners &amp; Shevack has created a print campaign for the American Jewish World Service.


Scientists Link '88 Drought to Natural Cycle in Tropical Pacific
LEAD: LAST year's killing drought in the United States was caused by massive, naturally occurring climatic forces in the tropical Pacific Ocean and had little to do with global warming caused by the greenhouse effect, according to new evidence.


Drummond Rushes Past L.S.U.
LEAD: Syracuse was almost perfect today.
A clever offensive display and a steady defensive effort resulted in an easy victory over Louisiana State, 23-10, in the Hall of Fame Bowl before an announced crowd of 51,112.


Danzig History Offers Little Help on Gaza
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perestroika, Without Western Subsidies
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's pledge to cut 500,000 Soviet troops and 10,000 tanks could signal the beginning of a new era in East-West relations.
If the Soviets are serious about economic reform - and I believe they are -these cuts may be just the first installment in a large-scale reallocation of resources from the military to the civilian sector.


Prelude to Mars: 5 Months in a Cave
LEAD: An Italian researcher will spend five months - the time required to fly to Mars - in a cave here this year.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-11


THE MEN BEHIND THE BIGGEST STORIES ON WALL STREET AND IN WASHINGTON: HENRY R. KRAVIS, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts; RJR Nabisco Deal A Triumphant Work For Master of Buyouts
LEAD: The buyout specialist Henry R. Kravis began last year by donating $10 million to build the Henry R. Kravis wing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and followed with $10 million for the Mount Sinai Medical Center.


Addenda
LEAD: *
The American Advertising Federation has issued a call for nominations for its third annual Distinguished Advertising Educator Award.
For information and nomination forms, call (202) 898-0089.


Proudly, a Soviet Dissident Is Buried
LEAD: Yuli M. Daniel was buried and eulogized today in Moscow on a searing cold day, a day as cold as a prison camp.
It was the sort of day, a man at the graveside observed, that Russia seems to reserve for the funerals of its bravest inmates.


Wellspring of Support for Mayor Barry
LEAD: As ''Dump Barry'' signs went up on Capitol Hill, 3,000 of the faithful at a gospel revival in northeast Washington stretched out their hands to Marion S. Barry Jr., the besieged Mayor, in a prayer vigil being played out in the most loyal wards of this stunned and divided city.


A Higher Gas Tax Isn't Courage, but Arrogance; User Charges
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I. Sniper Fires At a Policeman On a Bogus Call
LEAD: A sniper fired at a Southampton Town police officer who was responding to what turned out to be a bogus report of a traffic accident here early Sunday morning, the police said today.


Bills' Shift From Running Leaves Game Plan in the Air
LEAD: In studying for his master's degree in history at Harvard, Marv Levy learned George Santayana's dictum: ''Those who do not learn the lessons of history are doomed to the repetition of its mistakes.''


Labor Chief's Future
LEAD: Although Lane Kirkland flatly denies it, there is growing speculation among labor leaders inside and outside the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s headquarters in Washington that he may soon step down.


Georgia Names Goff To Replace Dooley
LEAD: Georgia has named Ray Goff, an assistant coach and former quarterback for the Bulldogs, to replace Vince Dooley as the football coach.


No. 1 Notre Dame Finishes a Perfect Season


Cholesterol Testing for Shoppers Is Challenged
LEAD: A company offering quick, cheap tests of blood cholesterol levels to shoppers says technology has outpaced state laws governing medical testing, but the state maintains the company's services do not have the proper licenses and has filed suit to enjoin the testing.


Atlanta Journal; Loss of Mail Jolts Tenants Into Action
LEAD: For some time, residents of the Bankhead Courts public housing project here suffered in silence from the brisk, open and frequently violent drug trade in their midst.
Then last month an innocent letter carrier found himself in the middle of a drug deal gone bad, and the Postal Service cut off the mail to the 500 apartments.


100,000 Burmese at Funeral Of an Independence Figure
LEAD: More than 100,000 Burmese poured into the streets of Rangoon today to join a funeral procession for the widow of Aung San, who led the country to independence from Britain.


Shaw Becomes a Hit In 2-Goal Performance
LEAD: There were television lights, radio microphones and nonstop requests for interviews.
David Shaw stood smiling in the middle of it all last night.
For once this season, the public spotlight warmed Shaw more than it burned.


Deals by Michael Foods
LEAD: Michael Foods Inc. said it had acquired all the outstanding stock of Wisco Farm Cooperative Inc. and had agreed in principle to acquire certain assets of Microfresh Foods Inc.
Terms of the deals were not disclosed.


Welfare Hotel Isn't One Now
LEAD: New York City has moved the last of 448 families from the Martinique Hotel, a spokeswoman for the city said yesterday.


Pretoria Ties Of Ford, G.M.
LEAD: Michigan, home of the Big Three carmakers, will no longer invest state pension funds in two of the automobile companies because they have business ties to South Africa, state Treasurer Robert Bowman announced on Friday.


Chinese Demand More By a Literary Legend
LEAD: To Chinese readers, he is virtually a one-man literary movement, more a genre than an author, his 36 novels of chivalry and romance mesmerizing both Chinese peasants and foreign academics alike.


Man, 88, Held in Slaying of 2
LEAD: An 88-year-old man who had been feuding with the other residents at a cramped retirement home was accused today of killing two of them and injuring four others while they slept, the authorities said.


People
LEAD: *
Brian Anderson has been promoted to executive vice president and director of marketing at Marcoa DR Group, a direct-marketing company formed by the merger of BBDO Direct, the DR Group and Marcoa Direct.


Treasury Secretary Off to a Quiet Start, but Loud Issues, Including Taxes, Lie Ahead
LEAD: Nicholas F. Brady has a machine to read quotes from the markets, and he uses it.
He has a facsimile machine hooked up in his Washington apartment.
He calls in assistants and deputy assistants to explain Treasury business, and they say he is a rigorous interrogator. ''He scrutinizes you,'' one said.


Chess
LEAD: The Soviet Union once again demonstrated its superiority in team competition by winning the 28th Olympiad in Thessaloniki, Greece, on Nov. 27 with a 40 1/2-15 1/2 score in the 14-round Swiss-system event.
This was the 16th time out of its 17 appearances that the Soviet Union has won the gold medal.


Black Mayor and Council Are Elected in Divided Town
LEAD: This racially divided town held its first locally supervised election since the 1930's today, re-electing the Mayor and voting in her all-black council slate.


Two Deal Makers Who Set Out Alone Find They Have Plenty of Company
LEAD: When Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph Perella bolted from First Boston early in 1988 to begin their own firm, Wall Street drubbed the investment house's stock.
By the market's account the two merger and acquisition specialists were worth at least $127.5 million, the value lost that day in the stock.


Regulator Tackles the Savings Crisis Because 'I Like a Challenge'
LEAD: Before he assumed the chairmanship of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in July 1987, the question asked most frequently of M. Danny Wall was why he wanted the job.


Fetisov Tries Diplomacy in Quest to Join Devils
LEAD: The Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Yuri V. Dubinin, has joined the saga of Vyacheslav Fetisov and his effort to play for the New Jersey Devils.


William Como, 63, A Longtime Editor Of Dance Magazine
LEAD: William Como, the editor in chief of Dance Magazine, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Pacific Bell has retained Adland, San Francisco, to create advertising for the Asian-American market.


Getting Organized The Electronic Way
LEAD: RESOLVED: That this year we are finally going to get organized.


Telefonica Accord
LEAD: Spain's state industrial holding group, Instituto Nacional de Industria, and Telefonica Nacional de Espana have agreed to pool their electronics and computer software interests under a wide-ranging agreement.
Officials at Telefonica, in which the Government holds a stake of more than 30 percent, said the company's chairman, Luis Solana, signed a deal with Instituto's chairman, Jordi Mercader, that calls for detailed plans to be drawn up within three months.


Industry Sees New Markets After Europe Bans U.S. Beef
LEAD: American meat-exporting companies say that they have already found alternative markets for many products they normally sell to Europe but that the industry will not escape some harm.


Quiet Day For Dollar
LEAD: The dollar ended hardly changed in Frankfurt today with most world financial centers closed for the New Year's holiday.


O-T-C Stocks Rise 14%, But Trading Dwindles
LEAD: After ending 1987 in turbulence, the over-the-counter market bounced back with strong growth in 1988.
Some of the largest gains were posted by companies that were sold or put into play as takeover candidates.


Rio Police Say Overcrowding Caused Party Vessel to Sink
LEAD: The police today blamed overcrowding for the capsizing of a boat packed with revelers planning to watch a New Year's fireworks display off Copacabana Beach.
At least 51 people died.


U.S. Tells P.L.O. That Any Clues On Bombing Would Be Welcomed
LEAD: An American envoy told a Palestinian official in an informal meeting on Saturday that the United States would welcome any information the Palestine Liberation Organization might have about the Pan American bombing over Scotland, a White House spokesman said today.


How Easily Violence Comes Into the Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wheat Offer Made to China
LEAD: The United States Agriculture Department on Friday offered to subsidize sales of one million metric tons of wheat to China, the second such offer this month.


Forget Bush's Lips
LEAD: Happy New Year, folks!
But don't bother to read George Bush's lips.
No matter what he said in the campaign, Federal taxes went up on Jan. 1 for a lot of Americans - most brutally for those who are elderly and reasonably well off financially.


Cadwell's Help For Retarded
LEAD: Cadwell Davis Partners handles the advertising for about half a dozen Johnson &amp; Johnson products.
J. &amp; J. has long supported the Association of Retarded Citizens, which has 160,000 members and 1,300 chapters.
So it was natural for Franchellie (Frankie) Cadwell and Herman A. Davis, the agency's president and chairman, to help the association create its first fully coordinated advertising campaign, including broadcast, outdoor and print ads.


Sri Lanka President Sworn In
LEAD: Prime Minister Ranasinghe Premadasa, vowing to restore peace and prosperity to a country ravaged by ethnic strife, was installed today as the new President in this sacred Buddhist city.
Mr.
Premadasa succeeds J. R. Jayewardene, who retires from public life after nearly 50 years in politics.


Cleveland Group to Play Bartok String Quartets
LEAD: The Cleveland Quartet is to play Bartok's String Quartets Nos. 3 and 6 and the composer's ''Contrasts'' on Jan. 19 at 8 P.M. in the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The concert is the second in a series of three devoted to Bartok's complete string quartets and other chamber works; the last one is scheduled for March 30.


Budget Plight In the Wings In Albany
LEAD: After less than a week's hiatus, lawmakers return to Albany today to start a legislative session that is expected to be dominated by the state's worsening financial plight.


Phoebe H. Stein, 75, Health-Care Advocate
LEAD: Phoebe Hockstader Stein, an advocate of health-care causes, died of lung cancer Sunday at Montefiore Hospital.
She was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Carnegie Ushers Cross the Footlights for a Night
LEAD: The sounds the ushers hear at Carnegie Hall are not always music to their ears.
There are perennial irritants, like the whisperers.
And the persistent coughers.
And the candy-wrapper soloists.
There are the latecomers who demand to be seated in the middle of a symphony movement.
And yes, there are even the sports fanatics who wear earphones to performances during the World


2 Argentines Prepare American Jazz Revue
LEAD: Is the revue dead?
Not if Claudio Segovia and Hector Orezzoli, two Argentine producers who have brought new life to the genre, have anything to say about it.


Renault to Get Aid From French
LEAD: The French Government has decided to proceed with a $2 billion capital injection for Renault S.A., the state-owned auto maker.


'Chess' Cast to Perform In Carnegie Hall Benefit
LEAD: Judy Kuhn, David Carroll, Philip Casnoff and other members of the original cast of ''Chess'' are to perform a concert version of the Broadway musical at Carnegie Hall on Monday at 7:30 P.M.
The performance is a benefit for the Emergency Shelter Inc., which provides beds, job training and counseling for homeless teen-agers.


Books of The Times; The Familiar Evils of Hong Kong, Then and Now
LEAD:  Hong Kong  By Jan Morris  Illustrated. 359 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Vietnam Veterans Expecting Agent Orange Benefits Soon
LEAD: Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange will get their compensatory payments in 1989, more than a decade after veterans first sued the defoliant's makers and 16 years after American forces pulled out of Vietnam.
The first payments are expected to go out in March or April.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The economy grew in December at the highest rate in five months, partly because of a surge in export orders, according to the monthly report of purchasing managers.
Production, new orders and export orders all surged. [ Page D1. ] The Federal Home Loan Bank Board put on a stunning display of its ability and willingness to strike deals last week.


Knights Honor Reagan
LEAD: The Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of St.
John of Jerusalem, of Rhodes and of Malta has decided to mark its 900th anniversary this month by presenting its Grand Cross of Merit Special Class to President Reagan.


Williams's Late Drive Puts Clemson on Top
LEAD: Rodney Williams, Clemson's quarterback, does not always look pretty, but today in the Citrus Bowl against Oklahoma he showed why his record does.


Persistent Recruiters
LEAD: Less than a month before the Reagan Administration folds its tent, the personnel staff is still recruiting.
One newcomer of note is John F. Cogan, who joined the Office of Management and Budget in October as a consultant and then became an unofficial special assistant to the director, Joseph R. Wright Jr.


Port Authority 'Growing' Own Electricians
LEAD: Hours after the High School for the Humanities has adjourned its regular daily sessions in Manhattan, a band of young Port Authority employees squeezes their young adult frames into the small desk chairs.
Clad still in their dusty boots and green work uniforms, they join a larger contingent of union-sponsored apprentices for two hours of lectures, quizzes and the occasional catnap.


A Higher Gas Tax Isn't Courage, but Arrogance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Economy's Captain Picks a Crucial Battle And Has Some Luck
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, emerged in 1988 as the interim captain of the American economy.


Lost Boy Ate Spiders to Live
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy who was lost in the Cleveland National Forest survived six days and bitter-cold nights by sleeping in hollow logs and eating snow and spiders, his mother said.


Bonn Sees No Proof Yet of Company's Role in Chemical-Arms Plant
LEAD: As West European leaders skeptically weighed the Reagan Administration's accusation that Libya has a chemical weapons plant, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government said today that preliminary investigations had uncovered no proof that a West German company had helped build it.


'Junk Bond' King Waits Uneasily As Prosecutors Prepare Their Case
LEAD: Although Michael R. Milken will remember 1988 as a year in which he spent more time with his lawyers than he cared to, 1989 could be worse.


67 DIE WHEN FERRY SINKS IN CARIBBEAN
LEAD: A ferry overloaded with New Year's travelers sank off the Caribbean coast after it ran out of fuel, drowning 67 people, the authorities reported today.
Fourteen were missing and 46 people survived.


Michigan Gains Upset With a Big 2d Half
LEAD: Maybe, just maybe, the big pendulum of football fortunes is finally swinging toward the Big Ten in its long, frustrating Rose Bowl wars with the Pacific-10 Conference.


State Lotteries Have Something of the Shell Game About Them
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Higher Gas Tax Isn't Courage, but Arrogance; But Not Diesel Fuel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cleanup After Harbor Blast
LEAD: Workers cleared wreckage Sunday at a harbor where at least 50 yachts were destroyed in an explosion that set off a chain-reaction fire.
The explosion Saturday night was aboard a pleasure boat moored at the Watergate Yachting Center.


Lounge Wear for Cocooning
LEAD: With the fire gone out of ready-to-wear clothes and consumers staying close to home, hearth and VCR, designers are making lingerie to suit the elegant Park Avenue hostess or the working woman trying to unwind.


In Spite of Crisis, New York Lacks Basic Services for AIDS Patients
LEAD: After eight years as the epicenter of the AIDS epidemic, New York City still has no nursing homes for AIDS patients and only one modest residential center for them.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Chesnokov Upset by Volkov: Aleksandr Volkov of the Soviet Union upset Andrei Chesnokov, the top-seeded player, 6-3, 6-1, in the first round of the $123,400 South Australian Open in Adelaide yesterday.
Mark Kratzmann of Australia upset second-seeded Darren Cahill of Australia, 7-6, 6-4.(AP)


Cable-TV Systems Offer More and Charge More
LEAD: Cable television systems are offering more channels to more viewers, but the price for watching is also going up.


Emotional Talks Inspire 49ers In Their Quest to Be Champions
LEAD: Talk is cheap?
It would be difficult to convince the San Francisco 49ers of that, a polished team now one victory short of Super Bowl XXIII after a punishing 34-9 playoff victory over the Minnesota Vikings in Candlestick Park on Sunday.


At Texas Border, Hopes For Sewers and Water
LEAD: After years of inaction, Texas is trying to put together programs to address one of the nation's most wrenching public health problems: the tens of thousands of people living without running water or adequate sewage treatment along the border with Mexico.


Guggenheim Art Show Draws Crowds in Prague
LEAD: An exhibition of modern art from the New York and Venice Guggenheim collections drew 121,000 visitors during its display at Prague's National Gallery.


Fight Against Malaria
LEAD: The parasite chiefly responsible for malaria has become increasingly resistant to chloroquine, a drug once regarded as a wonder cure for the disease.
But a team of American scientists has discovered that chloroquine remains effective against the parasites if the drug is administered along with an antidepressant.


Jazz Guard Injured
LEAD: The Utah Jazz guard Bobby Hansen will be placed on the injured-reserve list again after fracturing bones in his cheek at a New Year's Eve party.


Officially a Year Older, But Are They Better?
LEAD: Did you remember, at the moment 1988 turned to 1989, to wish happy birthday to every racehorse in the Northern Hemisphere?


Reports of Child Abuse Spur Gifts to Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: The recent tragic accounts of abused children have caused an outpouring of sympathy and contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Many donors have sent gifts in memory of Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old who was fatally beaten in Manhattan in 1987, and Jessica Cortez, 5, found dead with a broken neck in her apartment in the Bushwick section of


Uniting the Enemies of Pol Pot
LEAD: The United States and Vietnam now share an important goal - preventing Pol Pot and his killer Khmer Rouge forces from regaining power in Cambodia.
But common action requires that Hanoi fully honor its promise to withdraw all Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.
And as those withdrawals continue, the U.S., Vietnam, the Soviet Union and China all need to work together with the aim of disarming Pol Pot's troops and inserting an international force to save the Cambodian people.


Loel Guinness, 82, R.A.F. Flier And a Socialite on 2 Continents
LEAD: Loel Guinness, an heir of the banking branch of the Guinness family who was a Member of Parliament for 14 years and a socialite on two continents, died Saturday of heart disease at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 82 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Explaining Last Summer's Drought  The 1988 drought was caused by cyclical changes in the tropical Pacific and had little to do with the greenhouse effect, new evidence indicates.
With an improving understanding of the global climate system, scientists have linked cold waters off South America to storms and atmospheric disturbances that drove the jet stream northward, causing drought in North America.


Subpoenas by North Expected
LEAD: Three more Reagan Administration officials expect to receive subpoenas to appear as defense witnesses on behalf of Oliver L. North at his trial on conspiracy charges arising from the Iran-contra affair, an Administration spokesman said here today.


The Truth About Crime
LEAD: A recent report from the American Bar Association contains a noteworthy confession: Criminal justice can't control crime.
The A.B.A.'s appeal for more acceptance of that uncomfortable point deserves wide attention.


CHANGES PLANNED IN ENTRANCE TEST USED BY COLLEGES
LEAD: In its first major overhaul since it was created in 1959, a standardized college admission test taken by about one million high school juniors and seniors annually will be redesigned to emphasize a wider range of mathematical knowledge and more abstract reading skills.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Why do the altitudes of timberlines vary from one mountain range to another?
A.
The treeline or timberline, the line on mountains and in polar regions beyond which trees will not grow, is mostly determined by temperature, according to researchers at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


For Happy Memories, Have a Nice Day Today
LEAD: WAS 1988 a good year for you?


Interest Rates Seen Rising For 6 Months
LEAD: As they peered into the new year from the relative safety of the one just past, credit market analysts seemed to have a remarkably clear view of what is likely to unfold over the next six months.
What happens afterward is in considerable dispute.


Use of Jailhouse Informers Reviewed in Los Angeles
LEAD: A jailhouse informer's recent disclosure that a prisoner can easily frame someone with bogus testimony has exploded into scandal for the nation's largest District Attorney's office.


Testing a 'Mirror of Disease'
LEAD: AN experiment in the Netherlands has called into question claims by many practitioners of ''alternative'' medicine that visible changes in the irises of patient's eyes can aid diagnosis of many different diseases.


Blaze Severely Injures 3 Children in the Bronx
LEAD: Three children were critically injured early yesterday in a fire that the authorities said was set in their apartment in the West Farms section of the Bronx.


Fatal Stabbing Of a Couple Is a Mystery
LEAD: The Larchmont police said yesterday that they still had no suspects and no motive in the fatal stabbing of a couple whose bodies were found in their home on Sunday evening.


WASHINGTON TALK - Working Profile: Army Secretary John O. Marsh Jr.; Military Leader Wins High Ground, Quietly
LEAD: John O. Marsh Jr. is the longest-serving Secretary of the Army in modern times and one of the few senior officials in the Defense Department to have served through the entire Reagan Administration.
He may also be the least known.


AZT Can Damage the Liver, Doctors Say
LEAD: AZT, the only drug approved for the treatment of AIDS, can on rare occasions damage the liver, a new report indicates.


Wall St. Finds Life After Crash
LEAD: Rebounding from the October 1987 stock market crash, the Dow Jones Industrial average climbed 11.8 percent last year to 2,168.57.
Merger activity reached record levels and corporate profits soared.
Articles on the outlook for the stock and bond markets, mergers and corporate profits begin on page D1, followed by full-year tables for the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq national market system.


Monitor Introducing Redesigned Newspaper
LEAD: The Christian Science Monitor will introduce a revamped daily newspaper today, with fewer pages, color photography and less advertising, after months of internal turmoil over the project.


Financial Videos From Dollar Dry Dock
LEAD: Look out MTV, Dollar Dry Dock Bank has come out with its own in-house videos.
While the vignettes of financial advice may not rival Michael Jackson's hit singles, Borejko Leibler's subsidiary B Designed is banking that customers will use the three-minute shorts to learn more about the fundamentals of Wall


Braniff Shifts Its Account To McKinney
LEAD: PREPARING for its third major marketing realignment since emerging from bankruptcy five years ago, Braniff Inc. has named McKinney &amp; Silver, a veteran of airline advertising, as its agency of record.


William Haber, Who Directed Aid To Jewish Refugees, Is Dead at 89
LEAD: William Haber, an economist who helped Jewish refugees after World War II as an adviser to the United States armed forces and for 25 years after that as president of the American Organization for Rehabilitation Through Training Federation, died Friday in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 89 years old.
Dr.
Haber, who was a professor emeritus of economics and former dean at the University of Michigan, died of pneumonia at his home, said Avi Feinglass, a spokesman for the federation.


Treasury Bill Auction Set For Today
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular auction of three-month and six-month Treasury bills.


U.S. WILL PROPOSE WIDE U.N. POWERS ON CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: The United States will soon propose giving additional powers to the Secretary General of the United Nations to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons anywhere in the world, Administration officials said today.


Capital Cities' Satellite Stake
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc. has acquired a 14.3 percent stake in Satellite Music Network Inc., the Dallas-based company that pioneered the use of satellites to beam radio programming to AM stations nationwide.
Last week, Satellite Music announced that Captial Cities had offered to buy the company for $5.40 a share, or a total purchase price of $48.38 million.


China's Big Lurch Backward Theory Is Now Seen as Study in Pragmatism
LEAD: Despite China's steps in recent months to restore central planning in some areas of its economy, there are growing signs that the country remains committed to developing more of a market economy.


27 Arrested at Nuclear Plant
LEAD: Twenty-seven people were arrested on trespassing charges Saturday at a brief demonstration to protest the restarting of the Pilgrim nuclear plant nearly three years after it was closed for management and maintenance problems.Those arrested were among more than 125 demonstrators, the authorities said.On Friday, the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission cleared the way for low-power testing of the 670-megawatt reactor.


American Exchange Has Strong 4th Quarter
LEAD: In choosing among America's three stock arenas, investors would have fared most successfully last year if they had placed their bets on the American Stock Exchange.


Strike Cuts Iberia Flights
LEAD: A 24-hour strike by mechanics of Iberia Air Lines forced the cancellation of 55 flights today, an Iberia spokesman said.
The cancellations mostly affected flights to and from Madrid and Barcelona on the domestic carrier Aviaco, the spokesman said.


Review/Television; Eudora Welty on Her Start as a Writer
LEAD: Tonight at 9 on Channel 21 and at 10 on Channel 13, ''The American Experience'' on public television offers a documentary that was produced by Patchy Wheatley for the British Broadcasting Corporation.
But ''Eudora Welty: One Writer's Beginnings'' is about a very American writer, a woman who has lived just about all of her nearly 80 years in the state-capital city of Jackson,


Market Place; Milder Rise Seen For 1989 Profits
LEAD: WITH a lower dollar prompting stronger exports for many companies and years of restructurings in basic industries helping to cut costs, corporate profits in 1988 rose far more rapidly than expected when the year began.


A Publishing Program That Has a Lot to Offer
LEAD: PUBLISH-IT is a publishing program that, in the I.B.M.-compatible version I tried, seems to have everything anyone could want for producing professional-looking newsletters, brochures, advertisements, anything you would have gone to a printshop for, with a minimum of fuss.


Heavy Security, but No Snarls


Panel Approves Evacuation Plan For Area Around Seabrook Plant
LEAD: A Federal licensing panel has approved New Hampshire's evacuation plans for the Seabrook nuclear power plant, dismissing objections that the region could not be cleared fast enough to protect thousands of people in an accident.


A Perfect Finish at 12-0 For Top-Ranked Notre Dame
LEAD: From the day they gathered in South Bend, Ind., to begin their work in the August heat, the football players at the University of Notre Dame listened to the little man remind them of their shortcomings.


A Higher Gas Tax Isn't Courage, but Arrogance; Trucks Should Pay
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wall Street's Bonuses for '88 Favor Experts in Mergers and Acquisitions
LEAD: It's year-end bonus time on Wall Street, and by all accounts 1988 was a very, very good year to be a mergers and acquisitions specialist at firms like Morgan Stanley, First Boston and Goldman, Sachs.


Florida St. Overcomes Mistakes
LEAD: Sammie Smith rushed for 115 yards to lead an error-prone Florida State offense tonight as the Seminoles turned an early 13-0 lead into a 13-7 victory over Auburn in the Sugar Bowl.


'How's He Doin'?'
LEAD: Edward I. Koch, the Mayor of New York City, is not at all happy about the speech of the city's schoolchildren.
Too often, he says, it is incorrect.


A Blueprint for Government Ethics
LEAD: Michael Deaver leaves the White House and promptly begins to lobby his former colleagues.
Scandal jars the Pentagon.
Congress fails to limit corrupting honorarium payments.
Special-interest money pours into lawmakers' personal and campaign bank accounts.
Americans are being insulted by a political culture that places private gain ahead of public trust.


A State Offers Working Poor Insurance Aid
LEAD: In a pioneering program that is being closely watched in Congress, the state of Washington this week began providing medical insurance to working people who cannot afford it.


Columbia Candidate
LEAD: Gerry DiNardo, the offensive coordinator at the University of Colorado, confirmed yesterday that he had been interviewed for the head coaching job at Columbia.
DiNardo, born and raised in New York, played at Notre Dame from 1972 to 1974.


Bruins, Led by Aikman, Win 7th Bowl in a Row
LEAD: Troy Aikman converted 12 of 20 third-down situations as the U.C.L.A.
Bruins set a National Collegiate Athletic Association record with its seventh consecutive bowl triumph, a 17-3 victory over the Arkansas Razorbacks in the Cotton Bowl.


The Flow of the Game Will Determine Pitino's Moves
LEAD: The Knicks' starting lineup will remain unchanged tonight when they play the Boston Celtics at Madison Square Garden.
The ''subtle'' changes that Coach Rick Pitino promised after Friday night's embarrassing loss to the Charlotte Hornets, an expansion team, will involve execution on offense and defense and perhaps the substitution pattern.


Shiite Militias Step Up Their Fight in Lebanon
LEAD: Fighting between rival Shiite Muslim gunmen intensified today and spread from Beirut to southern Lebanon.


End of an Experience


James Chambers, 68, Former Orchestra Hornist
LEAD: James Chambers, a teacher and scholar of the French horn who was the principal hornist of the New York Philharmonic for 23 years, died of a heart attack Sunday at his home in Cranberry, N.J.
He was 68 years old.


Exotic Clam Colonies
LEAD: Scientists repeatedly descending to 11,000 feet in the deep-diving submarine Alvin, have discovered a number of communities of six-inch clams and other creatures fed by organic seeps along a 30-mile stretch of the Monterey Canyon, 50 miles off Monterey Bay, Calif.


Iraq Said to Cut Oil Exports
LEAD: Iraq has cut its oil exports by 90,000 barrels a day in accordance with its new OPEC production quota of 2.64 million barrels a day, the official Iraqi news agency said today.


Ruling Sought on Injuries
LEAD: Paul Brown, the Cincinnati Bengals' founder, general manager and vice president, said yesterday he would ask the league's competition committee, of which he is a member, to look into the question of fake injuries after the season.


PATTERNS
LEAD:  Seventh Avenue Blues


Adams Examined
LEAD: Michael Adams, the Denver Nuggets' No. 2 scorer and most prolific 3-point shooter, was scheduled to undergo a bone scan to determine the nature of a painful injury to his right foot that will keep him out of tonight's game at San Antonio.


Backlash on Takeovers Is Feared
LEAD: It was the year of the big takeover.
Even leaving out the still to be concluded RJR Nabisco buyout that saw one bidder raise the ante on another by several billion dollars, there was a record $266 billion in mergers, acquisitions and leveraged buyouts completed in 1988.


Fat-Cell Protein Is Implicated in Obesity
LEAD: IN a major advance in the study of obesity, researchers have discovered that abnormally low levels of a protein produced by fat cells may be linked to the propensity to gain weight.


Taking On America's Team
LEAD: It was hard enough taking on all the Subway Alumni and the Freeway Alumni and the Windy City Alumni and the Sunbelt Alumni.


British Pork Shift Offered
LEAD: The Agriculture Department has offered to reduce import restrictions on shipments of British swine, pork and pork products to the United States.


U.S. Population in '88 Grew By 2.3 Million, Bureau Says
LEAD: The population of the United States was 246.9 million as the New Year began, almost 2.3 million higher than a year ago, the Census Bureau said Sunday.


Building a Dream, Floor by Rotting Floor
LEAD: The six-story apartment building at 241 West 113th Street, just west of Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard in Harlem, is the kind of abandoned ruin that marks all of New York City's poor neighborhoods.


Bank Board's Wild Week Of Round-the-Clock Deals
LEAD: With a stunning display of its ability and willingness to strike deals and spend money, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board put on a show last week the like of which is seldom seen in Washington.


By Design; New Year, New Image
LEAD: A few shifts in the way you put yourself together - hair, makeup and jewelry - can make a significant change in your appearance.
Herewith, some suggestions for achieving a 1989 look, at least from the neck up.


Saudi-Texaco Joint Venture
LEAD: Texaco Inc. and Saudi Arabia said they had closed their deal for a joint venture to refine and market petroleum in the United States.


What's in a Japanese Name? For Many Women, Obscurity
LEAD: Reiko Sekiguchi is the name she was given at birth, and that is how she is addressed at social gatherings and scholarly conferences, on research papers, even on letters from her husband.


Market for New Issues Fell Sharply in '88 Amid Investor Disenchantment
LEAD: Although the economy and the performance of the stock market rebounded nicely from the October 1987 crash, corporations found investors unwilling to buy many new stock issues last year.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are in danger of chemical weapons becoming just another weapon of choice.
We seek to raise the political costs of their use, and we hope that even countries accused of using chemical weapons will join in affirming support for the 1925 Protocol.''  - Roger G. Harrison, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State.


5 Africans Say They Were Tortured by the Chinese
LEAD: Five African students were tortured by the police in the eastern city of Nanjing, after a week of racial unrest in that city, an African diplomat today quoted the students as saying.


A Banker Who Changed the Rules
LEAD: In an industry sometimes denigrated for its lack of boldness, J. Carter Bacot, chairman of the Bank of New York, stands out in 1988 as the banker who redefined the boundaries of what is acceptable.


Discounting Not on Rise, Retailers Say
LEAD: Post-Christmas shoppers facing a sea of signs in store windows advertising huge discounts off ''our already reduced prices'' might find it hard to believe, but many retailers say discounts since Christmas have been equal to or slightly below those of the corresponding period last year.


Working Woman
LEAD: John Emmerling Inc. has added another member of the Time Inc. family to its client stable.
Working Woman, a publication of the Working Woman/ McCall's Group (which is partly owned by Time), has retained the agency to create a trade campaign that will debut in mid-January.
The magazine, which has a circulation rate base of 950,000, currently has no agency.


Depressed Woman Is Alive After Jump From the Verrazano
LEAD: A 22-year-old Staten Island woman under treatment for depression jumped from the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge early yesterday and survived a 230-foot plunge to the icy waters below.


Scientists Track Clues Linking a Bacterium To Stomach Disorders
LEAD: NEW research has produced strong evidence that an S-shaped bacterium causes the common stomach disorder gastritis.
And scientists say there is increasing though inconclusive evidence that the microbe is linked to many stomach and duodenal ulcers.


Rain in Pennsylvania Found Most Acidic
LEAD: RAIN at a monitoring station in central Pennsylvania registered the highest acid content of 131 sites in 46 states, according to a report by the Natural Resources Defense Council.


Jersey Mayor Is Sworn For the Seventh Time
LEAD: Mayor Thomas G. Dunn was sworn in today for the seventh time.
It was also for the last time, he said.


Correction
LEAD: A listing in the Executive Changes column of Business Day on Friday about the Consolidated Natural Gas Company misidentified a new board member.
He is Steven A. Minter.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Intervoice Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,926,018
1,793,133
Net inc
566,684
224,239
Share earns
.16
.07
Shares outst
3,650,671
3,266,818
9mo rev
7,606,415
4,278,875
Net inc
1,366,350
539,334
Share earns
.40
.17


Jefferies Accuses GAF Of Carbide Stock Role
LEAD: Boyd L. Jefferies, a crucial Government witness in several securities fraud cases, made his courtroom debut yesterday by accusing the GAF Corporation and one of its senior executives of asking him to manipulate the price of Union Carbide stock in the fall of 1986.


Archie Boe, Who Led Expansions At Allstate and Sears, Dies at 67
LEAD: Archie R. Boe, a former president of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and the Allstate Insurance Company, died of cancer Monday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 67 years old and lived in Chicago.


Stanford Selects Black as Head Coach
LEAD: Dennis Green, the coach in charge of receivers for the San Francisco 49ers the last three years, yesterday was named head coach at Stanford University.
In becoming the fourth black head coach among the nation's 104 N.C.A.A.
Division I-A colleges, Green, who is 39 years old, replaces Jack Elway, who was dropped Dec.


Doctors' Group Acts to Aid Abused Women
LEAD: The leading association of obstetricians and gynecologists today opened a campaign to help women who are victims of physical abuse, a problem that C. Everett Koop, Surgeon General of the United States, said had become an ''overwhelming'' public health burden.


Oxford Industries Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oxford Industries Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Sales
154,145,000
150,999,000
Net inc
2,720,000
b2,298,000
Share earns
.28
-
Shares outst
9,973,131
10,816,823
6mo sales
301,691,000
302,393,000
Net inc
6,244,000
1,059,000
Share earns
.63
.10
Shares outst
9,973,571
10,917,122


Rates Are Mixed At Citicorp Auction
LEAD: Interest rates were mixed yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 8.952 percent, down from 9.0393 percent last week and down for the second consecutive week.


Coffee and Cocoa Prices Up; Crude and Heating Oil Rise
LEAD: Coffee futures prices rose sharply yesterday despite weekend showers in the major coffee-growing region of Brazil, the world's largest producer.


Blacks Keep Reins in Georgia Town
LEAD: Black candidates won all six city offices Monday in this racially divided town, proving to many black residents that a victory by blacks last year in Keysville's first election since 1933 was not a fluke.


Equal Rights Proposal Is Revived in House
LEAD: A group of 129 members of the House of Representatives reintroduced the proposed equal rights amendment to the Federal Constitution today and urged President-elect George Bush to support it.


V.M.I. Names Shuck
LEAD: Jim Shuck was named as Virginia Military Institute's head coach yesterday, saying the job with the Keydets would pose challenges similar to those he faced as Army's offensive coordinator.
Shuck, 34, plans to use the wishbone offense, which has worked well for Army, as he takes over the job with a five-year, $52,000-a-year contract.


Budd Speaks Out
LEAD: Seeking to counter renewed criticism of her political views, Zola Budd said yesterday she did not support any ''political system that entrenches the superiority of one race over another'' or violates basic human rights.
The former world cross-country champion issued one of her most explicit political statements in response to a controversy provoked by interviews she recently granted to British television networks.


About New York; An Experience? Sure. Timeless? Not in New York
LEAD: Albert Boyars mailed out a news release just last September that said the ''New York Experience'' was ''timeless,'' like New York City itself.
Here it is January and there is no longer an ''Experience'' to experience.
The 55-minute sound and light blitzkreig closed Monday night, proof that timelessness and permanence are two different things in New York.


Pepsico's Bottling Accord Off
LEAD: Pepsico Inc.'s agreement to buy the General CinemaCorporation's soft-drink bottling business for $1.5 billion has been canceled because questions from the Federal Trade Commission prevented the deal's completion before the end of 1988, the two companies said yesterday.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the 1988 performance of stocks on the American Stock Exchange misidentified the eighth-biggest loser for the year.
It is Energy Development Partners Ltd., a Denver-based partnership, not the Energy Development Corporation, a subsidiary of the Public Service Enterprise Group.


Economic Scene; The Bank Board's Costly Dilemma
LEAD: HOW do you plug a $70 billion hole with a handful of small change?
If you are the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, you use a little creative accounting and a lot of i.o.u.'s.
Last week the board dealt away 34 bankrupt savings and loan associations, ending a year in which it committed the Government to $38 billion in bailouts.


U.S. Officials Predict Long Investigation of Capital's Mayor
LEAD: Federal officials said today that their investigation of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. would take months to complete and would probably involve half a dozen or more investigative agencies.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allied Research Corp., Baltimore, a producer of high-technology weapon systems, named Gene J. Deporter to the new post of senior vice president of business development.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-9  A major Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan appears to be ready for as early as Jan. 15, Western diplomats said.
At the same time, rebels announced an alliance for interim government.
Page A1


Youth, 18, Gets 4 to 10 Years For Setting Fire to a Couple
LEAD: An 18-year-old from Brooklyn was sentenced yesterday to 4 to 10 years in prison in the 1987 burning of a couple sleeping in Prospect Park.


Holding On to Faith in the Face of the Reality of Evil
LEAD: In May of 1987, while reporting on the Klaus Barbie trial, the novelist and short-story writer Hugh Nissenson spoke to a French Jesuit priest who had served in the Resistance in World War II. ''Our generation has experienced the truth about history,'' the priest said. ''Evil is real.
The human condition hasn't changed since Adam and Eve.


Bridge
LEAD: In odd-numbered years, North America is entitled to send two teams to the world championships for the Bermuda Bowl.
One of these is always from the United States, which has by far the biggest bridge population, and the other is from Canada, Bermuda or Mexico.


A New Spectator Sport: Looking, Not Cooking
LEAD: NINA KAMINER subscribes to three cooking magazines, regularly buys and reads new cookbooks, and has become addicted to watching cooking shows on television. ''My favorites are Madeleine, Jeff and Julia,'' she said, referring to Madeleine Kamman, Jeff Smith and Julia Child, whose shows are broadcast on public television.


Boy, 17, Critically Ill From Poisoned Yogurt
LEAD: Federal health officials have found cyanide in a container of yogurt purchased in Camden, N.J., that was eaten by a youth who became critically ill yesterday in Trenton.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


BOOK NOTES
LEAD:  Stalin With Warts


Comprehensive Care Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comprehensive Care Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
59,292,000
50,029,000
Net inc
3,093,000
2,139,000
Share earns
.30
.21
Shares outst
11,901,000
12,874,000
6mo rev
117,353,000
100,181,000
Net inc
4,701,000
4,646,000
Share earns
.48
.44
Shares outst
11,937,000
12,874,000


J. I. Case Predicts Higher Sales in '89
LEAD: Sales of construction equipment will soften this year, but Tenneco Inc.'s troubled J. I. Case Company subsidiary predicted that its 1989 sales will increase in most categories.
Case, which has endured major losses from its operations that make construction and farm equipment, believes its models ''will bear positive results in 1989 and beyond,'' said Stephen


Holly Farms To Test Ruling
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation, a poultry producer, said today that it would fight a court ruling won by its hostile suitor, Tyson Foods Inc., that blocks its friendly merger with the Conagra Corporaion.


Elisabeth Hoffman Dietz, Professor, 80
LEAD: Dr.
Elisabeth Hoffmann Dietz, a retired professor of education at Brooklyn College, died of pnuemonia Monday at Emory University Hospital in Atlanta.
She was 80 years old and lived in Sun City, Ariz.


U.S. Says Libya Moves Chemicals For Poison Gas Away From Plant
LEAD: Administration officials said today that Libya had moved chemicals needed for the production of poison gas away from storage sites near a major chemical plant.


How to Recognize Danger Signs of Depression; Italy and Mental Illness
LEAD: To the Editor:


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: NOTHING is cozier on a cold evening than steaming mashed potatoes served with an ample main course - or eaten on their own from a bowl that warms the hands as the food soothes frazzled nerves.


Arthur R. Gold, Professor, 53
LEAD: Dr.
Arthur Ralph Gold, a professor of English at Wellesley College in Massachusetts, died of cancer Saturday at Cambridge Hospital.
He was 53 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.


Rare Wines Aid Meals-on-Wheels
LEAD: A SINGLE large bottle of Taittinger Champagne holding the equivalent of 36 regular bottles - reportedly the largest Champagne bottle ever made - and a magnum of 1982 Chateau Mouton-Rothschild coupled with a lunch for four at the chateau are among hundreds of rare and unusual wines scheduled to be auctioned for charity in Manhattan on Jan.


CSX Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,048,000,000
1,838,000,000
Net inc
b122,000,000
c129,000,000
Share earns
1.01
.82
Shares outst
118,119,242
156,336,391
Yr rev
7,592,000,000
6,950,000,000
Net inc
b147,000,000
c138,000,000
Share earns
.93
.88
Shares outst
146,451,343
154,814,387





FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Staying Green


Playoff? What Playoff?
LEAD: rrA group of early risers crowded in front of Lou Holtz yesterday morning to see if he had changed his mind on one of the burning issues of our time.


China's Racial Unrest Spreads to Beijing Campus
LEAD: China's racial unrest spread to Beijing today, with a march by Chinese students to protest what they said were assaults by African students on Chinese women.


Kohlberg, Kravis Views Mcorp Data
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the Wall Street investment house that has acquired RJR Nabisco Inc. for $24.88 billion, is examining the financial records of Mcorp to determine whether to bid for the troubled bank holding company.


New Emergency-Room Rules Seen Going Unheeded in New York City
LEAD: New state regulations intended to end overcrowding in emergency rooms in New York probably cannot be complied with, the heads of public and private New York City hospital agencies said yesterday.


Pretoria 1988: A Year Many Lost a Voice
LEAD: The Government restricted the political activity of 32 organizations in 1988, according to the Human Rights Commission, a private monitoring group based in Johannesburg.


Sewer Money's Aroma Endures
LEAD: Thomas Josefiak, the chairman of the Federal Election Commission, hotly denies charges that his agency ignored widespread fund-raising abuses in the 1988 Presidential race.
Yet the commission remains curiously blase about the obvious corruption of public campaign financing.


About Education
LEAD: ''We made a commitment to go to the moon.
Can't we make a commitment that no person will drop out of school and that all people will be able to read?''


Big Surplus For Germany
LEAD: West Germany reported its second-biggest monthly trade surplus on record today, and economists said the United States and others would probably renew their complaints that Bonn was doing too little to correct global trade imbalances.


Waterhouse Investor Servces Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waterhouse Investor Servces Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Revenue
3,970,655
4,450,754
Net inc
24,442
232,987
Share earns
.01
.09
Shares outst
2,482,002
2,572,002


Tranzonic Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tranzonic Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,936,300
17,302,300
Net inc
1,166,600
960,500
Share earns
.33
.27
9mo sales
59,986,200
52,705,200
Net inc
3,667,600
3,003,300
Share earns
1.02
.84


U.S.-China Diplomat Quarrel Grows
LEAD: A dispute between China and the United States about restrictions on diplomatic movements has grown into a case study in how negotiation strategies can go awry.


New PGA Circuit Gives Hope to Young Players
LEAD: The PGA Tour office, which conducts both the regular American pro golf circuit and the senior tour in this country, is to start another tour in 1990 that will serve as a proving ground for young golfers hoping to make the major pro golfing circuit.


A Former Energy Chief Is in Running for Post
LEAD: President-elect George Bush has held talks with former Energy Secretary James R. Schlesinger, who is under consideration for the same post, Bush aides said today.


Hawaii Tempest Over Burial Ground
LEAD: The discovery of 900 skeletons at an ancient burial ground has led to a temporary halt in building an $80 million beachfront hotel on Maui island and to calls for changes in state laws that could slow Hawaii's construction frenzy.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COUNCIL FOR NAMIBIA - 3 P.M.


A Los Angeles Galaxy Awaits a Brighter Star
LEAD: You might think that Jimmy Carter's going home to Plains, Ga., or Harry Truman's going back to Independence, Mo., would be a much bigger deal than Ronald Reagan's coming home to Hollywood.
After all, what high-profile celebrities had those small towns been exposed to?
None, till they spawned Presidents.


Fire Guts Historic Village House


Way Cleared for Woman to Become Bishop
LEAD: The first woman named to become a bishop in the Episcopal Church cleared a major obstacle to the position today when she received the necessary votes from church committees across the country.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  SKIING  Swiss Wins 3d Slalom: Vreni Schneider of Switzerland posted her third World Cup slalom victory of the season, winning at Maribor, Yugoslavia, yesterday.
She finished ahead of Monika Maierhofer of Austria and Tamara McKinney of the United States.
It was Schneider's sixth World Cup victory over all this season.


Soviet Jews to Join World Congress
LEAD: The way has been cleared to allow Soviet Jews formal representation in the World Jewish Congress, the executive director of the group said yesterday.


Review/Television; 'Banking Basics,' Including a Pitfall
LEAD: ''Banking Basics,'' tonight's opening hour of a three-part PBS series, ''Money in America: The Business of Banking,'' begins with an unusual credit.
We are informed that the series was financed by the Wells Fargo bank ''in partial settlement of a class action proceeding involving overdrafts and returned checks.


Providence Goes to 11-0 By Trouncing St. John's
LEAD: Unbeaten Providence College, led by Matt Palazzi's 19 points, overwhelmed St.
John's, 98-69, in Big East play tonight.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the outlook for mergers and leveraged buyouts misidentified the company that recently put the credit ratings of Salomon Brothers and Shearson Lehman Hutton under review.
It was Moody's Investors Service.
In addition, a table with the article contained an incomplete list of the advisers to Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company in its acquisition of RJR Nabisco Inc.


Course Is Revamped For New Jersey Race
LEAD: The New Jersey Waterfront Marathon will have a revamped course this April that will start on the George Washington Bridge and end at Giants Stadium.


Edwards Injured
LEAD: Eddie (The Eagle) Edwards of Britain, the ski jumper who last February soared and dipped to international renown during the Winter Olympics at Calgary for his dogged competitive spirit despite extremely limited talent, yesterday broke a collarbone during a practice session in Innsbruck, Austria.
Training for a World Cup event, Edwards lost control of his right ski in mid-air and tumbled several times after landing, suffering a head injury and skin abrasions as well as the broken collarbone.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Slide
LEAD: The credit markets began the new year on a sour note yesterday, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell sharply in light trading.


Shultz and Regan Subpoenaed by North
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz, several of his aides and senior officials of the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence Agency have been subpoenaed as defense witnesses in the Iran-contra conspiracy trial of Oliver L. North, the agencies said today.


Washington Leans Away From Yanks
LEAD: The chances appeared to be growing yesterday that Claudell Washington would not return to the Yankees, which would leave them without a left-handed hitting outfielder.


Dukakis Rules Out 4th Term as Governor
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, whose Democratic Presidential campaign ended in defeat in November, announced today that he would not seek re-election as Governor of Massachusetts in 1990.


'Radical Ideas' of Sociologists Gain New Respect
LEAD: After years of adhering to the advice of psychologists, many educators are now turning to sociologists and their more radical prescriptions in the search for solutions to longstanding educational problems.


Noll Retained
LEAD: After several weeks filled with hints and rumors of a staff shakeup, the Pittsburgh Steelers yesterday announced that four assistant coaches had been let go, the defensive coordinator had resigned and Coach Chuck Noll would stay with the Steelers until he retires.
Dan Rooney, the Steeler president, said of Noll, ''I have much confidence in his ability to lead the team back to the top.


Possible Candidates For New York Mayor File for Public Funds
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch and four other potential mayoral candidates filed yesterday to participate in the city's new public campaign-financing program.
But City Council President Andrew J. Stein said he would not participate, contending the $28 million plan is too costly to taxpayers.


Soviets Report Protests In Georgia in November
LEAD: Nationalists in Soviet Georgia staged factory sit-ins, demonstrations and hunger strikes to protest constitutional changes that they fear could limit local sovereignty, Pravda said today.


Ohio Mattress Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Mattress Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
178,682,000
168,514,000
Net inc
10,493,000
7,835,000
Share earns
.32
.24
Yr sales
661,505,000
598,149,000
Net inc
33,237,000
23,371,000
Share earns
1.00
.77


National Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
54,381,000
42,542,000
Net inc
4,523,000
3,911,000
Share earns
.39
.34
6mo rev
103,021,000
85,952,000
Net inc
8,862,000
7,633,000
Share earns
.77
.67


When Dividends Are Bad News
LEAD: AMERICAN corporations are raising the dividends they pay to shareholders.
Paradoxically, this may indicate that now is not a good time to buy stocks.


Cease-Fire Efforts Fail in Lebanon


Police Assault On Drugs Moves Into 3d Borough
LEAD: New York City's new street-level assault on drug trafficking was expanded into a third borough yesterday with the deployment of a 117-member Tactical Narcotics Team in the East New York section of Brooklyn.


Washington Talk: Briefing; What's in a Name
LEAD: The Bureau of Standards has just received a new name and an expanded mission.


Peru's Inflation Put at 1,722%
LEAD: The Government says consumer prices rose 1,722 percent last year, the highest single-year mark in memory, and one economic forecasting concern predicts that they will rise at more than three times that rate this year.


Super Rite Foods Inc reports earnings for 13wk to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Rite Foods Inc (OTC)
13wk to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
194,513,000
164,340,000
Net inc
1,613,000
1,364,000
Share earns
.32
.27
39wk sales
546,289,000
474,687,000
Net inc
5,075,000
3,012,000
Share earns
1.01
.60


S.E.C. Picks Computer Bid
LEAD: After a delay of more than a two years, the Securities and Exchange Commission today awarded a $52 million contract to build its electronic data gathering, analysis and retrieval system, known as Edgar.


Reagan Rules Out Oil Fee
LEAD: President Reagan said today that he had decided against an oil import fee or other action to curb oil imports, but conceded that ''the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Leber Katz Counts On Computers
LEAD: FCB/LEBER KATZ PARTNERS celebrated its 35th birthday yesterday by peering into a crystal ball and seeing an apple.


Toys 'R' Us Names Two Vice Chairmen
LEAD: Toys ''R'' Us Inc., operators of the toy and children's clothing chains, yesterday announced the appointment of two vice chairmen and the retirement of its president, and reported an increase in Christmas season sales that disappointed some analysts.


Miami Coach Ignores Critics and Remains Successful
LEAD: He has a cherubic face and perfectly coiffed hair, which give Jimmy Johnson a distinctive look, but have also made him a caricature among college football coaches.
His slick style, outspoken manner and coaching philosophy win more adversaries than admirers.
During the Orange Bowl game, for instance, Bob Trumpy, the NBC analyst who has made his own reputation by speaking his mind, called


Oliver L. Austin, 85, Ornithologist, Is Dead
LEAD: Oliver L. Austin Jr., an ornithologist who wrote a definitive study, ''Birds of the World,'' in 1961 and who was curator emeritus of ornithology at the Florida Museum of Natural History, died Saturday at his retirement home in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 85 years old and had lived for many years in Tuckahoe, N.Y., and in Wellfleet.


Nets Win as Hornets Set An Attendance Record
LEAD: Joe Barry Carroll and Roy Hinson scored 22 points each tonight as the Nets used a fourth-period spurt to defeat the Charlotte Hornets, 109-106.


Trials of Illness and Survival Inspire Donors to the Neediest
LEAD: Matthew was born with respiratory problems that threatened to cut short his life, and he had to be rushed to a neonatal unit in Manhattan.


Soviet Travel Curb on Goods May Aim at East Bloc Allies
LEAD: A Soviet regulation that will bar foreigners from taking caviar, television sets and refrigerators out of the country after Feb. 1 appears to be the latest shot in a growing trade war between the Soviet Union and some of its Eastern European economic allies over scarce consumer goods.


EATING WELL
LEAD: Roast squab with port wine sauce; grilled chicken breast with white bean, fennel and escarole salad; braised salmon on a bed of barley and white rice: hardly Spartan dishes, yet they are part of a program for people who want to eat healthful but elegant food when they dine out.


Topics of The Times; And Read All Over
LEAD: A careful editor, amused by the vagaries of the English language, has for years found the word ''misled'' a momentary puzzle because in her head she read ''MY-zuld.'' Then it dawned on her that the word ''read'' itself poses a problem: its tense can be understood only from context.
That is, although the spelling of misled might mislead her into a mispronunciation, she is not likely to be misled into the wrong tense.


Connecticut To Address Budget Gap
LEAD: The Connecticut General Assembly will begin its 1989 session today, confronting not the opportunities of recent years but rather the limitations presented by a huge expected gap in the state budget.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Monday about plans to address Israel's economic problems rendered a word incorrectly in a quotation from Finance Minister Shimon Peres.
The quotation should have read, ''This is a directed and serious attempt to turn the economy toward growth, export, industry and economic independence''; he did not say ''dependence.


In Modern Times, Shrinking Standards
LEAD: REMEMBER when an acceptable substitute for a biscuit or cookie cutter was one end of an empty can of frozen orange juice?
When the ingredient list made reference to a No. 2 can?
When there was one size coffee can and it held a pound of coffee?
It also held a loaf of bread, which is why so many recipes years ago called for a coffee can for bread baking.


Concord Fabrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Fabrics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Sales
35,853,962
35,752,900
Net inc
23,102
b2,282,674
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


New Chips Offer the Promise Of Much Speedier Computers
LEAD: Scientists have begun to combine two or more substances to create devices on computer chips that switch electronic signals hundreds of times faster than existing models.


Panel Asks Strong U.S. Push To Develop Superconductors
LEAD: A Presidential advisory panel has recommended that the Government organize a more aggressive national program to develop superconducting materials.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.24
N.A.
9.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.13
N.A.
5.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.28
N.A.
6.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.28
N.A.
8.59
30-YR.


Beyond 'Moosewood': Vegetarian Food for the Committed 80's
LEAD: Mollie Katzen was 10 years old in 1960 when she discovered that spaghetti did not come out of a can.
She was well into her teens before she ate fresh broccoli, cauliflower or asparagus.
Her first foray into cooking was a mud pie, made with real mud at age 2, and her first professional job, at 16, was flipping hamburgers at a department-store grill.


Review/Television; Agatha Christie Updated
LEAD: Admirers of Joan Hickson's delicious Miss Marple in public television's ''Mystery!'' series know quite well that the British have a knack for bringing Agatha Christie to the screen.
The American record, unfortunately, is spotty, particularly in a series of films made for CBS by Warner Brothers Television over the last several years.


GTE-A.T.&amp;T. Joint Venture
LEAD: The GTE Corporation and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said today that they had completed the formation of a joint-venture company to supply integrated services digital network and other advanced technology to GTE telephone companies.


Christopher Andrewes, Virologist, Dies at 92
LEAD: Sir Christopher Andrewes, a virologist who helped discover the influenza virus, died Saturday.
He was 92 years old.


Aileen Inc reports earnings for 13wk to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aileen Inc (NYSE)
13wk to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
17,157,000
14,163,000
Net inc
426,000
b3,772,000
Share earns
.08
-
52wk sales
61,767,000
52,218,000
Net inc
865,000
b6,379,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss and after idle plant costs of $3,521,000 for both the 13 weeks and 52 weeks.


When Gloves Just Won't Do
LEAD: MUFFS say as much about the times as they do about the temperature.


Former Slaves Tell Of a Torn Country
LEAD:  Bullwhip Days  The Slaves Remember  Edited by James Mellon.  460 pages.
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $27.50.


Clarcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarcor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
56,143,000
52,057,000
Net inc
6,203,000
6,050,000
Share earns
.78
.75
Yr sales
202,337,000
180,415,000
Net inc
20,598,000
18,780,000
Share earns
2.59
2.33


Kayser-Roth Names a New Chief
LEAD: The new owners of the Wickes Companies have taken its Kayser-Roth Hosiery Group off the market and today named a new top officer from a rival hosiery maker.


Mead and Toyota Fight Over Name
LEAD: When the Toyota Motor Corporation decided to call its 1989 luxury-car line Lexus, the Mead Corporaton went to court.
The name, Mead said, infringed on Lexis, the registered trademark for computerized information services provided by Mead Data Central Inc.


Hewlett-Packard To Buy Hilco Stake
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said it would make a 25 percent investment in Hilco Technologies Inc. of St.
Louis in exchange for an undisclosed amount of its stock.
In addition, for three years, Hilco's software for manufacturing companies will run exclusively on Hewlett-Packard's hardware, and Hilco will become a reseller of the


In Pittsburgh, Housing for Homeless Veterans Becomes a Reality
LEAD: To the Editor:


Torture Called Routine For Turkish Prisoners
LEAD: Amnesty International accused the Turkish authorities today of routinely torturing political detainees and said it had received reports of torture almost daily in the last two months.


CBS Records to Buy Tree, Ending an Era in Nashville
LEAD: Tree International Publishing, the last country music publisher to be both owned and operated in Nashville, is being sold to CBS Records for more than $30 million.


Sterling Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Software Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
45,331,000
38,515,000
Net inc
b1,303,000
1,329,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
5,992,000
6,890,000
Yr rev
169,802,000
135,918,000
Net inc
b1,352,000
c6,206,000
Share earns
-
.59
Shares outst
6,018,000
8,346,000


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Carolco Pictures Inc., Los Angeles, an independent movie maker, said it had paid $40 million for television syndication rights to 40 movies made by Hemdale Film Corp.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Maltese, Out of the Moonlight
LEAD: Serphin Maltese, the newly elected State Senator from Queens, sets a positive example for other New York politicians: he has resigned as chairman of the state's Conservative Party.


Adrian S. Lamb, Artist, 87
LEAD: Adrian S. Lamb, an artist whose portraits hang in the White House, the Smithsonian Institution, Harvard Law School, the Pentagon and the United States Naval Academy, died of a heart attack in Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital on Saturday.
He was 87 years old and had homes in New Canaan, Conn., and Chappaquiddick,


For 3 With Lyme Disease, Pain Without End
LEAD: Because of Lyme disease, Claire Palermo walks with a cane now.
At the age of 39, she says she sometimes feels like she is 82.
In the last two years, she has seen 42 doctors, spent $30,000 on medical treatment, missed four and a half months of work and experienced a multitude of symptoms, from arthritis and heart palpitations to profound fatigue and depression.


Dollar, Off, Recovers a Bit On Report of U.S. Ship Move
LEAD: The dollar opened the year's first trading day with a sharp decline and then rebounded some on a report that American Navy ships are being sent to the Mediterranean.


Plan to Expand Church Media Reveals Christian Science Rift
LEAD: Christian Science, a faith that has come to epitomize a quiet, disciplined spirituality, is being rent by discord provoked by the denomination's rapid expansion into radio and television broadcasting.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dukakis Rules Out 4th Term


Why Not Help the Soviets Leave?
LEAD: Moscow now gives every sign of resuming its troop withdrawals from Afghanistan in time to meet the treaty deadline of Feb. 15.
Barbara Crossette of The Times reports that Soviet officials are being flown out of Kabul, a telltale sign that the end is near.
That leaves the United States and Pakistan, chief supporters of the Afghan resistance for nine years, with the critical choice whether to abet or complicate the


Again, Guatemala Is Cynical on Human Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


San Francisco Journal; Chronicling the Suffering He Shares
LEAD: Tucked inside a recent issue of the student newspaper at San Francisco State University was a 64-page magazine called Helpers in the War on AIDS, a stark and moving collection of photographs and essays about people who care for the sick and the dying.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Interested Observer
LEAD: Michael J. Boskin, President-elect George Bush's choice to become chairman of the the Council of Economic Advisers, will be setting up shop at the council today, White House officials say.
He will be an observer until the inauguration, while the current chairman, Beryl W. Sprinkel, completes his final chore of publishing President Reagan's Economic


Topics of The Times; Not Bitter in New Hampshire
LEAD: The Governor-elect of New Hampshire and the Mayor of Portsmouth, its largest city, deserve gold stars for enlightened reaction to news that a commission recommends closing Portsmouth's Pease Air Force Base.
Pease is one of the largest installations on the Federal hit list, with 2,250 military personnel and 400 civilian employees.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Squelching a Rumor
LEAD: Supreme Court Justices do not usually deign to respond publicly to what people say about them.
But a report in Jan. 2 issue of Newsweek that Justice Byron R. White ''has told friends'' that he was thinking of retiring soon was apparently too much for the normally taciturn 71-year-old Justice.


The Chicken Dinner, Both Humble and Noble
LEAD: CHANGING a meal's status requires more than a change of name, but not much more.
Roast chicken is still roast chicken whether you label it haute cuisine, bourgeois cuisine or country cooking; even calling it ''poulet roti'' will not transmogrify this simple bird.
Move, however, from the kitchen to the dining room and from everyday dishes to fine china, then add an appetizer and dessert, and a family meal becomes a festive dinner for guests.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Technology


Field Selling Pioneer Press To Sun-Times
LEAD: The Chicago Sun-Times said today that it had agreed to buy Pioneer Press Inc., a suburban newspaper chain, from the Field Corporation for an undisclosed amount.


New Quake Hits Armenia
LEAD: A new tremor rocked the earthquake-devastated Armenian city of Leninakan on Saturday, but it caused only minor damage to buildings, city relief authorities said today.
The quake was one of a series of aftershocks that hit the area after a catastrophic earthquake on Dec. 7 that killed at least 25,000 people across Soviet Armenia, a spokesman said.


BKW Systems Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BKW Systems Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,944,610
4,115,585
Net inc
296,769
b911,806
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Study Asserts 'Poison Pills' Do Not Raise Stock Prices
LEAD: A new study challenges an earlier analysis compiled by Georgeson &amp; Company that defended ''poison pills'' on the ground that companies adopting such takeover repellents outperform those that do not.


Francis Van Bortel, 67, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Francis J. Van Bortel, a former executive vice president of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the advertising agency, died of a heart attack Sunday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 67 years old.


BIG SOVIET PULLOUT FROM AFGHANISTAN IS SEEN RESUMING
LEAD: After suspending its troop withdrawal from Afghanistan two months ago, the Soviet Union now appears to be taking steps to carry out its original agreement to pull all its forces from the country by Feb. 15, Western diplomats said today.
They said a major withdrawal seems to be planned as early as Jan.


Debt Issue in Mexico
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has called for unity behind his efforts to negotiate a reduction in Mexico's foreign debt servicing burden. ''Whoever doesn't contribute to the debt negotiations will really be attacking the unity of the nation, so necessary at this hour, and playing the game of our creditors,'' he said on Monday.


Apogee Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apogee Enterprises Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
113,900,000
79,027,000
Net inc
4,031,000
3,434,000
Share earns
.30
.26
9mo sales
311,426,000
221,566,000
Net inc
10,205,000
9,073,000
Share earns
.76
.68


Collins Spurns Murdoch Bid
LEAD: The Scottish publisher William Collins P.L.C. today rejected an increased takeover bid by Rupert Murdoch and sought a friendly deal with a French publisher instead.


Unbeaten Seton Hall Defeats Georgetown
LEAD: With each victory, Seton Hall's basketball program takes another step toward higher ground.
And though the season is still young, the Pirates are savoring the view.


Lessons
LEAD: Public schools in the United States have traditionally modeled themselves around prevailing fashions in industry.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  All the Rage


Reagan to Undergo Surgery For Finger Ailment Saturday
LEAD: President Reagan will undergo minor surgery Saturday to correct a condition in his left hand that makes it impossible for him to straighten his ring finger, the White House said today.


Boy, a Bystander, Dies in a Police Shootout
LEAD: A 14-year-old Brooklyn boy was killed last night when he was caught in the middle of a shootout between two police officers and a gunman, the police said.


Woman Arrested in Newark In Cocaine Seizure at Airport
LEAD: A woman was arrested this weekend for trying to smuggle $300,000 worth of cocaine onto a flight leaving Newark International Airport, a Port Authority spokesman said today.


PERES IS ATTACKED ON AUSTERITY PLAN
LEAD: Finance Minister Shimon Peres's austerity plan to shore up Israel's troubled economy is running into sharp opposition, particularly among members of his own Labor Party.


Chrysler Plans a 10-Cylinder Engine
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation confirmed today that it is developing a huge 10-cylinder engine that it hopes to place in a sports car by the early 1990's.


Oakley and the Knicks Rebound in Overtime
LEAD: The off-season trade for Charles Oakley never paid better dividends for the Knicks than last night.
The power forward, acquired from the Chicago Bulls for Bill Cartwright, did what he does best: rebound.


OPEC's New Friend: Us
LEAD: Americans often fail to recognize how much the health of our high-cost oil producers depends upon the success of OPEC in limiting oil production.
Indeed, Americans can get quite dewy-eyed thinking about the beauties of inexorable market forces - until, belatedly, they recognize that the marginal, high-cost producer who should be squeezed out in the quest for efficiency is us.


Steinberg Mental Exam To Be Ordered by Judge
LEAD: The judge in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg said yesterday that he would approve a prosecution request to order a psychiatric examination of Mr.
Steinberg.


Rite Aid Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rite Aid Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
694,493,000
648,132,000
Net inc
16,543,000
20,213,000
Share earns
.40
.49
9mo sales
2,049,082,000
1,789,826,000
Net inc
59,115,000
b108,343,000
Share earns
1.43
2.62


Baker Is Fined
LEAD: Al (Bubba) Baker, a defensive end for the Minnesota Vikings, has been fined $10,000 by the N.F.L. for a late hit on Mike Tomczak, the Chicago Bears' quarterback, in the final game of the regular season, which the Vikings won, 28-27.
Baker plans to appeal the judgment and has asked for a hearing before Commissioner Pete Rozelle.


Plant Grows Own Pesticide
LEAD: Using biotechnology methods, a Maryland company has created an innovative corn plant that grows its own pesticide to combat the destructive corn borer.


Chief Executive Picked At Cyclops Industries
LEAD: Cyclops Industries, a steelmaker in Pittsburgh, said yesterday that James F. Will had been named chief executive.


Street Dramatist in India Slain Over Play
LEAD: A leftist who was one of India's most popular street theater directors was beaten to death by thugs last weekend after he refused a politician's demand to stop a drama in support of an opposing candidate, witnesses said.


The First Day on the Job for the City's First Black District Attorney


Digital Optronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Optronics (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,754
59,187
Net loss
535,848
159,546
Yr rev
140,019
284,719
Net loss
1,679,128
485,857


Israeli Diamond Exports
LEAD: Israel exported polished diamonds worth an all-time high of $2.46 billion in 1988, the Israel Diamond Exchange's president, Moshe Schnitzer, said today.
Mr.
Schnitzer said the figure, which compares with $2.06 billion last year, represented about a third of all Israeli industrial exports.
He said the added value after the cost of rough stone imports was $600 million.


Koch Contends He Is Scapegoat For Journalists
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday spent much of his first, formal City Hall press conference of the year testily complaining about the press.


A Top Receiver Seeks a Supreme Catch
LEAD: Everything in pro football has come so fast and in such a flurry for Jerry Rice that, at first glance, he remains not only the game's consummate wide receiver, but also the happy, carefree youth he recalls being as he grew up in Crawford, Miss.


Tokyo Bank to Sell Chicago Operation
LEAD: The world's largest bank, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd., said it was selling its Chicago operations to the First American Bank Corporation, a suburban bank holding company, to focus entirely on business banking.
Terms were not disclosed.
The deal includes assets of $35 million, including about 6,000 checking, savings and other accounts, and a retail loan portfolio of less than $5 million.


QED Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* QED Exploration
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
373,591
563,474
Net loss
b342,099
c57,175
Share earns
-
.02
b-Included a $575,000 non-cash writedown of the company's oil and gas properties resulting from lower oil and gas prices.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ciociola &amp; Company Wins Remco Account
LEAD: It's still looking a lot like Christmas at Ciociola &amp; Company, which has won the $2 million to $5 million Remco Toys account, and at Bohbot Communications, which has been called on to handle media planning and buying for the $12 million Matchbox Toys USA account.


Izvestia Opens Pages to 'Parasites'
LEAD: ''French perfumes, French wines, the French striving for comfort have been well known to you for a long time,'' read the notice on page 5 of tonight's issue of Izvestia, the Soviet Government daily newspaper. ''Now you have the opportunity to get better acquainted with industrial France.''


Congress Convenes in Its 101st Incarnation


Dr. Irwin Lubowe, 83, Retired Dermatologist
LEAD: Dr.
Irwin Lubowe, a dermatologist specializing in disorders of the hair and scalp, died Monday at Doctors Hospital in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Barrett Resources Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barrett Resources Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,747,000
4,052,000
Net inc
b1,340,000
c656,000
Share earns
.22
-
b-Includes a tax loss carryforward of $442,000.
c-Net loss


Iceland Devaluation
LEAD: Iceland devalued its currency, the crown, today for the fourth time in less than 12 months to ease the island's crippling financial problems, and the nation warned of more economic measures to come.
The central bank said it was devaluing the currency by 4 percent against the dollar, bringing the rate to 48.08 crowns from 46.16.


BEI Holdings Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Holdings Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,839,000
7,357,000
Net loss
2,807,000
b2,241,000
Share earns
-
.22
Yr rev
41,487,000
40,778,000
Net inc
c3,715,000
c8,251,000
Share earns
.41
.80


NAVY OFFICIAL SAID TO HAVE GOT GIFTS
LEAD: Federal investigators in the Pentagon procurement case believe that two consultants gave $1,000 gifts to a Navy official in a position to help the Hazeltine Corporation compete for a contract, a court affidavit made public today said.


Great Wines of Jersey and Indianola
LEAD: ''CHATEAUNEUF DU MAHWAH,'' the label announced.
Mahwah?
New Jersey?
The wine was flavored by ''hunks of choice native white oak from Newark,'' the label explained.
Food aficionados were given a hot tip: the wine ''is best enjoyed with tofu and mashed potato sandwiches.''


PARLEY ON RIGHTS LIKELY IN MOSCOW
LEAD: President Reagan has agreed to a Soviet proposal to hold a human rights conference in Moscow in 1991, Administration officials said today.


Congress Opens Session In Spirit of Conciliation
LEAD: With circumspection about the political fights to come, the 101st Congress opened today with pledges from the Democrats in command that they would work in a bipartisan spirit with both their new President and their old Republican rivals.


Europeans to Offer Plan to Ease Trade Dispute With U.S.
LEAD: The European Community will present a proposal to the United States this week that it hopes will ease a dispute over beef raised with growth hormones.


How to Recognize Danger Signs of Depression
LEAD: To the Editor:


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: DRIED salted cod has been associated with Spanish, Portuguese and French cooking for centuries.
It was especially valuable before refrigeration because of its long shelf life.
The cod, some of which measure up to six feet long, were usually salted aboard fishing vessels in large wooden barrels.
Before cooking, the fillets were soaked in water to remove the salt and reconstitute the flesh.


Cuomo to Seek Rise in Grants For Welfare
LEAD: Despite a state budget gap that he estimates at more than $2 billion, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to propose an increase in state welfare benefits in his State of the State address on Wednesday.


Balboa Journal; Noriega's Comic Strip War: It's Deadly Serious
LEAD: The cartoon cutouts on the manicured lawn here at first resemble the backdrop of a perverse miniature golf course: a gunslinger putting a bullet betwen Santa Claus's eyes.


The Deficit Commission: Still Needed
LEAD: Barely 24 hours after President-elect Bush appointed two members to the budget deficit commission, President Reagan's budget office proclaimed that the plan Mr.
Reagan will send Congress Monday will bring the books into balance in 1993.
If that's right, if a balanced budget is already in the cards, why is a deficit commission needed?


How to Recognize Danger Signs of Depression; Enough Stigma
LEAD: To the Editor:


WINE TALK
LEAD: THERE is a generation of wine drinkers out there convinced that zinfandel is white.
The extraordinary success of white zinfandel over the last six years is one of those marketing phenomena that not even the most astute M.B.A. could have predicted.
It's been good for the wine industry - and certainly for the zinfandel growers - and appears to have made a large number of consumers happy as well.


The Nazi Time: Younger Jews Try to Comprehend
LEAD: ''My parents never really spoke about it,'' Janet Greenberg, whose parents are both survivors, said as she walked through Yad Vashem, the Israeli memorial to the six million Jewish civilians who died at the hands of the Nazis in World War II.


Homeless New York Families to Get U.S. Rent Subsidies
LEAD: The Koch administration announced yesterday that it would for the first time set aside Federal rent subsidies for homeless families as part of a plan to end the use of welfare hotels in New York City.


Construction Spending Rose 0.8% in November
LEAD: Construction spending rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in November, reflecting an increase in work on homes and government projects that more than offset slower building of offices and shopping malls, the Commerce Department reported today.


Scimed Life Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scimed Life Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,779,000
3,077,000
Net inc
1,301,000
b331,000
Share earns
.42
-
9mo sales
18,256,000
10,515,000
Net inc
2,104,000
b4,000
Share earns
.73
-


Washington Talk: Electoral College; Bush Gets to Proclaim Own Election Victory
LEAD: At precisely 1 P.M. on Wednesday, Vice President George Bush plans to enter the House of Representatives and, within 30 minutes, make a not very surprising announcement before a joint session of Congress.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Stanley Works To Ammirati
LEAD: The Stanley Works, the New Britain, Conn., manufacturer of home hardware products, has moved its $10 million to $12 million account from Della Femina, McNamee WCRS to Ammirati &amp; Puris after a review that began in the fall.


Hextall Sparks 4-1 Victory for Flyers, Putting Damper on Islander Revival
LEAD: The Islanders stormed the Flyers with 18 shots in the first period tonight and took a 1-0 lead, but they let up after that, and the Flyers, with strong goaltending by Ron Hextall, took control and emerged with a 4-1 victory.


Digital Licenses Apollo's Software
LEAD: Apollo Computer Inc., based in Chelmsford, Mass., said the Digital Equipment Corporation had licensed its network computing system and was evaluating it for use in future products.
The system consists of software tools that allow the automatic distribution of parts of a single software application to multiple computers across a network.


About Real Estate; Office Building in Queens Rises After Long Delays
LEAD: Nearly a decade after a developer first sought to build on the site of the defunct Kew Gardens Hospital near the Queens Borough Hall, the steel frame is in place for a 13-story office building.


Lemonade From a Greenish Tweed Lemon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holtz Hails the No.1 Irish But Finds Flaws Amid Glory
LEAD: The most optimistic ones among the followers of football at the University of Notre Dame had pictured their coach going onto the field not long after darkness fell upon the Arizona desert.


Oxidyne Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oxidyne Group
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,392,000
2,119,000
Net loss
1,882,000
3,393,000
Yr sales
8,200,000
9,200,000
Net loss
4,000,000
6,600,000


Oil Rig Count Declines
LEAD: The number of working rotary oil rigs in the United States fell by 32, to 908, in the week ended Saturday, compared with 1,121 a year earlier, Baker Hughes Inc. said yesterday.
Baker Hughes's economist, Ike Kerridge, said the decline in the rig count was expected. ''If it follows the normal seasonal pattern, it will decline until April,'' he said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Wells, Rich Resigns Cosmopolitan Magazine
LEAD: Wells, Rich, Greene has resigned the Cosmopolitan account.
The Hearst Magazines publication had put its account, worth less than $1 million annually, into a speculative review that the agency was not interested in participating in.


Puerto Rico Governor Seeking Vote on Status
LEAD: Gov.
Rafael Hernandez-Colon has called for a plebiscite on Puerto Rico's political status.


Fountain Powerboat Indusries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fountain Powerboat Indusries
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,334,000
3,304,000
Net loss
58,000
307,000
Yr sales
20,137,000
10,024,000
Net inc
b426,000
b119,000
Share earns
.10
.03
Shares outst
4,460,000
4,356,000


Double Murder In Westchester Puzzles Police
LEAD: Clues to the savage slaying of a couple here continued to elude detectives today as troubled residents walked by the stone-and-stucco house to see where the murders had occurred.


Jehovah's Witness Wins Bid To Block More Transfusions
LEAD: A Jehovah's Witness who was given a blood transfusion against her will won an appeal today that set aside the court order that allowed the transfusion, her lawyer said.


American Standard
LEAD: American Standard Inc., an equipment supplier to the construction industry, has sold its Steelcraft division to Masco Industries of Taylor, Mich., for more than $100 million.
American Standard, based in New York, said it was using the proceeds to reduce debt.
Steelcraft, based in Cincinnati, has annual sales of more than $100 million.


Bonn's Proliferation Policy
LEAD: It should come as no surprise that a West German company has been accused of helping Libya build a plant to produce poison gas.
If true, this is only the latest in a long line of irresponsible West German exports.


Tokyo Route Award Won't Be Contested
LEAD: The Department of Transportation said yesterday that it would comply with a court order awarding the coveted Seattle-to-Tokyo route to Continental Airlines.
The department had previously argued that Continental was the least qualified of the three carriers seeking the route.


New 12% British Bond
LEAD: The British Government today introduced a high-interest bond guaranteed to earn 12 percent a year over five years.
National Savings, a Government savings plan, said the interest on its new ''capital bond'' is accumulated and paid out at redemption, so the value including interest of a $:100 bond held for five years would be $:176.24, or about $320 at today's currency exchange rates.


Eddie Heywood, 73, Jazz Pianist, Arranger and Composer, Is Dead
LEAD: Eddie Heywood, the pianist whose highly stylized arrangement of Cole Porter's ''Begin the Beguine'' made his sextet one of the most popular jazz groups of the 1940's, died Monday at his home in North Miami, Fla.
He was 73 years old.


Those Who Would Should
LEAD: Democrats and Wall Street just won't leave George Bush alone on this tax thing.
They want more taxes laid on, and they keep fretting at Mr.
Bush to lay on with a will.


S. M. Milliken, 78, Lawyer and Adviser To Service Groups
LEAD: Seth M. Milliken, a lawyer who spent his career as a pro bono adviser to nonprofit groups, primarily working on housing for the poor, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Milliken was on the board of the New York City Mission Society, where he founded a school tutorial program in East Harlem in 1964.


Saharan Rebels Leave For Talks in Morocco
LEAD: A delegation representing the Polisario Front guerrillas left for Morocco tonight for its first talks with King Hassan II on ways to end the 13-year war in Western Sahara.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 2 More Advertisers To Use Comedians
LEAD: Two more advertisers are joining the trend toward using comedians as spokesmen.
Next week, Post Fruit &amp; Fibre cereal, a product of General Foods, introduces ads featuring Harvey Korman and Tim Conway, co-stars of television's defunct ''The Carol Burnett Show'' and veterans of the stand-up comedy circuit of years past.


B.P. to Sell Mining Unit To RTZ
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company, the nation's largest concern, today announced plans to sell off its mining operations to the RTZ Corporation and to buy back much of the major stake in the oil company held by the Kuwaiti Government.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There comes a time when each of us has to ask himself if at the end of one's current term, it isn't time to pass the mantle of leadership to new hands.
And I believe that by the end of 1990 that time will have come.''  - Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.  [ A10:4. ]


Review/Theater; Seeking a Lost Mother To Find a Lost Self
LEAD: An adoptee searches for her natural mother in Sybille Pearson's ''Phantasie,'' but that search is less for a new parent than it is for clues to the character's buried self.
Without knowledge of the circumstances of her birth or of her parentage, the woman (Diane Salinger) has had to fantasize possibilities.


Woman, 25, Pleads Not Guilty In Death of Girl, 5
LEAD: A Brooklyn woman indicted in the death of her 5-year-old daughter last month pleaded not guilty at an arraignment yesterday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Bomb Scares Slow or Disrupt Passenger Flights in Europe
LEAD: Bomb threats forced unscheduled landings and flight delays at airports in Switzerland, Scandinavia and elsewhere, authorities said today.


Seton Hall Topples Georgetown


Radiant Technology Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiant Technology Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,608,300
6,074,800
Net inc
b298,000
b122,900
Share earns
.11
.04
b-Includes extraordinary gains of $129,000 and $40,000 for the latest year and prior year, respectively.


The Characters Are Real, the History Isn't
LEAD: The Czar is baffled by his sister-in-law's taste in men.
In an unusually down-to-earth moment from Roberto Pazzi's novel ''Searching for the Emperor,'' Czar Nicholas II wonders how Elizabeth could have chosen such an ''empty-headed and superficial'' lover.
Her reason, which elevates imagination over sex appeal or love, points to the heart of the novel: ''Give me only a little of a man, a very little,'' she says.


TALKS BY DARMAN SHOW BUSH'S PLANS TO HANDLE BUDGET
LEAD: President-elect George Bush's strategy for dealing with the Federal budget has begun to take shape, and Richard G. Darman, who has been given unchallenged authority to draft Mr.
Bush's budget policy, is trying to sell it to Congress.


Art Rush Dies at 81; Agent for Performers
LEAD: Art Rush, a talent agent who represented such performers as Vladimir Horowitz, Orson Welles, Roy Rogers and Dale Evans, died of heart failure Sunday.
He was 81 years old.


The Brash Bed: Today's Bold Design Statements
LEAD: IN the 50's, people bought suites of furniture for the bedroom.
In the 60's, the brave slept on water beds, and in the 70's the avant-garde chose platform beds to make a minimal design statement.
Today, although four-poster and brass beds are still popular, the beds of choice are reinterpretations of antiques or one-of-a-kind designs.


Entremont Leaving Denver Symphony
LEAD: Philippe Entremont, the French-born conductor and pianist, has announced his resignation as music director of the Denver Symphony, effective at the end of this season.


Cuomo Plans A Major Effort To Fight Drugs
LEAD: Calling drug abuse ''the single most ominous phenomenon of our times,'' Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today outlined a major new effort to combat drugs in New York despite the state's tremendous financial problems.


Bridge
LEAD: There have long been connections between what are generally considered the three leading intellectual games of the Western world: bridge, chess and backgammon.
A century and a half ago Deschapelles had a good claim to be considered the world's best at chess and the world's best at whist, bridge's forerunner.


A History of Hostility
LEAD: Although the United States asserted that today's clash between Libyan and American warplanes had ''no connection whatsoever'' with a disputed Libyan chemical plant, that appears to be true only in the narrowest sense.


Stocks Rally as Dow Rises 33.04, to 2,177.68
LEAD: Stocks rallied strongly yesterday in a broad advance that market experts attributed to a stronger dollar and a late wave of program buying.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 18 about a decline in civility during 1988 misstated an affiliation and title of Dr.
James R. Walker.
He is assistant professor of communication at Memphis State University, not a professor at the University of Tennessee.


Nicaraguan Devaluation
LEAD: Nicaragua devalued its currency by 54 percent today, the seventh drastic reduction in a year, and cut subsidies on transportation and military spending to combat an economic slump and soaring inflation.
The central bank said in a statement that the cordoba was now fixed at 2,000 to the United States dollar, down from 920 to the dollar.


Toxic Issue at Arsenal Stirs Furor in Colorado
LEAD: Residents of a trailer park 10 miles northeast of here are at odds with state and Federal officials over the health risks of the cleanup of toxic waste at the nearby Rocky Mountain Arsenal.


For Those Who Have Lost Sleep, The First Casualty Is Creativity
LEAD: In a study with implications for the work performance of everyone from students and artists to hospital interns and pilots, a British researcher has found that loss of sleep sabotages creative faculties and the ability to deal with unfamiliar situations more rapidly than it impairs other mental abilities.


Study Islam, Khomeini Suggests to Gorbachev
LEAD: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini told Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, in a letter delivered today that Communism was dead and that he should study Islam.


A Plant Almost Too Good to Be True
LEAD: WITH much fanfare, several mail-order nurseries are introducing a new chrysanthemum in their 1989 catalogues, and all signs suggest that it is destined to become one of the most widely planted perennials in the United States in the next few years.


T. Herbert Shriver 2d, Investment Banker, 77
LEAD: T. Herbert Shriver 2d, a retired investment banker, died Wednesday at his home in Towson, Md., after a long illness.
He was 77 years old.


In Blended Families, Rivalries Intensify
LEAD: AT first, Christa and Shayne Johnson treated each other with the wariness of two hungry cats who suddenly have to share the same food bowl.
Each was 8 years old and used to being the only child of a single parent.
When those parents were married eight years ago, Shayne and his father moved in with


Friendly French Offer for Collins Is Ended
LEAD: The battle for control of William Collins P.L.C., the Scottish publisher, took a new turn today as a friendly French bidder stepped aside and Collins said it would open talks with Rupert Murdoch's News International P.L.C.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q. I own a two-family house that has baseboard hot-water heating.
When the heat comes on the pipes knock, even though I have the system drained often.
The banging is worse in the pipes going to the second floor.
I was told that I would have to break walls open to correct this problem.
Is there a simpler solution?


Chicago Merc Is Opposing Amex Trading Instrument
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange has recently argued to the Securities and Exchange Commission that a new type of trading instrument proposed by the American Stock Exchange cannot legally be traded.


Wertheim Co-chairman Resigns to Form a Firm
LEAD: Frederick A. Klingenstein has resigned as co-chairman of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the Wall Street investment firm, to form his own company specializing in investing for individuals and families with substantial assets - about $10 million or more.


Duties Raised on Vehicles
LEAD: The United States Customs Service today reclassified an increasingly popular category of imported utility vehicles and mini-vans, making them subject to a 22.5 percent tariff.


Review/Opera; Cultivating Young Singers in Jersey
LEAD: The Opera/Music Theater Institute of New Jersey, a training organization for young singers directed by the longtime Metropolitan Opera bass Jerome Hines, presented its first full opera production, ''The Magic Flute,'' Saturday and Monday at Newark Symphony Hall.
On the evidence of the second performance, the institute has succeeded in what must be the first step of any such group's mission: identification of talents worth developing.


Next Flight of a Shuttle Moved Back Five Days
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today it would launch Discovery on the next space shuttle flight on Feb. 23, five days later than originally scheduled.


Last-Minute Gifts Save a Vietnam Memorial
LEAD: A forest planted by a Vietnam veteran in memory of Americans who died in the war was saved today when supporters raised enough money to stave off its sale by a bank.


Plan by Hoffmann
LEAD: Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., an afiliate of the Swiss pharmaceutical concern F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company, said it would build a $60 million plant in Freeport, Tex., to produce beta carotene, a nutritional supplement and food-coloring agent found naturally in carrots, broccoli, squash and other vegetables.


Illusion and Reality on Stage: Earning a Living vs. Altruism
LEAD: Paul Hecht's luck as an actor has certainly changed.


Chitchat During Pageant Is About Texas, Not Taxes
LEAD: They were just a couple of guys from Texas, sitting around talking.


Panel Seeks to Streamline F.D.A. for Cancer and AIDS Drugs
LEAD: A new panel of experts hopes to find ways to streamline the bureaucracy of the Food and Drug Administration, its chairman said today.


Review/Comedy; Genial Student Of Anxieties And Foibles
LEAD: Larry Miller is one of today's few younger comedians whose unswerving geniality and seamless delivery make him a possible contender to preside one day over the genteel living room tradition of which Johnny Carson remains king.
A low-keyed, friendly observer of human foibles, Mr.
Miller, who is appearing through Jan.


Booking Guests for Talk Shows: A Hectic Hunt for Ever-Fresh Gab
LEAD: Gail Evans has 9,000 telephone numbers.
She has dozens of earthquake survivors, 15 people who say they've had afterlife experiences, 4 who insist they've seen Big Foot.
She has the phone number of Cher's mother and the number of Rocky Graziano's upstairs neighbor.
She has business numbers, home numbers, country home numbers, car phone numbers, airplane numbers and beeper numbers.


Bennett of Bills Already Rated As One of the N.F.L.'s Best
LEAD: On their first day together at Alabama, the new head coach, Ray Perkins, told the freshman Cornelius Bennett, ''You're going to be the next Lawrence Taylor.''


Ouster Of Milken Seen Near
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, the head of the high-yield bond unit at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., will be removed from the firm and receive virtually none of his pay for last year as part of Drexel's settlement with the Government of charges of securities law violations, people familiar with the agreement said late yesterday.


St. Paul's Architectural Time Capsule
LEAD: ''YOU have traditional homes and Brave New World things, a fondness for Gropius and a Breueresque look,'' said Tom Martinson, referring to the conglomeration of styles in University Grove, a neighborhood of 102 homes built on the northwestern edge of St.
Paul by University of Minnesota faculty members and administrators.


Big Challenge Follows Big Victory
LEAD: About three hours before game time Tuesday night, Seton Hall's team bus arrived at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Right then, the Pirates realized this wasn't an ordinary game.


Orders to U.S. Factories Rose by 0.3% in November
LEAD: Orders to the nation's factories for manufactured goods increased by a modest three-tenths of 1 percent in November, a report some economists said reflected continued but slower economic growth.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  METS (NL) - Named Rick Lawes assistant public relations director.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS - Agreed to terms with Danny Cox, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
BASKETBALL  UTAH (NBA) - Waived Bart Kofoed, guard.
COLLEGES  CINCINNATI - Named Tim Murphy head football coach.


Pitt Upsets Syracuse in Big East Opener
LEAD: Sean Miller had 22 points tonight as Pitt handed Syracuse its first loss of the season, 81-76, in the Big East Conference opener for both schools.


European Flavors In SoHo
LEAD: ''L'AQUITAINE is a little-known region in the south of France, but it's a name I've always liked,'' Carlos Fernandez Llamas said.
So L'Aquitaine was the name Mr.
Llamas chose when he opened a furniture gallery and interior design company last month in a converted factory space at 17 Greene Street between Canal and Grand Streets in S


Mexicans Hoping for 'Salinastroika'
LEAD: Some of the challenges facing Mikhail S. Gorbachev as he pursues glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union also confront Mexico's new President, and drawing parallels between the two has become an intellectual parlor game among Mexicans of various ideological persuasions and foreign diplomats here.


Suffolk Woman Being Protected Is Shot to Death
LEAD: A 34-year-old woman who obtained a protective court order after her former husband was accused of trying to murder her was shot to death on the front steps of her house here Tuesday night, the Suffolk County police said.


Lorillard Appointment
LEAD: Lorillard Inc., the manufacturer of Kent, True and Newport cigarettes, has appointed Lucy M. Giordano its director of media.
Ms.
Giordano, 40 years old, started at the company 21 years ago as the secretary to Bill Sands, the retiring media director whom she is succeeding.
Lorillard, a subsidiary of the Loews Corporation, does its media planning and buying in-house, and handles media placement for the Loews hotels and its Bulova watches.


2-Month-Old Baby Dies in a House Fire
LEAD: A 2-month-old infant on Staten Island being watched by a baby sitter was killed last night when a fire broke out in the baby's bedroom, the police said.


Giants' Assistant Turns In Resignation
LEAD: The Giants announced yesterday that Len Fontes has resigned as the defensive backfield coach.
It was the team's first coaching change since the Giants finished the season with a 10-6 mark and failed to make the playoffs for the second straight season.
Neither Bill Parcells, the Giants' head coach, nor Fontes could immediately be reached for comment.


Celtics Surprised By Suns
LEAD: The Phoenix Suns broke a nine-season Boston Garden losing streak tonight with a 106-104 victory over the Celtics.


Chrysler and Government Settle an Age Bias Case
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission have tentatively settled an age discrimination suit filed by the commission in 1981 on behalf of 231 former salaried Chrysler employees.


Not Getting Sympathy, Officials Hope for Raise
LEAD: Since conservative Republicans have long preached the gospel of ''fiscal responsibility,'' one might expect virtually all of them to oppose the hefty pay increase recently proposed for Federal lawmakers, judges and executives.
Not so.
Every year, their complaint goes, the financial sacrifice of public service grows greater.


Senate Leaders, Reacting to Criticism, Agree to Vote on Rejecting a Raise
LEAD: Senate leaders, responding to public criticism of the recommendation to increase Congressional pay by 50 percent, agreed today to schedule a vote within the next month on whether to reject the pay increase.


Protein Clue in Dystrophy
LEAD: An important protein made by muscles is produced by brain cells in a different form, says a study that may help explain why some people with muscular dystrophy also suffer mental impairment.


New Yorkers Braving the Chill of It All
LEAD: Scarves were wrapped tightly, flags flapped snappily and cars hacked hoarsely as a wind-whipped front of frigid air bore down on the New York metropolitan region yesterday.


Test for the Attorney General
LEAD: Dick Thornburgh faces one daunting internal problem as Attorney General, the same one that has tested his predecessors in the Justice Department for 30 years.
That is the character of the F.B.I.


California Gala for Reagans Raises Money for a Drug Center
LEAD: A glittering crowd rolled out a welcome wagon laden with caviar tonight for President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, at a black-tie party that was held to mark the couple's impending return to California and to raise a million dollars for a new center to combat drug abuse.


Stake Is Increased In Starrett Housing
LEAD: The New York real estate developers Seymour and Paul Milstein have raised their stake in the Starrett Housing Corporation to 25 percent from 7 percent.
Starrett, the New York-based construction company that built the Trump Tower and the Trump Plaza, received $60 million last year in connection with longstanding claims against


Group Says Sloppy Labs Mislead Consumers on Radon Tests
LEAD: A consumer group said today that results from over-the-counter kits to test for the presence of the carcinogen radon in the home may be misleading or false because of poor quality control at laboratories that analyze the results.


Senior U.S. Official Says Libyans Should Destroy Chemical Factory
LEAD: As the United States prepares for a conference in Paris on chemical weapons, a senior Administration official said today that Libya should tear down a vast chemical plant.


Lyman C. Thunfors, 85, Retired Executive
LEAD: Lyman C. Thunfors, a retired business executive, died of cancer Monday at his home in Bridgeport, Conn.
He was 85 years old.


Books of The Times; Stalking a Boy Genius for the Codes
LEAD:  Daddy  By Loup Durand  Translated by J. Maxwell Brownjohn. 374 pages.
Villard Books. $18.95.


BRIEFS
LEAD: British Petroleum Co., London, will pay Kuwait a profit of about $700 million for 790 million shares of B.P.
On Tuesday, when the deal was announced, estimates of Kuwait's profits on the sale were lower.


Proxy-Fight Plan Over Pennwalt Bid
LEAD: In response to the rejection of its $785 million offer for the Pennwalt Corporation, Centaur Partners said that it would begin a hostile proxy fight to gain control of the Philadelphia-based chemical concern.
Pennwalt rejected as inadequate a $100-a-share offer from Centaur.


'Poison Pill' Revamped At Borden
LEAD: Executives of the Borden Company announced yesterday that they had put into effect a new type of takeover repellent that would result in the resignations of the company's top 25 managers if an acquirer took over the company at a price Borden's directors considered unfair.


Power Supply Going Down In Argentina
LEAD: It has become common sense in this metropolis of 11 million people not to enter an elevator within five minutes before or after 7 A.M., noon or 5 P.M.


2 Studies Show Big Drops In U.S. Share of Electronics
LEAD: Two recent studies conducted by Japanese and European organizations show that the United States' share of the world's electronics production has dropped far more dramatically than previously estimated, a United States trade group said today.


Raising Quality: Consumers Star
LEAD: Deep down, what do people really want in a car door?
That is not a trivial question for the Budd Company, which is using an increasingly popular Japanese quality control system to find the answer and make better doors as a result.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: AVOIDING personal injury is the first consideration when using any tool.
And with power tools, because accidents can be severe, this rule cannot be overemphasized.


Walesa Interview Published In Communist Party Weekly
LEAD: Lech Walesa, interviewed by the Communist Party weekly Polityka for the first time since 1980, predicted that the authorities will have to reinstate his union one way or another.


Quaker Plans Ghirardelli Sale
LEAD: The Quaker Oats Company said today that it would sell its Ghirardelli chocolate business, based in San Leandro, Calif.


Lawyers Slug It Out In Tyson-Cayton Case
LEAD: Beyond the battle to control the boxing future of Mike Tyson, a struggle that has pitted the heavyweight champion's manager, Bill Cayton, against Tyson and the promoter Don King, a small-scale skirmish is shaping up: one to influence public opinion.


Soviet Writers' Chief Quits
LEAD: Georgi Markov, a defender of standard Communist values in the arts, retired Wednesday as chairman of the Soviet Writers' Union, the country's most important officially approved organization of authors.
Mr.
Markov, 77 years old, was one of the union's most powerful figures for almost 20 years, serving as its first secretary from 1971 to 1986 and then as its chairman.


Close to Home
LEAD: THE Christmas tree, kept till the day after New Year's, is finally gone, the ornaments are back in their boxes, and my major present, new earrings, has been worn thrice already.
Now I am settling in for the long, slow trek through winter, for the low sun and the short days and the air that drops like iron into the lungs.


TV Notes
LEAD:  'Butterfly' by Prince


Chief Executive Hired By American Hospital
LEAD: Richard A. Gilleland, who has been in the hospital-products industry for 20 years, was named yesterday as chief executive of American Medical International Inc., one of the nation's largest hospital companies.


Bush Seeks More Candidates For Post of Energy Secretary
LEAD: Aides to Vice President George Bush said today that the President-elect had asked that additional candidates be proposed for the post of Energy Secretary.


Fund Denial for Holocaust Course Is Upheld
LEAD: Secretary of Education Lauro F. Cavazos has said that he does not intend to reverse a decision denying money for a education program about the Holocaust, despite pleas from a group of Congressmen.


Best Products Fills Key Post
LEAD: Norman S. Matthews, the former president of Federated Department Stores Inc., has been named vice chairman and a director of the Best Products Company, the catalogue-showroom chain in Richmond.


Busch Shuts Plant Because of Oil Slick
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies suspended production at its biggest brewery because an oil slick working its way down the Mississippi River has slightly altered the taste of the water used in making beer.
Company officials have not detected anything that would indicate a health hazard, Andrew J. Steinhubl, senior vice president of brewing, said.


Bank Regulator Asks for Powers To Raise Fees and Limit Lending
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation proposed today to strengthen the deposit insurance system by giving it new powers to increase premiums on banks and to rein in high-risk lending.


Thornburgh Meets On Trial of North
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra investigation, Lawrence E. Walsh, held an unusual private meeting today amid indications that Government concerns about national security were posing a threat to Mr.
Walsh's prosecution of Oliver L. North.


Charles M. Shapp, 82, Ex-New York Educator
LEAD: Charles M. Shapp, a retired New York City school superintendent, died of a heart attack Tuesday in Marbella, Spain, where he lived.
He was 82 years old.


Commuting: Have Mug, Will Travel
LEAD: THE peripatetic nature of American society has spawned all sorts of strange creations, among them billboards, Winnebagos, Walkman radios and car telephones.


Albany Resumes Year-Round Cycle
LEAD: The Governor's State of the State address has traditionally marked the start of a new political season.
In years past, the event served as a sort of homecoming, with legislators who had not seen each other for months returning to slap backs and exchange stories in the manner of students coming back to school after a long summer recess.


CHEMICAL PLANT LINK DENIED
LEAD: American warplanes today shot down two Libyan fighters that displayed ''clear hostile intent'' in international waters off the Libyan coast, the Administration said.


Lukas Foss to Leave Brooklyn Philharmonic
LEAD: Lukas Foss, music director of the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra since 1971, is to retire at the end of the 1989-90 season, orchestra officials announced yesterday.


You Need Medical Advice at 3 A.M.? It May Be Only a Phone Call Away
LEAD: It was 3 o'clock in the morning and a man, finally fed up with a throbbing, long-neglected bunion, decided it was time to do something.
He called a telephone number, and a registered nurse, after telling him how to relieve the pain, gave him the name of a specialist he could arrange to see later that day.


Metro Matters; A Time to Raise And a Time To Deny a Raise
LEAD: What do Robert R. Kiley and the average welfare mother have in common?


Ex-Coach Complains
LEAD: A week after being dismissed as the defensive coordinator for the Los Angeles Raiders, Charlie Sumner was quoted in yesterday's editions of The Los Angeles Times as saying that Coach Mike Shanahan had made him a ''fall guy.'' Shanahan, whose Raiders turned in a 7-9 record in his first year as head coach, dismissed Sumner and Willie Brown, another assistant, a few days after the Raiders were eliminated from playoff consideration.


U.S. Airports Told to Use Computer-Card Security Systems
LEAD: In a sweeping new move to tighten security at United States airports, the Government yesterday ordered that computer card systems be installed at the busiest terminals by early 1991 to keep people who might threaten airline safety from reaching restricted areas.


Philip Tobin, 46, Former Tuckahoe Mayor
LEAD: Philip D. Tobin, a labor lawyer who was twice elected mayor of the village of Tuckahoe in Westchester County, died of pneumonia Tuesday night at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan after a long battle with cancer.
He was 46 years old and lived in Tuckahoe.


Cairo Journal; Finance and Islam Mix, Igniting a Mighty Scandal
LEAD: When Effat Abbas Mohammed lost her life savings to Al Rayan, a huge Islamic investment fund, her story told much more than the sad failure of her ambition to make good and righteous money to help in raising four daughters.
By now, hundreds of thousands of middle-class Egyptians may also have seen their modest wealth disappear in the hands of funds accused of dubious dealings.


FEW DATA FOUND IN CAPITAL INQUIRY
LEAD: The inspector general of the Department of the Interior said tonight that his auditors had found few records in the Virgin Islands concerning consulting work there by District of Columbia officials, including Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.
But the inspector general, James Richards, said in an interview that some of the records that had been uncovered about the 1988 consulting project on personnel and pay matters, including hotel and travel expenses, ''would raise your eyebrows.


Talking Deals; The Constraints On Bank Buyouts
LEAD: JUST as Congress and business leaders are growing alarmed over the mounting levels of debt associated with leveraged buyouts, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout specialist, seems to be looking at a Texas bank as a possible acquisition target.
Could it be that leveraged buyouts are about to happen in the banking industry, one of the most financially sensitive businesses in the country?


Tracing the Roots
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Attacks and Accusations: The U.S.-Libya Bitterness
LEAD:  December 1979: A mob in Tripoli sets fire to the United States Embassy in support of the Iranians who took over the American Embassy in Teheran, taking staff members hostage.
May 1981: The United States closes the Libyan Embassy in Washington.
August 1981: Two United States F-14's shoot down two Soviet-built Libyan SU-22 warplanes over the Gulf of Sidra.


Sharp to Griffin Bacal
LEAD: Griffin Bacal has won the account for the Sharp Electronics Corporation of Mahwah, N.J., the American unit of the Sharp Corporation of Japan.
The New Jersey operation, which makes consumer electronics and office automation products, has a budget for broadcast and print advertising of $12 million to $15 million.


Legionnaire's Shuts a School
LEAD: Hunterdon Central Regional High School will be closed, at least for Thursday, because one janitor was confirmed to have and another is suspected of having Legionnaire's disease, a spokesman for the school said today.


Busy Schedule Ahead For Fly-Fishermen
LEAD: A daylong fly-fishing workshop sponsored by the Nutmeg, Mianus and Croton Watershed chapters of Trout Unlimited will be held at the Turn of River Middle School in Stamford, Conn., Jan. 14.


Castro Plays Down Differences With Soviets on Economic Change
LEAD: Fidel Castro sought tonight to minimize differences between Cuba and the Soviet Union, but reaffirmed his refusal to adopt Mikhail S. Gorbachev's program of economic liberalization to remedy his country's critical economic problems.


Chilhood Memories
LEAD: In ''Museum Memorializes Life in Tenements'' (Dec. 15, 1988), James Hirsch reported that the curators of the Lower East Side Tenement Museum had been unable to find anyone who had lived in its building at 97 Orchard Street in Manhattan.
The article prompted this letter.
To The Home Section:


Mini-van Displayed By G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation took the wraps off its long-awaited plastic-body mini-van today, but the move was criticized by Chevrolet dealers who were angry at having to share the vehicle with Pontiac and Oldsmobile.


Need Sheets for Your 707?
LEAD: If you need extra-long twin sheets, dust ruffles for higher than normal beds or linens for irregularly shaped beds, E. Braun is one shop that can make them.
This specialty linen house, on New York's Upper East Side, even makes extra-narrow sheets for mattresses like those on boats or railway cars.


Regina Reports $16.8 Million Loss
LEAD: The Regina Company, the financially troubled maker of vacuum cleaners, yesterday reported a loss of $16.8 million for the period in which inaccuracies were cited in its earnings by accountants.


Qaddafi Vows to 'Meet Challenge With Challenge'
LEAD: Libya said today that the downing of two Libyan jet fighters by United States Navy planes was a premeditated attack, and Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi said that his nation would ''meet challenge with challenge.''


'Starlight Express' to Close
LEAD: ''Starlight Express,'' the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical with lyrics by Richard Stilgoe, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Gershwin Theater.
Directed by Trevor Nunn, the show will have run for 761 regular performances and 22 previews.


Gains for Chemical
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation's Houston-based Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc. unit will report a profit for 1988, and the parent company will post record annual earnings, a Chemical Bank spokesman, Kenneth Herz, said.


The Blooming Of Black Quarterbacks
LEAD: The legend has it that when Robert Fulton was about to launch this invention of his, a boat that would supposedly run on steam, he was told it would never go.
When it did, he was told it would never stop.
History informs us that it did that, too.


Excerpts From O'Neill's Message to the General Assembly
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Gov.
William A. O'Neill's State of the State address to the Connecticut General Assembly:


River Phoenix Ranks Acting Below Animal Rights and Music
LEAD: When River Phoenix learned he had just won the National Board of Review's award as best supporting actor of 1988 for his performance in ''Running on Empty,'' his first response was to ask what the society was.


Pay Raises Won't Improve Our Lawmakers; In the Public Interest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yields Rise For Week
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose for the week that ended yesterday, with the yield increases in C.D.'s concentrated in the six-month and one-year maturities.


East Dominates West in Race for Eclipse Awards
LEAD: New York horses and horsemen were rewarded with a virtual sweep of thoroughbred racing's championship prizes.


Nightmare a Reality As Body of Mother Is Found in Freezer
LEAD: A woman who had had nightmares about her mother's 1985 disappearance pried open a locked basement freezer and found the woman's battered body on Monday, the police said.
The discovery led her father, a high school dean of students, to confess the slaying.


Campaign-Financing Law Is Amended
LEAD: The New York City Council, after a committee meeting marked by shouts of anger and frustration, overwhelmingly approved a series of amendments to the city's new public campaign-financing law.


The State of 3 States
LEAD: Money was on the minds of the gov-ernors of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut yesterday.
They warned their constituencies separately of budget constraints necessitated by spending that is outpacing revenues.


Ball for Cleaner Air
LEAD: On Inauguration Eve, two environmental groups will sponsor a ball to raise public awareness of air pollution and its effects, specifically how the atmosphere traps pollutants under the sun's heat, like a greenhouse, in a way that is some think will raise the Earth's temperature.
The ball will be held in a greenhouse.


Florence Ryder, 88, Newspaper Publisher
LEAD: Florence Ryder, chairman of the Times Journal Company, which publishes several weekly newspapers serving members of the armed forces worldwide and a number of suburban newspapers in the vicinity of Washington and San Diego, died in her sleep yesterday at her home in Washington.
She was 88 years old.


Jersey Faces Shortfalls in Revenue, Kean Warns
LEAD: Echoing concerns in neighboring states, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean today disclosed growing shortfalls in the state's tax revenues and warned that New Jersey's next budget would be ''very tight.''


From Regan to Bush
LEAD: President-elect George Bush is receiving a lot of advice these days, some of it unsolicited.
Still, he might welcome the thoughts of Donald T. Regan, President Reagan's ousted chief of staff, in the form of a chapter added to the paperback edition of his 1987 memoir ''For the Record.''


Baker's First Blunder
LEAD: The Bush administration, three weeks before it takes office, has sent a signal of irresolution and hypocrisy in dealing with the Soviet Union.


Europe's Grand Plan for Web of Fast Trains
LEAD: European nations are undertaking the world's most ambitious high-speed rail project, which will tie Europe closer together by allowing travelers to move across the Continent at speeds up to 186 miles an hour.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Progress Software Corp., Bedford, Mass., to Giardini/Russell Group, Watertown, Mass., with a $500,000 budget.


Cyanide Yogurt Case Still Puzzles Officials
LEAD: Investigators believe the cyanide poisoning of a teen-ager who ate tainted yogurt is an isolated incident, but they said yesterday that they were looking into a possibility that it might be linked to an unsolved product-tampering case two years ago.


Thompson's Choice
LEAD: Daley Thompson of Britain, the 1983 world decathlon champion and the 1980 and 1984 Olympic gold medalist in the event, says that Ben Johnson should be banned from international competition for life.
Johnson was banned for two years after testing positive for steroid use following his victory in the 100-meter dash at the Seoul Olympics.


14-Year-Old Bystander Is Killed In a Police Shootout in Brooklyn
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy returning home from church services in Brooklyn was shot in the head and killed Tuesday night after he and his family were caught in crossfire between a policeman and a robbery suspect.


Westerners Can Avoid Soviet Customs Curb
LEAD: New regulations barring foreigners from taking scarce consumer goods out of the Soviet Union after Feb. 1 will not apply to Westerners who buy caviar, vodka and other items and pay for them with dollars and other convertible currencies in special stores, a customs official said today.


Trial Begins On Newhouse Tax Issue
LEAD: Testimony began today in an attempt by the Government to win more than $600 million in taxes from the estate of Samuel I. Newhouse, who built one of the country's largest newspaper chains before his death in 1979.


Some Travelers Switching Airlines
LEAD: Concerned about the possibility of bombings, some travelers have begun to switch from United States airlines to foreign carriers for their flights to Europe.


Anti-Cholesterol Move by Keebler
LEAD: The Keebler Company, which sells more than $1 billion worth of cookies, crackers and other snack foods each year, said it would stop using tropical oils and animal fats in all its products.
The company, a unit of United Biscuits (Holdings) P.L.C. of Britain, is the latest food manufacturer to respond to consumer concerns about the cholesterol problems associated with coconut oil, palm oil, palm kernel oil, lard and beef fat, all of which are high in saturated fat.


Excerpts From Cuomo Address: Challenge of Difficult Times
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's State of the State address, as recorded by The New York Times.


Rates Steady in Quiet Trading
LEAD: The prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in lackluster, apathetic trading yesterday.


Ousted Panamanian Leader Offers to Talk With Noriega
LEAD: Panama's ousted President, Eric Arturo Delvalle, has written to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega offering to negotiate an end to the nation's political crisis, according to a document obtained today.


Murals, Monuments And Urban Decor
LEAD: FOR the last 14 years, trompe l'oeil facades by the muralist Richard Haas have been decorating urban landscapes from Los Angeles and Milwaukee to Fort Worth and Cincinnati.
In New York, many remember the cast-iron facade he created at 114 Prince Street and his re-creation of the old Times Tower in Times


Part of Hollywood Past Dies in Closing of Hotel
LEAD: A part of Hollywood died Tuesday as the last guests checked out of the 67-year-old Ambassador Hotel, the home of the Cocoanut Grove, one of the most famous nightclubs of the 1930's and 1940's.


People
LEAD: *
Jennifer Clark has been promoted to senior vice president, management supervisor, at Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson.


Dartmouth Is Ordered To Reinstate 2 Editors
LEAD: A state judge has ordered the reinstatement of two student journalists at Dartmouth College, saying their suspensions were tainted by bias against the off-campus conservative weekly for which they worked.


Knicks Stun Nets With 20-0 Explosion
LEAD: The Knicks have had other superb comebacks this season, but tonight's bordered on miraculous.


A 'Private' Collection Of Silver
LEAD: SINCE the early 1970's the Italian industrialist Cleto Munari has been commissioning internationally famous architects and designers to produce silver objects.
Although they were originally commissioned for his private collection, Mr.
Munari began exhibiting these pieces in European galleries and museums, then hiring craftsmen in


World Bank Raises Rates
LEAD: The World Bank is raising interest rates for relatively prosperous developing countries to 7.65 percent annually, the first such increase since the bank began lending at variable rates in 1982, officials said today.


Lina Prokofiev, 91, Widow of the Composer
LEAD: Lina Prokofiev, a singer and the wife of the Russian composer Sergei Prokofiev, died Tuesday in London.
She was 91 years old and lived in London.


Review/City Ballet; After Mice And Toys, Balanchine
LEAD: It could have been a Sunday in November.
It wasn't.
It was a Tuesday night.
And it was this month: January.
Nevertheless, by dancing ''Ballo Della Regina,'' ''Episodes'' and ''Brahms-Schoenberg Quartet'' at the New York State Theater, the New York City Ballet offered the three works by George Balanchine that it presented Sunday night, Nov.


Good Riddance to the Welfare Hotels; At Least Help the Homeless Off the Street
LEAD: ''I don't pray!
Pray for what?
I been prayin' all my life and I'm still here.
When I came to this hotel, I still believed in God.
I said: 'Maybe God can help us to survive.' I lost my faith.
My hopes.
And everything.
Ain't nobody - no God, no Jesus - gonna help us in no way.''


AFRICANS IN BEIJING BOYCOTT CLASSES
LEAD: African students at a Beijing language institute began boycotting classes today to protest what they feel is racism in China, and interracial clashes were reported in another city after two weeks of racial unrest.


CNN in Latin America
LEAD: The Turner Broadcasting System said today that it would transmit the Cable News Network 24 hours a day to Latin America on the Pan American Satellite Corporation's international satellite.
The agreement followed tests that began in November, TBS said.
Turner's decision to use Pan American Satellite is a victory for the private company, based in Greenwich, Conn., and a defeat for Intelsat, the international consortium that operates most communications satellites.


Jazz Waives Kofoed
LEAD: The Utah Jazz yesterday waived the second-year guard Bart Kofoed, following an incident in which a teammate, Bobby Hansen, sustained a broken cheekbone during a scuffle at a New Year's Eve party. ''There are many versions of the story,'' said the Jazz general manager, Dave Checketts. ''The fact is, a punch was thrown, and I don't see that the situation could ever be patched up again.


Lewenthal Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for the pianist Raymond Lewenthal is to be held on Monday at 3 P.M. at Green Auditorium, 40 West 68th Street.
Mr.
Lewenthal died of a heart attack on Nov. 21 at the age of 62.
The service is open to the public.


Richard Siegel, Teacher, 70
LEAD: Richard Siegel, a retired English teacher, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.


James Thompson, 85, Surgeon and Educator
LEAD: Dr.
James Edwin Thompson, an educator and retired surgeon, died of heart failure Tuesday at his home in Siesta Key, Fla.
He was 85 years old.


Competition Cuts Price Of Gift-Wrap Books
LEAD: ABOUT five years ago Joost Elffers, a Dutch book and graphic designer, had the idea of putting wrapping papers into book form.
Paul Gottlieb, president of the Harry N. Abrams publishing company, was enthusiastic. ''It was a great concept,'' Mr.
Gottlieb said. ''But Joost didn't really know how to do it.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-15


Mr. Cuomo's Priorities, and Their Price
LEAD: Partway through his State of the State address Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York, the Cuomo who can charm with a word and a nod, heard some applause greet his call for expanding social programs despite budget rigors, and digressed from his text.
He clapped his hands, grinned and said: ''I'm pleased to hear the applause.


Whalers Win in Overtime; Dineen Assists on 4 Goals
LEAD: Brian Lawton scored at 3 minutes 19 seconds of overtime tonight, giving the Hartford Whalers a 5-4 victory over the Buffalo Sabres.


Correction
LEAD: A chart on Tuesday about key yields for fixed-income securities in 1988 mislabeled several yield curves.
This is a corrected version.


A Wall Street Boutique Names a Senior Partner
LEAD: Ken Miller said he did not leave Merrill Lynch almost one year ago to create a one-man boutique.
That is why he called his fledgling deal shop the Lodestar Group, to suggest his role as guiding light. ''If you name a firm after yourself, it doesn't help in getting additional personnel,'' Mr.
Miller said.


Steinberg's Lawyer Predicts Conviction
LEAD: The defense lawyer in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg said yesterday that his client ''probably would be found guilty'' in the death of Lisa Steinberg and that he would probably be sent to prison.


Hoare Govett Sets Cutback
LEAD: The brokerage Security Pacific Hoare Govett announced today that it was getting out of the British and international bond markets and laying off 140 people.


Fire Shuts Down a Reactor
LEAD: A fire in a turbine building at the Oconee Nuclear Station on Tuesday caused operators to shut down one of its three reactors, a utility spokeswoman said today.
Workers were starting the plant's Unit 1 reactor, which had shut down automatically Monday, when an electrical breaker apparently caught fire, the station manager, Mike Tuckman, said.


Arafat Presses Israel to Accept Talks


Now Soviet Armenia Begins to Rebuild
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. EXPLAINS MOVE ON RIGHTS PARLEY
LEAD: Hoping to bring a European security conference to an end before President Reagan leaves office, the Administration announced today that it would support a meeting on human rights in Moscow in 1991.


Fast Play Is Not Fit Yet
LEAD: Fast Play, the Seattle Slew colt who had been considered a leading prospect for the Kentucky Derby May 6, is unlikely to run in any of the Triple Crown races, his trainer said yesterday.


Reported Arafat Threat Is Grist for Israeli Debate
LEAD: Right-wing Israeli politicians said today that reported death threats by Yasir Arafat against other Palestinians showed that the Palestine Liberation Organization was still a ''terrorist organization.''


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article headed ''Atlanta Journal'' on Tuesday about crime at the Bankhead Courts public housing project misidentified officers who kept watch over an all-night vigil by elected officials, ministers and students.
They were police officers, not National Guardsmen.


Pay Raises Won't Improve Our Lawmakers; Obscene, Reprehensible
LEAD: To the Editor:


BAKER SAID TO PICK A KISSINGER MAN
LEAD: James A. Baker 3d, the Secretary of State-designate, has offered the job of Deputy Secretary to Lawrence S. Eagleburger, colleagues of both men said today.
Mr.
Eagleburger is a career diplomat long associated with Henry A. Kissinger.


Freddie Mac Offers Mortgage Issues
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, is offering $1 billion in mortgage participation certificates through a real estate mortgage conduit, with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets as lead manager.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 30
Dec. 23
Jan. 1
1988
1988
1987
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.3
Gasoline stocks
229.6
222.0
227.4
Distillate stocks
126.4
125.4
136.5
Crude imports, daily
5.7
4.7
4.5
Product imports, daily
2.6
2.8
2.2
Crude stocks
334.4
337.2
350.5
Crude production, daily
8.0
8.0
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
84.1
83.7
85.0


Ward Approves Police Immunity In Melee at Park
LEAD: Moving to counter criticism that the Civilian Complaint Review Board has not done all it could to expose police wrongdoing in Tompkins Square Park last August, Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward has authorized the panel's investigators to selectively reinterrogate officers, this time under grants of immunity from departmental charges.


Giving Rises In 77th Drive For Neediest
LEAD: Contributions to the 77th annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are running ahead of the last appeal, and donors seem to be particularly alarmed by the desperate plight of the homeless.


East New York, Haunted By Crime, Fights for Its Life
LEAD: The Brooklyn block where Norris Graham died is a bleak stretch of sidewalk that looks as if it is more for dying than living.
Garbage and glass are everywhere, and someone has spray-painted ''Keep Out Killer Dog and Mother'' on a door.


Up to $2 Million Is Missing From a Chicago Storage Site
LEAD: As much as $2 million in coins owned by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is missing from a suburban armored car company and the Federal Bureau of Investigation has entered the case, the authorities said today.


New and Classic Pipes, And Prompt Repairs
LEAD: ''PIPE smokers are funny people,'' said Vince Nastri, president of the Barclay-Rex Pipe Shop, started by his grandfather in 1910, in the Wall Street area. ''They break their pipes, and it's like they've broken their legs.
They have to have them fixed right away.''


Review/Television; Dinosaurs: Faster, Smarter, Warmer
LEAD: The image of the dinosaur is being refurbished.
Long considered just dumb, oversized lizards, the creatures that dominated earth for 140 million years are getting a better press.
Revisionist paleontologists now hold that dinosaurs were warmblooded, quite energetic, not necessarily unintelligent and, in at least one species, caring of their young.


Ms. Honors Portraits Series
LEAD: The much-honored ''Portraits'' campaign created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather for the American Express Company is adding another leaf to its laurel wreath: Ms. magazine's first annual ''Making A Difference'' advertising award.


Praise and Skepticism Greet the Drug Plan
LEAD: Officials grappling with New York's huge drug problem welcomed proposals today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in his State of the State Message to combat drug abuse.
But some officials criticized the Governor's program as thin on specifics and new initiatives.


Ruth Moore, 80, Dies; Wrote About Science
LEAD: Ruth Moore Garbe, a writer of books about science, died of cancer Monday at her brother's home in San Francisco.
She was 80 years old lived in San Francisco.


Afghan Cadets Reportedly Riot in a Capital in Soviet Central Asia
LEAD: A large group of Afghan cadets training at a Soviet police academy went on a rampage Tuesday in the Soviet Central Asian city of Tashkent, leaving an infant boy dead and several other people wounded, according to reports reaching Moscow tonight.


A Look at Some of the Winners


Building a Better Bird Cage
LEAD: THESE days it seems even birds are deserving of historic houses.
So believes Johanna Welty of Walnut Creek, Calif., who makes limited-edition bird cages in such styles as an Italian Regency dovecote and a Palladian aviary.


Reagan Schedules a Farewell
LEAD: President Reagan will deliver a farewell address over television from the Oval Office at 9 P.M. on Jan. 11, the White House said today.
The speech will be given nine days before Vice President Bush succeeds Mr.
Reagan as President.


Rangers Take Bows After Earning Tie
LEAD: The opening by the Rangers last night prompted a collective review that would have made the critical reception of ''Legs Diamond'' seem quaint, even mildly encouraging.
New York, having stumbled ineptly through 20 minutes of hockey, was thunderously booed by the Garden crowd.


Linens of Lively Prints
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the pure white sheet has been considered the height of fashion by decorators for several years, two lines of designer sheets currently in the works are anything but.


U.S. DROPS CHARGES IN IRAN ARMS CASE
LEAD: Federal prosecutors dropped all charges yesterday in a 1986 indictment charging a London lawyer, a retired Israeli general and nine other men with plotting to sell more than $2 billion in American-made weapons to Iran.


Pay Raises Won't Improve Our Lawmakers; With Our Deficit?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rabbis Agree to Plan for Stores Near Graves
LEAD: The Chicago Rabbinical Council, a group of Orthodox Jewish leaders, has reluctantly agreed to the construction of a shopping center on a plot of land bordered on three sides by a Jewish cemetery, a member of the council says.


3 Dead After Taking of Hostages
LEAD: A prison parolee demanding an airplane to Libya held about 20 people hostage in a restaurant Tuesday, killing one of them.
The police fatally shot the suspect but also killed a hostage by accident, the authorities said today.


Bonn Finds No Libya Tie at Company
LEAD: Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said today that his Government had found no evidence yet to substantiate American assertions that a West German company had helped Libya build a chemical weapons plant, though it took the charges ''very seriously.''


Nick Virgilio, 60, Poet Known for His Haiku
LEAD: Nick Virgilio, a poet who specialized in haiku, died Tuesday at George Washington University Medical Center after a heart attack while taping an interview for the CBS television program ''Nightwatch.'' He was 60 years old and lived in Camden, N.J.


Practically a Native
LEAD: The attractive flier, offering the upscale magazine European Travel &amp; Life at half price, says for openers that it ''invites you to begin a lifelong love affair with the most magnificent place on earth'' - meaning Europe.
The advertisement for the three-year-old publication displays color photographs of a formal castle garden, a baroque ballroom, a prancing fashion model, some fine china, a contemplative writer, and an unidentified couple in Bavarian leather knickers, with a seal-point Siamese cat, captioned: ''The People.


Copper Prices Rise Sharply; Concern About Supply Cited
LEAD: Prices of copper futures rose sharply yesterday on supply worries rekindled by the apparent bombing of three locomotives in Peru and a decline in the warehouse stocks of copper at the Commodity Exchange in New York.


Atomic Cleanup Is Seen Costing U.S. $92 Billion
LEAD: The Energy Department estimated today that it could cost $53 billion to $92 billion to clean up radioactive and chemical pollution at plants used to manufacture nuclear bombs and at other military and civilian installations under the department's control.


Co-op Efforts Rewarded At D.M.B.&amp;B.
LEAD: WHEN he was a graduate student, Clay E. Stobaugh enticed a dozen colleagues to pose for an ''Eligible Bachelors of the Harvard Business School'' calendar, a project that netted him several thousand dollars.
As director of co-operative advertising at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles for the last two and a half years, he has routinely lured dozens of companies to join in one ad, a procedure that has gained the agency about $10 million in revenues.


Housing Repair Data Inflated, Goldin Says
LEAD: City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin asserted yesterday that the Koch administration had inflated the number of apartments it has renovated for homeless families by counting some renovations more than once.


Strange Wants to Put His Successful Run Behind Him
LEAD: The PGA Tour, one of the favorite multimillion-dollar toys of corporate America and corporate Japan, will begin its 42-tournament season Thursday when Curtis Strange, the United States Open champion, and a healthy Greg Norman tee off first in the MONY Tournament of Champions here at the LaCosta Country


16 Die in Philippines
LEAD: A motor launch carrying more than 140 people sank in the central Philippines and at least 16 people were killed, the coast guard said today.
Twelve people were reported missing.
The vessel, the Jem II, sank Tuesday off Romblon Island, about 150 miles southeast of Manila, a coast guard officer said.


Opening-Day Tradition
LEAD: Tradition means a great deal on Capitol Hill.
So does family.
Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, has honored both on the first day of every new Congress since he first came to Washington in 1955.


Pay Raises Won't Improve Our Lawmakers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Illinois May End Premarital AIDS Testing
LEAD: The nation's only law requiring premarital testing for AIDS may not be a law much longer, mainly because the overwhelming majority of those tested have shown no signs of the AIDS virus.


Lauder Leaves New York City To Announce Run for Mayor
LEAD: Ronald S. Lauder, former ambassador to Austria, traveled to Albany yesterday to announce that he was running for mayor of New York City.


Tensions in Mediterranean Spur Broad Dollar Advance
LEAD: The dollar advanced against most major currencies in moderate trading yesterday, bolstered by tension in the Mediterranean and market expectations of strong United States employment data.


Braniff in Move to Buy 100 Planes
LEAD: In an aggressive step toward modernizing and expanding its fleet, Braniff Inc. said today that it would buy as many as 100 airplanes from Airbus Industrie in a deal valued at roughly $3.5 billion.


Debenture Offering From Fannie Mae
LEAD: In its first financing of the new year, the Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae, is offering $700 million in debentures due in 1994 through various securities dealers.


Chief of Steinberg Ethics Investigation Quits
LEAD: The chief counsel for the committee that disciplines lawyers in Manhattan announced Tuesday that he would resign, amid news reports that he mishandled charges of drug use and other misconduct against Joel B. Steinberg.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  A high-speed European rail network that would sharply cut travel times is in the works. [ Page A1. ] THE ECONOMY  The F.D.I.C. wants new powers to increase premiums on banks and to rein in high-risk lending. [ A1. ] President-elect Bush's strategy for the Federal budget has begun to take shape.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.41
9.40
6.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.25
8.13
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.37
8.28
6.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.28
9.28
8.69
30-YR.


Jefferies's Campaign Giving Is Cited
LEAD: Boyd L. Jefferies, the Government's main witness in a series of securities fraud cases, may have violated Federal election laws by concealing contributions made to members of Congress, lawyers involved in the stock manipulation case of the GAF Corporation said yesterday.


Tri-Cities Journal; Icy 'Miracle in the Desert' Is an Oasis of Cheer Amid the Gloom
LEAD: Here in the desert of southeastern Washington State, home of the Hanford nuclear reservation, just about every piece of news lately has been bad.


Carlucci Backs Panel On Closing U.S. Bases
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci has approved a special commission's recommendation to close dozens of military bases around the country, setting the stage for a final debate on Capitol Hill, Pentagon officials said today.


New Data on the Pill Find Breast Cancer As a Possible Risk
LEAD: An expert advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration will meet today to consider surprising new evidence that the use of oral contraceptives may increase the risk of breast cancer.


Recycling Is a Far Better Solution Than Navy Yard Incinerator
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Tuesday, with an article about the outlook for interest rates, provided incorrect labels for several yield curves.
A corrected table appears today on page D15.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This announcement shall be deemed a sufficient declaration of the persons elected President and Vice President of the United States.''  - George Bush, President of the Senate, after the reading of the final vote of the Electoral College.  [ A1:2. ]


Jobless Rate Up in Germany
LEAD: West Germany's unemployment rate rose in 1988 despite the nation's highest economic growth in this decade, data released today by the Federal Labor Office showed.


The War Against Chemical Warfare
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is spending its final days militantly resisting the spread of chemical warfare.
Whether part of a larger strategy or not, the shooting down of two Libyan fighter planes in the Mediterranean yesterday is likely to advance that high purpose.


Global Trading Network Near for New York Merc
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange is moving closer to the age of electronic trading, with its governors considering a plan to link their market with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange through a global computer network called Globex.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Events: Bee (Quilting) to Zebra (Carved)
LEAD: Needle in Hand, Art Center of the 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; 212-996-1100.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Israeli Debate on Arafat


Excerpts From Pentagon Briefing on Libyan Jets
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Pentagon briefing today on the downing of the two Libyan jets, including the opening statement by Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci and a question-and-answer session with Mr.
Carlucci and Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff:  Opening


John J. Faal, Professor And Administrator, 64
LEAD: John J. Faal, a professor of economics and a former academic vice president at Suffolk County Community College, died of complications from acute leukemia yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Smithtown, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Commack, L.I.


Thatcher at Rites for Crash Victims
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher led several hundred mourners today at an emotional memorial service for the 270 people who were killed when Pan Am Flight 103 was blown apart by a bomb two weeks ago over the Scottish countryside.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Sukova Advances: Top-seeded Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia advanced to the third round of the $150,000 Danone Australian hard-court championship in Brisbane yesterday with a 6-4, 6-2 victory over unseeded Alexia Dechaume of France.
Fifth-seeded Hana Mandlikova, a native of Czechoslovakia who is an Australian citizen, continued her recent poor form when she served 18 double faults during her 6-4, 6-4 loss to unseeded Catherine Tanvier of France.


2 FROM FRENCH TVJ HELD IN BOMB HOAX
LEAD: The New York bureau chief and a producer for a French television station, working on a report about airport security, were arrested yesterday and charged with trying to check three packages containing fake bombs through Kennedy International Airport, the Port Authority police said.


Sahara Guerrillas Hold Talks For First Time With Hassan
LEAD: Senior Polisario Front guerrillas conferred with King Hassan II on Wednesday in their first direct contact with the Moroccan monarch since the Western Sahara war began nearly 13 years ago.


Ditka Hasn't Decided Who Will Start for Bears
LEAD: The injured Mike Tomczak and the now-healthy Jim McMahon alternated at quarterback today in the Bears' practice for the National Conference championship game Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers in Chicago.
Coach Mike Ditka of the Bears said he would not decide until later in the week on which quarterback would start.


Connecticut Session Opens With a Jolt
LEAD: The often-staid Connecticut General Assembly began its 1989 session today in tumult, with the bitterly contested ouster of the powerful two-term Speaker overshadowing Gov.
William A. O'Neill's warnings of fiscal constraint.


Personal Health
LEAD: Premenstrual syndrome, now widely known, discussed, diagnosed and even used as a legal defense, is still a biomedical mystery whose cause and proper treatment have yet to be established.


Cut Nuclear Weapons, Don't Add to Them
LEAD: To the Editor:


Braniff's Checkered Past
LEAD:  May 1982 Braniff Airways Inc. files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, and the courts order the airline grounded.  1982-1983 The Pritzker family of Chicago, after gaining concessions from unions, buys Braniff.
March 1984 Braniff resumes service with 30 Boeing 727 jets serving 25 cities.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Ashland Coal Inc., Huntington, W. Va., named Kenneth G. Woodring senior vice president, operations, and Raymond Smallwood president of its Hobet Mining Inc.


Soviet Readers Finally Told Moscow Had Trotsky Slain
LEAD: For the first time, a Soviet historian has told Soviet readers that the Kremlin was responsible for the slaying in exile of Leon Trotsky 48 years ago.


Sikes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sikes Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
34,510,000
32,283,000
Net inc
2,678,000
1,829,000
Share earns
.30
.20
9mo sales
100,622,000
91,889,000
Net inc
7,147,000
6,210,000
Share earns
.80
.69


New Flaws Are Discovered at Nuclear Arms Plant
LEAD: Engineers working to repair reactors at the nation's most important nuclear weapons plant encountered more potentially serious structural weaknesses today that could cause further delay in producing tritium, a vital ingredient of atomic weapons.


'African-American' for 'Black' Signals a Return
LEAD: To the Editor:


Punitive Damages Strike at Intent to Harm
LEAD: To the Editor:


9 Are Convicted of Extortion On Restaurant Inspections
LEAD: Six New York City health inspectors and three restaurant consultants were convicted yesterday of extorting thousands of dollars from restaurant owners by threatening to cite them for violations or close them.


AFRICANS IN CHINA ARE FINALLY FREED
LEAD: About 45 African students who had been held against their will by the authorities in the eastern Chinese city of Nanjing for the last 10 days were released today.
Most plan to leave China as soon as possible.


Healthcare Compare Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare Compare Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,798,000
3,958,000
Net inc
743,000
369,000
Share earns
.13
.08
Shares outst
5,762,000
4,230,000


Copeland Extends Bid for Church's
LEAD: A. Copeland Enterprises Inc., the owner of Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken, has extended its tender offer of $8 a share for Church's Fried Chicken Inc. to Feb. 7 by order of the United States District Court of the Eastern District of Louisiana, which is considering takeover-related litigation between the two companies.


On-Line Software Internaional Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* On-Line Software Internaional Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
20,182,000
20,523,000
Net loss
b444,000
c1,717,000
Share earns
-
.25
Shares outst
6,085,000
6,722,000
6mo rev
38,847,000
39,035,000
Net loss
b629,000
c2,737,000
Share earns
-
.40
Shares outst
6,216,000
6,730,000


Rail Police Resent Extra Burden of Homeless
LEAD: Freezing weather and gusty winds have prompted many homeless people to seek shelter in New York City's transportation terminals, prompting complaints from the police at Pennsylvania Station that they are being forced to work overtime to keep the homeless moving.


Treasury Issues Continue to Dip
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped again in moderate trading yesterday as market participants awaited this morning's release of December employment data.


White Supremacist Guilty
LEAD: A Federal jury today found a white supremacist guilty of conspiring to violate a family's civil rights.
The defendant, Gary Skillman, 24 years old, was convicted of of using force and the threat of force to intimidate the family and of burning a cross outside the family's home in Orange County.
The crimes carry a maximum sentence of 21 years.


Intermetrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermetrics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,020,000
12,009,000
Net inc
b716,000
c602,000
Share earns
.20
.17
9mo rev
37,090,000
35,538,000
Net inc
b2,210,000
c1,494,000
Share earns
.63
.43


Charles J. Buesing, Executive, 79
LEAD: Charles J. Buesing, a retired sales executive and longtime trustee of the American Cancer Society, died of emphysema Saturday at Indian River Memorial Hospital in Indian River Shores, Fla., where he lived.
He was 79.


Manic Basketball and Making Waves in the Air
LEAD: Molissa Fenley, Wendy Perron and Elizabeth Streb took choreographic chances Wednesday night in the first of two programs to be presented by Dance Chance at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.


Steinberg's Lawyer Finds Sudden Fame, and Infamy
LEAD: Ira D. London, Joel B. Steinberg's lawyer, tells the story himself.
He goes into a fashionable Manhattan restaurant where he used to dine unknown but where he now gets a good table.


Datamag Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datamag Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
390,788
388,830
Net loss
461,609
205,210
Yr sales
1,795,439
870,230
Net loss
1,784,280
541,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Russian at U.N. Says Moscow Had Urged Restraint by the U.S.
LEAD: The Soviet representative to the United Nations said today the Soviet Union had urged the United States to ''show restraint in the area'' before the aerial encounter in which two Libyan warplanes were shot down over the Mediterranean.


Arbitration for Thon
LEAD: Dickie Thon, the San Diego shortstop who had demanded a trade, exercised another right yesterday by filing for salary arbitration.
He was the only one of the 176 eligible players to file on the first day of the 12-day filing period.
Under the trade demand, the Padres must trade Thon by March 15 or lose him as a free agent.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  AFRICAN AMERICAN FESTIVAL, a program of music and colorful costumes by the Universal Language Ensemble, 1 and 3 P.M.
Sunday, at the Third Street Music School Settlement, 235 East 11th Street.
Tickets: children and the elderly, $2.50; others, $5.
Information: 777-3240.


Rev. Charles T. Fritsch, A Biblical Scholar, 76
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Charles T. Fritsch, a biblical scholar and former professor of Old Testament literature at Princeton Theological Seminary, died Monday at his home in Jamesburg, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 76 years old.


U.S.-CUBA ENMITY MAY BE RELAXING
LEAD: After three decades of mutual hostility, the United States and Cuba appear to be edging toward a wider range of contacts that some diplomats say may lead to somewhat improved relations.


Pacers Pick Versace In Third Change
LEAD: In their third change of bench leadership while losing 23 of 29 games this season, the Indiana Pacers yesterday named Dick Versace, an assistant with the Detroit Pistons for three seasons, as their coach.
The Pacers lost their first seven games under Jack Ramsay, dropped two more under the assistant coaches Mel Daniels and Dave Twardzik after Ramsay resigned, then won 6 of 20 games under George Irvine, vice president of basketball operations.


Review/Art; Man Ray's Beginnings
LEAD: As it was for many young American artists at the time, the Armory Show of 1913 was for Man Ray an event of singular significance.
It put his mind ''in a turmoil,'' he recalled years later, ''the turmoil of a seed that has been planted in fertile ground, ready to break through.'' What Man Ray produced during the next eight years - beginning with the Cezanne-derived canvases he painted of scenes around his home in Ridgefield, N.J., and then in the photographs, collages and other Dada-inspired objects he created after moving to New


Auto Sales in '88 Set 2d-Highest Mark Ever
LEAD: The automobile industry enjoyed its second-best year ever in the United States in 1988, with sales of more than 15 million cars and trucks for an unprecedented fourth straight year.


CARLUCCI APPROVES BASE-CLOSING PLAN
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci approved a plan today to close dozens of military bases around the country, calling it a ''unique opportunity'' to save money that had been endorsed by military leaders.


Dexter Masters, 80, British Editor; Warned of Perils of Atomic Age
LEAD: Dexter Masters, a writer and an editor, died of bronchial pneumonia at St.
John's Hospice in Springfield, Ill., yesterday.
He was 80 years old and lived in Totnes, England.


Roosevelt I. Landmarks Are New York History
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Acts to Lift a Hauler's License
LEAD: In the first major crackdown on violators of the state's costly year-old garbage-disposal rules, the Board of Public Utilities has voted to ban a hauler from operating in the state.


'Xanadu/The Millions'
LEAD: Storytelling, music and dance will be combined in ''Xanadu/The Millions,'' presented by Mark Taylor and Friends tonight through Sunday at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street.
Suggested by the story of Marco Polo, the multi-media piece was choreographed by Mr.
Taylor to a score for percussion and amplified cello, composed and played at each performance by Elise Tobin.


Review/Art; The Possibilities of Line at the Nolan Gallery
LEAD: Given that line is the primary vehicle of drawing, a trip to the David Nolan Gallery, by whatever means available, is in order.
On view is an exhibition that traces the evolution of an eccentric linear drawing style in the work of Rudi Troger, born in 1929 and a teacher at the Academy of Fine Arts in Munich, and two of his students, Erwin Pfrang and Franz Gunzel.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindsay Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
28,151,000
20,513,000
Net inc
2,533,000
1,560,000
Share earns
1.22
.75


Correction
LEAD: A brief article by Reuters in Business Day yesterday about the unemployment rate in West Germany described the change incorrectly.
The rate fell to 8.7 percent in 1988, from 8.9 percent in 1987, but the total number of unemployed did rise.


Paul Brown Gives Bengals A Regimen
LEAD: After the Cincinnati Bengals' switchboard operator plugged in the phone call, the voice that answered announced: ''Coach Brown's office.''


Iran-Contra Events Span the Reagan Era
LEAD:  Aug. 4, 1981 Maj.
Oliver L. North of the Marine Corps is assigned to duty at the White House with the National Security Council.
December 1981 President Reagan signs a ''finding'' authorizing a covert Central Intelligence Agency operation to support the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.
December 1982 The first Boland amendment becomes law barring use of Federal money to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua.


Irvin Shapiro, 82, Distributor of Films By Foreign Directors
LEAD: Irvin Shapiro, a film importer and distributor who introduced many notable foreign movies to the United States, died of complications from Parkinson's disease on Sunday at his home in New York.
He was 82 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.94
9.35
6.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.28
8.25
5.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.48
8.37
6.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.28
N.A.
8.59
30-YR.


John E. Lawe, 69, the President Of the Transport Union, Is Dead
LEAD: John E. Lawe, president of the Transport Workers Union of America since 1985 and before that president of Local 100, which represents New York City's subway and bus employees, died of complications from cancer of the esophagus yesterday at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 69 years old.


Bonus to U.S. From Clash: Intelligence
LEAD: In shooting down two Libyan fighter planes, the Navy added to its knowledge of Libyan air defenses, information that would be useful if the Reagan Administration decided to attack what it says is a chemical weapons plant.


Samuel T. Carter 3d, Author, Is Dead at 84
LEAD: Samuel T. Carter 3d, a radio and television writer who retired to write on American history, died of cancer Dec. 28 at the Ponperaug Woods Health Center in Heritage Village, Southbury, Conn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Heritage Village.


Ex-Insider Who Elects To Remain on Outside
LEAD: At a moment of political transition, when legions of potential officeholders are cajoling, conspiring or cudgeling their way toward the inner circles of power, former Navy Secretary John F. Lehman Jr. shows every sign of digging in firmly on the outside.


Half a Billion for One Plane
LEAD: The Pentagon's sophisticated new weapons are often criticized as gold-plated.
Not the B-2, the Air Force's latest bomber.
Forget plate: the aircraft costs nearly its weight in solid gold.
Last month, on his final day as Secretary of the Air Force, Edward Aldridge said that each B-2 Stealth bomber will cost $516 million.


Israel Approves $550 Million in Budget Cuts
LEAD: A proposal by Finance Minister Shimon Peres to reduce the Israeli Government budget by $550 million was approved tonight by the Israeli Cabinet.


Review/Art; Four New Sculptors
LEAD: Curtis Mitchell is one of many artists living in a raw warehouse area in Brooklyn, not far from the Brooklyn Bridge.
One of his three untitled works in the ''Emerging Sculptors'' show at the Sculpture Center was inspired by a visit to Manhattan's glitzy Trump Tower.
With its rectangular trunk shape, its marble facing and a carpet placed over it as carefully as a shroud, the sculpture suggests a fancy portable altar.


Global Trade System Gains
LEAD: As expected, the governors of the New York Mercantile Exchange voted late Wednesday night to join Globex, an electronic futures trading system developed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and Reuters Ltd.
The system is designed to afford traders around the globe access to both markets after their normal trading hours.


This Is the Team That Embry Built
LEAD: No joke.
The Cleveland Cavaliers, once the comic relief of the National Basketball Association, now have the best record in the league.


Dow Climbs To Highest Since Crash
LEAD: Stocks rose broadly in heavier trading yesterday, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average to the highest close since the October 1987 crash.


Proposal on Automated Trading Systems
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today approved for public comment a measure that would require increased regulation of private automated trading systems.


Reviews/Music; After 20 Years Onstage, a Debut For Jill O'Hara
LEAD: After a 20-year career in musical theater that includes a role in the original production of ''Hair'' at the New York Public Theater in 1967 and a Tony nomination for her performance in ''Promises, Promises,'' Jill O'Hara is making her cabaret debut at Danny's Skylight Room in the Grand Sea Palace, 346 West 46th


Intermagnetics General Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermagnetics General Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Sales
10,140,000
7,912,000
Net inc
419,000
295,000
Share earns
.07
.05
6mo sales
19,605,000
14,285,000
Net inc
820,000
581,000
Share earns
.13
.09


Cockpit Voices, Critical Moments
LEAD: O.K., bodeys  [ Libyan planes ]  have jinked back at me again for the fifth time.
They're on my nose now, inside of 20 miles.


Beeba's Creations Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beeba's Creations Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
23,204,083
20,712,027
Net inc
404,470
b454,701
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
4,599,639
4,841,086
b-Net loss


Reviews/Music; Pursuing The Research Of 'Bird' Songs
LEAD: Charles McPherson's set at the Village Vanguard on Wednesday night was typically predictable, and typically brilliant.
The alto saxophonist ripped through a handful of standards - ''Billie's Bounce,'' ''Cherokee,'' ''Easy to Love'' - as well as an original ballad.
Solos followed one another logically, and Mr.


West Germans Try to Curb Dollar's Rally
LEAD: The West German central bank intervened against a surging dollar yesterday, indicating its increasing displeasure with the dollar's growing strength.


Man Executed in Missouri for Killing Waitress
LEAD: A convicted killer was put to death by injection early today for the murder of a tavern waitress, becoming the first Missouri inmate executed since 1965.


Soviets Curbing Private Businesses
LEAD: The Soviet Government has sent a wave of alarm through the growing private business sector with sweeping new limits on a range of private businesses, including medical care, publishing, film making, video salons, schools, concert booking and the manufacture of religious artifacts.


Reagan Supports 50% Raise for U.S. Officials
LEAD: President Reagan decided today to recommend that members of Congress, Federal judges and top members of the executive branch get a 50 percent pay increase, the White House and Congressional officials said this evening.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about Braniff's purchase of aircraft from Airbus Industrie described a transaction involving Pan American World Airways incorrectly.
Airbus and International Aero Engines paid $115 million, plus the return of Pan Am's deposit, for the right to assign the order and options to Braniff.


Snow Falls in Iran's Desert
LEAD: Snow has fallen on the desert regions of Khur and Biyabanak in eastern Iran for the first time in 50 years, the official Iranian press agency reported today.
Officials said four inches of snow had fallen in the last 24 hours, forcing schools to close.


Koch Ends Support for River Projects
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch, anticipating election-year criticism of his development policies, has withdrawn his support for two large waterfront projects and says he will run ''on a campaign of balanced development.''


Raimondi Cancels
LEAD: Ruggero Raimondi, the bass who was to sing in the ''Pavarotti Plus ...
Plus!'' concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday at 8 P.M., has dropped out because of illness.
Paul Plishka will take his place in the ensemble pieces requiring a bass.
The performance is to be broadcast by the public television on ''Live from Lincoln Center'' and simulcast locally on WNCN radio (104.3 FM).


On Stage
LEAD:  Newcomers In New Play


Questions Left Hanging; In Skillful Defense Strategy, North's Team Exploited Administration's Embarrassment
LEAD: By dropping the most serious charges against Oliver L. North, the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra case has left a host of questions that may never be answered.


Armenians Raise a Glass to All Those Who Cared
LEAD: Normally on this day, Christmas Eve on the Armenian Church calendar, the Arutunyan family would have invited friends and relatives for a joyous feast and exchange of gifts.
And the next day they would have gone to the cemetery to remember the dead.


ESPN Will Pay $400 Million For Baseball-Game Rights
LEAD: The ESPN cable network yesterday won the television rights to 175 major league baseball games a year for four years, beginning in the 1990 season, in a $400 million deal.


Thanks From Armenia
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  The United States wants Soviet help in pressing Libya to cease operations at a chemical plant that Washington says will be used to make chemical weapons, Secretary of State George P. Shultz said.
Page A1


F.D.A. Panel Finds No Need for Change In Taking of the Pill
LEAD: An advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration said today that no changes in the use of birth control pills or in warning labels on the pills are warranted despite new evidence suggesting that use of the pill may increase the risk of breast cancer.


Audiovisual Madrigal
LEAD: ''Salt 40,'' a work about 40 years of conflict in Israel, by Kei Okada, is to be perfomred at Franklin Furnace, 112 Franklin Street, tonight at 8:30.
Mr.
Okada, a Japanese composer living in New York, has described the piece as an audiovisual madrigal.
It is also to be performed tomorrow evening at 8:30.


Review/Film; A Hunger for Wisdom
LEAD: ''36 Fillette'' was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 4.
The film, which is in French with English subtitles, opens today at Lincoln Plaza 2, Broadway at 63d Street.


Exemptions by the C.F.T.C.
LEAD: In a policy retreat, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission today exempted from its regulatory jurisdiction certain financial instruments linked to the price of oil, gold and other commodities.


Tyson in Accident
LEAD: Mike Tyson was in another car accident yesterday, when his 1988 Lincoln was hit by another car trying to get around a stalled vehicle in Las Vegas, Nev.
No one was injured in the accident, which police described as a minor fender-bender that slightly damaged the door of Tyson's car.
Tyson, a passenger, was on way to his doctor to be fitted for a mouthpiece.


Military Bases Affected by Commission's Recommendations
LEAD: Following is a list of 145 military installations affected by the recommendations of the Commission on Base Realignment and Closure.
The numbers after each installation indicate a loss or gain of jobs and the amount of annual savings where any is expected.
ALABAMA  Alabama Ammunition Plant, closed, minus 1, $30,000.


Review/Art; Esthetics of Comfort
LEAD: He was ''Coddy'' to her.
She was ''Pussy'' to him.
They were friends, colleagues, collaborators.
Between them, they had an immense influence on the way certain people wanted to live.
In New York, in Boston, in Newport, R.I., in the Berkshires and on Long Island, their ideas were law, more or less, for those who did not blanch at the tab.


INDICTMENT IS SEEN IN PENTAGON CASE
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in Virginia is expected to announce on Friday the first indictment in a broad investigation of accusations of bribery and fraud involving Pentagon officials, the Justice Department said today.


Fur Vault Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fur Vault Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Revenue
36,828,000
35,831,000
Net inc
27,000
1,085,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
12,559,000
12,889,000
6mo rev
50,671,000
49,457,000
Net loss
2,573,000
b130,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
12,560,000
13,057,000


Can Courts Put a Price on the Enjoyment of Life?
LEAD: When Emma McDougald entered the New York Infirmary 10 years ago to deliver her second child, she was a healthy 31-year-old who worked as a subway token clerk, managed her household and was planning to return to college.


Bilzerian Enters Plea of Not Guilty
LEAD: Paul A. Bilzerian, the Florida financier who took over the Singer Company last year, pleaded not guilty yesterday to 12 counts of violating securities and tax laws, conspiracy and making false statements to the Government.


U.S. Criticizes Bonn on Response To Charges on Chemical Company
LEAD: Senior State Department officials said today that West Germany was not moving quickly enough to respond to American assertions that a German chemical company had helped Libya build a vast chemical plant.


California's Deukmejian Says He Won't Seek a Third Term
LEAD: Gov.
George Deukmejian announced today that he would not seek a third term in 1990, saying that he wants to return to private life for ''new challenges.''


Iranian Concern To Make Peugeots
LEAD: Iran's biggest auto company, Iran Khodrow, has signed a contract with Peugeot S.A. of France to produce 500,000 cars in the next 10 years, the Iranian press agency reported today.


'88 Decline in U.S. Executions Defies Predictions
LEAD: Fewer criminals were executed in the United States in 1988 than in any of the previous five years despite a 1987 Supreme Court decision that prompted predictions that the tide of executions would rise.


Discrimination Denied In AIDS-Drug Tests
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Says Tape Shows Missiles On a Libyan Jet
LEAD: The United States said today that it had visual evidence indicating that two Libyan fighter planes were armed when they were shot down Wednesday by Navy fighters over the Mediterranean.
It accused Libya of lying in asserting that the planes were unarmed reconnaissance aircraft.


Oliver North: Still Accountable
LEAD: Oliver North, the man at the heart of the Iran-contra affair, has cut the heart out of the criminal case against him.
The special Federal prosecutor, after struggling to reconcile the needs of national security with the demands of a public trial, has decided that he must drop the major conspiracy and theft charges against the former National Security Council staff officer.


Newhouse Head Testifies
LEAD: Samuel I. Newhouse Jr. today lifted a small bit of the curtain that has kept from public view the inside workings of his family's vast newspaper, magazine and broadcast holdings.


For Christmas of '88, It's Adios and Ta-Ta
LEAD: Three events will ring out the Christmas season this weekend: a parade and a concert drawing on Hispanic traditions, and a Boar's Head and Yule Log Festival recalling old England.


Duke Remains Unbeaten
LEAD: Despite a lackluster offensive performance in the first half, top-ranked Duke led Davidson by 15 points, so Coach Mike Krzyzewski knew the Blue Devils' defense was effective.


Bengals' Wilson Arrested
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the Bengals' often-troubled running back who was suspended for the entire 1987 season for substance abuse, was arrested early this morning and charged with disorderly conduct.


Keep Family Planning Free of Ideology
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Tripoli, Business Is Almost as Usual
LEAD: Shops were open, workers went to their jobs and commerce and business seemed normal here today.
But a day after an aerial confrontation in which two Libyan fighter planes were shot down, there was anxiety over what the Americans might do next.


Officer Removed Badge At Melee, Police Assert
LEAD: A 32-year-old New York City police officer was suspended yesterday and ordered to face trial on a departmental charge that he removed his badge during a melee last summer at Tompkins Square Park.


A Correction
LEAD: An article on Wednesday incompletely identified a West German company allegedly involved in illegal shipments of nuclear materials to third world countries.
The company is Alfred Hempel KG GmbH &amp; Company of Dusseldorf, not the F. W. Hempel Company Inc., also of Dusseldorf.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  DAY FOR QUARTETS


Spielberg and Warner's Plan Cartoons
LEAD: The director Steven Spielberg, a longtime lover of animated cartoons, is joining forces with Warner Brothers for a new television version of Warner's famous ''Merrie Melodies'' cartoons, to be called ''Tiny Tunes.''


A New Arafat Veto by Violence?
LEAD: Yasir Arafat should not be surprised that every word he utters, every statement made in his name is meticulously scrutinized.
The world has so long associated the Palestine Liberation Organization he heads with terrorism that the credibility of his recent renunciation of this practice remains fragile at best.


The Singer Madonna Again Files for Divorce
LEAD: The actor Sean Penn and Madonna, the singer, have separated and are planning to end their three-year marriage, a spokesman for Mr.
Penn said today.


Magee Shows He Belongs In Champions' Tourney
LEAD: Andrew Magee admits that he was intimidated by the big-name players while spending the last four years earning his spurs on the PGA Tour.
He remembers the first time he played with Jack Nicklaus when he was a rookie.


South African Insurgents Agree To Shut Their Bases, Angola Says
LEAD: The African National Congress has agreed to close its military training bases here, Angola's President said today.


The lonely view from the bench for the new judge who must undergo a rite of passage
LEAD: The new judge, clad in a T-shirt and shorts, walked past a couple of lawyers at a local health club.
Only a few years ago, he knew, both of his one-time bar brethren would have ignored him. ''Good evening, your Honor,'' said one, thinking he was leaving.
In fact, the judge was only going to the Nautilus machine, and when he emerged a few minutes later he passed them again.


Robert Coles, Ophthalmologist, Dies at 68
LEAD: Dr.
Robert S. Coles, an internationally known ophthalmologist and educator, died Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.


United Tote Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Tote Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,291,317
4,964,230
Net inc
838,030
c544,441
Share earns
.51
.33
Yr rev
22,521,339
18,608,293
Net inc
b1,760,073
c1,390,069
Share earns
1.08
.85


Auctions
LEAD:  Cream of the Plum


Enron Subsidiary In L.I. Gas Accord
LEAD: Enron Gas Marketing Inc., a subsidiary of the Enron Corporation, signed a 15-year $150 million agreement to supply natural gas to a co-generation plant to be constructed in Uniondale, L.I., as part of the Nassau District Energy System, which supplies power on Long Island.


Another Silicon Valley Tailspin
LEAD: Wyse Technology, once a fast-growing maker of personal computers and computer terminals, said today that it would reduce its work force by 15 percent in response to steep drops in revenue.
The company also announced that its president and chief operating officer, Phillip E. White, had left to join another company.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Allstate Insurance Co., Northbrook, Ill., a subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., named as executive vice presidents Louis G. Lower 2d and David E. McPherson.
In addition, it named Myron J. Resnick senior vice president and treasurer.


Oil Prices Stage a Rebound On Reports of Tight Supplies
LEAD: Crude oil prices bounced back yesterday, reflecting reports of a possible squeeze in deliveries of North Sea oil in the London market and expectations that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other producers might agree to further steps to reduce output.


National Medical Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Medical Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
894,643,000
769,596,000
Net inc
47,324,000
43,813,000
Share earns
.64
.58
Shares outst
73,896,000
74,959,000
6mo rev
1,747,202,000
1,516,441,000
Net inc
88,438,000
84,008,000
Share earns
1.20
1.12
Shares outst
73,909,000
75,068,000


Islanders Overcome Bruins With 5 Goals in Second Period
LEAD: Brent Sutter, who normally suffers through his post-game analyses of Islander games this season, basked in this one and even allowed some nostalgia for shinier seasons to temper his recollections of tonight's 5-3 victory over the Bruins.


Mullen Becomes Rangers' Odd Man In
LEAD: It wasn't much of a shot.
In fact, it barely qualified as a pass.
But for the Rangers, the puck that was launched without much speed or intent turned out to possess an unerring sense of direction.


Panel Lines Up Some Glitter For Eve of the Inauguration
LEAD: The co-chairmen of the committee mapping the activities surrounding President-elect George Bush's inauguration announced a number of plans today, including agreement by Bob Hope and Chuck Yeager to serve as grand marshals in the inaugural parade.


Shenyang Journal; A City That Undoes Mao Under His Steady Gaze
LEAD: This drab, Dickensian city, where a statue of Mao presides over the snow-covered central square, is best known for its soot and industry.


Less Is Still Enough For Depleted Bears
LEAD: In 1985, the Chicago Bears steamrollered the opposition almost every week en route to an impressive victory in Super Bowl XX.
Now a Bears team with less firepower, less talent and many more injuries is struggling and usually winning.


India Hangs Two Sikhs Convicted In Assassination of Indira Gandhi
LEAD: Two men convicted in the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in October 1984 were hanged this morning, the Government announced.


FOR STALIN PURGES, YET MORE CRITICISM
LEAD: The Communist Party called today for the mass rehabilitation of Soviet citizens convicted by the summary courts that carried out Stalin's purges.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced $700 million in real estate mortgage investment conduit securities.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Creative Star Is Joining Hill, Holliday
LEAD: JOHN FERRELL, the creative prodigy whose demotion and subsequent departure from Young &amp; Rubicam last fall stunned the advertising industry, is joining the New York office of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos as executive vice president and chief creative officer.


Farm Credit Bank Cancels Offering
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation said yesterday that it would not conduct its regularly scheduled offering on Jan. 23 because it and its borrowers have only a limited need now to raise cash in the debt market for medium- and long-term financing.


Pop/Jazz; Recalling A Pop Artist And a Friend
LEAD: ''Andy, it's me/Haven't seen you for a while/I wish I had talked to you more when you were alive,'' begins the elegiac lyric for ''Hello It's Me,'' one of 14 new songs written by John Cale and Lou Reed for their new musical suite, ''Songs for 'Drella.''


Bush Is Urged to Fight Threat of Global Warming
LEAD: The National Academy of Sciences urged President-elect George Bush today to place the threat of a significant increase in global temperatures high on his agenda because ''the future welfare of human society'' is at risk.


TCBY Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCBY Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
25,174,000
18,172,000
Net inc
4,725,682
2,802,756
Share earns
.18
.11
Yr sales
97,963,000
69,183,000
Net inc
19,794,015
13,011,589
Share earns
.75
.49


Paris Broker Stake To Bankers Trust
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation has agreed to take a 49 percent stake in Didier Philippe S.A., a French stockbroker.
Didier Philippe said in a statement that the bank would not take any role in running the brokerage and that its current directors would retain control.


Cocaine Blamed in Bus Deaths
LEAD: A bus accident last May that killed three people and injured 19 others was caused by the bus driver, Louis Taylor, 45 years old, who was high on cocaine, according to Dutchess County prosecutors.
Mr.
Taylor is charged with manslaughter in the deaths of the victims, who were mentally handicapped adults.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
12,722,007
10,247,139
Per share
1.27
1.02
Yr net inc
47,368,534
38,340,592
Per share
4.74
3.83


'He's Got a Missile Off,' Followed by 'Good Kill'
LEAD: A Navy cockpit tape of the confrontation between American and Libyan jet fighters offers only flashes of video images, but provides in sound the drama of American aviators unexpectedly caught up in combat.


'Misbehavin' ' to Close
LEAD: ''Ain't Misbehavin','' a revival of the 1978 musical celebrating the music of Fats Waller, will close after the Sunday matinee on Jan. 15, at the Ambassador Theater.
The show, which was directed by Richard Maltby Jr., will have had 8 previews and 176 regular performances.


The Mahres Return, This Time as Pros
LEAD: Professional ski racing lumbered along for about 20 years with only a few recognizable stars and little spectator interest.
This season, that changed after Phil and Steve Mahre, the American Olympic medalists, joined the pro circuit.


Strong December Sales Reported by Retailers
LEAD: The nation's largest retailers yesterday reported strong December sales, registering an average gain of 10 percent above the previous Christmas season.


Big Bear Inc reports earnings for 13wk to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Big Bear Inc (OTC)
13wk to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
250,094,000
225,671,000
Net inc
3,201,000
4,183,000
Share earns
.36
.47
Shares outst
8,999,000
9,013,000
The year-ago share earnings and shares outstanding are adjusted for a 15 percent stock dividend.


Critics Say New York Can Do More on Child Abuse
LEAD: Child-abuse experts, reacting to Mayor Edward I. Koch's statement that his administration could not have prevented most child-abuse and neglect deaths last year, say New York City could do a far more effective job of protecting children.


Books of The Times; Art: The Immortal Substitute for Life
LEAD:  Utz  By Bruce Chatwin  154 pages. Viking. $16.95.


Undefeated Harvard Faces Tough Tests
LEAD: With the holiday pause at an end, college hockey now jumps into an eight-week period that will determine which teams will go to the post-season tournaments.


Hattie Rosenbaum, Manager for Famous In Music, Dies at 82
LEAD: Hattie Clark Rosenbaum, a longtime vice president at Columbia Artists Management and one of the first women to attain a leading role in the concert-management profession, died of a brain tumor Dec. 24 at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She was 82 years old.


Virgin Islands Chief Discusses Inquiry
LEAD: The Governor of the Virgin Islands said today that he regretted having named a former District of Columbia official to oversee a revision of the islands' personnel system.
He said the official, Charles Lewis, who is at the center of an investigation of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington, ''wasn't producing anything.


Recognition Spurns Prospect Group
LEAD: Recognition Equipment Inc., the postal equipment company that has been indicted in a scandal involving Federal contracts, rejected an acquisition proposal from the Prospect Group, a New York-based investment group.
Prospect, which has recently increased its ownership in Recognition, made a conditional proposal to buy the outstanding shares of Recognition for $12.75 a share in a Dec.


Judge Rules Economic Panel Can't Hold Meetings in Secret
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled today that the National Economic Commission, a blue-ribbon panel on cutting the budget deficit, may not conduct its deliberations in secret.


Equity Growth Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equity Growth Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,123,000
4,092,000
Net inc
556,000
242,000
Share earns
.08
.04
Shares outst
6,778,905
5,778,092
The 1987 results included T.A. &amp; D.A.
Troy Co. operations only for the 6 months from the date of acquisition in March 1987.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about a professor of economics and former academic vice president at Suffolk County Community College in New York misidentified him.
The professor, who died on Wednesday, was John J. Saal, not Faal.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  CALIFORNIA (AL) - Signed Jim Eppard, first baseman-outfielder, to a one-year contract.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Named Dave Bristol third-base coach.
HOUSTON (NL) - Agreed to terms with Craig Reynolds, infielder, on a one-year contract.
BASKETBALL  NATIONAL BASKETBALL ASSSCIATION - Fined Rick Pitino, Knicks coach, $3,000 for remaining near the playing area after being ejected from a game against the Chicago Bulls on Dec.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Federal Express Corp, Memphis, an overnight delivery service, said it had acquired the home delivery service business of Littlewoods Organization P.L.C. of Britain.
Terms were not disclosed.


Meadowlands to Open
LEAD: Harness racing will return to the Meadowlands at 7:30 tonight as a 194-night meeting opens at the track in East Rutherford, N.J.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Monday about books inspired by the Joel B. Steinberg and Bess Myerson trials described ''The Dark Side of 10th Street'' by Maury Terry incorrectly.


U.S. ASKS SOVIET AID IN PRESSING LIBYA ON CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: The United States is seeking Soviet cooperation in pressing Libya to cease operations at a chemical plant that Washington says will be used to make chemical weapons, American officials said today.


Producer of Pop Music Buys Stake in Chrysalis
LEAD: David Geffen, a Los Angeles-based producer of films, pop music and Broadway theater, has expanded his holdings to Britain.
Mr.
Geffen, 45, has acquired an 8.4 percent stake in the Chrysalis Group, a financially troubled entertainment company.


Washington Mayor Says He Took Drug Tests and Released Results
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that he had been tested for drugs twice a year and had released the results.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  Jazz at J's


Bronx Arts Ensemble
LEAD: Masanobu Ikemiya, a pianist and harpsichordist, is to play works by Brahms, C.P.E.
Bach, Carl Nielsen and George Rochberg with members of the Bronx Arts Ensemble at Wave Hill, West 252d Street and Endependence Avenue in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 549-3200.


Bonn Clears Company of Libyan Role
LEAD: Government investigators said today that they had found no evidence of illegal exports by a West German chemical company that Washington has accused of helping build a chemical weapons plant in Libya.


Seeing Double at Adolfo: Never Too Much of a Good Thing
LEAD: Adolfo's spring and summer clothes, shown yesterday, looked both slicker and softer than usual as the designer continued his long-term hommage to Chanel.


John W. Brooks, 71, Retired Chief Of the Celanese Corp. of America
LEAD: John Wood Brooks, a retired chief executive and chairman of the Celanese Corporation of America, died of heart failure Wednesday at his home in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
He was 71 years old.


Agency Backs Medicare Cut at Teaching Hospitals
LEAD: The General Accounting Office today supported a Reagan Administration proposal to sharply reduce the extra Government compensation to 1,100 teaching hospitals for Medicare patients.


Allwaste Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allwaste Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
22,463,000
16,031,000
Net inc
1,841,000
1,287,000
Share earns
.17
.13


Kinder, Gentler Lunch
LEAD: A luncheon meeting Wednesday at the Capitol Hill Club brought together William K. Reilly, the President-elect's choice to head the Environmental Protection Agency, and Manuel Lujan Jr., his nominee to be Secretary of Interior.
A Bush aide later characterized the luncheon as an augury of a ''kinder, gentler administration.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Our Towns; Don't Build Here: The Fine Points Of Foot-Dragging
LEAD: New Jersey's Mount Laurel housing plan is probably the most painless way to build low- and moderate-income housing in suburban America.
Developed after 12 years of court battles, the state plan sets a quota of subsidized units for each suburb.
But it doesn't cost the suburb a cent.
The builder pays for it.


Sammie Smith Exits
LEAD: Sammie Smith, the Florida State junior tailback whose 115 yards rushing made him the most valuable player in the 13-7 victory over Auburn in the Sugar Bowl, said yesterday that he would apply for the National Football League draft.
Smith, whose freshman class will graduate this spring, was the Seminoles' leading rusher the last two seasons.


Trader's Plea Reveals New Front In Battle on Wall St. Corruption
LEAD: Several Federal agencies have joined in a broad investigation of stock manipulation, using evidence that came to light as a result of the market crash of October 1987, officials reported yesterday.


Oracle Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oracle Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
123,745,000
60,306,000
Net inc
17,189,000
7,653,000
Share earns
.26
.12
6mo rev
214,384,000
101,580,000
Net inc
24,256,000
10,814,000
Share earns
.36
.16


Bird Return Nears
LEAD: Larry Bird's recovery from surgery on his heels last Nov. 19 is ahead of schedule and he will probably return to the lineup before March 1, the Boston Celtics' team physician, Dr.
Arnold Scheller, said yesterday. ''There's no buildup of scar tissue, but right now we've got to work on getting the strength back in his calf muscles,'' Scheller said.


Miller, Herman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller, Herman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
205,189,000
183,728,000
Net inc
11,933,000
11,755,000
Share earns
.49
.48
6mo sales
395,687,000
344,364,000
Net inc
24,709,000
21,814,000
Share earns
1.01
.89


3 Miners Killed in Kentucky Cave-In


At the Movies
LEAD: When you've got something old, something new, something borrowed and something blue, usually the topic is weddings.
But this time it's movies - in particular, the outlook for movies early this new year.


SON OF 2 RECLUSES IS DISCOVERED DEAD
LEAD: A 14-year-old boy has died of starvation and his parents and sister are under treatment for malnutrition in a case some people here link to the family's belief that God would take care of all their needs.


ReviewFilm; Love, and Discord, Between Sisters in Liverpool
LEAD: Liverpool, 1944.
The world is upside down, what with noisy, brawling, well-fed Yanks everywhere, throwing cigarettes and nylons around and acting as if they owned the place.
The very proper Nellie (Joan Plowright) doesn't like it.
Her thin lips permanently pursed, Nellie watches as giggly girls parade the streets, being pawed by American servicemen.


Money Fund Assets Dip
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 453 money market mutual funds decreased by $449.50 million, to $278.03 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 136 institutional funds increased by $588.4 million, to $72.41 billion.
The assets of the 226 general-purpose funds were up by $249.1 million, to $89.94 billion.


Review/Piano; Kalichstein in Recital
LEAD: Twenty years have passed since Joseph Kalichstein's New York debut, at which the Israeli-born pianist made a strong impression as a technician of heroic aspirations and a musician of serious intent.
His subsequent capturing of the Leventritt Award further fueled that reputation and targeted him as one of his generation's most promising artists.


Conlan Planning To Rejoin Bills
LEAD: Shane Conlan, a Pro Bowl linebacker sidelined for the last six weeks with a foot injury, practiced with the Buffalo Bills today and said he would start in the American Football Conference title game against the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday.


Costco Wholesale Corp reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Costco Wholesale Corp (OTC)
12wks to Nov 20
1988
1987
Revenue
579,295,000
415,665,000
Net inc
3,431,000
b2,488,000
Share earns
.13
.10
Shares outst
25,919,000
25,363,000
b-Included a net gain of $1,160,000 on retirement of subordinated debentures and a tax loss carryforward of $771,000.


Europe Fires A New Shot In Trade War
LEAD: The European Community said today that American walnuts and dried prunes, peaches, apricots and papayas would be subject to punitive tariffs if its trade dispute with the United States was not settled soon.


Mr. Stein's Strange Arithmetic
LEAD: Andrew Stein, the New York City Council president, misleads the public about the true costs of his refusal to participate in the city's new public campaign financing system.
He claims it will hold down the cost of an unpopular reform.
In fact, it will trigger higher spending, while restoring the influence of wealthy donors.


Israeli Civilian Killed in the West Bank
LEAD: An Israeli man was found killed in the West Bank on Thursday night, and Jewish settlers tried to raid nearby Arab villages in revenge, Israel radio said.
But troops ejected the settlers and blocked roads into Arab areas.


Raid Brings Largest Cash Haul in the War on Drugs


What Next for a Mink-Coated 4-Year-Old?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Weekend; Harold Prince's 'Butterfly'
LEAD: Harold Prince has collected a record 16 Tony Awards for his stage productions over the years, most recently for ''The Phantom of the Opera.'' Somewhat less well known is his work in opera.
He staged, for instance, Carlisle Floyd's ''Willie Stark'' for the Houston Grand Opera.
And on tap are ''Don Giovanni'' for the New York City Opera and ''Faust'' for the Metropolitan Opera.


'1992' Architect To Advise Firm
LEAD: Lord Cockfield, who stepped down today as vice president of the European Community, will become a consultant and special adviser on European affairs to Peat Marwick McLintock &amp; Company, Britain's largest firm of accountants and management consultants.


Man Charged in Death Of a 14-Year-Old Boy
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was charged with homicide yesterday in the death of a 14-year-old student, Jeffrey Vilain, who was caught in the middle of a gun battle between a police officer and a suspected robber in the East Flatbush section.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Society, relatives and those close to the victims await the full rehabilitation of all innocently repressed and the perpetuation of their memory.''  - Soviet party declaration on victims of Stalin's purges.  [ A6:2. ]


Oklahoma Assails N.C.A.A. Immunity for Dykes
LEAD: Hart Lee Dykes, the Oklahoma State wide receiver who could reportedly figure in probations handed to four college football programs by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, ''is making a mockery of the N.C.A.A. system'' by receiving immunity for his testimony, a University of Oklahoma official said today.


President to Be Chief At Pratt &amp; Lambert
LEAD: Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc., an old-line Buffalo-based coatings and adhesives company, said yesterday that its president, Joseph Castiglia, was taking on the added title of chief executive.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about Ira D. London, the lawyer for Joel B. Steinberg, misidentified a New York University law professor who commented on legal ethics.
He is Stephen Gillers, not Villers.


Steinberg May Face One Less Charge
LEAD: Prosecutors said yesterday that they were seriously considering dropping the first-degree manslaughter charge against Joel B. Steinberg on the ground that their case was primarily based on his ''depraved indifference'' to Lisa Steinberg's life and not on any intent to kill her.


Vito Titone, Lawyer, 91
LEAD: Vito Titone, a retired lawyer, died of heart failure Wednesday at his winter home in Hallandale, Fla.
He was 91 years old and lived in Roslyn Heights, L.I., for the last year.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Philip D. Tobin, a labor lawyer and former Mayor of Tuckahoe, N.Y., omitted the identity of a principal client.
Mr.
Tobin was counsel for the Newspaper Guild of New York.


Nichols Research reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Research (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,361,762
9,940,484
Net inc
627,063
533,589
Share earns
.18
.16


The Arafat Murder Threat
LEAD: Consider the following sequence of events.


DISCLOSURE OF SECRETS FEARED
LEAD: The independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra case today moved to dismiss the main criminal charges against Oliver L. North, saying concern over the use of secret Government documents as evidence made a trial on those charges impossible.


Jefferies Says He Destroyed Notes on Trades
LEAD: Boyd L. Jefferies, an important Government witness in several securities fraud cases, testified yesterday that shortly before entering a plea-bargaining agreement in 1987 he destroyed many of his notes about his trading patterns and discussions with clients.


Drug Emporium Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drug Emporium Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
100,237,000
79,309,000
Net inc
1,731,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.27
.25
9mo sales
294,039,000
225,740,000
Net inc
4,890,000
2,752,000
Share earns
.84
.55


Lojack Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lojack Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,507,786
450,645
Net inc
56,594
b362,049
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
3,687,717
1,507,892
Net inc
221,164
b641,486
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Dining Out Guide: Italian
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Azzurro  ** (Sept. 26, 1986), 1625 Second Avenue, at 84th Street (517-7068) - This little family-run Sicilian restaurant is expert at pastas and regional dishes.


Knicks' Run Against Nets Is Still Barely Believable
LEAD: It lasted 7 minutes 4 seconds.
It's hard to imagine unless you saw it.
And it was a microcosm of the reason the Knicks (20-10) are a first-place team and why the Nets (13-18) remain far from the top.


The Right Goal
LEAD: A Canute-like law commands the Federal budget deficit to stop at $100 billion in fiscal 1990.
So a new President and a new Congress are about to take office hell-bent on reducing the deficit for that year by $27 billion to $41 billion, depending on whose economic estimates are accepted.


Energy Post Stumps Bush, With No Clear Candidate
LEAD: President-elect George Bush's attempt to complete his Cabinet remained stalled today with no clear choice for Energy Secretary, senior Bush aides said.


Bishop Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bishop Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,322,000
2,562,000
Net inc
176,000
b248,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
10,061,000
9,971,000
Net loss
2,531,000
538,000
b-Net loss  Fiscal 1988 loss included $2,040,000 of non-recurring repositioning costs recognized in the third quarter, which resulted from management's programs designed to reverse operating loss trends and return the company to profitability.


MAI Details Drexel Link
LEAD: MAI Basic Four Inc. today disclosed new details of its relationship with the embattled investment banking firm Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


S.E.C. Review on Lawyer
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission decided yesterday to review the decision of a Federal administrative law judge in the case against George C. Kern Jr., a prominent takeover lawyer.


National Medical Plans To Spin Off Hillhaven
LEAD: In its second significant restructuring in two years, National Medical Enterprises Inc. said today that it planned to spin off to shareholders one of its largest units, the Hillhaven Corporation, the nation's second-largest nursing home company.


Twist in North Case Isn't a Surprise in Congress
LEAD: Members of the special Congressional committees that investigated the Iran-contra affair in 1987 said today that they were not surprised by the independent prosecutor's decision to seek dismissal of the conspiracy and theft charges against Oliver L. North.


4 Illegal Asian Immigrants Are Believed to Have Drowned in River
LEAD: As many as four illegal Asian immigrants, including a 7-year-old child, are believed to have drowned in the turbulent Niagara River this week while being smuggled into the United States on a flimsy inflatable raft.


Florida Schedules Still in Conflict
LEAD: Last year, the Florida Legislature thought it had come up with a clever settlement to the endless war among the Miami area's three throughbred tracks over prime winter racing dates.


Toyota Wins Round in Court
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation today won a skirmish with the Mead Corporation over the use of the name Lexus for its new luxury car, and then displayed two models of the new, high-priced car line at the North American International Auto Show here.
The United States Court of


Pan Am Crash Inspires Gifts to the Neediest
LEAD: In memory of the victims of the explosion of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, Fred Halden of Teaneck, N.J., sent $25 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Highway's Demise: Nightmare for Drivers
LEAD: The rusting, rotting remains of a portion of the West Side Highway are about to get the burial they have so long deserved.
Starting in March, a 14-block stretch of the viaduct, moribund for years, will be torn down and hauled away.


Applied Power Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Power Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
51,389,000
37,616,000
Net inc
4,154,000
b3,196,000
Share earns
.63
.50
b-Includes a $450,000 tax credit.
The latest quarter included $1,700,000 pre-tax allowance for one- time costs associated with redirecting manufacturing and warehousing operations.


Grafton Journal; Library's Name Brings Talk of Anti-Semitism
LEAD: Wintertime in this quiet town frequently finds children gliding uneventfully on ice skates across the frozen Milwaukee River while their parents keep warm over coffee cups in local diners, often hashing over the latest high school basketball game.
Residents acknowledge that news that makes headlines here might seem mundane to those in the big cities - news of a new library, perhaps.


A Last Hurrah
LEAD: The Washington establishment is preparing a last hurrah for George P. Shultz at the State Department Monday night.
Among those expected to join in honoring the Secretary of State at cocktails and dinner are Henry A. Kissinger, William P. Rogers and Edmund S. Muskie, all of whom held the top Cabinet office, along with members of Congress, the diplomatic corps and such familiar foreign policy establishment figures as David Rockefeller, Sol M.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:  The Other Dirty Dozen


The Newest Arrivals for the New Year
LEAD:  Aureole


Reviews/Dance; Exploring the Boundaries Of Frivolity and Ferocity
LEAD: The New York City Ballet presented a program that probed extremes of light and darkness on Wednesday at the New York State Theater.


New Director at Photography Museum
LEAD: The International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House in Rochester announced yesterday that James Enyeart will become its director on April 15.
He succeeds Robert A. Mayer, whose resignation was made public Wednesday.


Grumman Offering Notes With Buyout Protections
LEAD: The Grumman Corporation is offering $200 million of 10 3/8 percent notes due in 1999 at a price of par, or about 1.11 percentage points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity, through underwriters led by Dillon, Read &amp; Company.


Clash Off Libya Arouses Concern in Europe
LEAD: The downing of two Libyan jet fighters has sharpened concerns among America's Western European allies that the Reagan Administration could be preparing for a military strike against a Libyan chemical plant.


Newest Arrivals for the New Year
LEAD: IF cities had official mottos, ''What's new?'' might well be the most fitting phrase for the five boroughs of New York.
Change is so permanent a feature of city life that one almost expects yesterday's parking lot to be tomorrow's skyscraper and the nondescript coffee shop one visited last month to become the fashionable restaurant or trendy discotheque that opens next week.


His Number Is Up
LEAD: Joseph Frank of Lafayette, Ind., made his mark in history today, which is his 26th birthday.
According to the Selective Service System, he was the first 18-year-old to register for the draft eight years ago after Congress passed a law requiring young men to sign up within a month of their 18th birthday.


Gansz Dismissed
LEAD: Frank Gansz, whose teams won only eight games in his two seasons as coach of the Kansas City Chiefs, was dismissed yesterday by Carl Peterson, general manager and chief operating officer.
Under Gansz, 50 years old, who had two years left on his contract, the Chiefs were 8-22-1. (AP)


Airlines Ordered to Install Devices to Avert Collisions
LEAD: All planes that carry more than 30 passengers must have collision-warning devices by the end of 1991, under a rule the Government issued yesterday.


Debt Crisis For Banks Said to End
LEAD: Three leading bank regulators told Congress today that third world debts no longer posed a threat to this country's banking system.


TV Weekend; U.S.-Soviet Relations
LEAD: ''The Eagle and the Bear,'' a 26-part weekly series on the cold war that begins at 8 tonight on the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable network, is chronologically jumpy.
The first episode starts, reasonably, with the end of World War II and of the United States-Soviet wartime alliance.
In the second episode, we are in Korea a couple of years later.


American Recreation Centers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Recreation Centers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 23
1988
1987
Revenue
8,747,000
7,381,000
Net inc
384,000
13,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
15,238,000
12,881,000
Net loss
307,000
b1,197,000
Share earns
-
.25


Lockheed Contract
LEAD: The Navy awarded the Lockheed Corporation a $52 million contract to build two prototypes of a new submarine-hunting patrol plane, indicating that the project cleared an internal Pentagon review.
In October, after a spirited competition, the Navy selected Lockheed to develop a modernized version of its P-3C Orion antisubmarine airplane.


Tarpley Suspended
LEAD: The Dallas Mavericks forward Roy Tarpley, who went to drug counselors for help Wednesday, was suspended indefinitely without pay yesterday in line with the National Basketball Association's anti-drug agreement.
The 24-year-old Tarpley returned to the active roster Dec. 13 after missing 14 games with torn cartilage in his left knee.


Into the Woods
LEAD: With Congress in recess until Jan. 20, it is junket time again and one of the more unusual journeys will take five Senators and two Representatives into a tropical rain forest next week.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Aureole


'African-American' for 'Black' Signals a Return; No Hyphens, Please
LEAD: To the Editor:


OPEC Output Surge Cited
LEAD: OPEC members raised production in December to its highest daily level in more than seven years, creating a surplus that could depress oil prices in coming months.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Reagan Backs Pay Raise


Official to Quit To Weigh Race For Kean Post
LEAD: Attorney General W. Cary Edwards announced today that he will quit his post in two weeks to contemplate whether to run for governor this year, a move that most politicians here consider likely.


3 States Cope With Slump In Revenues
LEAD: Already in this very young year, the Governors of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have warned that they may be forced to cut services and freeze spending because tax revenues are falling short, even as their states' economies remain strong.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Smoking on the Premises


Thorn-EMI Gets SBK for $337 Million
LEAD: Thorn-EMI, the British conglomerate that owns Capitol Records, will buy SBK Entertainment World, the publisher of more than 250,000 songs, for $337 million, the highest amount ever paid for a music publisher.


School Bus Driver in Drug Arrest
LEAD: A school bus driver taking a 4-year-old girl home from nursery school in Brooklyn was arrested yesterday afternoon when he stopped the bus to buy crack, the police said.


John Tower Has Malignant Polyp Removed
LEAD: John G. Tower, who has been chosen by George Bush to be Secretary of Defense, had a malignant polyp removed from his rectum last week in Dallas, a hospital spokeswoman said today.


Economic Scene; Recession in '89? Majority Doubt It
LEAD: WHAT lies ahead for the economy in 1989?


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGI Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Net inc
5,419,000
5,928,000
Share earns
.70
.77
Yr net inc
12,652,000
13,967,000
Share earns
1.64
1.81
The company said its gains from the sale of real estate investments in 1988 were $3,024,000, or 39 cents a share, with gains of $3,749,000, or 48 cents a share, in the prior year.


U.S. Warns Salvador on Rights Cases
LEAD: The recent collapse of a key human rights case and the failure to make progress in another have prompted renewed political controversy here and warnings that United States aid to this country could be cut.


Northwest Air Turns the Corner
LEAD: When a Northwest Airlines flight arrived late here recently, a passenger who missed his ride home asked the carrier to reimburse him for the $6 taxi ride.
Ron Dahm, a customer service supervisor, approved the request on the spot.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-7


Wayward Bus Trip in Libya Avoids Factory
LEAD: Several dozen journalists boarded two buses here this morning for what they thought would be a trip to the chemical plant that is the center of a dispute between Libya and the United States.


Social Security Reserves
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chief Rival Abandons Effort To Oust Los Angeles Mayor
LEAD: City Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky, the only significant challenger to Mayor Tom Bradley, dropped out of the mayoral race today, saying he was discouraged by a poll indicating he had little chance of winning the election April 11.


CUOMO PROPOSES PENSION CHANGES
LEAD: The Cuomo administration wants to lower the state's contributions to the pension fund for state workers to save New York hundreds of millions of dollars and help close its huge budget gap without major tax increases.


2 South African Black Policemen Die in Township Grenade Attack
LEAD: Two policemen were killed and 30 were wounded Thursday night when suspected guerrillas threw four grenades onto a police parade ground in a black township near here, the police said today.


Nozzles for Cutting Pollution Arrive at Jersey Gas Stations
LEAD: This week was the first that New Jersey's largest gasoline stations were required to do their part to reduce air pollution by using pump nozzles designed to trap gasoline vapors.


Queens and Brooklyn Give Subway Improvements Bronx Cheer; Isolated in Sea Beach
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Health System's Problems Resist Quick or Inexpensive Solutions
LEAD: New York City's health-care system is in the midst of a crisis for which few quick, inexpensive or painless remedies are available.


Your Money; A Need to Gauge One's Cash Flow
LEAD: Sometime in the next three months most taxpayers will be sorting through their 1988 financial records to get the information they or their tax preparers need to file returns.
A key to really getting finances under control is to do the job as soon as possible and as thoroughly as possible, by preparing an entire cash-flow statement that shows all expenditures as well as income and deductions.


PROTESTS FOLLOW HANGING OF 2 SIKHS
LEAD: Stores and schools in predominantly Sikh areas were closed today to protest the hanging of two Sikhs for the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.


Dollar's Rise Hurts Copper; Coffee Prices Down Sharply
LEAD: Prices of copper futures fell sharply yesterday in a selloff linked to profit taking and the dollar's strength against the British pound.


Patents; Method to Repair Teeth Offers Less Discomfort
LEAD: Howard Cohen, an orthodontist in Woodmere, L.I., has invented a way to repair chipped and broken teeth more easily and with less discomfort to the patient.


GOVERNOR IN WEST RULES OUT '90 RACE
LEAD: Gov.
George Deukmejian, with a simple announcement Thursday, has made California government and politics more lively and interesting than it has been since he took office in 1983.


Arvia MacKaye Ege, A Poet, Is Dead at 86
LEAD: Arvia MacKaye Ege, a poet and a founder of the Rudolph Steiner Educational and Farming Association, died Wednesday at her home in Hillsdale, N.Y.
She was 86 years old.


Anglo Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anglo Energy (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,031,000
10,211,000
Net loss
848,000
7,101,000
Yr rev
62,150,000
31,335,000
Net inc
b22,497,000
c85,593,000
Share earns
1.00
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $26,749,000.


Inmates Interview Author About Dr. King
LEAD: In Unit C-73 on Rikers Island during the noon hour yesterday, one of the first questions the inmates asked Taylor Branch was: What prompted you, a white man, to write a book about the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.?


A Leader Who Took Japan to War, to Surrender, and Finally to Peace
LEAD: Emperor Hirohito reigned over not one Japan, but three: a Japan consumed with militarism almost from the time he took over the Chrysanthemum Throne, a Japan that lay in ruins at the end of World War II and seemed destined for years of occupation and dependency, and finally a Japan that, from the shambles of defeat, achieved in peacetime global economic power.


Cancer Experts See A Need for Caution On Use of Birth Pill
LEAD: Several leading experts in breast cancer said yesterday that they believed new data linking oral contraceptives and breast cancer were so troubling that some women should be discouraged from taking birth control pills.


Ottoman Archive: Painful Look Into Turkish-Armenian Past
LEAD: After 74 years and countless recriminations, Turkey plans to reopen the archival records on one of the more grisly episodes of this century: the mass deaths of Armenians at the hands of the Ottoman Turks during World War I. For decades, Armenians have maintained that as many as 1.5 million of their countrymen were murdered or were allowed to die of starvation and exposure in a deliberate Turkish attempt at genocide begun in the spring of 1915.


Washington's Lesson for Washington
LEAD: Should all Americans have health insurance?
Yes; in the richest nation in the world, the question shouldn't be if, but how to finance decent universal coverage fairly and efficiently.


BP America Sets New Brand Name
LEAD: BP America Inc., the United States unit of the British Petroleum Company, said it would replace the various brand names under which its gasoline stations operate with a single brand name.
The company refused to disclose the new name or say whether the name chosen for the American market would also apply to B.P.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the conviction of nine people in a New York City restaurant inspection scandal misstated the charges.
Each defendant was convicted of extortion, but the number of counts varied among defendants.


The Twelve Charges That Still Face North
LEAD: Oliver L. North faces 12 charges in addition to the two major counts that the prosecution in the Iran-Contra case is seeking to dismiss.


MBS Textbook Exchange reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MBS Textbook Exchange (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,757,000
7,238,000
Net inc
63,000
55,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
5,075,000
5,356,000


Cigna Weighs Sale of Division
LEAD: The Cigna Corporation said yesterday that it might sell its Hartford-based personal financial services group in a deal that analysts said could fetch $500 million for the diversified insurance company.


Correction
LEAD: The headline yesterday on an obituary of Dexter Masters, a writer and editor, misstated his nationality.
He lived in England but was an American.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertrans Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,990,488
28,380,813
Net inc
1,083,401
325,411
Share earns
.21
.07
Yr rev
130,751,206
100,777,166
Net inc
3,650,960
2,399,652
Share earns
.74
.49


Patents; 3 New Drugs Backed for AIDS Study
LEAD: Three new drugs that promoters say could help in the fight against AIDS were granted patents this week.
The granting of a patent does not mean the drugs are necessarily safe or effective treatments for the disease, merely that they meet the Patent Office's criteria of being original and non-obvious.


No Strickland Problem for Pitino
LEAD: The Rod Strickland situation appears to be one of the few thorns these days for the Knicks, who head into their game against Cleveland today with a 20-10 record and their best start in 16 seasons.
And it's a perplexity that is not likely to go away.


Son Kills Mother Over Crack Money, Police Say
LEAD: A Bronx teen-ager with no history of disciplinary trouble stabbed his mother to death Tuesday after she refused to give him money to pay a crack dealer, the police said yesterday.
After the killing, the youth rearranged his mother's body to make it look as if she had been raped and robbed, they said.


About New York; Along Avenue J, Cowpokes Bust Bucking Broncos
LEAD: Molded fiberglass dinosaurs and baby-sized spaceships with convertible tops still gently toss juvenile riders for 25 cents a turn along the old shopping district of Avenue J in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.


Cabot Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Medical Corp. (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,837,000
14,744,000
Net inc
1,259,000
b1,098,000
Share earns
.18
.17
Shares outst
6,869,555
6,777,830
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $103,000 resulting from the retiring of a promissory note at a discount.


Michael J. Napolitano, Radiologist, 59
LEAD: Dr.
Michael J. Napolitano, chairman of the radiology department of the Catholic Medical Center of Brooklyn and Queens, died Thursday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y., after a short illness.
He was 59 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Oklahoma St. Is Placed On Probation
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association today banned the Oklahoma State football team from bowl and television appearances as part of a four-year probation for recruiting violations.
The N.C.A.A. warned that future infractions could result in the ''death penalty,'' which would shut down the program.


Devils' Top Line Enjoys Its Reunion
LEAD: The Devils are a much better team when Mark Johnson is flanked by John MacLean and Patrik Sundstrom, the team's top two scorers.


Harvest Drops in China
LEAD: China reported today that its 1988 grain harvest fell for the fourth straight year, calling into question the ability of the nation to feed its billion people.
The official China Daily attributed the shortfall to one of the worst droughts in China's history and to ''lack of motivation'' by peasants to plant more grain.


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sudbury Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
152,279,000
128,827,000
Net loss
2,361,000
b3,265,000
Share earns
-
.25
6mo sales
295,158,000
234,239,000
Net loss
2,099,000
b5,942,000
Share earns
-
.47


Heading for a Victory


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Women  Auburn 67, Tennessee 59: Carolyn Jones and Vickie Orr each scored 18 points as third-ranked Auburn put itself in position to take over the No. 1 spot with a victory over top-ranked Tennessee (11-1) last night in Auburn, Ala.
The Lady Tigers improved to 13-0 and should move to the top in next week's poll since No.


Suit Attacks Policy That Keeps Aliens in Texas
LEAD: Attorneys representing aliens from Central America filed suit here today in an attempt to overturn a new Government immigration policy that has left hundreds of aliens stranded and homeless in one of the nation's poorest areas.


Florida Faces Loss
LEAD: A disclosure by Vernon Maxwell, a rookie with the San Antonio Spurs, that he accepted payments from agents while playing for the University of Florida, could cost the university more than $600,000 in forfeited revenues from National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments of 1987 and 1988, The St.


Accords by Banks Advance Nabisco Deal
LEAD: The $25 billion buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company moved nearer to completion yesterday after a few dozen of the world's largest banks agreed to lend in the vicinity of $10 billion for the deal.


Implants Rejected, Girl Dies
LEAD: A 3-year-old girl who had received a transplant of five organs died today, and experts said the girl's swift decline showed that the procedure for replacing the digestive system was still in its infancy.


Consumer Complaints on Airlines At the Lowest Level in Four Years
LEAD: The number of consumer complaints against airlines in the United States fell in December to the lowest level in four years, the Department of Transportation said Thursday.


Coach Relieved
LEAD: Mike Pollio, the coach of the Virginia Commonwealth basketball team, said yesterday he felt a sense of relief to learn that the death last Monday night of Michael Brown, one of Pollio's players, was not drug-related.


Strong Dollar Helps Treasury Bonds Gain
LEAD: The market in long-term Treasury bonds was buoyed yesterday by a stronger dollar, which influenced investors and traders more than the Government's report of higher employment in December.
Shorter-term Treasury maturities were narrowly mixed.


The New Year's First Snow Brings Out the Daredevils


Review/Music; 4 Saxophones on an Unaccompanied Romp
LEAD: Though jazz has regularly used instrumental combinations that defy convention, the 1980's have seen a real increase in the popularity of oddly outfitted groups.
The 29th Street Saxophone Quartet, which played at Visiones on Thursday night, made it clear why the practice has become so popular: without the interference of a rhythm section, its four saxophones are immensely sensual and capture an archtypical jazz sound.


Autoclave Engineers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autoclave Engineers (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
17,149,000
17,221,000
Net inc
1,121,000
1,252,000
Share earns
.28
.32
Shares outst
3,947,184
3,961,848
6mo sales
32,876,000
30,978,000
Net inc
b2,307,000
1,344,000
Share earns
.58
.34
Shares outst
3,948,686
3,959,548


Review/Music; Philharmonic Strings Are Given the Stage
LEAD: In mid-December, Zubin Mehta gave nearly all the string players of the New York Philharmonic a week off.
This past week, he has given the winds and brass a rest.
Such planning may mostly have to do with union contracts, mandating a certain amount of time off per musician.
But the programming made sense artistically as well: the


Shareen Blair Brysac Weds Karl E. Meyer
LEAD: The marriage of Shareen Blair Brysac, the daughter of Fred E. Blair of Paris, Tex., and Denver, and the late Margaret Blair, to Karl E. Meyer, the son of Dorothy Meyer of New York and the late Ernest L. Meyer, took place yesterday in New York.
Judge Albert A. Blinder of the Court of Claims performed the ceremony in his chambers at 2 World Trade


Chase Manhattan Cuts London Unit
LEAD: Chase Manhattan Equities, the British brokerage subsidiary of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, said it would withdraw from some London share trading operations and eliminate 135 jobs here.
Chase said the trading volume and profits were too small, so it would withdraw from making markets in British equities.


Altex Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altex Industries (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
744,000
1,083,000
Net loss
229,000
1,343,000


Patents; Aluminum Mulch Said To Spur Plant Growth
LEAD: The Transmet Corporation, recently spun off from the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio, has developed an aluminum flake mulch that reflects sunlight and is said to increase the growth rate and yield of garden plants.


Chemical Arms: Third World Trend
LEAD: Libya's reported attempt to join the chemical weapons club is the latest example of a trend in the Middle East and Asia that appears to have tripled the number of countries possessing such weapons in the last decade.


Snowstorm Wreaks Mischief on Most Roadways
LEAD: A wet white rag was thrown in the faces and under the feet of New York region residents yesterday, as the first snowfall of the year dropped three to five inches from southeastern New Jersey to the tip of Long Island.


John B. Newman, Professor, 71
LEAD: Dr.
John B. Newman, a retired professor of speech at Queens College and an expert in semantics, died of heart failure Monday at his home in Whitestone, Queens.
He was 71 years old.


The Missing Conscience Of the 20th Century
LEAD:  Tours of the Black Clock  By Steve Erickson  320 pages. Poseidon. $18.95.


16 More Polish Sailors Jump a Ship in Boston
LEAD: Sixteen Polish sailors fled a fishing trawler in Boston Harbor Thursday, joining 30 of their countrymen who jumped ship last week and applied for political asylum in the United States.


Bush Aides Say Tower Will Still Be Nominated
LEAD: Aides to President-elect George Bush said today that John G. Tower would still be nominated to be Secretary of Defense, despite Mr.
Tower's surgery last week to remove a cancerous polyp from his rectum.


Queens and Brooklyn Give Subway Improvements Bronx Cheer; Too Much Tooting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cracks Mar the Facade of Bhutto's Pakistan; To Protect Minorities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Satellite's Nuclear Risks Discounted
LEAD: The space agency said today that the risk of a nuclear accident will be only slight when it launches an interplanetary satellite carrying a plutonium power plant later this year from the space shuttle Atlantis.


Jobless Rate Down for 5th Year in a Row
LEAD: The Labor Department said today that unemployment fell in 1988 for the fifth year in a row, to a yearly average of 5.4 percent.


Derby Preps In Florida
LEAD: More than a dozen newly turned 3-year-olds will contest the Florida season's first two prep races for the Triple Crown this weekend.


TOP REAGAN AIDES KNEW NORTH CASE FACED COLLAPSE
LEAD: The six senior Reagan Administration officials who decided to prohibit the use of certain classified evidence in the trial of Oliver L. North were advised in advance by the prosecutor that their action could cripple his case, Government sources familiar with the decision said today.


F.A.A. Plans Changes In Rivets on Older 727's
LEAD: Expanding its campaign to assure the safety of aging airliners, the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday proposed a rule calling for intensive inspections for fuselage cracks in older Boeing 727's.


A City Where Apartheid Shows Its Gentler Face
LEAD: A semblance of normal life has returned to obscure some of the political tensions of this scenic coastal city, part of an area damaged by the social engineering of apartheid and nearly a decade of sporadic civil unrest.


Chip Industry Is Planning A Health Study at Factories
LEAD: The nation's semiconductor industry said today that it would begin a comprehensive health study of its workers to determine whether working in a computer chip factory is hazardous.


MIXING INVESTMENTS
LEAD: The beginning of the new year is a perfect time to establish or review personal investment portfolios.
Economic conditions should be an important part of any guide to what kind of investments to make.
For instance, a weak or slowing economy favors bonds.
Not everyone's financial needs are alike, and portfolios should vary - some are geared to increasing personal wealth and favor stock investments.


Review/Television; 'Cops' Camera Shows the Real Thing
LEAD: You want to be a star?
Join the police force.
At least that seems to be the message Fox Broadcasting is delivering as the Rupert Murdoch organization pounces mercilessly on ''reality'' programming.


Browns Meet Carson
LEAD: Coach Joe Walton said yesterday that the Jets' defensive coordinator, Bud Carson, met with Cleveland Browns officials Wednesday to discuss the head coaching job left vacant when Marty Schottenheimer resigned last week.
Walton said he had told Carson he did not want him to leave the Jets, but gave him permission to be interviewed for the job.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


Eagleburger Is Named for No. 2 Post at State Dept.
LEAD: President-elect George Bush today selected a number of prominent political associates and Government figures to serve as State Department officials and United States ambassadors.


Westerbeke Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westerbeke Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
4,197,100
4,572,600
Net inc
37,900
b543,500
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,174,449
2,033,750
Yr sales
18,228,900
19,269,100
Net inc
114,700
b1,096,200
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
2,139,511
2,033,750


Hirohito Death Closes Markets
LEAD: Japan's stock, commodity and bond markets did not open today after the announcement that Emperor Hirohito had died.


Dukakis Delivers Fiery Speech
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis inspired liberal followers and irked conservative critics with a suprisingly fiery State of the State Speech Thursday night.
Mr.
Dukakis lashed out at his opponents as ''gutless wonders'' and said ''baloney'' to those who accuse the state of overspending.
Republican leaders and conservative Democrats said they found some of the Governor's remarks bitter and even tasteless.


Senior Tee Rule Nearly Drives Palmer Off Course
LEAD: While a strong, cold wind zipped over the LaCosta Country Club course in the second round of the MONY Tournament of Champions today, Arnold Palmer was very warm from the second hole on.
Actually he was hot under the collar.
Palmer admitted later that he almost walked off the course after he learned that he hit from the wrong teeing ground on No.


A Soviet Official Issues A Vow on Afghanistan
LEAD: The Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister promised today that Soviet troops would be out of Afghanistan by Feb. 15, an Afghan guerrilla leader said after meeting with him.


A Bill Without Money
LEAD: The hue and cry over the deplorable conditions of New York City's schools has produced, in record time, a new, if revolutionary, authority: the New York City School Construction Authority.
Now provided with first-class leadership, it has the powers to press school projects to prompt completion.
But a will and a way won't suffice if projects are not assigned and funds not allocated.


Man Found Dead in His Car Was Wanted in L.I. Killing
LEAD: A man being sought on charges of killing his former wife - who had obtained a protective order against him - was found shot to death this afternoon at a rest stop on the Long Island Expressway, the authorities said.
He had apparently committed suicide.


Cold Days Inspire Aid To Neediest
LEAD: As winter sets in with blustery winds, freezing temperatures, ice and snow, many people's thoughts turn to the needy, who are particularly vulnerable at this time of year.


Capt. Crab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capt. Crab Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 28
1988
1987
Revenue
3,404,334
3,442,350
Net inc
86,872
60,907
Yr rev
14,591,769
13,730,102
Net inc
207,681
362,078
Share earns
.01
.02
The company said included in earnings for fiscal year 1987 was approximately $550,000 of franchise and other fee income.


Madonna and Sean Penn To End Their Marriage
LEAD: Madonna has filed for divorce to end her turbulent three-year marriage to the actor Sean Penn, a spokesman for her record label said.


Corrections
LEAD: The Weather Report last Sunday through Thursday carried miscalculated times for the rise of the sun, the moon, Saturn, Mars, Venus and Jupiter for those dates.
Corrected listings appear today on page 46.


First Natl Bancorp (Gainesille, Ga.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Natl Bancorp (Gainesille, Ga.) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,302,000
3,669,000
Per share
.55
.47
Yr net inc
16,545,000
14,810,000
Per share
2.11
1.90


Arnault Purchases Lift LVMH Stock
LEAD: The stock price of LVMH Moet-Hennessy Louis Vuitton soared to a record high on the Paris stock exchange.
Company sources said the French financier Bernard Arnault, a large stockholder, has been buying additional shares of LVMH, which controls some of France's best-known luxury brands, in recent days.


House Plan to Assure a Raise: Prevent Floor Vote
LEAD: The House leadership has a plan to make sure that top Government officials, including members of Congress, get a proposed 50 percent raise.
The leaders plan to send any measure to reject the raise to a committee and bottle it up there, top strategists said today.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Thursday about the opening of the Connecticut General Assembly misstated the vote to elect Richard J. Balducci as Speaker of the House.
It was 94 to 57 for Mr.
Balducci; he was supported by all 63 Republicans and 31 dissident members of the 88-member Democratic majority.


Review/Music; Distilling the Erotic in Weill
LEAD: Among modern theater composers, Kurt Weill has proved to be the one with whom rock-era performers identify the most readily.
The skewed bluesiness of his music, along with the cynicism of his collaborators' lyrics - not only those of Bertolt Brecht but also those of Alan Jay Lerner and Ogden Nash - lend the songs a perennial contemporaneity.


Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
50,453,000
51,159,000
Net inc
3,072,000
2,989,000
Share earns
.34
.32
Shares outst
9,095,000
9,249,000
Yr sales
196,764,000
183,596,000
Net inc
11,284,000
10,272,000
Share earns
1.24
1.10
Shares outst
9,113,000
9,328,000


May Sets Mergers For Goldwaters
LEAD: The May Department Stores Company said it would merge the five Phoenix stores of its Goldwaters division into its Robinson's department store chain, based in Los Angeles, effective Feb. 26.
Two other Goldwaters stores will be operated by two other May divisions, and two in Tucson, Ariz., will be sold to other retailers.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
9.00
6.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.28
8.28
5.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.48
8.48
6.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.30
9.33
8.65
30-YR.


Suit to Block Housing Is Dismissed by Judge
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice today dismissed a lawsuit by opponents of a proposed housing project for the homeless in the town of Greenburgh.


Starving Family Refused to Buy Food, Police Say
LEAD: A starving family had more than $3,600 in cash and in bank accounts but refused to spend it for food because they believed the money ''belonged to God,'' according to a police affidavit made public today.


Hearing for Scurry
LEAD: Rod Scurry faces a preliminary hearing April 4 on charges of possession and use of cocaine.
The court date was set for the free-agent pitcher during a brief appearance Thursday in Reno Justice Court.
He remains free on $6,000 bail.
The 32-year-old left-hander was arrested Dec. 22 and charged with buying $40 worth of crack from a police informant.


Time for Reckoning Arrives for Hembrick
LEAD: The Olympic T-shirt he wears is a souvenir, but it is also a sad reminder of what should have been the highlight of Anthony Hembrick's amateur boxing career.


It's Bad Enough Without Bashing Calcutta
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bengals Accused of Pulling a Fast One  No-Huddle, Hurry-Up Offense Angers Opponents
LEAD: It is fiendish, the better mousetrap. It might be unethical if not illegal.


Tokyo Takes News Solemnly, but in Stride
LEAD: With customary attention to decorum and detail, and with flashes of spontaneity, Tokyo awoke this morning to witness the first ascension of an Emperor since 1926, and to mourn the only monarch most Japanese have ever known.


Liability Cap in Crash May Not Apply to All
LEAD: To the Editor:


Andersen's Chief Will Step Down
LEAD: In an unexpected move, Arthur Andersen &amp; Company said today that Duane R. Kullberg would relinquish the title of term was scheduled to expire.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Revenue
18,153,160
28,240,714
Net inc
2,646,518
4,246,029
Share earns
.28
.45
Shares outst
9,452,068
9,468,668
9mo rev
55,558,345
79,254,825
Net inc
7,876,813
13,445,658
Share earns
.83
1.42
Shares outst
9,452,068
9,474,202


On the 12th Day of Christmas


Man Enters Not-Guilty Plea In Beating Death of a Girl, 5
LEAD: A Brooklyn man charged with his companion in the fatal beating of her 5-year-old daughter pleaded not guilty yesterday.


Earth Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Earth Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Revenue
8,645,336
10,281,544
Net inc
294,777
266,563
Share earns
.10
.09
Shares outst
2,865,034
2,988,050


Strickland Vs. Pitino Vs. Bianchi
LEAD: The Knicks' rookie guard, Rod Strickland, who can dazzle, flung up a cuckoo shot in traffic that flew over the hoop.
This was on Tuesday night against the Celtics at Madison Square Garden.


Bonn Seems To Reverse Dollar View
LEAD: The dollar surged again yesterday, powered by an apparent change of stance by the West German central bank that left some currency traders wondering what was going on.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


CVN Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVN Cos. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
171,022,000
144,922,000
Net inc
4,766,000
6,415,000
Share earns
.25
.30


George M. L. La Branche, Stock Trader, 89
LEAD: George M. L. La Branche, founder of La Branche &amp; Company, a Manhattan stock trading concern, died of pneumonia Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


'88 Jobless Rates in New York And Jersey Drop to '69 Level
LEAD: Unemployment rates rose slightly in New York State and New Jersey last month, but the annual rates for the two states dropped to levels not matched in 19 years, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


A Bigger Sea Around Us
LEAD: With a Christmas week stroke of a pen, President Reagan bestowed on the United States a breathtaking gift: 185,000 square miles of new territory.
That's the biggest acquisition since the purchase in 1867 of Alaska's 586,000 square miles.
The President extended the country's territorial waters from 3 to 12 miles, pursuant to a United Nations convention that has been denounced by his own Administration as a leftist plot.


Injury to Maggie Smith Leads to 'Lettice' Delay
LEAD: Maggie Smith broke a shoulder while riding a bicycle on vacation in November and the accident has forced the postponement until next season of ''Lettice and Lovage,'' the Peter Shaffer play in which she was scheduled to star on Broadway this spring.


Japan's Emperor: A Mortal Man
LEAD: When the American military high command in Tokyo in 1945 suggested that Emperor Hirohito renounce his divinity, the Emperor was bemused. ''I have never considered myself a god,'' he said, ''nor have I attempted to arrogate to myself the powers of a divine being.''


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Weather Report last Sunday through Thursday carried miscalculated times for the rise of the sun, the moon, Saturn, Mars, Venus and Jupiter for those dates.
The correct times appear below:
$
Date
*2*Saturn
*2*Moon
*2*Sun
rise
set
rise
set
rise
set
1
6:57
16:14
1:13
11:56
7:20
16:39
2
6:53
16:10
2:16
12:21
7:20
16:40
3
6:50
16:07
3:22
12:51
7:20
16:41
4
6:46
16:04
4:30
13:30
7:20
16:42
5
6:43
16:00
5:37
14:18
7:20
16:43


Review/Music; A Guitarist From Italy
LEAD: Piero Bonaguri, a guitarist from Italy who made his New York debut on Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, is a talented interpreter, if not the most adventurous programmer.
Most of the music he offered was from the tried-and-true core of his instrument's literature, including guitar works by Sor, Torroba and Villa-Lobos, and transcriptions of pieces by Frescobaldi and


Nancy Vaiti Is the Bride Of Stephen J. Zielinski Jr.
LEAD: Nancy Whitehead Vaiti, a daughter of Edward Whitehead of West Allenhurst, N.J., and the late Eleanor Whitehead, was married yesterday to Stephen J. Zielinski Jr., a son of Rose Zielinski of Trenton and the late Mr.
Zielinski.
Judge Alvin Y. Milberg, the assignment judge of the New Jersey Superior Court, officiated at the Monmouth County Court in


Hirohito, 124th Emperor of Japan, Is Dead at 87
LEAD: Emperor Hirohito, the last of the World War II leaders and Japan's longest-reigning monarch, died today at the Imperial Palace.
He was 87 years old.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about budget problems facing New York, New Jersey and Connecticut characterized Connecticut's response incorrectly.


Less Mystery in Car Rentals
LEAD: Drivers should find it easier to shop for the lowest rental-car rates this year, and many customers will be able to disregard the industry's puzzling and expensive insurance options, thanks to some new laws, guidelines and credit-card services.


Four Dead, Five Injured in Connecticut Fire


Inscrutable Occidental Mentality
LEAD: For days warlike sounds have issued from Washington about the need for a ''surgical strike'' to ''take out'' that troublesome chemical plant in Libya.
This fast-food and medical jargon harks back to Vietnam days when it was used to describe what our air forces were up to, which was bombing with a ferocity somewhat less destructive than nuclear assault.


Bruce Failing Sr., 70, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Bruce F. Failing Sr., an advertising executive, died of a heart attack Thursday at the Albany Medical Center.
He was 70 years old and lived in Westhampton Beach, L.I.


New York School Board Faulted For the Disarray of Local Districts
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education has failed to prevent the local decentralized school districts from mismanaging their budgets, ignoring ethical standards and often placing politics ahead of educational concerns, education officials, union leaders and representatives of community watchdog groups say.


Marcos Out of Hospital
LEAD: Former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines has been released from a hospital and is resting at home after spending a week in the hospital for treatment of congestive heart failure, an aide said.


For Harper &amp; Row, the Deal Insures Closer Cooperation
LEAD: Now that Rupert Murdoch has won control of William Collins, Harper &amp; Row will be able to integrate more closely its publishing and distribution in Britain and Canada, where the two companies have often gone their separate ways.


FIRST INDICTMENT RETURNED BY JURY IN PENTAGON FRAUD
LEAD: A Federal grand jury returned its first indictment today against a military contractor, a Pentagon official and five other people in the two-year investigation of fraud and bribery in military weapons procurement.
Another contractor and two of its former executives pleaded guilty in a Federal court to similar charges growing out of the investigation.


Soviets Dispute U.S. Assertion On Libya Plant
LEAD: The Soviet Union implied today that the United States had no proof for its assertion that Libya had built a chemical weapons plant.


Ex-Chiefs of Haas Penalized In Stock-Manipulation Case
LEAD: More details of the Government's investigation of stock market manipulation were disclosed yesterday, as charges of regulatory violations were brought by the National Association of Securities Dealers.


U.S. SPURNS SAUDIS ON LIBYA MEDIATION
LEAD: Less than two weeks before two Navy fighter planes shot down two Libyan jets over the Mediterranean, the Reagan Administration rejected an offer by Saudi Arabia to mediate between the United States and Libya, State Department officials and Arab diplomats said today.


Life Magazine Photos
LEAD: ''Life: Through the 60's,'' an exhibition of 200 photographs from the archives of Life magazine is to be on view at the International Center for Photography, Fifth Avenue at 94th Street, from March 17 to May 14.
The photographs run from the late 1950's to the early 70's, and the subjects include the civil-rights movement, the Vietnam War, the Peace Corps and the Kennedy Administration.


Donald P. Wright, Lawyer, 48
LEAD: Donald P. Wright, a vice president and general counsel at the Harris Corporation, the electronics and communciations company, died of a heart attack Thursday at Holmes Regional Hospital in Melbourne, Fla.
He was 48 years old and lived in Indialantic, Fla.


Toyota Will Build Trucks In California if G.M. Agrees
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is close to concluding an agreement that would allow the Toyota Motor Corporation to build 100,000 trucks a year in Fremont, Calif., G.M.'s chief executive, Roger B. Smith, said today.


Capital's Mayor Balks at Drug Inquiries
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., under Federal investigation for a December visit to a man suspected of being a drug dealer, declined today to make public the results of 10 drug tests that he has said he took over the past five years.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Despite the concerted efforts of medical treatment, finally today His Majesty passed away from a tumor in the duodenum.'' - Shoichi Fujimori, grand steward of the Imperial Household Agency.  [ 1:1. ]


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 8.


Polaroid Stock Plan Upheld; Setback for Shamrock Seen
LEAD: The Delaware Chancery Court today determined that the Polaroid Corporation's employee stock ownership plan was valid, a ruling that appears to be a setback to Roy E. Disney's takeover bid for the film and camera company.


PENTAGON FRAUD: INDICTMENT AND GUILTY PLEAS
LEAD:  The companies and some of those involved in the Government's investigation of fraud in weapons procurement.
HAZELTINE CORPORATION: A Greenlawn, L.I., manufacturer of military electronic systems.In 1986, the company, which also has plants in Massachusetts, was bought by the Emerson Electric Company of St.


Bridge
LEAD: If the players competing in the Winter Regional Swiss Team Championship in Manhattan three weeks ago had been asked by Santa Claus what they wanted for Christmas, a likely answer would have been a doubled part-score, making game, with the help of some mis-defense.


A Witness Says Nussbaum Hit And Flung Lisa
LEAD: A defense witness in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg testified yesterday that she saw Hedda Nussbaum fling Lisa Steinberg aside in a fit of rage and then slap her on the side of her neck in 1983 when the child was less than 2 years old.


De Rose Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* De Rose Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,055,000
8,967,000
Net loss
628,000
375,000
Yr sales
19,956,000
23,427,000
Net loss
2,118,000
1,515,000


'Romance' to Close
LEAD: ''Romance Romance,'' a four-character musical by Keith Herrmann, with book and lyrics by Barry Harman, will close after tomorrow's performance at the Helen Hayes Theater.
The musical will have played 289 regular performances and 10 previews.


Digital Communications Asociates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications Asociates Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
52,162,000
54,795,000
Net loss
b4,245,000
c3,582,000
Share earns
-
.64
Shares outst
14,457,000
15,092,000
6mo rev
103,879,000
104,955,000
Net inc
b2,824,000
18,494,000
Share earns
.19
1.23
Shares outst
14,772,000
15,076,000


Manning Injures Knee Ligament
LEAD: Danny Manning of the Los Angeles Clippers, the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft last summer, has knee ligament damage and will not be with the Clippers when they play the Knicks tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden.
The severity of the injury will be determined next week.


McMahon Named Starter
LEAD: Jim McMahon, who publicly lobbied to start the National Conference championship game, was given the job today by Coach Mike Ditka.


Collapse of North Case: Back to Basics
LEAD: Beneath the weighty invocations of national security, the complex requirements of the Classified Information Procedures Act and the exalted titles of those whose fortunes were to some degree at stake, the case against Oliver L. North foundered this week on one of the simplest, most basic propositions of the


Southwestern Public Service Co. reports earnings for 12mo to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Public Service Co. (NYSE)
12mo to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
790,949,000
775,518,000
Net inc
104,904,000
104,101,000
Share earns
2.38
2.36


Contractor Disciplines 17
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation, the military contractor that agreed to pay a record $115 million fine last October for defrauding the Government, has taken disciplinary action against 17 employees as a result of the case.


President Enters a Hospital For Surgery on Hand Today
LEAD: President Reagan was admitted this evening to the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, where he will undergo minor surgery on his left hand Saturday for a condition that has caused a curvature of his ring finger.


Missouri Puts Killer to Death In Tavern Waitress's Slaying
LEAD: A convicted killer was put to death by injection early today for the murder of a tavern waitress, becoming the first Missouri inmate to be executed since 1965.


BASKETBALL


Queens and Brooklyn Give Subway Improvements Bronx Cheer
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Oklahoma State Punished


Greece Scrutinized Extradition Request
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alfred Julien, Lawyer, Dies at 78
LEAD: Alfred S. Julien, a New York trial lawyer who was founder and senior partner in the law firm of Julien &amp; Schlesinger, died of heart failure yesterday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 78 years old and also had homes in Manhattan and in Westhampton Beach, L.I.


New Boston Arena
LEAD: An agreement for the owners of the 60-year-old Boston Garden to build a new arena, which could be ready by the fall of 1992, was announced yesterday by Mayor Raymond Flynn.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Beverly Enterprises Inc., Pasadena, Calif., agreed to sell 20 nursing homes in Massachusetts to GHM Inc., East Hartford, Conn., for $47.25 million.


Thomas Holmes, Psychiatrist, 70
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas Holmes, a psychiatrist who helped create a stress scale of such events as marriage and work troubles, died Dec. 24 of a stroke.
He was 70 years old.


Mark Producing Sells Its Assets
LEAD: The Consolidated Natural Gas Company said it and a Japanese partner had agreed to acquire the exploration and production assets of Mark Producing Inc. for about $245 million in cash.
Mark Producing, a Houston-based company, has extensive natural gas and oil properties in the Gulf of Mexico.
The deal includes proven and probable reserves of 190 billion cubic feet of natural gas and five million barrels of oil.


Difficult Issues Emerge On Canada-U.S. Trade
LEAD: When Gary Timmerman returned from a shopping trip to Chicago he became an example of the misconceptions and disappointments that have sprung up since the free trade agreement between the United Sates and Canada took effect last weekend.


U.N. HEARS DEFENSE IN DOWNING OF JETS
LEAD: The United States presented photographs of what it said were armed Libyan fighter planes to the Security Council today in support of its contention that American pilots acted in self defense in shooting down the Libyan planes.


An Opera Based on O'Neill
LEAD: An opera based on the Eugene O'Neill play ''Desire Under the Elms'' is to have its premiere on Wednesday at the City Center, 131 West 55th Street, to benefit the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn.
The work, composed by Edward Thomas with a libretto by Joe Masteroff, will be performed by the New York Opera Repertory Theater, with Judy Kaye starring.


Cracks Mar the Facade of Bhutto's Pakistan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Murdoch Wins Control of Collins
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch's News International P.L.C. won control today of William Collins P.L.C., ending a two-month struggle by the major British book publisher to resist a takeover by Mr.
Murdoch.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 7, 1989
LEAD:  Economy


Bonn Asks U.S. for Evidence of Libya Connection
LEAD: The West German Government renewed its demands today that the United States supply evidence to support assertions that a German chemical company was involved in the contruction of a chemical plant in Libya.
Bonn complained that it was being victimized by a ''media campaign'' in the United States.


Honeywell Bull to Cut Work Force by 15%
LEAD: Honeywell Bull Inc. said today that it would reduce its American work force by 15 percent, or 1,600 employees, in the next two months to make itself more competitive.


Bush Calls Walsh's Motion 'the Proper Suggestion'
LEAD: President-elect George Bush said today that he thought the independent Iran-contra prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, ''did the right thing'' Thursday in moving to dismiss the two main charges against Oliver L. North.
But the Senate Democratic leader called for more information on the move.


30% MORE FOR AIDS IN REAGAN BUDGET
LEAD: The Reagan Administration will send to Congress on Monday a $424.4 billion budget for health and human services that will include a 30 percent increase in spending on AIDS but restrain the growth of Medicare and Medicaid.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the snow, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Attendants Forced Cancellation of Flight
LEAD: Flight attendants at Newark International Airport forced United Air Lines to cancel a Los Angeles-bound flight on Tuesday night when they learned of a sabotage threat shortly before the 198 passengers boarded.


Winfield Group Suing Steinbrenner Again
LEAD: The stormy relationship between Dave Winfield and George Steinbrenner yesterday produced a new round of thunder and lightning over an old matter: the owner's failure to make payments to the David M. Winfield Foundation.


But Does Ice Cream Go With Romance?
LEAD: How does an ice cream manufacturer draw attention to new flavors in the dead of winter?
Well, Haagen-Dazs's strategy this week was to release results of a poll that explored attitudes toward romance at the same time it announced its new flavors: deep chocolate, deep chocolate fudge and deep chocolate peanut butter.


Review/Dance; City Ballet's Answer to 'Unanswered Question'
LEAD: ''The Unanswered Question,'' presented by the New York City Ballet on Thursday at the New York State Theater, has been a prickly addition to the company's repertory.
The piece, created by Eliot Feld for City Ballet's American Music Festival last spring, demands dramatic presence rather than virtuoso dancing from its performers.


Home Banking By Computer Hasn't Made Paper Obsolete
LEAD: Despite the continuing optimism of some bankers, banking at home with a personal computer has not come anywhere near its potential.


Who Knew What Will Remain Unknown
LEAD: PERHAPS more than a whimper, but there certainly wasn't much of a bang when the main thrust of the Government's case against Oliver L. North collapsed last week.


Big Stanley Wins Tropical
LEAD: Big Stanley, the quickest 2-year-old sprinter in Florida last year, carried his speed a mile and an eighth today to win the $166,950 Tropical Park Derby by 1 3/4 lengths at Calder Race Course.


Musings On Moses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Employers Assay Ban on Polygraphs
LEAD: AS Westchester retailers tabulate the profits from a successful holiday season, they fear they are losing ground against a common enemy, the thieving employee.
On Dec. 27 polygraph testing, one of the means retailers in the state have used to determine the honesty of employees, was banned under the Employee Polygraph Protection


Where the Trout Reside, and Why Where the Trout Are Hiding, and Why
LEAD: If you begin to peruse Tom Rosenbauer's ''Reading Trout Streams'' (Nick Lyons Books, $17.95) this winter, you'll spend less time flailing dead water when the fifth month's soft breezes are upon us.


Art Brut
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding ''In Europe, Tracing the Art of the Outsider'' (Travel, Nov. 20): Those who would like to learn more should read ''Art Brut'' by Michel Thevoz, the curator of the Art Brut Museum in Lausanne.


Turtle Bay Tour
LEAD: Adventure on a Shoestring is to conduct a walking tour of the Turtle Bay section of Manhattan at 3 P.M. today.
The fee is $5; for meeting place, call 265-2663.


Klaus Column: Help in the Kitchen
LEAD: My usual reaction to one of Barbara Klaus's articles is, ''Thank the household gods!
I am not alone,'' and her piece on holiday cooking  [ ''What It All Boils Down To,'' Long Island Sound, Dec. 4 ]  evoked that consoling shock of recognition.
I wonder if she is familiar with a further complication.


POSTINGS: Just Off Central Park; Rocky Road for Townhouses
LEAD: If everything went right for Townhouses on the Park, one-half block from Central Park West, all 77 of its two- and three-bedroom apartments with balconies and gardens would have sold for only $63,000 and $73,000.
But just about everything went wrong for the community development corporation that started building the project eight years ago with Federal and city aid.


Garment Unions Sue To Ban Work in Home
LEAD: Unions and clothing industry groups have filed a suit to block new Government regulations that would allow work at home in five industries, ending a 40-year ban.


The Black Ascent In Union Politics
LEAD: IN the early 1960's, the executive council of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. provoked an angry outcry from some labor leaders when it urged them to open their ranks to black workers.
It was not until 1964, some 15 years after the armed forces began to integrate and a decade after the Supreme Court ordered desegregation of public schools, that the last labor federation affiliate removed the ''whites only'' clause in its constitution and bylaws.


Reviews/Music; Newcomers in Met Opera's 'Figaro'
LEAD: Casts seem to be shifting more rapidly in the later years of the James Levine regime at the Metropolitan Opera than they did earlier on, and the four newcomers to Wednesday's cast of Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' served to underscore that instability.


Howard Beach Victim Convicted in a Shooting
LEAD: Timothy Grimes, one of the victims of the Howard Beach racial violence, has been convicted of malicious wounding for shooting his brother in the face.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  IT ONLY HURTS WHEN I LAUGH.
By Stan Freberg. (Times Books, $19.95.) America's self-styled ''gray-flanneled kamikaze pilot,'' Stan Freberg wields the stiletto of satire against the smug and self-satisfied in popular culture and advertising.
Mr.
Freberg was the mad prophet of the airwaves, performing on radio, television and records his hilarious sendups of everything from ''Dragnet'' to the overcommercialization of Christmas.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Warehouses; In a Tenant's Market, Bigger Is Considered Better
LEAD: ALTHOUGH warehouse space tends to be tediously stable as a real estate investment in the metropolitan New York area, good fortune in 1988 was skewed sharply in favor of developers specializing in huge suburban warehouse complexes.


Multiple Listing Coming to Manhattan
LEAD: AN upheaval, bitter and factional, is reshaping the way apartments are bought and sold in Manhattan, forcing brokers to abandon traditional strategies in a marketplace lurching toward the future.


Valarie King Is Engaged
LEAD: Valarie King and Douglas P. Thoren, a son of Carol McKenna of Hoboken, N.J., and Donald P. Thoren of Mount Kemble Lake, N.J., plan to marry in August, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harold King of Ridgefield, N.J., have announced.
Ms.
King, a graduate of Douglass College at Rutgers University, is studying for a Ph.D.


A Town of Crystal And Old Artistry Near Florence
LEAD: EVERYONE has heard of Venetian glass, but not even most Florentines, a mere 30 miles away, are aware of the crystal from Colle di Val d'Elsa, although 90 percent of Italy's crystal is made in this little hilltop town.
More famous in Dante's time than it is today, the scene of a decisive battle between Ghibellines and Guelphs, the poetic-sounding Colle di Val d'Elsa (literally the Hill in the Valley of the River Elsa), off the busy superstrada on the way to Siena, is also the birthplace of Arnolfo di Cambio, the greatest architect of his time, who designed Florence's


STREETSCAPES: Woodycrest Children's Home; A New Life - and Mission - for a Bronx Residence
LEAD: IT IS a wreck, still elegant in parts, but definitely a wreck.
Now the vacant, vandalized Woodycrest, a home for neglected children built in the Bronx in 1902 by the American Female Guardian Society and Home for the Friendless, seems on the road to repair, if not restoration.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  New York Bans Waivers on Auto Rentals


Jody Ann Hocart Engaged To Marry Gregory James
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Hocart of Essex Fells, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jody Ann Hocart to Gregory Michael James, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John James of Glen Rock, N.J., and Fairfield, Conn.
A spring wedding is planned.


RIVER BLINDNESS: CONQUERING AN ANCIENT SCOURGE
LEAD: ON THIS BRIGHT NOVEMBER morning the mood is anything but gloomy in Sikoroni, Mali, a mud-hut village of the vast West African savanna.
The summer rains were generous for the first time in years, and today 10-foot sorghum stalks are bowed by heavy heads of grain.
True to protocol, the chief of this village of 400 has called in the elders to exchange ceremonial words with arriving visitors.


Richard Goldwater, 70, Ex-Assemblyman
LEAD: Richard M. Goldwater, a Manhattan lawyer and former New York State Assemblyman, died of complications of pneumonia Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 8, 1989
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $5.95.) A bond trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
8
THE TOMMYKNOCKERS, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) Two writers' zealous attempt to unearth mysterious artifacts causes havoc.


WHAT DRIVES THE PISTONS
LEAD: FOR A BASKETBALL FAN, A VISIT TO the preseason training camp of any National Basketball Association team is instructive and perhaps a little deflating.


Armchair Travel
LEAD: To the Editor: Since insensitive tourists create a disproportionate amount of ill will for the traveling population, I am grateful for Arthur A. Witkin's advocacy of armchair travel (Letters, Nov. 20).


Hirohito's Death Puts Focus on New Identity
LEAD: The death of Emperor Hirohito may crystallize a national pride, self-confidence and search for Japanese values under way long before he took ill.


How Israel's Economic Revival Ran Out of Steam
LEAD: AT the turn of the century, the creed of the founders of modern Israel was Labor Zionism.
Steeped in European socialism and a belief in hard outdoor work, and determined to escape pogroms and shtetls, they sought not only a new country, but a new Jewish people.


Alison Cumming Riker, a Teacher, Marries Lieut. Steven Paul Friedel
LEAD: Alison Cumming Riker, a daughter of Mrs.
Gordon Potter of Rumson, N.J., and the late William I. Riker, was married in Rumson yesterday to Lieut.
Steven Paul Friedel of the Army, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Theodore Friedel of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. performed the ceremony at St.


Jill Caryn Norman, a Lawyer, Marries Sami Hisham Fouad in Massachusetts
LEAD: Jill Caryn Norman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Norman of Concord, Mass., was married there yesterday to Sami Hisham Fouad, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
A.
A.
Fouad of Ames, Iowa.
Naomi Cherny, a Justice of the Peace of Lexington, Mass., performed the ceremony at the Concord Academy Chapel.


Classroom to Dias: Teacher of the Year
LEAD: ALTHOUGH she begins her official reign as Connecticut Teacher of the Year for 1989 this month, in some ways Carol R. Virostek feels she has held the title for much, much longer.


Three Men Are Killed In Separate Incidents
LEAD: Three people were killed Saturday in different drug-related incidents in New York City, the police said.


Interior Dept. Acts to Speed Sales Of Public Lands for Development
LEAD: In the last days of the Reagan Administration, the Interior Department is taking a series of steps to accelerate or simplify the transfer of public lands and public sources of energy to private entrepreneurs.


Theater in the State: A 'Coming of Age'
LEAD: NO sooner had the new year begun when three of the state's 15 professional theaters got down to the business of opening their next plays - all on the same night.
And within a month, three more productions will reinforce the new year's theater blitz in New Jersey.


GUIDE
LEAD: YALE'S WINTERFEST Elizabeth Egloff's ''Phaedra and Hippolytus,'' Anthony Giardina's ''The Beach,'' Anne Commire's ''Starting Monday'' and Douglas Wright's ''Interrogating the Nude'' are four new plays to be performed as works-in-progress during the ninth annual Winterfest at the Yale Repertory Theater, at York and Chapel Streets in New


12 Arabs Wounded in Uprising
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and wounded 12 Palestinian demonstrators today, and there were conflicting reports over responsibility for the overnight killing of a West Bank village leader.


'Goodbye' for Some, 'Ciao' for Others
LEAD: I READ somewhere that yuppies are taking leave of one another these days with the word ''ciao.'' I have never been able to bring myself to say ''ciao.'' But I would like to.
I roll it around in my mind. ''Ciao.'' Even better, ''Ciao, baby.''


Hannah Fryshdorf, Researcher, 68
LEAD: Hannah Fryshdorf, the assistant executive director of the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research in Manhattan, died of cancer Friday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 68 years old and lived in the Bronx.


Learning Service With a Smile
LEAD: STUDENTS and ducks shamble about the palm-lined campus of Florida International University on a bright Miami day, the former to classes and the latter to nearby ponds.
Despite the sprinkling of people wearing chefs' uniforms, the ducks are unconcerned.
Students at the F.I.U.
School of Hospitality Management have little time to flambe anything with cherry sauce; they are too busy with classes in hospitality information systems, hospitality law and physical-plant management.


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: This is the year of the AnimalL the Chicago Bears and Buffalo Bills.


John W. Kjorlien Is the Bridegroom Of Ms. Kowalski
LEAD: The marriage of Suzanne Celia Kowalski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon John Kowalski of Captiva Island, Fla., and Woodstock, Vt., to John Walker Kjorlien, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence John Kjorlien of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Osterville, Mass., took place yesterday at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn.


MORE DEMAND FOR THOSE WHO MAKE WATER FLOW
LEAD: In 1985 and 1986, record high water in the Great Lakes washed away and flooded streets.
In 1988, a dry, hot summer was followed by a quick return to substantially lower levels that left harbors too shallow for ships to navigate.
The extreme fluctuations in water levels have created a nearly continuous debate among engineers and planners over the success - or lack of it - of current methods to regulate the water's rise and fall.


On Broadway, Spectacles Raise the Stakes
LEAD: ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' Andrew Lloyd Webber's $8 million megamusical, has been a consistent sellout since its opening last January, taking in more than $28 million at the box office.
But it is not expected to reimburse its investors fully until the end of April - more than 15 months into its run.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: 'No Beer Here'


Baseball Notebook; Mattingly Is Still Top Hitter Despite Off Year, Study Says
LEAD: A statistical study determined last off season that for the previous four seasons Don Mattingly easily was the best player in the universe.


The Scramble For Black Professors
LEAD: THREE YEARS AGO, Mylon Winn was a professor of political science at the University of Alabama with no particular plans to leave.
Then he received a letter from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, saying that the school was seeking to hire more minority-group faculty members.
Today Mr.
Winn, who is black, makes his home in


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers may be the league's most dominant team after scoring 34 points against Minnesota's top-ranked defense.
Against the N.F.C.
Central Division champion Chicago Bears, San Francisco will win by attacking with a dominant offensive line to control Mike Singletary, allowing Joe Montana adequate pass protection.


Old Scourge, New Cure


Kay M. Larholt Engaged
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Larholt of London of the engagement of their daughter Kay Marice Larholt to Neill Eric Silverman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Silverman of Livingston, N.J.
Miss Larholt, a doctoral candidate in biostatistics at the Harvard University School of Public Health, graduated from Ben Gurion University in Beersheba, Israel.


Ambivalence Over Pill Grows With Risk Data
LEAD: Ever since birth control pills were first marketed in the United States in 1960, many doctors and women have found themselves torn between enthusiasm for the liberating contraceptive and fears about possible dangers from long-term use.


Military Figure With Contras Slain Near Honduran Capital
LEAD: A military leader of the Nicaraguan rebels was assassinated by gunmen in Honduras today, a rebel spokesman said.


The Nuclear Arms Industry's Ills, Step by Step
LEAD: Among the problems that will be considered in coming weeks by the 101st Congress is how to pay the enormous costs of repairing and cleaning up the nation's crippled nuclear weapons production system.
Last spring, the United States lost its remaining means of producing tritium and plutonium, essential ingredients of nuclear warheads, when the last reactors at the aging Savannah River Plant in South Carolina were shut down.


Catherine Gallaher, Banker, Weds W. A. Mulligan
LEAD: Catherine Mary Gallaher, the daughter of Frank Dixon Gallaher of New York and the late Catherine Antoinette Gallaher, was married yesterday to William Anthony Mulligan, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Bernard Mulligan of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert J. Verigni performed the ceremony in the Lady Chapel at St.


A Seasoned Broadcast Producer Turns to Cable
LEAD: ''A producer's lifeblood is access to air time,'' said Av Westin, ''whether it is on a network station, on cable or on a cassette for which someone makes his own air time.''


Repairing Veneer on Woodwork
LEAD: Veneer is usually a thin layer of attractive woodthat is glued in the surface of thicker, less attractive wood to enhance its appearance.


A Texas-Size Bet in Advertising
LEAD: The commercial opens with a shot of the actor Randy Quaid slouched in his rather messy apartment, holding a beer and a very large sandwich.
He is complaining in a folksy way about a party he recently attended. ''They didn't even serve beer,'' he grouses. ''I oughta throw a real party - Texas style.


Fighting Dirty Air And Motorists' Ire
LEAD: WHEN Colorado proposed in 1987 to be the first state to mandate the use of high-oxygen gasoline to cut carbon-monoxide pollution, surveys showed that most of the affected motorists were angry or worried.


Matchup Of a New Order In A.F.C.
LEAD: The Bengals and the Buffalo Bills, representing the New Order of American Conference teams, meet in the A.F.C. championship game at Riverfront Stadium Sunday.


Melding Design and Disability
LEAD: THE EXTERIOR of a school can be deceptive.
From the outside, two public schools, the Frederick J. Gaenslen School in Milwaukee, Wis., and the Mercer Junior-Senior High School in Trenton, N.J., look like any other new schools.
They are both low-slung, modern brown brick structures.
The American flag flies in front of the canopied entrances.


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: Since the Giants are out of it, I really don't care.
Anyway, I think the Cincinnati Bengals and the Chicago Bears will meet in the Super Bowl.
It will be a great matchup between the Boomer and Jim (Taco Bell) McMahon.
ADAM KRAMER  Madison, Conn.


THOSE GIANT CHEESE GRATERS IN THE SKY
LEAD:  THE CITY THAT NEVER WAS  Two Hundred Years of Fantastic and Fascinating Plans That Might Have Changed the Face of New York City.
By Rebecca Read Shanor.
Illustrated. 254 pp.
New York:  Viking. $35.


FILM VIEW: 'Mississippi Burning': Generating Heat or Light?; Taking Risks to Illuminate a Painful Time in America
LEAD: ''Mississippi Burning'' is now on trial.
It's just 21 years and three months since the climax of the case that inspired the movie, when a group of white supremacists were put into the dock and charged with violating the civil rights of three young voter-registration workers.
The means being murder, the violations were permanent.


FANFARE FOR THE COMMON COMPLAINTS
LEAD:  THE COMPANY OF CRITICS  Social Criticism and Political Commitment in the Twentieth Century.
By Michael Walzer.  260 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $19.95.


A 'New Olivier' Is Taking On Henry V on the Screen
LEAD: Any exciting young British actor is almost inevitably dubbed ''the new Olivier.'' But in the case of 27-year-old Kenneth Branagh, the comparison is unavoidable.


For Small-Scale Entertaining, Simple but Not Ordinary
LEAD: AFTER the holidays, when the memory of exhausting large-scale entertaining has finally receded, it is pleasant to have a few friends around for a quiet dinner.
The following is a meal for four to six that is somewhat out of the ordinary yet simple enough to prepare just before your guests arrive.


Newark Ministry to Homeless is Losing Its Home
LEAD: The Rev.
James W. Parrott raised his eyes to the dingy ceiling, blessed the dozens of homeless people huddled around tables waiting for their only hot meal of the day and prayed for a ''miracle on Broad Street.''


How an Era Empowered Students
LEAD: WHERE ONCE decisions about college life were made by administrators and faculty, the 60's changed all that.
Today student representatives sit on panels and committees alongside faculty and officials.
Where once students were seen and heard only in the classroom context, the 60's empowered them.
Now their counsel is institutionalized, in an effort to avoid potential conflicts.


Book on Valvano Brings a Denial
LEAD: Jim Valvano, the North Carolina State basketball coach and athletic director, said he was never interviewed for a book scheduled for publication next month that, according to a published report, accuses him of running a corrupt basketball program on its jacket.


Defining Factors On Exercising
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Argentine, Aiming to Please, Runs as a Peron for the 90's
LEAD: Carlos Saul Menem is known as a pleasant fellow who can't say no and as a man who likes to be photographed with showgirls and belly dancers.


Chinese Modern With Old Favorites
LEAD: THE age-old debate continues.
French or Chinese?
Which is the world's premier cuisine?
Residents of St.
James don't have to choose; they have it all.
Lotus East, an exceptional Chinese restaurant, recently opened approximately 500 crispy duck lengths from Mirabelle, one of Long Island's great French restaurants.


Enlisting a List to Keep a Community's Charm Unusullied
LEAD: AT the turn of the century, summertime crowds of New Yorkers came by train to vacation in the seaside village of Stony Creek and the nearby Thimble Islands.
The New Yorkers who now come to Stony Creek hope to buy part of it.
Although the state's real estate market as a whole has cooled, Stony Creek, on Long Island


Duke Player Stars In the Hula Bowl
LEAD: Anthony Dilweg of Duke passed for three touchdowns to Michigan State's Andre Rison today as the East beat the West, 21-10, in the Hula Bowl.


Rebuild America by Rebuilding Labor
LEAD: A dangerous, virtually unquestioned assumption has taken hold of American management - that the best way to be competitive is to cut people, wages and salaries.
This assumption has led to the trade deficits that are bankrupting America, and it is making our nation dependent on foreign powers for all manner of capital, products and - increasingly - technology.


For Small-Scale Entertaining, Simple but Not Ordinary
LEAD: AFTER the holidays, when the memory of exhausting large-scale entertaining has finally receded, it is pleasant to have a few friends around for a quiet dinner.
The following is a meal for four to six that is somewhat out of the ordinary yet simple enough to prepare just before your guests arrive.


Of Dorms and Roommates
LEAD: WHEN Boston University moved last fall to prohibit students from having overnight visitors in their dormitories, some students were outraged but most of their parents were relieved.
Spurred by the case of a parent irate because her daughter's roommate had a boyfriend sharing her room for two months, the university's president, John R.


Moss Dismissed
LEAD: Coaches who take over teams that have been in recent trouble with the National Collegiate Athletic Association are forever complaining that they are being unfairly punished for transgressions committed by others when the N.C.A.A. imposes sanctions on their programs long after the infractions were committed.


The Trade War Keeps Simmering
LEAD: The new-year trade war between the United States and Europe got off to a halting start.
The European Community, led by Jacques Delors of France, did impose its Jan. 1 ban on meat from animals treated with growth hormones.
Washington, which says the ban is trade protectionism and not a health measure, did apply its 100 percent retaliatory tariff on $100 million worth of European food imports.


A March Bridal For Ann Guthrie
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mrs.
Mahlon G. Guthrie of Washington of the engagement of her daughter Ann Joyce Guthrie to Mark Kelsall Hingston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Hingston of Needham, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in March.


Deer Problem At Chemical Plant
LEAD: THE E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company plant in Deepwater, N.J., knows how to make chemicals.
But controlling the chemistry of rapidly reproducing deer has the company stumped.


2 Held as Leaders of Scheme Defrauding Metals Investors
LEAD: A man and a woman with homes in the New York metropolitan area have been arrested in Florida and charged as the organizers of a scheme in which more than 2,000 people across the country were cheated out of $21 million that they believed had been invested in precious metals, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Judges Concur on Raise, Especially in New York
LEAD: To Judge James L. Oakes, a good illustration of why Federal judges deserve pay raises is what happens to their clerks when they join law firms.


An Early Jump On Admissions
LEAD: THE FIRST signs are in that it's going to be a particularly anxious season for high school seniors seeking admissions to the nation's most selective colleges.


Pro-Iranian Terror Groups Targeting Saudi Envoys
LEAD: Newly formed underground organizations believed linked to Iran say they have mounted a campaign of terror against Saudi diplomats abroad.


Kimberly K. McDermott Is Married To Miles D. N. Esty, a Law Student
LEAD: Kimberly Kavanaugh McDermott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. McDermott of Hamburg Cove, Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Miles David Newman Esty, a son of Susan Esty of New York and St.
John, V.I., and the late William C. Esty 4th.
The Rev.
Andrew E. Fiddler performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church-on-the-Green in New Haven.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Three years ago, we put siding on our house and had it stained, rather than painted.
A couple of months ago, I noticed some gray spots on this siding, and they have now spread all over the outside.
It seems to be some kind of mold, and scrubbing with Clorox got rid of it.
This is harsh and seems difficult to do over the entire house.


Don't You Believe the Deficit Isn't a Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hungary's History
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Editorial Notebook; Their Race Problem, and Ours
LEAD: The anti-African student riots of the last two weeks have opened a new window on China and the view isn't pretty: black students under attack . . . beaten by police . . . detained incommunicado . . . shocked on the genitals with cattle prods.
The Chinese attitude toward blacks seems unapologetically racist.


The Morning After the Storm Before


The Road to Industrial Rebirth; Make Allies Share Defense
LEAD: The 101st Congress will likely challenge the Bush administration to spend less overseas to defend our allies and more to defend our own economic future.
The alternative is to witness a continued erosion not only in commercial competitiveness but in our military-industrial base as well.


Title Search
LEAD: A mile or two south of Pauillac, the famous wine town in the Bordeaux region of France, lies the renowned Chateau Pichon-Longueville, founded in the 17th century by Jacques de Pichon, Baron de Longueville and first President of the Bordeaux Parlement.
The present, 19th-century neo-Gothic chateau, with its narrow black spires jutting up out of the vineyards, is along the


A Smoker's Advice
LEAD: To Legislators I am angered that the County Board of Legislators is considering a bill that would ban smoking in public places and workplaces in the county.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Gorbachev Assails Skeptics


Migratory Birds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Writer vs. Robot
LEAD: LAST WEEK I RECEIVED a 'Grammatik III' word-processing program,'' writes Gertrude M. Webb of Waltham, Mass., ''and have been using it to analyze my own written work.
I thought it might be fun to 'Grammatik-ize' a few paragraphs of your column.
I'm passing the robot's comments along to you.
Enjoy.''


Repairing Veneer on Woodwork
LEAD: Veneer is usually a thin layer of attractive woodthat is glued in the surface of thicker, less attractive wood to enhance its appearance.


New Opera and Old Wines
LEAD:  Music at Cathedral


Don't You Believe the Deficit Isn't a Problem; One-Armed Economist
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Cotswolds
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently returned from a bicycle trip through the Cotswolds and was interested to read Bruce Boucher's ''Stones of Wiltshire'' (Travel, Nov. 13) in which he describes the abbey at Malmesbury.
I had spent part of an afternoon in this town while on the way to Bath.


Clearwater Coffee House Organized
LEAD: AN unusual folk-singing revival will get under way in northern Westchester next Saturday evening when the folk singer Pete Seeger performs at the opening of the Walkabout Clearwater Coffee House at the Harvey School Hall in Katonah.
Organizers of the monthly nonprofit coffee house say they hope the audience will sing in the chorus and help with the environmental-action programs of Walkabout Clearwater, a nonprofit environmental organization chartered by the Poughkeepsie-based Clearwater Inc.


Autodidact
LEAD: To the Editor:


Down to Size
LEAD: I HAVE MOSTLY BLAND recollections of the professors in my seven years of higher education.
Two I recall vividly, because -though it was not their intention - they terrified me.


THE CASE FOR BURNING
LEAD: Peter Matthiessen's article on the Yellowstone fires was a thoughtful piece and goes further than anything else I've read to convince me that this disaster probably couldn't have been avoided, that change is part of the natural order of things and that life in all the beauty of Yellowstone will go on (''Our National Parks: The Case for Burning,'' Dec.


Planning Ahead
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis, who spent much of 1988 in an unsuccessful bid to cut short his third term as Governor of Massachusetts by becoming President, announced last week that he will not seek a fourth term.
Mr.
Dukakis noted that he will have served for 12 years when his current term ends in 1990, and said that it would then be time to ''pass the mantle of leadership to new hands.


THE CASE FOR BURNING
LEAD: It is high time that the National Park Service's decision not to combat Yellowstone's lightning-caused fires was defended.
The public's misguided furor over the natural calamity was fueled by election-year politics, local business interests and ignorance.


Bringing Superconductivity Down to Earth
LEAD: WHEN the new high-temperature superconductors were discovered two years ago, they inspired visions of revolutionary products -trains that float above their tracks, supercomputers the size of grapefruits and perfectly efficient electric power lines.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Business Forum page last week by K. Graham Walker, president of the Dexter Corporation, dropped a phrase from a sentence about the company's goals.
It should have read: ''My goals for Dexter are very clear - to renew the growth of earnings on a sustainable basis to equal at least two times the growth of real gross national product plus two percentage points.


China Assails Foreign Reports on Racial Strife
LEAD: China today sharply criticized what it described as fabrications in foreign news reports about recent racial incidents in several Chinese cities.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  ODYSSEY: Pepsi to Apple . . .
A Journey of Adventure, Ideas, and the Future, by John Sculley with John A. Byrne. (Perennial/Harper &amp; Row, $10.95.) Having taken on Coke with the ''Pepsi Generation,'' John Sculley left his job as president of the soft-drink company to enforce some discipline at Apple Computer, where he eventually replaced the legendary Steven Jobs.


Jones Holds On For 2-Stroke Lead
LEAD: Steve Jones, winner of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am last winter, took a two-shot lead today into the final round of the MONY Tournament of Champions at La Costa Country Club when Chip Beck slumped badly at the end of the third round.


Video Olympics Test Fitness of the Young
LEAD: LEN SAUNDERS grabbed a microphone, and the 250 elementary school students gathered in the gymnasium of the Valley View School grew silent.
Mr.
Saunders told them that most of their peers in the country did not know how to exercise and that he expected them to be exceptions.


Philippine Troops Rout Muslims Who Seized a Military Garrison
LEAD: Troops backed by combat helicopters stormed a military garrison today held by Muslim gunmen and ended a three-day standoff in which at least 17 people were reportedly killed.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We will do everything in our power to prevent German nationals, citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany and German companies from cooperating in a foreign country in the production of chemical weapons.''  - Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher.  [ 1:6. ]


Grief and Apathy as Expatriates Mourn Hirohito
LEAD: Despite the absence of black bunting and other outward signs that Japan's Emperor had just died, Japanese residents running errands in the slushy cold of this village today related a sense of loss, however muted by the thousands of miles separating them from Japan.


Anne Kingsbury to Wed in September
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Kingsbury of Brooklyn have made known the engagement of their daughter Anne Howard Kingsbury to L. Eric Andrews, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Andrews Jr. of Fairfield, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in September.


The CD Revolution Is Here 20 Years Ahead of Schedule
LEAD: Five years ago, in a Blithely prophetic mood, this column predicted that it would take about 25 years for the newly introduced CD to supplant the firmly entrenched LP record.
Now it turns out that this prophecy erred on the side of caution by roughly 400 percent.


FICTION
LEAD:  FROM THE REMINISCENCES OF PRIVATE IVANOV: And Other Stories.
By Vsevolod Garshin.
Translated by Peter Henry, Liv Tudge, Donald Rayfield and Philip Taylor. (Dufour Editions, Cloth, $27.50; Paper, $13.95.) For a few years in the mid-1880's, the eyes of the Russian literary world turned to Vsevolod Garshin.


The Prado Shakes Off the Dust of Centuries
LEAD: At least two prime ministers, the directors of several of the world's most illustrious museums and even Britain's Prince Charles are reported to have courted him, so when Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza finally signed an agreement a few weeks ago lending to the Prado for 10 years a major portion of his multibillion-dollar art collection, it seemed as though


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  SKIING CLINICS  Weather or not, cross-country skiing comes in for some scrutiny today, when Long Island's state parks start their annual series of free weekly clinics devoted to that most amiable pastime.


The Super Baby Burnout Syndrome
LEAD: PARENTS HAVE LONG appreciated the Picasso-like brilliance of their own children's first finger-painting.
But never before have they paid so much attention to the amateur-quality strokes of the child next door.


Wyche Provides Example Of the Merits of Hard Work
LEAD: The reminder can be found on an orange and black sign near the top of a building being constructed downtown.
Or on the radio stations that play thematic groups of songs.
And certainly, early this afternoon, the message will be sent in the stadium on the banks of the Ohio River:


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: The petite woman is skiing swiftly down a slope somewhere in New England.
Faster and faster she goes, when suddenly, to her horror, she is in midair and heading over a cliff.
She cries for help; the words that tumble from her lips are spoken in a Boston accent.
That really terrifies he and with that, Dr.


BONN TO REVIEW AMERICAN EVIDENCE ON LIBYAN PLANT
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced steps today to convince West Germany that a Libyan plant that the United States says is intended to produce chemical weapons was built with German help.


Ann Reynolds Engaged To Robert deButts Jr.
LEAD: The engagement of Ann Elizabeth Reynolds, a producer for ''Good Morning America'' on ABC-TV, and Robert Edward Lee deButts Jr., an associate in the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith, has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Dr. and Mrs.
Telfer Barkley Reynolds of Los


The High Costs of Dumping Going Higher)
LEAD: IT'S becoming more and more expensive to get rid of something nobody wants: garbage.
Many garbage haulers say they are considering raising their prices 20 percent or more this year, as towns charge more at disposal centers to cover their own costs and as recycling requirements make handling garbage more complicated and expensive.


Seton Hall Thrashed For First Defeat
LEAD: Seton Hall never receives a warm welcome here.
And tonight, the Pirates got another cold slap in the face.


Judges Who Decide Social Security Claims Say Agency Goads Them to Deny Benefits
LEAD: Many of the judges who decide claims for Government disability and health insurance charge that they are being harassed by the Social Security Administration in an effort to reduce costs.


Skiers Aid The Battle On Cancer
LEAD: WHILE traversing a snowy trail on Hamburg Mountain here five years ago, Paul Kattermann of Frankford Township, an avid skier, caught up to the 12 participants in the first Ski-a-thon benefit for the American Cancer Society and its Sussex County chapter.


A Little Coffee To the Rescue
LEAD: WHEN I FIRST began teaching, I was invited to a workshop for new faculty.
Like most people who teach at universities, I had spent a long time learning what to teach, but none learning how to teach it.
Somehow, my university seemed to hope, a weekend spent with experienced members of its faculty would make up for that.


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: Super Bowl prognosis: Bengals 24, Bears 10.


Donna Kaloust Engaged
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Kaloust of Gloucester, Mass., of the engagement of their daughter Donna Louise Kaloust to Dr.
Robert Christopher Hedgepath, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Hedgepath of Wilmington, Del.
An August wedding is planned.


Finding New Life at the Water's Edge
LEAD: A smokestack economy, polluted lake water and icy winters are tough negative images to fight.
But after suffering years of national derision, civic leaders in such Great Lakes cities as Cleveland, Buffalo and Detroit are turning to idled industrial waterfronts to bring back residents and attract new visitors.


HUNT FOR PAN AM BOMBER: NEW SHAPES AND SHADOWS
LEAD: The bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 does not bear the trademark of any one terrorist group, and so investigators are speculating that it was carried out either by a new coalition of terrorists or by a radical group demonstrating previously unknown capabilities.


American Jews Stand Firmly to the Left
LEAD: DESPITE the sociological rule that economic success usually leads to conservatism, American Jews remain distinctly liberal in their social and political outlook, as even the disappointed conservatives among them concede.


Student Engaged To Jane E. Veron
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Veron of White Plains of the engagement of their daughter Jane Elizabeth Veron to Andrew Todd Feldstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Feldstein of Flagstaff, Ariz.
The couple plan an August wedding.


Part of the Family
LEAD: BUNDLE up and prune; lack of leaves reveals tree/shrub scaffolding, which makes it easier to do some judicious cutting; this is also a good time to prune overgrown conifers and hollies.
Cut off the Christmas tree branches and place them over perennials to protect early growth in spring.
Do not overfeed or overwater house plants now because most of them are in a resting or dormant period.


Dentists: AIDS Gear Raises Fees
LEAD: PEOPLE going to the dentist may pay higher fees this year, because dentists are raising their fees to pay for protection against the AIDS virus.


Cyanide Said Found In Teen-ager's Home
LEAD: Cyanide has been found in the home of a teen-ager who lapsed into a coma after eating yogurt tainted with the poisonous substance, a newspaper reported today.


It's a French-Inspired Find in Peapack LBy VALERIE SINCLAIR
LEAD: SEVERAL years ago, a mini-phenomenon called bagel chips hit the stores.
The idea originated with Jim Burns, Gary Ricker and Rene Reist, who were at that time owners of the Cheese Store in Bernardsville.
Originally, the chips were a means of making use of bagels that would otherwise be thrown out.


Two Trillion Dollars Is Missing; Why Is U.S. Prosperity Eroding? It's No Mystery.
LEAD: ITEM: In 1966, when the prototypical American man turned 50, he had enjoyed a 31 percent increase in income over 10 years.
For his present-day counterpart, the increase has been only 10 percent.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ended Dec. 24  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $430,000  117 West 17th Street  (Brooks Van Horn Condominium)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,280-sq.-ft. prewar condo; dining area, large kitchen, high-ceilings, 2 exposures; common charge $183, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Delson, Ginsberg Real Estate)


Kimberly Bush Is Married to Jose Lopez-Castillo
LEAD: At the Mystic Congregational Church in Mystic, Conn., Kimberly Earl Bush, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Bush Jr. of Noank, Conn., was married yesterday to Jose Miguel Lopez-Castillo, a son of Graciela Castillo del Valle of Mexico City and Miguel Lopez Somera of Topilejo, Mexico.
The Rev.
Peter B.


In Switzerland, Train Stations Are for Eating
LEAD:  T. S. Eliot created a character who . . .  pulled her stockings off  With a frightful cry of ''Hauptbahnhof!''


Sikhs Kill 14 Hindus After Executions in India
LEAD: Sikh militants shot to death 14 Hindus today in two attacks in the northern Indian state of Punjab, apparently seeking to avenge the hanging of two Sikhs convicted in the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.


Providence Rallies to 12-0
LEAD: Carlton Screen made two free throws with 11 seconds left to give undefeated Providence an 80-78 victory today over Connecticut in the Big East.


In Defense of Celibidache
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers will see through the fog of Chicago, while no one at the game will see what is going on, and everyone will say how great it was to be there.


IN QUOTES
LEAD:  ''The heady days of pre-October 19 gave birth to this case.
It is probably one of 1,000 tragedies from that day.''
Kalman Gallop,
lawyer for Stanley Aslanian Jr.,
former Wall Street executive
who agreed to plead guilty to stock fraud.


Review/Dance; Lindsay Fischer Stars as Balanchine's 'Apollo'
LEAD: A talented young dancer became a noble god on Friday night at the New York State Theater when Lindsay Fischer of the New York City Ballet gave his first performance in the title role of George Balanchine's ''Apollo.''


MAN'S 3 FINGERS REATTACHED
LEAD: Assailants severed four of a doorman's fingers outside a Brooklyn apartment building Friday, but doctors were optimistic yesterday that he would regain the use of three fingers that were surgically reattached, a hospital spokesman said.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  FABLES FOR THE NUCLEAR AGE.
By Alan Neidle.
Illustrations by Jeff Leedy. (Paragon House, Cloth, $16.95; Paper, $9.95.) Behemoths, butterflies and other creatures populate ''Fables for the Nuclear Age,'' canny political parables that take up where Aesop and Orwell left off.
As animals scheme to shift the balance of power, they imitate Homo sapiens' diplomatic strategies more apt to escalate problems than to solve them.


Succession Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


DATA UPDATE: January 8, 1989
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*3*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Oct. 88
Oct. 87
Change
Starts
1,542
1,538
0%
Completions
1,505
1,565
-4%
Sales
733
653
11%
(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*3*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Pope Calls a Conference of African Bishops
LEAD: Pope John Paul II has called a special synod of bishops on the role of the church in Africa, where Roman Catholicism is spreading faster than anywhere else.


Jill R. Vanacore Planning to Wed Richard G. Reid
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Vanacore of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Roberta Vanacore to Richard Gerveys Reid, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Reid of Brooklyn Heights and Quogue, L.I.
The couple plan a May 6 wedding.


Reviews/Music; Songs of Love, With a Latin Flavor
LEAD: Danny Rivera, one of Puerto Rico's leading pop singers, declaimed ardent love songs Friday night at Carnegie Hall.
He was performing a benefit concert for the literacy program of the National Puerto Rican Forum, an organization that works to improve employment opportunities for the economically disadvantaged.


POSTINGS: Confidence in Greenwich; Mansions on Spec
LEAD: In a soft market, smart money builds lavishly.
That seems to be the lesson to be learned in Connecticut.
While most of Fairfield County is enduring a residential sales slump, Greenwich is enjoying something of boomlet in mansion-building.
Signaling the confidence builders have in the high end of the housing market, four large homes rising near one another there are all being built on a speculative basis.


Disparity in Costs For Education
LEAD: I'm responding to the article ''Mount Sinai Vote Due On High School Plan''  [ Oct. 30 ] .


A Book Lover's Los Angeles
LEAD: THE poet John Ciardi once looked at the false-fronted electronic dream factory of Southern California and wrote, ''The only possible mistake is in trying to perceive depth there.'' Anyone who thinks that Los Angeles is a shallow, post-literate wasteland might be surprised to learn that it ranks second to New York in book sales, according to a United States Department of Commerce survey.


THE NATION: Barry's City; The Mayor's Troubles Turn Washingtonians To Local Business
LEAD: ''One of these days this will be a great city, if nothing happens to it.'' - Henry Adams, 1877.


THE REGION: To San Juan; Koch Leads the Pack in Pursuit Of Hispanic Voters
LEAD: NO ONE can say New York City lacked for standardbearers at last week's inauguration of Gov.
Rafael Hernandez Colon of Puerto Rico.
Mayor Edward I. Koch was there.
So were the Manhattan Borough President, David N. Dinkins, the City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, and the Comptroller, Harrison J.


Reagan in 'Good Spirits' After Hand Surgery
LEAD: President Reagan was termed in ''good spirits'' after minor surgery today to correct a condition that had caused a curvature of the ring finger on his left hand.
A White House spokesman said Mr.
Reagan remained awake throughout the operation and chatted about horses with his doctors.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The video column on Dec. 25 incorrectly described the kind of machine on which tapes recorded in Super-VHS can be played.
Such tapes cannot be played on standard VHS machines.
However, tapes recorded in standard VHS can be played on Super-VHS machines.


A Rebuttal To Cablevision
LEAD: Cablevision has been running recent TV commercials portraying ''the man on the street'' in an interview situation.
A woman claims she is not a sports fan, so why should she be expected to pay an increased rate if MSG (the Madison Square Garden network) was incorporated into the basic service?
Furthermore, why should someone who is not a Ranger or Knick fan have to pay for someone else's pleasure?


Director's Post Empty Again at Hudson River Museum
LEAD: AFTER serving a year and a half, Thomas S. Holman has resigned his post as director of the Hudson River Museum, museum officials and Mr.
Holman confirmed last week.
The 35-five-year old Mr.
Holman, the fifth director in this decade, signed a letter of resignation on Monday.


Argentina
LEAD: To the Editor: The Argentina Tourist Information Office listed in your article on Argentina (Travel, Oct. 2) is a travel agency, not a government office.
The official Argentina Tourist Office in the United States is the Argentina National Tourist Office, 12 West 56th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019; 212-603-0443.


MRS. THATCHER'S CHILDREN
LEAD: Malcolm Bradbury's look at British yuppies bothered me for the same reasons that Mrs.
Thatcher's policies, and those of her ideological soul mates on this side of the Atlantic, do (''Mrs. Thatcher's Children,'' Dec. 11).
Mr.
Bradbury describes those who benefit from her policies: ''they're smart, they're snappy, they're clever, they're clean.


THE WORLD: Talks in Paris; Can Words Stem a Flow Of Chemical Weapons?
LEAD: PRESIDENT REAGAN'S call in September for an international conference to discourage the use of chemical weapons seemed like a straightforward idea.
In December, a top State Department official said the conference would be ''an exercise in high rhetoric'' to revive a global taboo broken by the use of poison gas in the Iran


'Virus' Views
LEAD: To the Editor:


SCIENCE FICTION
LEAD: WHEEL OF THE WINDS (Tor, $18.95) is M. J. Engh's second novel.
Her first, ''Arslan,'' which was published in 1976 and reissued in 1987, is a disturbing fantasy about different kinds of power - political, moral, personal.
In it the United States is taken over, with hardly a shot fired, by a charismatic Central Asian adventurer named General


Haitians Detained in Florida After Rescue From Sailboat
LEAD: Ninety-four Haitians were rescued Friday after their 30-foot wooden sailboat ran onto rocks off the Florida Keys.
Most of the Haitians have been detained until a judge decides whether they should be deported, the authorities said.


Moscow's Afghan Envoy Looks to Political Solution
LEAD: Moscow's special envoy to Afghanistan said today that the solution to the Afghan conflict lay in the political and not in the military realm.


Cheers for the Lower Half
LEAD: AS president of the New Jersey chapter of the National Association of the Lower Half and one of the founders of the organization, I want to express our organization's concern and annoyance over the criticism and harassments directed toward Dan Quayle for his scholastic record.


New Zealand
LEAD: To the Editor: Because I have tramped up and down the Abel Tasman National Park coastal track on New Zealand's South Island, I was delighted to see the article on that splendid part of the world (Travel, Nov. 20).
But one small stone was left unturned.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Best Boy  Directed by Ira Wohl. 1979.
Today Home Entertainment.  111 minutes. $59.95.
Not rated.


Arts Groups Court the County's Older Residents
LEAD: THE county's older residents have become a serious focus of interest for many of the area's cultural organizations.
Theatrical and musical groups, as well as museums, are going beyond the standard discounted tickets for the elderly to seek new ways to attract them.


Sports of The Times; Jim McMahon and Politics
LEAD: In this city where Mayor Daley remains as revered as George Halas, where politics inspires as much devotion as the Bears, the pro football politicians had it all figured out.
They knew why Mike Tomczak, despite a damaged left shoulder, and not Jim McMahon would be the Bears' starting quarterback today in the National Conference championship game.


BLOCKED PASS


Washington Mayor Defended
LEAD: A man who is the central figure in a pair of Federal investigations of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. is quoted as denying that he used drugs with the Mayor and defended his role in a joint personnel venture between the governments of the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands.


On the Average, We All Would Like the Good Life
LEAD: TRYING to deal with the midlife crisis everyone says I am in, at my age, 47, I am baffled by my ordinariness.
I felt by this time that there would be something more - I felt I was better, or at least different, than the rest.


Reagan Budget: $1.15 Trillion
LEAD: When President Reagan submits the final budget of his Presidency Monday, it will be the first in which both spending and revenue exceed $1 trillion.


Nothing to Laugh About
LEAD: To the Editor:


Naturalissimo
LEAD: ''I'VE ALWAYS BEEN INFLUENCED by landscape,'' says Kenneth Frazelle, a 33-year-old composer who lives in Winston-Salem, N.C.
And though such a sentiment borders on a romantic cliche, it would appear that for Frazelle, the hills are alive with the sound of music.
His impromptu, crayon-and-pencil representations of the musical ideas he derives from the outdoors initiate his compositions.


M. O. Hill Wed To Ms. Peterson
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Peterson and Michael Oliver Hill, both lawyers at the Department of Justice in Washington, were married yesterday at the Washington Cathedral.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed by Canon Charles S. Martin.


Repairing Veneer on Woodwork
LEAD: Veneer is usually a thin layer of attractive woodthat is glued in the surface of thicker, less attractive wood to enhance its appearance.


Don't You Believe the Deficit Isn't a Problem; Late Conversions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Three years ago, we put siding on our house and had it stained, rather than painted.
A couple of months ago, I noticed some gray spots on this siding, and they have now spread all over the outside.
It seems to be some kind of mold, and scrubbing with Clorox got rid of it.
This is harsh and seems difficult to do over the entire house.


Jean Dexheimer To Wed in April
LEAD: Jean K. Dexheimer, an associate at the law firm of Davis Hoxie Faithfull &amp; Hapgood in New York, and Paul M. Dudek, an associate at the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, plan to marry in April.


Talk and Pictures Combined Make the Most Efective TV News
LEAD: To the Editor:


Garbage In . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Editors' Note
LEAD: The main article in the Business section on Dec. 25 discussed the possibility of renewed regulation on Wall Street, spurred by Drexel Burnham Lambert's decision to plead guilty to fraud.
The article said critics of deregulation would probably paint the Drexel case as only the latest example of Wall Street's being out of control; it listed other disputed behavior, some illegal and some not.


Pentagon Mapping Action in Fraud Investigation
LEAD: Pentagon lawyers, spending this weekend sorting through new disclosures in the investigation of military contracting, expect soon to announce steps against companies, consultants and Government officials involved in the case.


Stock Manipulation
LEAD: 'Mr.
Sherwin called and asked me in summary and in substance: If they wanted to have Union Carbide close for a specific price for several days, could that be done?
And I said, ''Yes.'' And Mr.
Sherwin said, ''We'll make up any losses.'' . . . .
In substance he said do you think you can close Union Carbide at 22 today, and I said, ''Sure, I think so.


LUCIAN FREUD: THE UNBLINKING EYE
LEAD: Marina Warner's article ''Lucian Freud: The Unblinking Eye'' (Dec. 4), full of compelling facts and rumors about Lucian Freud's personal life, is surely interesting, but what is important is to see and experience the intensity, depth and mastery of his work; there is no other painter like him.
Only a self-portrait by Rembrandt or Van Gogh comes close to the profundity and honesty of Freud's ''Reflection.


The Battle to Save the Banks
LEAD: The silent run was accelerating at the First RepublicBank Corporation's offices in Texas - silent because retail customers were not lining up on the streets.
This run was being fueled by large institutions, including other banks, racing to electronically withdraw uninsured deposits.
Alarm bells went off around Washington, as the nation's top bank regulators met in an emergency session.


Rachel Heyman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Rachel Claire Heyman and Daniel Baruch Lidawer were married last evening at the Palmer House in Chicago by Rabbi Marc Berkson, an uncle of the bridegroom.


AT END OF AN ERA, PRAYERS IN TOKYO
LEAD: On this last day of the era called Showa, or Enlightened Peace, this nation cried, prayed, skied, shopped and had its hair done.


Mink Coat Serves To Bare Cold Facts
LEAD: A MINK coat as both lure and coverup is the peg on which the British sex farce ''Not Now Darling'' hangs.


The Name of the Game
LEAD: OVER the holidays I devised a great new party game, called ''Pass the Point and Shoot.'' The rules are simple.
After spinning the camera on a table to see who goes first, you turn on its self timer and begin passing it around the table, to your left.


Schaus to Retire
LEAD: As coach he watched the Mountaineers' basketball team make it all the way to the final game of the 1959 N.C.A.A. tournament, and as athletic director he watched the Mountaineer football team win national recogition with an 11-0 regular-season record and a game, if losing, effort against No. 1 Notre Dame in the 1989 Fiesta Bowl.


Bread and Butter Note
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Collaboration, a Strange Beauty Emerged
LEAD: A curious intimacy exists between artists in a collaboration.
A distant closeness.


Two Counties Join in Sludge Disposal Plan
LEAD: Westchester and Nassau Counties have agreed to team up to find alternatives to dumping sludge in the Atlantic Ocean, Westchester County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said this week.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: Skiing  Schneider Posts Eighth Cup Victory: Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, skiing through a driving rain, captured her eighth straight World Cup victory and fourth giant slalom of the season yesterday in Schwarzenberg, Austria.
She had the best time in both heats for a winning total of 2 minutes 16.75 seconds.


State's Public Works Show: More than Just Buildings
LEAD: PEDESTRIANS strolling through the West Rock Tunnel of the Merritt Parkway in New Haven on the day of its dedication, the stones of Bulkeley Bridge in Hartford being set by hand, and even a worker loitering by a portable latrine as construction of the Hartford Armory went on all around him - such sights as these tracing the history of Connecticut's public buildings, highways and bridges are displayed in a new exhibit at the Connecticut Museum of History.


Changes and Uncertainty in the Theater Season
LEAD: ACCORDING to the theater calendar, the beginning of the year corresponds to the middle of the season.
By January, one can be certain that theater schedules will have changed since the first announcements of September.
Some shows have been postponed or canceled; others have been switched to different time slots.


Teen-Agers and AIDS: Protection, Yes, but How?
LEAD: AT first glance, two bills in the State Legislature to require that family life education programs, and materials circulated by the State Board of Education, shall stress abstinence from sexual activity until marriage as the ''only completely reliable means of preventing the sexual transmission of AI


Deer Hunting On Fire Island
LEAD: While a propensity for violence is a variable that many of us harbor in some degree, I cannot countenance the licensing of those who hunt with bows and arrows, ''Hunting of Deer Begins,'' (Dec. 18, 1988).


Evelyn M. Day Becomes Bride Of David Lasry
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., Evelyn Morris Day, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodney D. Day 3d of New York and Bryn Mawr, was married yesterday to David Paul Lasry, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James E. Lasry of La Jolla, Calif.
The Very Rev.
Arnold E. Mintz performed the ceremony.


The French and Saratoga
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviewing West Point's Honor Code
LEAD: Twin studies of the West Point honor system, one by graduating cadets and the other by outside experts, are likely to produce changes later this year in the way the code of conduct is applied.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Eastchester, N.Y.  $335,000  104 North Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; fenced yard, paneled den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,651.
New Rochelle, N.Y.  $300,000  909 Webster Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 54-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, den, accessory apartment; taxes $3,600.


For Small-Scale Entertaining, Simple but Not Ordinary
LEAD: AFTER the holidays, when the memory of exhausting large-scale entertaining has finally receded, it is pleasant to have a few friends around for a quiet dinner.
The following is a meal for four to six that is somewhat out of the ordinary yet simple enough to prepare just before your guests arrive.


The Everlasting Autodidact
LEAD: MY HIGH SCHOOL classmates completed four years of college last June, a date at which I too had completed four years of study.
Their graduation was greeted by presents, parties and diplomas.
Mine never occurred.
What studies and studies and never graduates?
The answer can be found in one word: autodidact.


Bowing to Pressure
LEAD: After 20 years as head of the Italian track and field federation, Primo Nebiolo has decided to step down in the wake of a series of scandals.
The 64-year-old industrialist, who also serves as president of the international track and field federation, has been criticized because of the scandals, which included the fixing of the men's long jump results at the 1987 world championships in Rome.


P.L.O. Gains Embassies in 3 More Countries
LEAD: China, Jordan and Qatar announced today that they will upgrade missions of the Palestine Liberation Organization in their capitals to embassies in recognition of the Palestinian parliament's declaration of an independent state.


Rangers Pick Islanders To Pieces
LEAD: After the game, the Rangers spoke of togetherness, the Islanders of disintegration.


A Job For the Holidays: The Other Side of the Counter
LEAD: IN my newly independent circumstances, the salary from my full-time job barely covers my expenses - expenses being all those boring necessities like food, shelter, car maintenance and panty hose.
So to make a little extra cash for the holidays, I pounded the pavement one day in November asking local shopkeepers if they needed Christmas help on Saturdays through the season.


Repairing Veneer on Woodwork
LEAD: Veneer is usually a thin layer of attractive woodthat is glued in the surface of thicker, less attractive wood to enhance its appearance.


Student Gains in Fight To Bar Pregame Prayer
LEAD: One day four years ago, when Kevin Douglas Jager was a freshman saxophonist in the marching band at Douglas County High School in suburban Douglasville, he complained to his father about the reciting of prayers before the school's home football games.
Doug Jager - everyone calls him by his middle name - is an agnostic, as is his father, William, who persuaded him to take his concerns to the American Civil Liberties


Oaxaca, Poised on the Edge of a Boom
LEAD: ESSENTIALLY, foreign travelers are drawn to Mexico for any of four reasons: beaches, pre-Columbian ruins, Spanish colonial architecture or traditional handicrafts.
It is ironic, then, that one of the few regions that contains all these attractions, and much more, within its borders is one that is neglected by most visitors from abroad.


Even While Money Is Short, Cuomo Has Big Plans for It
LEAD: THE State of the State address has often given New York's governors an opportunity to map their course for the coming year.
But Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's speech last week was a disappointment to anyone looking for clear directions.


EVERYTHING HAPPENS IN THE MAID'S ROOM
LEAD:  THE PASSION ACCORDING TO G.H.
By Clarice Lispector.
Translated by Ronald W. Sousa.  174 pp.
Minneapolis:  University of Minnesota Press.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $8.95.


Voicing a Conviction
LEAD: In what appeared to be a display of something other than dazzling legal footwork, Ira D. London, the defense attorney in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg, said last week that his client would probably be found guilty and be sent to prison.
Some legal experts called the remarks inappropriate and improper, and said they suspected that Mr.


London
LEAD: To the Editor: I would like to embellish on the ''Where to Eat'' section of ''What's Doing in London'' (Travel, Nov. 27).


Support Voiced For the Boycott
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


IN PARIS - MINISkIRTS OF THE MIND
LEAD: Around the display tables of university bookstores, ''the latest fashion from Paris'' does not refer to the length of skirts.
It refers to a series of startling ideas and images out of the French mind.
In paraphrase: That truth is castrating and humanism oppressive.
That the ego is infinitely dissolvable.


At a Breast Exam, Perfection Is Where You Find It
LEAD: I HAVE reached middle age, my children are grown and gone, I am a grandmother and I have perfect breasts.
I'm not the one who thinks so.
Today someone who saw me topless described them that way, someone who sees women's breasts every day - the mammography technician.


Music Teacher's View of Holiday Music
LEAD: As a public-school music educator for the last 23 years, I have had to deal with the issue of holiday music in a variety of school settings.
The article ''Schools Strive for Seasonal Balance''  [ Dec. 18 ]  was interesting but failed to point out one obvious solution to the dilemma.
Simply make the issue a non-issue by remembering that the primary function of the music teacher is to teach music and to provide positive musical experiences to all students.


N. Carolina Upset by Iowa On Free Throw by Marble
LEAD: Roy Marble's free throw with 11 seconds to play capped a 23-point performance, and Iowa beat North Carolina, 98-97, today.


Rise in Attendance Is Seen
LEAD: When auto racing finally discovered what other sports leagues already knew - that fans have an insatiable appetite for statistics - all sorts of performance barometers were created, from total laps led to fastest pit stops.
But one statistic from each race is usually known only to the promoter and the Internal Revenue Service: total attendance.


3 Killed and One Is Injured in Connecticut Crash
LEAD: Three men were killed and a fourth was critically injured when their car slammed into the back of a tractor-trailer in Farmington, Conn., late Friday night, the state police reported.


A Florida Show-and-Tell: Guns
LEAD: IN A LETHAL version of Show and Tell, pupils are increasingly bringing guns to elementary school and accidentally maiming or killing classmates.
While school districts nationwide grasp for solutions, officials in Dade County, Florida, unanimously approved the nation's first comprehensive ''gun awareness'' program.


The Past Examined
LEAD: IT IS NOT OFTEN that a social historian gets to watch social history march past his own window.
But that was Prof.
Leon F. Litwack's rare opportunity when the Free Speech Movement erupted at the University of California campus in Berkeley in 1964.
With what he calls a ''certain kind of exhilaration,'' the historian watched as his students succeeded where his older generation of social activists had failed.


Sports of The Tims; Make Way for the Other Pros
LEAD: For a change of pace, we will not have to worry today which football teams are ''clean'' or ''not clean.'' Did the Chicago Bears give a sports car to that mastodon as a bonus for enrolling at Halas U.?
Tsk, tsk.


From the Inside Out
LEAD: SITTING IN a movie theater a few years ago, Todd Gitlin had another of his frequent out-of-culture experiences.
He was watching the movie ''The Big Chill,'' about a group of college friends who had abandoned their 1960's political and social commitment in favor of 1980's affluence and personal striving.


Walter Cronkite: Speaking His Mind Instead of Just News
LEAD: Walter Cronkite had always been more comfortable delivering the news than making it.
But something was gnawing at him, and when the opportunity arose one evening not long after George Bush was elected President, Mr.
Cronkite made a speech in defense of liberal values that surprised people more than he could have imagined.


Steve Wolf's Big Test
LEAD: It is not surprising that United Airlines was the only major carrier to support deregulation when debates heated up in the late 1970's.
The free-for-all competition created by deregulation, United figured, would enable it to consolidate its position as the undisputed king of the skies.


Maria Lanari Married To John Foy, a Writer
LEAD: Maria Jose Britto Pereira Lanari, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roberto Lanari of Rio de Janeiro, was married there yesterday to John FitzGerald Foy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. W. Foy of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Adilson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Brejal Chapel.


To Call Battle of the Little Bighorn an Ambush Distorts History
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Need For Decay
LEAD: To the Editor:


SHOW-OFFS
LEAD: The highly decorative and accessorized bathing suits shown on these pages are mostly for making a splash.
Suits strictly for swimming, however, are still primarily maillots.


John Ehrman Plans To Wed Ms. Parsont
LEAD: The engagement of Diane Marie Parsont to John Ehrman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Ehrman of East Sandwich, Mass., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Elinor S. Parsont of Port Chester, N.Y., and Robert E. Parsont of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.


With Feet, Happy Is Better Than Dainty
LEAD: I AM not suited to capitulation.
It is not in my stubborn nature, nor was it in my lexicon until the question of sneakers arose.
Up to that point sneakers (grimy, disreputable, gargantuan) were a way of life for my grandsons, and they could have them, I decided.


PUBLIC AID THAT GOES WHERE DEVELOPERS FEAR TO TREAD
LEAD: For many of the Great Lakes region's downtowns, which have been hurt by the move to the suburbs as well as by a persistent industrial image, waterfront redevelopment is considered risky at best - especially since private developers have generally preferred more populated cities and warmer climates.


Exercise Pays Off
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A TAKEOVER PLAY IN MUTUAL FUNDS
LEAD: TAKEOVER specialists searching for companies with undervalued assets are increasingly noticing a type of publicly owned companynot typically thought of as takeover play: closed-end stock funds.
Indeed, as corporate acquisitions remove more equity from the stock market, investment professionals believe that acquirers will become increasingly interested in closed-end funds, especially those whose shares sell at sharp discounts to their net asset value.


Pension Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Musician in the Process Of Inventing Himself
LEAD: With his moviestar good looks, sultry New Orleans drawl and conviction that the jazz musician should be an entertainer as well as an instrumentalist, Harry Connick Jr. may have what it takes to inject the world of traditional jazz with a shot of Hollywood glamour.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Week in Review last Sunday listing successes of the United Nations in 1988 incorrectly described the participants in negotiations on the unification of Cyprus.
The talks are between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish communities on the island.


To the Reagans: Happy Trails
LEAD: Now that Ronnie and Nancy are about to pack their Vuittons and ride off into the sunset - hey! they're headed in the opposite direction, away from the Sturm und Drang of Long Island's infamous Shoreham, that is - the parting shot is that it's now O.K. to license and open all nuclear stops.


KING ARTHUR IN TORONTO
LEAD:  THE LYRE OF ORPHEUS  By Robertson Davies.  472 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Tasteful to Tasteless With a Flick of the Dial
LEAD: What's it to be: gentility or barbarity?
Television can give you either, as long as a demand is detected.
On tonight's Masterpiece Theater presentation, ''A Wreath of Roses,'' we can find British actors bringing a familiar measure of good taste and, yes, exquisite manners to a violence-tinged tale of loneliness.


Walsh Proves He Can Handle Criticism as Well as Plaudits
LEAD: Bill Walsh is 8-4 in playoff games, 100-63 in his 10th season as the San Francisco 49ers' coach.
He has won two Super Bowls, six National Conference West divisional titles and has coached the 49ers to their sixth consecutive playoff appearance.


BUCKAROO POETS: WHOOP-EE-TI-YI-YO, GIT ALONG, LITTLE DOGGEREL
LEAD:  I can ride the wildest bronco in the wild and woolly West,
I can rake him, I can break him, let him do his level best.
I can handle any cattle ever wore a coat of hair,
And I've had a lively tussle with a tarnal grizzly bear.
I can rope and throw a longhorn of the wildest Texas brand,
And at Injun disagreements I can take a leading hand.


The Caribbean Connection
LEAD: ''THE Great White Fleet'' conjures up visions of a vast medieval force, invaders perhaps, or explorers, or profiteers.
In some ways the Great White Fleet, which crisscrossed the Caribbean for more than 50 years, was all of these things.


Pretoria Held to Create Namibia Rebel Group
LEAD: A Namibian opposition leader has asserted that South Africa is creating a rebel Namibian group similar to groups aided in the past by South Africa in Mozambique and in Angola.


The Whitney Paradox: To Add Is To Subtract
LEAD: The temptation is to tell the story like a morality play.
Marcel Breuer's gray-granite Whitney Museum of Art, for two decades a Modernist fixture on Madison Avenue, is challenged by the upstarts of post-Modernism in the form of a design for a massive addition by Michael Graves.
The addition would not so much expand the Breuer building as overwhelm it by merging it into a post-Modern collage.


For Food Pantry Volunteers, All Is Not Peaches and Cream
LEAD: ''HEY, lady, what number are you at?'' The young man tries to peek over my shoulder at the stack of numbered cards I'm holding.
I tell him the number, he sighs noisily.


POSTINGS: 'Miracle' in Manhattan; Basement Multiplex
LEAD: Joseph Saleh called the Broadway basement where he is creating Manhattan's newest downtown moviehouse ''a miracle.'' Here was cheap space - less than $20 a square foot - where zoning permits a cinema.
It even seemed to have been built with the multiplex in mind: big at 20,000 square feet - ''like a football field'' - and tall with 26-foot ceilings.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.44
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.75
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.22
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.59
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
17.25
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


Lucy Garry Engaged To William Flinn 3d
LEAD: Lucy Anne Garry and William Flinn 3d, a son of Elizabeth Folk Flinn and Michael de Vlaming Flinn, both of Greenwich, Conn., plan to marry in June, Miss Garry's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Jay Garry of Atlanta, have announced.


Getting Your Family Onto the Slopes: A Primer
LEAD: REMEMBER that crazy weekend in Vermont years ago when you first went skiing?
You had a memorable time, even if you did crash into another skier and nearly fell off the lift.
You were more daring in those days, but you didn't take up the sport.
You're married now, have responsibilities, including a child or two, but you keep toying with the idea of getting the family on the slopes, schussing down trails together, relaxing in a lodge.


TALKING: Estate Taxes; Easing Federal Liability
LEAD: THE surge in property values in the last few years has thrust hundreds of families into a position where Federal estate taxes are likely to be due at the time of death.
Those taxes may turn out to be particularly steep if, in addition to a principal residence, there is a vacation home or investment property, such as a condominium, which may have skyrocketed in value, too.


Saturday Outing in San Angel
LEAD: A SATURDAY morning in San Angel begins, as do most days here, with the clanging of one of the bells in the tower of the Church of San Jacinto.
The church was constructed in the late 16th century by Franciscan monks and although much of it has been rebuilt, the bells have a heavy, tired sound - as though they have been ringing for too many years.


Burke's Return Benefits Devils
LEAD: The return of Sean Burke in goal inspired the Devils to post their second consecutive victory, a 5-2 decision tonight over the Detroit Red Wings.
It was the first time in almost a month that they won two in a row.


Chamber Orchestra To Make Debut Jan. 25
LEAD: Malcolm Bilson is to lead the On Original Instruments Chamber Orchestra in its debut performance, Jan. 25 at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street.
The core group of string quartet, flute, oboe, horn and bassoon will be expanded to 19 members for the program of Haydn's Violin Concerto in C - with Stanley Ritchie as soloist - and Symphony No.


Efforts for Children Called Inadequate
LEAD: As Governor Mario M. Cuomo's Decade of the Child enters its second year, doctors, advocates for children and some government officials say that the quality of life for poor children in the state is deteriorating quickly and that Albany's efforts are not keeping pace with the problem.


Taking a Scalpel to Health Costs
LEAD: There is a general practitioner in Florida who, while he may not realize it, is being watched from Connecticut.
Those monitoring his performance do not like what they see.


Making a Point On the Mound
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week; Which Teams Will Meet in the Super Bowl?
LEAD: The Jets and the Giants, right?  ROBERT E. SWEENEY  Brooklyn


They Talk a Lot, but at Least They're Trying
LEAD: ''In a way, they're pretty touching.
They all talked so much.
Like they'd seen this movie and wanted to be in it.'' That's Sam, the 16-year-old son of Jake and Catherine, explaining his parents to the audience in Susan Miller's new play, ''For Dear Life,'' which opens Tuesday at the Public Theater.


Ocean-Crash Recorder Found
LEAD: The voice recorder from a South African airliner that crashed into the Indian Ocean 14 months ago was recovered Friday and appears to be in good condition, Cecil Margo, a senior South African investigator, said.
All 160 people aboard were killed when the South African Airways Boeing 747 crashed as it approached Mauritius on a flight from Taipei to Johannesburg in November 1987.


Why an Austerity Plan Is Unraveling in Hartford
LEAD: FOR weeks, Gov.
William A. O'Neill had prepared voters and legislators alike for a year of budget cuts, higher taxes and difficult political compromises, all of which, he said, would be needed to solve Connecticut's worsening fiscal plight.
Then, only minutes before he was to open the five-month session of the General Assembly with his State of the State address on


Elizabeth Koontz, 69, Dies; Led Teachers' Union
LEAD: Elizabeth Duncan Koontz, the first black president of the National Education Association and director of the Women's Bureau in President Nixon's Department of Labor, died Friday after a heart attack at her home in Salisbury, N.C.
She was 69 years old.


Glamour and Fantasy and the Return of Dance
LEAD: JUST over a year ago, the demise of social dance was reported in the newspaper.
Apparently, in the age of health clubs and videocassette recorders, neither the physically fit nor the couch potato seemed inclined to cha-cha into the night.
But it is now clear that this particular obituary notice was greatly exaggerated.


For North, the Road Ahead Seems in Some Ways Harder
LEAD: Oliver L. North faces a long and in some ways more arduous legal battle on 12 remaining criminal counts against him now that national security concerns appear to have scuttled the two most serious charges, officials close to the case say.


Video Games On the Rebound
LEAD: THOUGH the crazed days of Pac-Man and Space Invaders may be over, student-union directors and students say a new generation of video games is flourishing on campus.


N.C.A.A. Director to Continue Plans for Playing by the Rules
LEAD: In his first major speech as the National Collegiate Athletic Association's executive director last January, Dick Schultz told a convention audience that intercollegiate athletics, in attaining unprecedented popularity and riches, had lost a measure of its integrity.


Led by Malone, Hawks Top Nets
LEAD: Moses Malone scored 12 of his 26 points in the fourth quarter tonight, leading the Atlanta Hawks to a 103-93 victory over the Nets.


The Swiss School Nonpareil
LEAD: ITS TUITION compares with that of the best American universities.
The people who run it are so determined that students get their money's worth that anyone absent without leave for more than 20 hours is automatically expelled.
A four-year veteran of military life found it ''in some ways tougher than the Marine Corps.


Style Meets Comfort
LEAD: SHOE buying for women is often a compromise between fashion and comfort.
But now the U.S.
Shoe Company, which came out with a specialized walking show for women in 1987, has a walking pump.
The Easy Spirit Dress pump has features that promise a high comfort quotient.
The shoes have a wide toe box, contoured heel support, a flexible sole, breathable fabric lining, and two layers of a shock foam.


Cavaliers Trip Up Weary Knicks
LEAD: It was payback time today for the Cleveland Cavaliers, who tied a National Basketball Association record by blocking 21 shots as they defeated the Knicks.


ONLY IRISH NEED APPLY
LEAD:  RAINBOW'S END  Irish-Americans and the Dilemmas of Urban Machine Politics, 1840-1985.
By Steven P. Erie.  345 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press.


'MR. STOCK MARKET': Li Yining; Selling China on a 'Public' Privatization
LEAD: Some economists dream of writing textbooks, others of having equations named for them.
Li Yining is more ambitious: He dreams of changing China.


Deborah Wickenden, Writer, to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
James W. Wickenden of Belle Mead, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Wickenden to Lieut.
James Arthur Crisfield, U.S.A.F., a son of James P. Crisfield of Youngstown, N.Y., and Lucile Stafford Proctor of Princeton, N.J., and Cotuit, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in


Latin America's Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in some copies on Dec. 25 about abortions performed solely because of the sex of the fetus attributed remarks by Dr.
Michael A. Roth to Dr.
Lawrence D. Platt.
Dr.
Platt does not perform abortions.
It was Dr.
Roth who said that doctors who decline to perform abortions for sex selection but perform abortions for other reasons ''are selectively picking out who they want to do them on and who not,'' and added, ''I haven't turned anybody down.


Metro-North Offers Plan To Improve Police Force
LEAD: The Metro-North Commuter Railroad today released a 90-day plan for restoring effectiveness and integrity to its police department, troubled by recent scandals.


Jersey Buys Computer to Match Fingerprints
LEAD: A system to match fingerprints in a few hours is to be introduced this year, New Jersey officials said this week.
The $12.2 million Automated Fingerprint Identification System can compare prints from a crime scene with the 1.9 million in the state's file at the rate of 9,000 a minute, officials said.


Vermonters Battle Mall's Developer
LEAD: Ben A. Frank has the air of a man under siege.


For Many Nicaraguans, the Future Lies Elsewhere
LEAD: TIMES are good at the Garcia Agency, which occupies a dim storefront near a busy Managua intersection.
Three years ago, the owners, caught up in the economic crisis that has enveloped Nicaragua, stopped selling clothes and other merchandise.
They have gone into a far more lucrative business, perhaps the only business in the country that is truly booming: They arrange trips for


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Luke Baione, 67, a Banking Executive, Dies
LEAD: Luke A. Baione, the former chairman of Crossland Savings Bank, the nation's 11th-largest savings institution, died of cancer Friday at his home in Staten Island.
He was 67 years old.


Kate Bonanno, a Designer, Is Married to Ian P. Turner
LEAD: Kate Bonanno, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Bonanno of Demarest and Mantoloking, N.J., was married yesterday to Ian P. Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Turner of Brisbane, Australia.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  OPERA IN DENVILLE


Canadians Fight Again, in Two Languages
LEAD: THE struggle over language in Canada has roots that go back to the 17th-century, when England and France first locked horns over the vast hinterland of North America.
For the past 20 years, the legacy has been a bitter battle over the right of English and French minorities in various parts of the country to the full use of their languages.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE SANDS OF TIME.
By Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $19.95.) Being Sidney Sheldon means never having to say you're writing.
In his 10th book, ''The Sands of Time,'' Mr.
Sheldon appears to have produced a literary version of painting by numbers.
The story follows the fortunes of four nuns from an intensely austere Spanish convent as they wander through scenery that seems to have been imported from ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' - in the company of some fugitive Basque nationalists.


A Visit to the Late, Great City Of New York
LEAD: WHEN people ask me where I come from, my answer is always New York City.
It doesn't matter that when I was 6 years old other people controlled my life and moved me ''out to Long Island.'' The umbilical cord was stretched; it was never cut.
I use any excuse to visit the city - a parade, a show, a walk in Central Park on an autumn afternoon.


Urban Woes Add to Burdens of Legislators
LEAD: THE stereotype of Connecticut as wealthy, content and pastoral persists despite growing evidence to the contrary.
There are crime, drugs, overcrowded prisons and stagnant areas of dire poverty - all largely products of the state's big cities, a realm far removed from the Connecticut of Currier &amp; Ives.


17 Reported Hanged in Iran Anti-Drug Campaign
LEAD: Seventeen drug smugglers were hanged in Teheran and other Iranian cities during a nationwide anti-narcotics campaign in which 1,000 people were arrested and scores were killed in shootouts, official Iranian reports said today.


MRS. THATCHER'S CHILDREN
LEAD: I did enjoy Malcolm Bradbury's piece about Mrs.
Thatcher's children, who are raking it in all over the new-look, designer Britain.
For one thing, it's always nice to read about oneself.
For another, Mr.
Bradbury's assertions weren't too far off the mark.


FILM: 'Mississippi Burning': Generating Heat or Light?; Cinematic Segregation In a Story About Civil Rights
LEAD: What ''Mississippi Burning'' intends is clear from a scene disturbingly like one in ''A World Apart,'' a film set against the black struggle with apartheid in South Africa.
In the closing scenes of ''A World Apart,'' the camera's eye comes in on a crowd of blacks assembled to bury one of their own murdered by the South African security police - and settles on two whites in that assembly.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Quick Fiction


Americans Abroad
LEAD:  STORMY MONDAY  Starring Melanie Griffith, Tommy Lee Jones (in photo, left), Sting (in photo), Sean Bean.
Directed by Mike Figgis. 1988.
Paramount Home Video.  92 minutes. $89.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated R.


GORBACHEV ASSAILS ECONOMIC SKEPTICS
LEAD: The Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, sounding unusually beleaguered and defensive, has lashed out at critics and supporters alike for losing faith in his economic program, and hinted more strongly that his initiatives have encountered high-level resistance.


In Hot Pursuit of Mentor Photos of Mentor's chief executive, Thomas H. Bruggere, with the package deal: Software by Mentor Graphics, running on Apollo hardware (NYT/Brian Drake); the chassis of an Apollo workstation, which uses Mentor's software system.
LEAD: ExecutiveS of the Mentor Graphics Corporation, whose revenues far exceed those of their next-biggest rival, like to describe their competition in the computer-aided engineering industry as ''vanquished.'' But now, the forces that turned Mentor into the industry's No. 1 company may be working against it.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  THE FACTS AND FICTIONS OF MINNA PRATT  By Patricia MacLachlan.  136 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $11.95.  (Ages 8 to 12


The Financial-Aid Numbers Game
LEAD: SWEATY PALMS.
Rapid pulse.
Muscle spasms.
All symptoms of families anticipating those tuition and expense bills that will start arriving the moment their child starts his college career.
But parents needn't resign themselves to elevated blood pressure or a four-year liquidity crisis; all they need do is learn - before their child applies to college - what financing is available at each one, and how it is parceled out.


'Army' Alert
LEAD: To the Editor:


HERO IN A RAGGED KILT
LEAD:  BONNIE PRINCE CHARLIE  A Biography.
By Carolly Erickson.
Illustrated. 331 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Sifting Through Bushels of Beethoven
LEAD: Beethoven remains the center of our musical, or at least our classical-musical, or at least our orchestral, life.
No better proof of that can be found than in the bins of our record stores, where a seemingly unstoppable flow of new Beethoven symphony recordings gushes forth every month.


Giants End Up In Proper Place
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Clash Of Proud, Big Egos In N.F.C.
LEAD: Rarely in any sport do two teams clash who have egos larger than the field boundaries on which they will play, who display confidence that oozes and overflows from owner down to equipment manager and who have the players to back any boast no matter how boisterous, no matter how brash.


'Isn't It a Waste?'
LEAD: The vision of a nonracial South Africa was raised just 77 years ago - on Jan. 8, 1912 - by the new African National Congress.
Today blacks are still denied political and other rights; the A.N.C. is banned, its leaders imprisoned, dead or in exile.
But its president, Oliver Tambo, is optimistic.


In the Boston Writers' Room, Few Distractions and Low Rent
LEAD: In a room just down the hall from the State Secretary of Transportation's office and a few floors down from the headquarters for Boston's subway, Paul Tucker spends most of his days writing a book about Claude Monet's paintings of the 1890's.


Hoyas Trounce Miami
LEAD: Alonzo Mourning scored 15 of his season-high 26 points in the decisive first half as Georgetown snapped Miami's five-game winning streak with a 112-79 victory today.


St. John's Triumphs On Free Throws
LEAD: One after another, the Redmen stepped to the foul line against Villanova.
And one after another, the balls dropped neatly through the basket.
The parade was unending, the results nearly unvarying.


'Colds Can Really Occur Year Round'
LEAD: AS the cold and flu season gets under way, Dr.
Matthew L. Cartter, a medical epidemiologist with the preventable diseases division of the state's Department of Health Services, can expect to get busy sorting and analyzing reports of influenza in the state.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Howell  $165,000  8 Admirals Row  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $2,864.
Middletown  $336,000  189 Ueland Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, family room; taxes $4,643.


Eilat
LEAD: To the Editor: If I wanted to boost tourism in Redneck City and was able to finagle a Travel section story on this hot spot, would you print the boast that my resort has no Jewish community?
Would you run a promotion that implies ''Jew-Free Vacation!''?
I hope not.
And I would have hoped that you would not have done so on Dec.


Q and A
LEAD:  Tax Abatement for Condo


Finding Your Routes
LEAD: IT was a curious thing to read some time ago that the Soviets have purposely been printing inaccurate maps of their motherland for years in order to bamboozle nosy foreigners.
What amazed me most was the realization that I have never gotten a bum steer from an American road map.


POSTINGS: Change in Westhampton; Sexton's Shrinking
LEAD: Last summer in Westhampton Beach, Sexton's was the same store it had been for 22 years.
But no sooner did the season end in October than the department store began to change.
By the time summer residents and vacationers start to return to the Long Island resort in April, Sexton's will be only one of 14 stores and professional offices operating out of the four connected buildings it once filled.


Q and A
LEAD:  Turks and Caicos


AIDS on the Job: Businesses Fight Fears and Prejudices
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the rising number of AIDS cases on Long Island has prompted concern among businesses, its impact in the workplace is hard to gauge because of the continuing stigma attached to AIDS and the reluctance of most affected employees to admit that they have the dreaded virus.


FICTION
LEAD:  VELOCITY.
By Kristin McCloy. (Random House, $16.95.) The night after her mother's funeral, Ellie, the heroine of Kristin McCloy's first novel, has a dream: she's riding in a car with her mother; neither is wearing her seat belt.
They go faster and faster, until. . . .
The very next night, Ellie meets Jesse, a long-haired, half-Cherokee biker who lives down the road.


A Par Contest For Junior Players
LEAD: EUROPEANS have long been energetic in promoting bridge for young players.
Several countries across the Atlantic, notably the Netherlands and Sweden, teach bridge in schools.
Britain has an annual event contested by about 70 school teams.


Beastly To Beckett?
LEAD: To the Editor:


TOUGH TALK FOR DEMOCRATS
LEAD: WHEN GEORGE BUSH TAKES THE oath of office later this month, all Americans will share a moment of celebration, offering our new President prayers and good wishes as he takes on the most demanding job in the free world.
But for Democrats it is also a time to reflect - to ask why a decisive majority of American voters have lost confidence in our ability to govern from the White


Elisabeth Ostrow To Wed a Lawyer
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Ostrow of New York and Atlantic Beach, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisabeth Sara Ostrow, to Andrew Victor Buchsbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Buchsbaum of Englewood, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Three years ago, we put siding on our house and had it stained, rather than painted.
A couple of months ago, I noticed some gray spots on this siding, and they have now spread all over the outside.
It seems to be some kind of mold, and scrubbing with Clorox got rid of it.
This is harsh and seems difficult to do over the entire house.


Miss Weingarten Planning to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Weingarten of New York and New Milford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Leslie Joy Weingarten, to Scott Ryan Singer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Singer of Huntingdon Valley, Pa.


Prospects; The Superconductor Race
LEAD: Last week a Presidential panel released a report calling for a more vigorous national effort to develop superconducting materials.
The report said the United States was falling behind Japan in commercializing this new technology.
It recommended increased Government funding for research and establishing research consortia comprised of Government laboratories, industry and university researchers.


Resourcefulness In the Domain Of the Forgotten
LEAD: Somewhere between impressionism and post-Impressionism on the one hand and Fauvism and Cubism on the other, there is a niche that has no one name.
What was done between 1888 and 1900 by the young Pierre Bonnard, the young Edouard Vuillard and their colleagues in the brotherhood known as the Nabis is difficult to identify in any existing major museum.


Laurie Edelman Weds T. A. Kyzivat
LEAD: Laurie Beth Edelman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerry Edelman of White Plains and Tolland, Mass., was married last evening to Thomas Anthony Kyzivat, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans Kyzivat of White Plains.
Cantor Raymond Smolover performed the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center in White Plains.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Three years ago, we put siding on our house and had it stained, rather than painted.
A couple of months ago, I noticed some gray spots on this siding, and they have now spread all over the outside.
It seems to be some kind of mold, and scrubbing with Clorox got rid of it.
This is harsh and seems difficult to do over the entire house.


In the Russian Motherland, Fascination Now With Those Who Chose Exile
LEAD: The writer Andrei D. Sinyavsky likes to say that he resides in Paris but lives in Russia, a spiritual home built of literature, fellow emigres and surprisingly joyful memories of nearly six years in a Soviet prison camp.


More Than an Artistic Director
LEAD: Within big performing arts institutions - where musicians' careers are made and unmade, audiences influenced and creative agendas set - power not only descends from its highest officials but swirls sideways around those just below them.


For Small-Scale Entertaining, Simple but Not Ordinary
LEAD: AFTER the holidays, when the memory of exhausting large-scale entertaining has finally receded, it is pleasant to have a few friends around for a quiet dinner.
The following is a meal for four to six that is somewhat out of the ordinary yet simple enough to prepare just before your guests arrive.


In Search Of Popular Culture
LEAD: EVEN IN THE late 1960's, when relevance was a campus battle cry, Ray B. Browne's intellectual wanderings seemed radical.
With a doctorate in American literature from the University of California at Los Angeles and a scholarly book on Herman Melville under his belt, he yearned to publish a journal on romance novels and rock music.


Yugoslav Backer of Changes Reported in Line for Premier
LEAD: Ante Markovic, a strong supporter of market-oriented liberalization and a leader of the republic of Croatia, is the leading candidate to become Yugoslavia's new Prime Minister, Yugoslav newspapers said today.


HE NEARLY GOT AWAY - IT WAS A SATURDAY
LEAD:  FAMILY OF SPIES  Inside the John Walker Spy Ring.
By Pete Earley.  385 pp.
New York:  Bantam Books. $19.95.


Madrid
LEAD: To the Editor: In the Nov. 20 Travel section there was a letter from Pilar Vico, director of public relations of the Spanish Tourist Office, regarding your article on the Dollar Abroad (Travel, Oct. 9).


Talk and Pictures Combined Make the Most Efective TV News; What We Can't See
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flights Seek Clues to Atlantic Storms
LEAD: After more than two years of planning, scientists have begun flights in specially equipped weather airplanes into the centers of fierce, unpredictable northeaster storms spawned in the Atlantic Ocean.


Wanda A Helped By Neediest
LEAD: The story of Wanda A., the battered woman who is now beginning a new life with her 7-year-old daughter in Harlem, has inspired many contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
An account of her struggle was published by The Times early last month.


MANHATTAN GETS SECURITY NETWORK
LEAD: A security network that puts 39 buildings in radio contact with police dispatchers began operating on the Upper East Side of Manhattan on Thursday, and organizers hope the program will spread to other buildings in the area and to other parts of New York City.


Dispute Over Halpin Policy
LEAD: DIFFERENCES in the interpretation of Suffolk County's policy of arrests in domestic violence have arisen since the recent murder of Elizabeth Croff by her estranged husband, William Croff, and his suicide.


Pursuing the Tears - and Laughter - in Parenting
LEAD: Infertility is not exactly a funny subject, but the cast now making a film that tackles this problem is striving for laughs as well as tears.


Arias Asks Delay in Central America Meeting
LEAD: President Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica has asked that the summit meeting of Central American Presidents scheduled for Jan. 15 to 16 be postponed.


China's Burst of Rage: A Show of Racism, And of Something More
LEAD: 'WE'RE tired of being second-class citizens,'' declared a large poster erected illegally last week by Chinese students at the Beijing Languages Institute.
In a sense, that seemed to be what China's racial unrest of the last two weeks has been about.


Special Today; Education Life/Section 4A
LEAD: The scholastic legacy of the 60's, its scholars and multimedia courses.


As Farm States Become Less Rural, Politics Also Changes
LEAD: IT will be another year before census takers fan out among the small towns and big cities, taking America's decennial head count.
Among politicians in Iowa and other farm states, where tens of thousands of people have abandoned small towns and family farms over the past decade, the 1990 census is approaching with the tread of doom.


INVOVLING CHILDREN IN CREATIVE PROCESS
LEAD: ''IT'S my favorite project,'' said Adina Salmansohn-Affelt, who has been involved with many kinds of community endeavors through the years.
Her most recent efforts, however, have led to the establishment of the Hudson School of Creative Arts.
Opened last September in south Yonkers, the school's stated purpose is to teach music, art and dance to students who would not otherwise be able to afford lessons.


Reagan, Qaddafi and the Death Cloud
LEAD: TWO weeks before leaving office, the Reagan Administration was again tangling with the man America loves to hate - Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya.
As they have done in the past, the Western European allies last week were sitting on the sidelines, wringing their hands and wondering whether the other shoe would drop.


Hembrick Wins, but Is Hurt
LEAD: He waited nearly four months for redemption, but Anthony Hembrick could not have known that there would be a price to pay for the victory he so craved.


Distinctive Chinese in Westport
LEAD: THE discovery of a Chinese restaurant with a style of its own is an auspicious way to welcome the New Year.
Tiger Bowl, on the Post Road in Westport near the Fairfield line, boasts a chef and owner from Shanghai.


Footing That College Bill
LEAD: NEARLY everybody seems to be getting into the act of making it easier for future generations of students to afford the rapidly rising college costs, which have more than doubled in the last decade.


Playing It Straight
LEAD: Perhaps it is a measure of how East-West relations have changed.
Vyacheslav Fetisov, a Red Army hockey player who would like to play for the New Jersey Devils, has made no perilous dash for freedom, but is behaving like any pro athlete seeking to be traded.
While his team has been playing a series of exhibition matches against American teams - the last one is set for tomorrow in Buffalo - Fetisov has bantered with reporters, wheedled his coach, and even discussed the matter with the Soviet Ambassador to the United States.


Stopping Child Abuse Before It Happens
LEAD: The screams began sometime after dinner: a teen-ager and his father were having a quarrel that could be heard through the wall of a neighbor's apartment in a luxury building on East 87th Street in Manhattan.
Suddenly the neighbor heard a banging.
Apparently the father was bashing his son's head against the bathroom wall.


Tap-Dancing Teachers: This Is Education?
LEAD: In an age when people have lost faith in the quality of education, when pupils are at risk and receiving less instruction within the classroom, how could the Port Jefferson Board and principals allow teachers to spend time tap dancing for parents, a district conference and for the entire school LLong Island Journal, Nov.


Susan Mary O'Connor To Be Married in April
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Connor of Convent Station, N.J., and Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Mary O'Connor to Michael V. McKay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McKay of Hempstead, L.I.
The couple plan to marry in April.


BEST SELLERS: January 8, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $19.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.
2
2
23
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy.


Review/Concert; Access Chamber Group In Lesser-Known Music
LEAD: The Access Chamber Ensemble is a group of young freelancers who describe their mission as ''the exploration of new or obscure music.''


Ilene Kantrowitz Engaged
LEAD: The engagement of Ilene Kantrowitz to Elliot Avrum Reinfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Reinfeld of North Plainfield, N.J., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Kantrowitz of Beverly Hills, Calif.
The couple plan to marry in August.
The future bride is an elementary-school teacher in Pasadena, Calif.


Action in Insurance Stocks
LEAD: Investors began the new year preoccupied with the possibility of more corporate takeovers.
And by the second trading day they had zeroed in on insurance stocks.
On Wednesday the stocks of Capital Holding, Monarch Capital and USLife shot up after investors learned of a report in an Asian newspaper that Nippon Life, a Japanese insurance company, was interested in buying an


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Chickens See Red, And It's Soothing


New York's Campaign Finance Law: Limits and Loopholes
LEAD: The first public financing of political campaigns in New York State went into effect in New York City last week.
It provides for the partial financing of primary and general-election races for municipal offices, similar to the national financing of Presidential candidates.


A GUIDEBOOK TO THE NEW MIRACLES
LEAD:  SCIENCE AND THE UNBORN  Choosing Human Futures.
By Clifford Grobstein.
Illustrated. 207 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $18.95.


Press Won't Chuck That Woodchuck Story
LEAD: How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?


Dazzling Display For Eiffel Tower
LEAD: AS the Eiffel Tower Management Company prepared to mark the centenary of its Paris attraction this year, it envisioned a display so dazzling that the entire world would notice it.
Space art, it was called.
One proposal under study last summer was for a ring of light made of 100 silvery plastic spheres, each six feet in diameter, connected by tubing into a circle 15 miles in diameter.


THE UNSPEAKALBE LIFE OF A CHILD
LEAD:  W  Or The Memory of Childhood.
By Georges Perec.
Translated by David Bellos.  164 pp.
Boston:  David R. Godine. $16.95.


Navy Officer Wed To Miss Morford
LEAD: At St.
Columba's Episcopal Church in Washington, Charlotte Weeks Morford, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Morford of Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Comdr.
Steven Anthony Fillipow, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis A. Fillipow of Long Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
William McDonald Tully performed the ceremony.


Football Is Levy's Obsession
LEAD: In his loafers, cable-knit sweater and chinos, Marv Levy looks like a middle-aged poet.


Colombia Says It Has Begun Peace Talks With Guerrillas
LEAD: The Government of President Virgilio Barco Vargas opened peace talks Friday with leftist guerrillas, Government officials said.


'Essence of North Carolina' Leaves Office at 89
LEAD: Thaddeus Armie Eure, the nation's longest-serving state official, has ended a 52-year career as North Carolina's Secretary of State.


Protest in San Salvador
LEAD: Troops used tear gas and fired shots in the air to break up a group of women protesting the compulsory draft of young men in poor neighborhoods, witnesses said.
Reynaldo Blanco, head of the independent El Salvador Human Rights Commission, said 20 people were detained at the demonstration Friday outside the barracks of the 1st Infantry Brigade.


Quick Peek, From Afar, at Libyan Plant
LEAD: Libyan officials took journalists to this town today and drove them past a disputed chemical plant, but then refused to allow a visit to the grounds of the complex.


Who Gets Credit For an Innovation?
LEAD: WHO should get the credit for a brilliant idea - the thinker who conceived it or the player who first actually put it on the board?


Steinberg Case PromptsRise in Abuse Reports
LEAD: THE death of Lisa Steinberg and the trial of her adoptive father led to an increase in reports of child abuse on Long Island during 1988, although authorities think that the incidence of abuse has probably not risen.


Trash Cans: Orange Sentinels of Brave New World
LEAD: IF it's orange, it must be Wednesday.
Like soldiers they line both sides of the street as far as the eye can see.
Each week the bright-orange trash cans of Smithtown's recycling program stand neatly at curbside.


A NEW BREED AT THE BARRICADES
LEAD:  SOPHISTICATED REBELS  The Political Culture of European Dissent, 1968-1987.
By H. Stuart Hughes.  172 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $20.


ROLE IN DRUG WAR FOR NATIONAL GUARD
LEAD: Select National Guard forces, including helicopter units and military police detachments, will be used increasingly this year in anti-drug activities.
Defense Department officials hope one result will be to ease public pressure on the Air Force, Army and Navy to fight drugs.


HOW FOTO JOE WON THE WAR
LEAD:  THE EIGHT CORNERS OF THE WORLD  By Gordon Weaver.  382 pp.
Chelsea, Vt.:  Chelsea Green Publishing Company. $19.95.


Ms. Ballon Is Married
LEAD: At the Harmonie Club in New York, Hilary Meg Ballon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Ballon of New York, was married last evening to Orin Stuart Kramer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian S. Kramer of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Ely Pilchik performed the ceremony.


Innocent Tenant Evictions Cause Koch to Assail Policy
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday called a Federal program that evicts innocent tenants from buildings seized in drug raids ''nuts'' and proposed that New York City oversee such buildings so occupants not charged with crimes can stay.


Exploring the Heart of Old Rabat
LEAD: THE Kasbah des Oudaia in Rabat stands as it has for centuries, aloof atop the cliffs overlooking the Atlantic and the Bou Regreg River, keeping watch over the mouth of the river, the inland plain and the little boats ferrying people to Sale, Rabat's gleaming white sister city on the right bank of the river.


Baseball Fans Should Strike, Too
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Completing A Dream
LEAD: From a farm on Long Island to Notre Dame to the Red Sox to baseball immortality in Cooperstown, N.Y.


Forecast For the 21st Century
LEAD: TODAY'S FIRST-GRADERS will be college freshmen when the 21st century begins a dozen years from now.
Computers will be ubiquitous, creating and, at the same time, helping to meet a staggering challenge for students.


Bringing the Television Image Into Focus
LEAD: What Dolby is to sound, Faroudja is to video.
Hard to pronounce and remember, the name isn't likely to become a household word.
Besides, unlike Ray Dolby - the inventor who made audio cassettes capable of high fidelity and likes to see his name emblazoned on every product based on his patents - Yves Faroudja prefers to stay in the background.


DATA BANK: January 8, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,009.4
$3,988.4
$3,831.1
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.0
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
169.1
$162.7
$149.5


Latin America's Literature
LEAD: To the Editor:


Harking to The Muse Of Music
LEAD: There may be many composers who made a major mark in other fields than music, though the only ones who occur to me are Charles Ives (insurance), Paul Bowles (fiction) and Arnold Schoenberg (painting).
Turn the coin the other way, however, and the situation changes: famous people from every sector of the nonmusical world seem impelled to dabble in composition.


Curtain Staying Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Feeding Bagels To Barracudas In Caneel Bay
LEAD: THERE'S something unnerving about having a four-foot stingray nuzzle against you while you're floating flat on your face, or offering a five-foot barracuda a bite of a bagel.
You learn later that a barracuda doesn't particularly like bagels, though it might be tempted by lox.
A stringray likes both, and will pester you for a handout.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Matinee CHLOE IN THE AFTERNOON Starring Bernard Verley (in photo), Zouzou (in photo), Francoise Verley, Daniel Ceccaldi, Malvina Penne.
Directed by Eric Rohmer. 1972.
Media Home Entertainment. 97 minutes. $59.95.
Rated R. French with English subtitles.
Frederic is happily married.
Or is he?
He's faithful to his wife, but he can't seem to keep his mind off all the desirable women around him - on trains, in shops, on streets.


Winfield Answered
LEAD: Stung by a suit filed by Dave Winfield, George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, said yesterday that he has been making payments to the David M. Winfield Foundation, but to an escrow account rather than directly to the outfielder's foundation.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Blue Point  $125,000  19 Smith Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, partial basement, porch; taxes $2,100.
Bayport  $160,000  930 Division Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1-year-old ranch; basement, decks, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Miami
LEAD: Four hundred and fifty years separate two conquerors who came to Miami in search of gold: Juan Ponce de Leon in the early 1500's and Don Johnson in the early 1980's.
Ponce de Leon never struck gold.
Don Johnson did, with his TV show ''Miami Vice.''


PERSPECTIVES: Shopping Centers; A Green Light for a South Bronx Venture
LEAD: YES, Gigi, they really are going to build a shopping mall and movie theaters on 161st Street in the South Bronx.


The World of Hamilton High
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jazz and Russian Dance in Stamford
LEAD: AS the concert season struggles to awaken after its holiday nap, Stamford leads the way with Russian dances, jazz duets, a recital by an eminent pianist and an adventure in cabaret pops.


Social Studies: A Bit of Background
LEAD: ''The schools ain't what they used to be, and never was.'' - Will Rogers.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


A Family Affair with Bikes
LEAD: ON most Tuesday evenings, children do their homework or settle down in front of television sets.
But not at the Maguire home in New Canaan.


Christmas: 'Mistreated And Misinterpreted'
LEAD: I'm a Christian and the Christmas described in ''Christmas Is Not My Holiday''  [ Westchester Opinion, Dec. 11 ]  is not my holiday either.
Like so many Christian and Jewish brethren, Christmas has been misinterpreted and mistreated for decades.


Shelters for Homeless Ordered
LEAD: Homeless residents of the capital and their advocates won a victory today when a judge ruled that the city must be prepared to open new shelters within three days in neighborhoods where existing shelters fill to capacity for two consecutive nights.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  IMELDA: Steel Butterfly of the Philippines.
By Katherine Ellison. (McGraw-Hill, $17.95.) Katherine Ellison is part of the Pulitzer Prize-winning San Jose Mercury News team that in 1985 traced the money of Ferdinand E. Marcos, then President of the Philippines, around the globe.
In ''Imelda,'' she is on the track of bigger game - the soul of the country as well as of her subject, Imelda Marcos, the President's wife, his political equal and - but for the explosion of long-simmering revulsion with their staggering corruption - his potential successor.


Ex-Football Player Finds New Goal With an Urban Ministry in Baltimore
LEAD: The Door officially opened just before Christmas, and about 175 adults and children from an East Baltimore neighborhood were warmly greeted by the bearded, 260-pound figure of the Rev.
Joe Ehrmann.


Fenner Turning Pro
LEAD: He's certainly had his share of problems since leading the Atlantic Coast Conference in rushing with 1,250 yards as a freshman in 1986, but now Derrick Fenner says he's going to turn pro.
After losing his scholarship to Gardner-Webb College because of academic deficiencies, Fenner, a transfer student who has not played in two years, said he had decided to waive his last years of collegiate eligibility and apply for the April draft.


When Buyers Shop for Reliability
LEAD: When a personal computer fails at a large company, the worker usually places a frantic call to the technical support office.
The technician comes to the desk and either fixes the problem or swaps the machine for a backup.
The failure is annoying but rarely catastrophic.
In most businesses, however, there is no in-house technical support, no backup machine or spare-parts inventory.


FLOURISHES
LEAD: Do not underestimate the power of a beauty statement.
When a number of women suddenly lop off their long hair, it may be more than just a collective whim.
Short hair tends to be popular when women are battling societal restrictions.
Right now, the feminine flourishes in fashion may be giving way to a more subdued, simplified look.


Colorful, Wooly and Warm
LEAD: IN these bundle-up days, even city slickers who see trees only at Christmas have discovered the cozy woolen woodsman's coat.
This colorful old American favorite is getting a lot of exposure, thanks largely to guess who?
Right you are: it's that noted lumberjack (and occasional designer) Ralph Lauren.


U.N.'s Angola Mission to Take Cuba at Its Word
LEAD: When the long-awaited withdrawal of Cuba's 50,000-man military force starts here Tuesday, verification promises to be limited to a friendly United Nations officer standing dockside with a clipboard.


THE INCREDIBLE STUFF
LEAD:  COUNTDOWN  An Autobiography.
By Frank Borman with Robert J. Serling.
Illustrated. 448 pp.
New York:  Silver Arrow Books/  William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Moving up the Ladder of Congress
LEAD: THE defeat of Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and the death of United States Representative Stewart B. McKinney have contributed to keeping the Connecticut Congressional delegation low in Congressional seniority.
But junior members who went to Capitol Hill in the 80's are quietly carving out their places.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  POETRY READING


Pacific Oil Spill Renews Fears of Offshore Drilling
LEAD: When Olympic National Park rangers reached the wild stretch of Pacific shore here a few days ago after hiking through the rain forest, they found a scene from their worst nightmares.


Review/Music; 2 Quintets In Return Engagement
LEAD: Weill Recital Hall is regularly visited by ensembles from universities across the country; that is one of the traditional ways for faculties to declare themselves to the larger musical community.
Not many of them, though, are assisted in their programs by one of New York's best-known chamber groups.


Richard W. Murray Wed To Miss Taylor, Executive
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York, Katherine Vinton Taylor, the daughter of Mrs.
William F. Taylor of Asheville, N.C., and the late Nita Montague Taylor, was married yesterday to Richard Walter Murray, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward John Murray of Hamburg, N.Y.
The Rev.


Four Day Trips From Mexico City
LEAD: IF you are visiting Mexico City and want to escape the bustle and noise for a day, there are several places not far from the capital that can be reached within two hours by car, for a picnic, a hike or a quiet day in the countryside.


Anne Rittenberry To Marry in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James Giles Rittenberry of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Boughton Rittenberry to Walter M. Steppacher 4th, the son of Mr.
Steppacher 3d and Margery D. Steppacher, both of Poughkeepsie.
A May wedding is planned.


In Praise Of Knight
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Ditka's New Lease on Life Is Less Taxing
LEAD: The house specialty at Mike Ditka's Restaurant in Chicago is pork chops, not because the chef likes them but because the owner likes them.


SWIM IN LAKE ERIE, SEE STORMS IN DULUTH
LEAD: The Great Lakes have only recently been recognized for their potential to trigger fresh business development.
After all, it was only 20 years ago that Lake Erie, which had been suffocating from a lack of oxygen, was declared ecologically dead.
The problems with water quality in the Great Lakes are far from solved.


Brian L. Peters Weds Maria Teresa de Ona
LEAD: At St.
Hugh's Roman Catholic Church in Coconut Grove, Fla., Maria Teresa de Ona, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan de Dios de Ona of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday to Brian Lawrence Peters, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Peters of Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Cristobal Figuero performed the ceremony.


Remorse From Dan Michel to James Joyce
LEAD: To the Editor:


Remorse From Dan Michel to James Joyce
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD: FRIDAY  Baseball


Perfect Pop From Tiffany - Seriously
LEAD: Seriousness has hit pop music big.
Whether in the high-mindedness of Tracy Chapman or the industrial, mass-produced ditties of Tiffany, seriousness is the flavor of the day.


U.S. Plan to Save Thrifts: Pay Now, Maybe Later
LEAD: A WEEK after the Federal Home Loan Bank Board struck a blizzard of year-end deals for sick savings and loan associations, many industry experts are asking, ''What hath the Government wrought?''


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  A NEW EUROPE  In 1992 twelve European nations will lift all restrictions on their citizens' ability to live and work in each others' countries. ''There will really be a united European nation,'' said Henry Gordan, moderator of a forum called ''Is World Federalism Inevitable?'' scheduled from 3 to 5:30 P.M.


Nassau Museum: Disruptive Changes
LEAD: I recently attended the Nassau County Museum of Fine Art, and, as in past visits, came away with an enjoyable and nourishing art experience.
I am saddened to learn that the kind of exhibits and programs my family has come to expect may soon end.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Akihito; New Symbol for New Japan
LEAD: In the closing days of World War II, as much of Japan lay in ruins, an 11-year-old boy was living and studying in Nikko, a quiet town in the mountains safe from the American B-29 Superfortresses that were bombing Tokyo nightly.


Planning for the Inevitable Rainy Day
LEAD: As is usually the case, many people ushered in the new year resolving to put their affairs in order.
One good place to begin, experts say, is to work out a system to deal with accidents, serious illness or other emergencies.


Reagan's Budget Gives Bush Some Room to Negotiate
LEAD: President Reagan will submit a final budget Monday that largely suits George Bush's priorities but still leaves the President-elect opportunity to put his own stamp on the Government.


Silver Spoons for Victorian Yuppies
LEAD: American silver of the 1890's - exotic, exuberant and hefty - has come into its own in the 1980's.
Museums mount major exhibitions, scholars write historical books and collectors - many in their 20's and 30's - from coast to coast seek punch bowls one word?
Mike two pn and pitchers from the gaslight era in auctions and antiques shops.


When Explosive Energy Drives Home a Point
LEAD: Now you see it, now you don't.
That could be said about the movement in many works by contemporary choreographers who send dancers hurtling through space.
Images often flash by so rapidly that one may not be sure how to interpret them.
Ambiguity may even be part of a dance's point.
Yet, when employed skillfully, speed can convey its own message.


Cardinal of Detroit Orders 30 Parishes In the City to Close
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Detroit today ordered 30 parishes in this city to close in the coming months and gave 25 others a year to improve their status or suffer the same fate.


Japanese Flick on Their TV's and Glimpse Well-Hidden History
LEAD: The nation awoke to a new imperial epoch on Sunday, the Heisei era of Achieving Peace.
But along with the celebrations came stark black-and-white images of Japanese soldiers invading Manchuria, assassinating prime ministers, bombing Pearl Harbor and hoisting the Rising Sun flag next to Nazi swastikas.


Two Shiite Militias Battle Fiercely Near Sidon
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militiamen fought their fiercest battles in a year of confrontation in southern Lebanon today, and the police said 28 people were killed and 51 wounded.


Schoolchildren Raise Money for the Neediest
LEAD: A group of second graders at Public School 221 in Little Neck, Queens, raised $360 for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
They did it by selling toys, games and books to other classes in the school.


Stung by Cable Audience Claims, Networks Retaliate
LEAD: For years, the cable television industry has gone around to advertisers mocking the major television networks and vigorously promoting the marvels of cable.
The networks have listened, shrugged and said nothing.
No more.
Tired of losing viewers and advertising dollars to cable, CBS and ABC have in recent weeks unleashed a get-tough strategy.


Woods Leads Bengals Past Bills
LEAD: In an American Conference championship game devoid of newfangled offensive gimmicks, the Bengals chugged along on the old-fashioned running of Ickey Woods today to beat the Buffalo Bills and advance to Super Bowl XXIII.


At Hardee's, Fast Food and Trends
LEAD: As Gary Langstaff explains it, his primary professional task is to understand precisely the role of the hamburger, the french fry, the seafood salad and the soda in society.


Police Guard AIDS Home For Toddlers
LEAD: A 16-month-old boy has become the newest resident of a Brooklyn block, but his reception by most of his neighbors has been as frigid as the recent weather.
The child has AIDS.


South Florida Journal; Will Car-Country Folks Be Steered to the Train?
LEAD: That symbol of the Northern suburbs, the commuter rail line, has come to South Florida.
But getting the track and the trains was easy.
Now comes the hard part: getting people to ride it.


The Mideast, Bush's First Test
LEAD: The Bush administration's first real foreign policy test is likely to come in the Mideast.


New Prosecutor Vows to Battle Drugs at School
LEAD: The new Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson, said yesterday that he would estabish a policy of seeking a minimum one-year sentence for people convicted of dealing drugs within one block of a school.


B.S.B. Buys Agencies In Norway and Sweden
LEAD: Backer Spielvogel Bates has cemented its dominant position in Europe's ''Nordic region'' with its agreement to acquire four agencies in Norway and Sweden from Scan Partner, a marketing communications company based in Oslo.


Sports World Specials; Ranger Memories
LEAD: ''Tradition on Ice'' might be one of the most stirring hockey videos ever made.
It's a 60-minute, 62-year retrospective that includes rare and dramatic early footage of Ranger action, interviews with Ranger stars from Murray Murdoch to Phil Esposito, and an almost nonstop narrative gush by David Perry.


New College Freshmen Sho Shifts in Attitudes
LEAD: A survey of members of the college class of 1992 shows that more are smoking, that they may be losing interest in business careers and that they overwhelmingly favor mandatory testing for AIDS and drugs.


Singer and Friends Make Music to Help Music
LEAD: One cold afternoon last week, the Swedish baritone Hakan Hagegard emptied the living room of the West Side apartment where he is staying and hauled in two enormous packing trunks.
The trunks contained pieces of a scale model of the Hakan Hagegard Music Center, a rehearsal space, recording studio and artists' retreat the singer hopes to build in Brunskog, Sweden - a project for which Mr.


Poison Reported Found In 17-Year-Old's Home
LEAD: Cyanide was found in the home of a teen-ager who lapsed into a coma after eating yogurt tainted with the poison, a newspaper reported this weekend.


At Least 37 Killed in Air Crash in England


In Patrick, the Last Are First
LEAD: A glance at the National Hockey League standings now, about midway through the season, shows that the two Patrick Division teams that missed the Stanley Cup playoffs last season are now among the top five in the league.


David Deutsch Wins Buick Dealers' Group
LEAD: After a five-way review, the 120 Greater Pittsburgh Buick Dealers group tapped David Deutsch Associates as its agency.


Short-Term Rate Rise Expected
LEAD: New evidence of economic strength makes further increases in short-term interest rates likely over the next month to six weeks, credit market analysts predicted.


Review/Music; Trumpet Avant-Gardist
LEAD: Two composers who are also performers - Ben Neill, a trumpeter, and David First, a guitarist - led their own ensembles in some of their recent works at La Galleria at La Mama on Saturday evening.


The Ant and the Grasshopper; Why Is U.S. Prosperity Eroding? Japan's Lessons.
LEAD: Japan and America are engaged in a furious struggle of which many Americans seem scarcely aware, a struggle that neither has to lose.


Review/Television; 'Twist of Fate' Concludes
LEAD: The unlikely is commonplace in television movies and dramas.
Even the Hallmark Hall of Fame recently offered Anthony Hopkins as a Frenchman who is arrested by the Nazis during World War II, gives away his possessions to save his life, and then returns after the war to be a servant in his own chateau, completely unrecognized by anyone in the village.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: Debt


Reviews/Dance; 'Raymond,' a Portrait Of Isadora's Brother
LEAD: The best came last on Friday evening at the Nikolais-Louis Choreospace, where the Mary Anthony Dance Theater Foundation presented work by Bertram Ross and Nai-Ni Chen.
Nothing in the program quite measured up to Mr.
Ross's ''Raymond,'' the bittersweet portrait of Isadora Duncan's addlepated brother, which closed the program.


Profits Up 40%, Dividends 11%
LEAD: Earnings of the companies in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 40 percent last year, but shareholders received dividend increases of only 11 percent, Standard &amp; Poor's said last week.


'Unbearable Lightness' Gets Film Prize
LEAD: ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being,'' the film version of the novel by Milan Kundera, was voted the best film of 1988 yesterday by the National Society of Film Critics, a 39-member group that includes critics from New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and other cities.
Philip Kaufman was voted best director for his work on that film.


Saatchi Gets Ski Job
LEAD: Last week Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, New York was given the North American ad account of Salomon, a French manufacturer of ski equipment and accessories.
The budget will be $7 to $10 million.
Last month, Saatchi's London office received Salomon's European account.
The former North American agency-of-record is John Creel Advertising.


Doctor Is Beaten to Death in Her Bellevue Office
LEAD: A doctor who had gone to work on her day off Saturday was found yesterday beaten to death in her office at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, the police said.


Fort Dix's Neighbors Need to Plan
LEAD: The partial closing of Fort Dix could pose more problems for southern New Jersey communitiesthan the total closing of other bases will pose elsewhere.
But that's no reason for Congress to scuttle the base-closing plan.
Instead, all affected areas need to make a quick start, with Federal help, on plans for future development.


A Misty Morning's Ride Through the Park


Armenian Benefit
LEAD: The Osipov Balalaika Orchestra, returning to the United States for the first time in 12 years, will present a benefit for Armenian earthquake relief at Carnegie Hall on Jan. 25 at 8 P.M.
The Osipov, directed by Nikolai Kalinin, will be joined by the dancers and singers of the Babkina Folk Ensemble and two Bolshoi Opera soloists, Galina Borisova and Vladimir Malchenko.


Nathan G. Finkelstein, 73, Dies; Chairman of Beauty Salon Chain
LEAD: Nathan G. Finkelstein, the chairman of the board of Glemby International, which operates more than 1,600 beauty salons around the world, died of lung cancer yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


How Many Young Lives Is a Basilica Worth?; Bitter and Sweet Money
LEAD: To the Editor:


Islanders Fall to Blackhawks
LEAD: After the game, Randy Wood sat ruminatively in a locker-room corner tonight and held an ice pack to his left knee as all around him his teammates used words like ''disaster'' and ''awful'' to describe themselves and their losing ways.


SOVIETS TO START TRIMMING ARSENAL OF CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: The Soviet Union announced today that it would start to destroy its stocks of chemical weapons.


Sports World Specials; Different Kind of Net
LEAD: Ever since Ivan Lendl left to play several tournaments in Australia a few weeks ago, he has had his secretary, Diane Nagy, send him daily messages about the doings of the Hartford Whalers of the National Hockey League.


Sports of The Times; Montana Was Never Better
LEAD: IN the warmth of the 49ers' locker room, Guy McIntyre, their offensive right guard, was smiling as he pulled his white ''62'' jersey over his shoulder pads.''Not against the Bears,'' he was saying to two teammates. ''Not in the frigid cold.''


Triangle-Pechiney Insider Inquiry Widens
LEAD: An insider-trading investigation involving the acquisition of Triangle Industries by Pechiney S.A., the French aluminum company, grew last week when investigators linked a friend of President Francois Mitterrand, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., and several stockbrokers in France and Luxembourg to the affair.


Threats Mar Opening of Brooklyn AIDS Home


An Infant Suffocates In Bed With Her Father
LEAD: A 4-month-old infant apparently suffocated while sleeping with her father early yesterday, the police said.


New Battle Erupts for LVMH Moet
LEAD: A new battle has erupted for control of the world's largest luxury-goods company, LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, and many analysts say all the jockeying could produce a stalemate rather than a clear winner.


Sara Lee Accounts
LEAD: In preparation for 1992, when European trade barriers will be eliminated, the Douwe Egberts/Sara Lee Corporation, a European subsidiary of the American consumer-products giant, has consolidated its advertising, currently at 30 local agencies, in B.B.D.O.
Europe, HDM and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.
A B.B.D.O.


Washington Talk: Civil Service; Many Reaganites Now Find the Capital Is a Nice Place to Work
LEAD: More than eight years ago Ronald Reagan ran against the Federal establishment in his Presidential campaign, arguing that government was the source of the nation's ills, not the solution.


Treasury Bill and Note Auctions This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, the Treasury will auction $7 billion of seven-year notes, followed on Thursday by the regular monthly sale of one-year bills.


Market Place; The High Price Of Manipulation
LEAD: IT is a back alley of Wall Street that normally gets little attention from the press or prosecutors, involving small companies and stocks that shoot into the stratosphere, only to fall back to the ground.
But although the companies are small, the losses for investors can be very large.
Sometimes, the losers are also the owners of family businesses that have been acquired by high-flying companies.


Reagan Leaves Hospital
LEAD: President Reagan returned to the White House today, a day after undergoing surgery on his left hand.
Mr.
Reagan waved his bandaged hand upon leaving the Walter Reed Army Medical Center here, where the operation, to correct a curvature in the ring finger of his left hand, was performed.
He was not wearing a sling, although reports before the operation said he would have to wear one.


Reviews/Dance; The Lewitzky Company in Three Recent Works
LEAD: Bella Lewitzky is always meticulous in her choreographic craftsmanship, and there are no sloppy movers in her Lewitzky Dance Company.
That was apparent this afternoon when the Los Angeles-based group presented three recently choreographed works in the Zellerbach Theater of the Annenberg Center at the University of


Queens Woman Charged With killing Mother
LEAD: A Queens woman described by the police and neighbors as chronically mentally ill was charged with arson and murder yesterday after her elderly mother died Saturday night in a fire that tore through their apartment.


'Who Is a Jew' Remains A Volatile Issue in U.S.
LEAD: The explosive issue of ''who is a Jew'' has been removed from the immediate political agenda in Jerusalem, but in the United States the debate continues to alter the relations of Jews with Israel and each other fundamentally, many American Jews say.


Prepare for a Wintry Day in the Woods
LEAD: SPORTS like skiing, hiking, snowshoeing, climbing and snowmobiling can turn cold and snow into a bounty of winter fun.
But you have to know when to be cautious.
Park trails and mountainsides are a lure for day trips and weekend excursions.
The risks are small if you go well prepared.
If you dress properly, take along the right food and recognize the signs of hypothermia and frostbite, you have little to fear and much to gain.


New Ampad Campaign By Partners &amp; Shevack
LEAD: Partners &amp; Shevack is focusing on consumers' inability to distinguish between brands of memo pads in its first campaign for a new client, Ampad.
In trade ads for the paper-pad manufacturer based in Dayton, Ohio, the agency eschews serious discussions of rips and runs in favor of whimsy.


Bridge
LEAD: For the last five years, tournament players in the New York area have known what to expect when they read the names ''Bergen-Cohen'' on the opposing convention card.
Marty Bergen and Larry Cohen, armed with a full arsenal of bidding theory and sharp card play, have won a string of titles at every level.


49ers and Bengals Advance to Super Bowl


Soviets Said to Arrest Armenian Dissidents
LEAD: Authorities in the Armenian capital of Yerevan have arrested a dozen more Armenian protest leaders in the latest crackdown on nationalist dissent in the republic, a Yerevan resident said tonight.


Sun-Times Deal is Called Sign of Gains
LEAD: The Chicago Sun-Times's agreement to acquire a second major suburban newspaper chain is a sign that the daily is on a firmer financial footing than it appeared to be a few months ago, despite a continuing decline in circulation, industry analysts say.


Industry Partners Disagree On Favoring of Chain Stores
LEAD: IT is virtually impossible to be around booksellers or publishers very long without realizing that they generally respect each other, taking considerable pride in their roles as disseminators of the written word.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  President-elect Bush's economic team is preparing proposals to encourage businesses to concentrate more on productivity and growth and less on quick profits, Treasury officials say.
The new administration hopes to confront problems like the decline of savings rates, the relative erosion of America's standard of living and lackluster investment in long-term growth.


No Headline


Rangaire's Head Ousted By Its British Investor
LEAD: A foreign investor has shaken things up at the Rangaire Corporation in Cleburne, Tex.


Israel's Presence in Moscow To Be Expanded, Arens Says
LEAD: The Soviet Union will upgrade Israel's consular delegation in Moscow and allow Israeli diplomats to conduct political talks there, Foreign Minister Moshe Arens said today.


The 60's for Sale


INSIDE
LEAD:  Doctor Slain at Bellevue  A pathologist who was five months pregnant was found in her hospital office, beaten to death and possibly raped, the police said.
Page B1.
Budget Battle to Begin  The annual budget battle on Capitol Hill begins today, and President Reagan's proposal is likely to be the first casualty.


Golf; Chip Shots Help Jones, Barber Win
LEAD: On a day when chipping into the cup from off the greens became commonplace, Steve Jones used a chip shot to help him win the MONY Tournament of Champions by three strokes over David Frost and Jay Haas.


New, Mellower Qaddafi Now on Display in Libya
LEAD: Another day, another demonstration to show support for Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, against assertions that he is building a plant to produce chemical weapons.


Trade Show's Hottest Item: The TV Set
LEAD: The hottest product at this year's Consumer Electronics Show is one of the oldest - the television set.
So strong has the demand been for television sets around the world that there is now a growing shortage.


Correction
LEAD: Because of editing errors, a report in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page on Friday misstated the date and purpose of a trip to Latin America by some members of Congress.
They are to study third-world debt issues and to examine results of large-scale clearing of the Amazonian rain forest in Brazil.


Women Meet, Ideology in Back Row
LEAD: Though they cheered for the proposed Federal equal rights amendment, more than 1,100 women representing 61 organizations focused more on trade deficits, job training, child care and other economic issues at a national conference this weekend.


How Many Young Lives Is a Basilica Worth?; Third World Debt
LEAD: To the Editor:


ARABS LINK CURBS ON GAS AND A-ARMS
LEAD: Iraq and other Arab nations said today that a call for a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons should be linked to a similar stand on nuclear weapons in light of Israel's reported possession of nuclear arms.


At Least 37 Die in British Plane Crash
LEAD: At least 37 people were killed and about 75 others were injured Sunday when a British domestic airliner crashed near a major highway in central England while trying to make an emergency landing, the police said.


How Many Young Lives Is a Basilica Worth?; John the Divine Largest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Schultz Urges Hiring Change
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association opened its 83d convention today with the executive director reaffirming the healthy condition of intercollegiate athletics and urging members to create more executive-level opportunities for women and members of ethnic minorities.


Topics of The Times; The Snooker Boom
LEAD: In Manhattan, new emporiums where the public can play pool and billiards are opening faster than the city's massage parlors closed.
These establishments are equipped with pocketless tables on which the congnoscenti play three-cushion billiards, and 6-by-12-foot snooker tables that look as big as polo fields next to standard


Results Plus
LEAD:  Skiing  Schneider Wins Again: Vreni Schneider continued her string of successes yesterday, winning a World Cup women's slalom in Mellau, Austria, for her third triumph in three days and her ninth of the season.
Tamara McKinney of Squaw Valley, Calif., who led after the first heat, straddled a gate in the second run and was disqualified.


Readings From 'Kitty'
LEAD: Kitty Carlisle Hart, the chairman of the New York State Council on the Arts, will read selections from her autobiography, ''Kitty,'' as well as from Moss Hart's autobiography, ''Act One,'' and other works, on Jan. 19 at St.
Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue at 50th Street.
The reading will take place from 12:30 to 1:30 P.M.; admission is free.


2 Macmillan Units Are Sold
LEAD: The Maxwell Communication Corporation said on Friday that it had sold Macmillan Inc.'s Intertec publishing unit and certain assets of its Webb Publishing Company for $171 million.
The purchaser, the Intertec


Long, Turbulent Run Of '42d Street' Arrives at Its Finale
LEAD: David Merrick's long-running ''42d Street'' closed on 44th Street yesterday afternoon at the St.
James Theater after 3,486 performances, and with it an era in Broadway musical history may have come to an end.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''And should anyone say to us that we waited too long before stopping the production of chemical weapons and imposing other prohibitions on them, we would say: yes we did wait too long.''  - Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union.  [ A8:2. ]


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, a publishing company, named Robert Baker to the newly created post of chief operating officer and executive vice president.


Business and the Law; U.S. Judge's Role In Wall St. Cases
LEAD: THE Federal judge presiding at the GAF Corporation stock-manipulation trial, Mary Johnson Lowe, is expected to decide this week whether to declare a mistrial because of charges of prosecutorial misconduct.


Topics of The Times; Beauty on a Bike
LEAD: The Palisades Interstate Park Commission governs one of the region's loveliest roads.
It runs along the base of the Palisades from just north of the George Washington Bridge to Alpine, N.J., offering intimate Hudson River views and access to marinas and picnic grounds.
The road, however, is barely two lanes wide and full of curves, and despite repeated requests from bicycling groups, the commission considers it unsafe for simultaneous use by autos and bikes.


TV Notes
LEAD:  CBS Late-Night Show


Review/Television; A School Success Story
LEAD: Channel 9 is showing a rerun tonight.
But it's the kind of program that cannot be repeated too often.


ON YOUR OWN;
LEAD: Like so much of yachting, sailboarding is a seasonal sport.
Or so it was until the advent of the mechanical windsurfer.


Venezuelan Seeks Unity On Latin Debt
LEAD: Even before taking office on Feb. 2, Carlos Andres Perez, the President-elect of Venezuela, has begun trying to forge a more unified Latin American approach to the region's foreign debt problem.


Fitness; Start Slowly and Use Common Sense
LEAD: Dr.
Priscilla Clarkson of the University of Massachusetts believes that exercise should not damage muscles so much that negative effects outweigh the benefits.
She makes the following suggestions for recreational athletes:


Broken Hill to Acquire Pacific Resources
LEAD: Pacific Resources Inc., an oil refiner and marketer, has agreed to merge with a subsidiary of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, the largest public company in Australia, the two companies announced yesterday.


Super Rematch: 49ers and Bengals Going to Miami
LEAD: At first, it was a quick death for the Chicago Bears.
They blinked, and swoosh, there went Jerry Rice blazing past them into the end zone.
Then it became a slow death for the Bears.
A 13-play drive here, a 12-play drive there, one consuming nearly six minutes and the other almost seven minutes of the final half, each ending with the San


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-9


Washington Talk: Briefing; Symington Tribute
LEAD: A memorial service will be held Tuesday at the National Cathedral for W. Stuart Symington, Secretary of the Air Force in the Truman Administration and a Democratic Senator from Missouri for 24 years.
He died Dec. 14 at 87.
On hand will be his son, James W. Symington, a former Missouri Congressman; Senator Ernest F.


Budget Tug of War Is About to Begin
LEAD: It begins officially Monday - the collision of political wills, national priorities, parochial interests and slippery arithmetic otherwise known as the budget process.


When Courts Take Charge Of the Unborn
LEAD: Last spring, Brenda Vaughan, a 29-year-old Washington woman, pleaded guilty to forging about $700 worth of checks.
It was her first offense and one that would normally have brought probation.
But because Ms.
Vaughan was pregnant and tests showed she had used cocaine, the judge sent her to jail until the date the baby was due, saying he wanted to protect her fetus from drug abuse.


Clippers, Minus Manning, Fall to Knicks
LEAD: The Los Angeles Clippers lost another road game last night.
They were thrashed by the Knicks, 134-100, at Madison Square Garden in a game that served as a morale builder for Johnny Newman and Gerald Wilkins, who had been in shooting slumps.
The 34-point margin was the largest this season for the Knicks, who brought their record to 21-11.


Rozelle's Snap Decision Forces Bengals to Adapt Special to The New York Times
LEAD: In the end, it was hitting, tackling and running that won for the Bengals today and sent them on their way to Super Bowl XXIII.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit Nov.
Tuesday  Wholesale Trade Nov.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  None  Friday  Producer Prices Dec.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary headline in some editions on Friday about one of the first women to become a leader in concert management misidentified her.
She was Hattie Clark Rosenbaum.


Proud Bears Face the Facts
LEAD: After teams lose important football games, their players are often stunned or angry or sullen or tight-lipped.
After the San Francisco 49ers soundly defeated the Bears, 28-3, today to advance to the Super Bowl, most of the Bears were calm and contained.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Sports World Specials column of SportsMonday on Jan. 2 about the Ed Block Courage Award misstated the reason Tom Baldwin of the New York Jets was nominated for the award.
He was nominated because of his fight against alcoholism.


In War Against Corrosion, Costly Byproduct Is Waste
LEAD: There have been times in recent months when Harry De Soi wasn't sure if waste handlers would accept the toxic heavy metals left over from his electroplating business in Franklinville, N.J.
Mr.
De Soi had visions of being fined by the Government and being labeled a polluter, as have so many other people in his business.


China Orders American Out
LEAD: An American and a Canadian have been ordered out of China because they were working for a United States-based dissident organization, the official New China News Agency said today.
Huang Wencheng, an American citizen, and Huang Han, Canadian, were accused of carrying out ''illegal activities'' for the New York-based Chinese Alliance for Democracy since they arrived in China as tourists, it said.


Review/Opera; Bronx Company in Smetana's Rustic 'Secret'
LEAD: ''Tajemstvi'' (''The Secret''), the next-to-last of Bedrich Smetana's eight operas, was composed under the strain of deteriorating health, financial troubles and progressive deafness. ''I'm afraid my music is not cheerful enough,'' he wrote to his librettist in 1877, ''but when I see only poverty and misery ahead of me all enthusiasm for my work goes.


Beijing Journal; Freshest Nuance in China's Art Is (Blush) Nudes
LEAD: In the 10 years since China opened up to the world, most Chinese encountered enough Coca-Cola, television, disco dancing and sunglasses to make them blase about most exotic imports from the Occident - until Beijing opened an exhibition of nude art.


Contra Military Commander Is Assassinated in Honduras
LEAD: A Nicaraguan rebel military commander was killed by gunmen on Saturday, the police said today.


A.C.L.U. Accuses Louisiana Of Neglecting Foster Children
LEAD: Hundreds of children in Louisiana's foster care program have been neglected by the system intended to protect them, the American Civil Liberties Union contends in a report to be issued this week.


Ketchum Fills Creative Post
LEAD: In two weeks, Ketchum Advertising/New York will welcome Liz Nickles Murray to the new post of executive vice president/executive creative director.


Jean Willes, Actress, 65
LEAD: Jean Willes, an actress who appeared in films like ''Elmer Gantry'' and television series like ''Perry Mason'' and ''Bonanza'' in her 30-year career, died of liver failure Tuesday.
She was 65 years old.


Why They, Not Jean Harris, Received Clemency
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Urdang Married To Jeremy A. Berman
LEAD: The marriage of Susan L. Urdang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry L. Urdang of New Rochelle, N.Y., to Jeremy A. Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simeon M. Berman of Brooklyn, took place yesterday at the Pierre in New York.
Rabbi Alvin Poplack performed the ceremony.


Review/Cabaret; Tony Bennett Opens A Club Near the Stars
LEAD: Tony Bennett, as much as any other pop singer of his generation, symbolizes continuity in a city where it often seems nothing was meant to last.
His mixture of streetwise toughness, starry-eyed romanticism and punchy sincerity also gives musical expression to a time-honored image of New York as a place where you have only to scratch someone's hardened surface to discover an unexpected reservoir of integrity, loyalty and decency.


An Actor Stands In As Writer
LEAD: ''In the Heat of the Night'' has emerged as one of the few hits of the new television season, and its success can be attributed at least in part to the active role taken by the series' star, Carroll O'Connor.


Hoping Students Without Homes Will Say, 'Here!'
LEAD: Only one parent, Luis Santiago, was waiting in the bitter cold outside the Prince George Hotel in Manhattan the other afternoon when the first yellow school bus rumbled down East 28th Street.


J. H. Weitzman Wed To Ms. Lowenbraun
LEAD: Leslie Lowenbraun, an associate at the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, and Jeffrey H. Weitzman, an associate at the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells, were married in New York yesterday at the Union League Club by Rabbi Donald R. Gerber.


Fitness; New Sophistication On Using Muscle
LEAD: BACK in 1981, when Priscilla Clarkson was a new faculty member at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and the ink was still wet on her Ph.D. diploma, she was fascinated with studying exercise and its relationship to muscle strength and fatigue.


Koch Seeks Taxes on Co-ops For Increased Child Services
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch's budget proposal for the next fiscal year, which is expected to call for service cuts and tax increases, will include $60 million in additional spending on child-abuse programs and education.


Crack and Gunfire Come to a Quiet Place
LEAD: On the elm-lined streets of Washington's Fourth Ward, where residents live in neat brick houses and dutifully tend their azaleas, many people now hurry indoors and dare not stroll the way they used to.


N.J. Transit Losing Hearts, and Fares, of Riders
LEAD: After steadily improving a nearly bankrupt system of trains and buses through most of the 1980's, N.J.
Transit is losing riders, revenue and some of its hard-earned reputation in what some commuters say is a rerun of the bad old days.


Cubans Leaving Angola Look Back in Fondness
LEAD: With her brown hair in a ponytail and heart-shaped earrings in her ears, 19-year-old Vivian Hernandez Caballero of the Cuban women's antiaircraft battery is already preparing for a long-awaited reunion this week with her boyfriend in Havana.


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Swiss economic growth in 1989 and a more restrictive monetary policy could combine to push interest rates higher, the Swiss National Bank said.
In its latest quarterly report, the bank reiterated its projection that real gross domestic product growth would be 2 percent this year, with inflation between 2 percent and 3 percent.


Charity Schools Teach No Lesson for Today
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ejection Helps Put Bills Out
LEAD: This was not the first time Tim McGee and Derrick Burroughs had met.
Just the most significant.


Horse Racing; Gulfstream Opens And Halrose Wins
LEAD: Halrose benefited from a scorching early pace to beat Jabotinsky by a long neck and win the $57,950 Spectacular Bid Stakes today before a record opening-day crowd of 26,517 at Gulfstream Park.


Argentine Inflation
LEAD: Argentina said Friday that its 1988 inflation rate was 387.7 percent, the highest since 672.2 percent in 1985, when President Raul Alfonsin's Government began the austral anti-inflation plan.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Seals' Lion
LEAD: Bob Kerrey's Vietnam War buddies attended his inauguration as Governor of Nebraska in 1983 and they watched last Tuesday as Mr.
Kerrey, a Democrat, was sworn as the junior Senator from Nebraska.


Bus Companies in Brooklyn Are Investigated for Bribery
LEAD: More than a dozen private school and passenger bus companies in Brooklyn are under investigation for offering bribes to an undercover inspector to overlook possible safety violations, law-enforcement officials say.


Ladbroke Buys Race Track
LEAD: Ladbroke Group P.L.C. said its United States Racing division had acquired for $41 million the Golden Gate Fields race track near San Francisco, a leading thoroughbred track and one of two big satellite-betting operations in Northern California.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page picture caption in some copies yesterday, based on information from The Associated Press, misidentified the men with Emperor Akihito of Japan.
From the right were Akihito; Crown Prince Hiro; Akihito's brother, Prince Hitachi, and a cousin, Prince Tomohito.


Attorney General Says Walsh Not Pressured on North Case
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that the Reagan Administration did not try to thwart Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra case, from pursuing any avenue of inquiry in the matter.


Scotland Investigates Report Of a Mix-Up in Crash Bodies
LEAD: The police said today that they were investigating a claim that the family of an American student killed in the crash of Pan Am Flight 103 was given the wrong body.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 9, 1989:
MONDAY
Carolina Freight Corp
West Inc
TUESDAY
AAR Corp
Ohio Mattress Co
Diversified Ener Minn
Unifirst Corp
Learonal Inc
Weyerhaeuser Co
WEDNESDAY
Bard C R Inc
Walgreen Co
Holly Farms Corp
Woolworth F W Co
Pacificorp
THURSDAY
Colgate Palmolive Co
Pillsbury Co
Ford Mtr Co
Rubbermaid Inc
Hartmarx Corp
FRIDAY
Flowers Inds Inc
New York St Elec &amp; Gas


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about the disciplinary actions taken by the National Association of Securities Dealers in a stock-manipulation case incorrectly described the findings and sanctions against Eugene K. Laff, the former chairman of the Haas Securities Corporation.
The association concluded that Mr.


BUSH AIDES STUDY IDEAS TO REDIRECT GOALS OF BUSINESS
LEAD: President-elect George Bush's economic policy makers are preparing proposals to encourage American businesses to concentrate more on productivity and growth and less on quick profits, Mr.
Bush's advisers in the Treasury Department report.


Israeli-Appointed Palestinian Is Wounded
LEAD: An Israeli-appointed Palestinian official in the West Bank was stabbed by masked youths early this morning in the second such attack in two days.


Mississippi Town Won't Get Film
LEAD: The owner of this town's only theater said today that she would not show the film ''Mississippi Burning,'' a fictionalized account of the deaths here 25 years ago of three civil rights workers.


Sports World Specials; Sluggers' Signatures
LEAD: Ask a fan where to find the greatest array of sports figures assembled in one place this month and the guess would probably be the Super Bowl.
The guess would be wrong.
No star or stars will shine brighter than the collection of sluggers who will sign autographs at Tropworld Casino and Entertainment Resort in Atlantic


Salvador Rebels' Drive on Mayors Is Bringing Chaos to Rural Areas
LEAD: In a major blow to United States policy in this country, municipal government has collapsed in many rural areas.


Perks for Peres Aggrieve an Austerity-Minded Israel
LEAD: A political storm was gathering today over reports that Finance Minister Shimon Peres's austerity budget is less austere than it first appeared.


Attention, Students: Never Mind Bush's G's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Group Said to Be Studying Offer to Buy G.E. of Britain
LEAD: A consortium of international companies is working on a possible bid for the General Electric Company of Britain, a London investment house said this weekend, prompting calls for Government intervention.


On Being Heard
LEAD: ''I will not equivocate,'' cried a passionate journalist a century ago, ''. . . and I will be heard!''


How Many Young Lives Is a Basilica Worth?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of The Times; Ickey Shuffles To Miami
LEAD: FORTUNATELY for the Bengals and the stern muse of the dance, Ickey Woods, the rookie with the wacky hoofs, saved his best choreography for the playing field yesterday afternoon in the American Conference championship game.


Bruin in Flight
LEAD: Cam Neeley of the Bruins flying through the air after he tripped over Robert Picard of the Nordiques last night in the first period in Quebec.
Boston won, 4-2. (AP)


New Loans Suspended By Agency
LEAD: The Export-Import Bank, a Government agency making below-market-value loans to buyers of American exports, has decided to suspend new lending operations as a result of the Reagan Administration's budget squeeze, bank officials said.


Canada Jobless Rate Off
LEAD: The Canadian unemployment rate fell to 7.6 percent in December from 7.8 percent in November, mainly because of increased job opportunities for men over 25 years old, the Government agency Statistics Canada reported Friday.
In December 1987, the seasonlly adjusted unemployment rate was 8.1 percent.


Digital Will Introduce PC's and Work Stations
LEAD: In a move certain to increase the competition in the fastest-growing portion of the computer industry, the Digital Equipment Corporation will introduce tomorrow a range of aggressively priced work stations and personal computers.


Tokyo Stocks Set Record
LEAD: The dollar rose against the Japanese yen in early trading today, while share prices set a record on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in the first day of trading after Emperor Hirohito's death early Saturday.


A Guide to Winter Excursions
LEAD: These organizations can provide information about outdoor workshops, outings and lectures.


Burmese, Still Under Military, Settle Into a Sullen Waiting
LEAD: Nearly four months after a spontaneous popular uprising against 26 years of eccentric military autocracy was crushed by the armed forces, the people of Burma have settled into a sullen and angry watchfulness made worse by economic hardship and continued repression.
Promised elections seem ever more remote.


Job Security a Mirage for Unions Despite Wage Concessions of 80's
LEAD: Job security replaced wage increases in the 1980's as the top contract goal of many American labor unions.
But with the decade almost over, the unions have had precious little success in winning employment guarantees.


The Problem of Control in Child Custody
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unusual Ad Campaign Improves Nissan Sales
LEAD: In an effort to reach the sophisticated buyer who is hard to impress with lists of extras, the Nissan Motor Company is relying on an unusual advertising campaign for one of its newest lines.


Family Rises Using Fraud On Medicaid
LEAD: Sheldon Weinberg owned a modest dress shop in Brooklyn before he and his sons branched off into Medicaid ventures.
Their new business quickly brought them the lavish trappings of success: six-figure incomes, a yacht, a $100,000 Rolls-Royce, apartments in Trump Tower, a butler, a maid and a $2.5 million home in


McLean Deal Seen Linked To Allegheny
LEAD: An investor group led by Paul S. Levy, one of two contenders to buy Allegheny International Inc., is well on its way to acquiring control of another company operating in bankruptcy, McLean Industries.
Although the two companies do not seem to realize it, their destinies could be intertwined.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Once again this past season, the two Canadian major league teams, Montreal and Toronto, failed to have a pitcher win 20 games.
Have the Expos or Blue Jays ever had a 20-game winner?


Big East; Not Surprisingly, Surprises Abound
LEAD: So far, the only predictable thing about the Big East has been its unpredictability.


Chief of Canon U.S.A. Is Returning to Japan
LEAD: Fujio Mitarai, who helped to make Canon cameras and business machines leading sellers in the United States, is going back to the parent company in Japan after 23 years -an unusually long stay here for a Japanese executive.


Passenger Bobsleds at Lake Placid
LEAD: DID you know that you can experience one of winter sport's ultimate fantasies, taking a turn down the Olympic bobsled course at Lake Placid, N.Y.?


D.M.B.&amp;B. Acquires Penchina
LEAD: PENCHINA, SELKOWITZ INC., a tiny New York agency known for its work for Burroughs computers, was acquired on Friday by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the $2.5 billion advertising giant.
Executives of the agency will receive an undisclosed amount of cash and stock in D.M.B.&amp;B., and a percentage of their agency's profits.


Books of The Times; True McGinniss Story of Greed, Lust and Murder
LEAD: Blind Faith  By Joe McGinniss  Illustrated. 381 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons.


Outdoors: Boats for Everyone
LEAD: BILLED as the oldest affair of its kind in the world, the 79th New York National Boat Show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan opens Saturday and continues through Jan. 22.


Review/Dance; Mazowsze, From Poland
LEAD: There is nothing quite like Mazowsze.
The Polish folk ensemble began its American tour - the fourth since its founding in 1948 - with a typically rich and heartwarming performance on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.


Wright Steers a Bold Course Into Stormy Issues
LEAD: In the basement of the Capitol an investigation of Representative Jim Wright grinds toward its conclusion.
Around him, allies advise a cautious, let-George-do-it-first approach in discussing the budget deficit with the new President.
But anyone expecting a weakened or wary Speaker finds that Mr.
Wright is not easily derailed.


Cranston Williams, 93; Led Publishers Group
LEAD: Cranston Williams, general manager of the American Newspaper Publishers Association for 21 years before his retirement in 1960, died of congestive heart failure Sunday at his home in Lynchburg, Va.
He was 93 years old.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Not even the Israelis have massacred so many Shiites.


REAGAN EMBRACES OPTIMISTIC GOALS IN HIS LAST BUDGET
LEAD: Eleven days before he is scheduled to leave office, President Reagan today proposed a $1.15 trillion budget for the fiscal year 1990 that he said would meet the deficit ceiling of Congress's budget-balancing law, significantly increase spending on the military and some other programs and avoid new taxes.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-13  China was urged to end state ownership of industry in a bold proposal for change made by three influential Chinese economists with close ties to the Government.
Page A1


Cuomo Explores Borrowing to Close New York Budget Gap
LEAD: Governor Mario M. Cuomo said today that the state would probably have to borrow ''somewhere in the range of a couple of hundred million dollars'' to close its budget gap for the current fiscal year.


75-Footers to Replace 12-Meters and Offshoots
LEAD: Moving to restore stability to an America's Cup tarnished by discord, international challengers have reached agreement on a new class of boat as well as race courses, dates and format for the next sailing competition.


Master Plan Seeks $15 Billion for Schools
LEAD: New York City school officials yesterday urged Mayor Edward I. Koch to provide $15 billion to rebuild and modernize New York's dilapidated school system by the end of the century.


Temco Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temco Service Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,078,452
25,478,516
Net inc
140,153
b92,472
Share earns
.25
-
Shares outst
559,552
594,564
Yr rev
107,740,000
101,721,098
Net inc
564,107
426,398
Share earns
.98
.72
Shares outst
574,562
594,564


N.C. State Encourages Investigation by N.C.A.A.
LEAD: Bruce R. Poulton, the chancellor of North Carolina State University, and Jim Valvano, the school's basketball coach and athletic director, today sent a letter to Richard R. Schultz, president of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, in which they invited an investigation into the university's basketball program.


Banponce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banponce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,824,000
5,646,000
Per share
1.01
.98
Yr net inc
20,913,000
12,017,000
Per share
3.63
2.08


Correction
LEAD: A report yesterday about the marriage of Leslie Lowenbraun and Jeffrey H. Weitzman misstated the bridegroom's occupation.
He is a partner, not an associate, in the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells.


Constance Chilton, Educator, 85
LEAD: Constance Chilton, a former director of the Elizabeth Morrow School in Englewood, N.J., died after a long illness on Dec. 28 at Englewood Hospital.
She was 85 and lived in Englewood.


Write-Off Is Set by Corning
LEAD: Corning Glass Works announced yesterday that it would take a one-time after-tax charge of about $84 million to its 1988 earnings for its estimated liability on future medical benefits for its current retirees.


Templeton Growth Fund reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Templeton Growth Fund
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
1,691,183,828
1,285,283,079
Per share
13.75
11.73
Shares outst
123,031,635
109,599,215
During the 12 months, dividends of 73 cents and capital gains of 48 cents were paid out.


Arias Postpones Latin Summit
LEAD: Costa Rica today announced the indefinite postponement of a Central American summit meeting that was scheduled for Jan. 15 and 16.


Washington Talk: State Department; For Diplomats, Time To Read the Tea Leaves
LEAD: When James A. Baker 3d and a coterie of aides began turning up in the State Department cafeteria line a few weeks ago, they sparked intense speculation within a bureaucracy trained to read intentions into seemingly minuscule nuances of behavior.


Herbert A. Seltzer, Administrator, 82
LEAD: Rabbi Herbert A. Seltzer, a retired administrator of a geriatrics center, died Friday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old and lived in Palm Beach.


Unisys Plans Job Cuts
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said Friday that it would cut 450 jobs from its Computer Systems division in St.
Paul and Eagan, Minn., through layoffs and attrition.
The information services company, which is based in Blue Bell, Pa., said about half of the jobs affected are salaried.
Unisys employs 10,800 people in Minnesota.


Feasts on Cotton Plant May Be Over for Pest
LEAD: TO a caterpillar, a growing cotton plant is a natural invitation to dine and farmers pay the multimillion-dollar check.
But now, genetic engineers have developed a cotton plant that is naturally poisonous to the pests.


Guidry's Agent Tells Mets He's Interested
LEAD: Ron Guidry made a bid yesterday to remain in New York.
His agent, Reggie Ringuet, called the Mets to find out if they had any interest in him as a relief pitcher.
Guidry spoke with Pat Gillick, general manager of the Toronto Blue Jays, who apparently do have some interest in him as a reliever. ''Basically, I couldn't give him an answer at this point,'' said Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' vice president for baseball operations.


Price Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 18
1988
1987
Sales
1,567,300,000
1,283,140,000
Net inc
38,870,000
30,870,000
Share earns
.79
.63


Chinese Dissident Freed From Jail, but Restricted
LEAD: A campaigner for democracy who had studied in the United States was released from a Chinese prison today.
But a Government official said he would not be able to return to America for at least a year.


Reagan Is Doing 'Quite Well' After Surgery on Left Hand
LEAD: President Reagan is ''recovering quite well'' from surgery to correct a curvature of the fourth finger of the left hand, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said today.


Dollar Rises Against Mark But Loses Ground to the Yen
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply against the West German mark yesterday and then retreated somewhat in the face of modest dollar sales by the Federal Reserve and several European central banks and comments from the president of the Bundesbank.


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Monica Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,946,313
2,397,850
Share earns
.72
.59
Yr net inc
10,146,560
8,454,086
Share earns
2.50
2.09


Pacific Resources Head Calls Deal 'Imaginative'
LEAD: For Robert G. Reed 3d, the chairman, president and chief executive of Pacific Resources Inc., the proposed acquisition of his Hawaii-based company by a large Australian crude producer is a ''win-win deal for everybody.''


Westchester Welfare Recipients Begin to Work for Their Benefits


Free Cello Recital
LEAD: The cellist Sharon Robinson is to give a free recital on Thursday at 8 P.M. at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, to open the Pro Musicis 20th-anniversary season.
The program will be a Marcello Adagio, Beethoven's Sonata in C, Chopin's Polonaise Brillante, Rachmaninoff's Sonata, Opus 19, and Ned Rorem's ''After Reading Shakespeare.


Spitak Journal; Towns Can Be Rebuilt; How About Broken Lives?
LEAD: In the towns that suffered the worst damage in the Armenian earthquake last month, survivors are turning their thoughts toward an uncertain future.


By Design: Winter Camouflage
LEAD: It's that time of year - gray skies, gray moods, and you feel a head cold coming on.
There are positive steps you can take to brighten your wardrobe and your mood.


18 Start in 'Workfare' in Westchester
LEAD: Fifteen men and three women began working today for their welfare benefits, as Westchester County initiated a ''workfare'' program that officials said could save taxpayers $2 million a year in relief costs in this city alone.


U.S. Opposed to 2 Westinghouse Ventures
LEAD: The Justice Department, which has taken few antitrust actions during the Reagan Administration, said yesterday that it would seek to block two proposed joint ventures between the Westinghouse Electric Corporation and ABB Asea Brown Boveri, a Swiss industrial equipment manufacturer, unless the deals are modified to eliminate features that the department says are anti-competitive.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.38
9.04
6.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.28
8.28
5.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.50
8.48
6.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.31
9.30
8.75
30-YR.


Setback for Fed Jurisdiction
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board suffered a setback Friday in its attempt to extend its regulatory reach over banking subsidiaries and state-chartered banks seeking to expand into such areas as insurance and real estate investing.


Chess
LEAD: For the first time since the beginning of women's international team play in 1957, the Soviet squad had to yield the championship to Hungary in the 1988 Olympiad, which ended Nov. 27 in Thessaloniki, Greece.
The sensational Hungarian women racked up a score of 33-9 to capture the gold medal.


Ojeda's Recovery
LEAD: Bob Ojeda, who nearly severed the tip off a finger of his pitching hand with an electric hedge clipper in an accident on Sept. 21, says he is recovering nicely from the career-threatening injury.
The Mets' left-hander, who has begun pitching from the mound at a high school field in his hometown of Visalia, Calif., reported he was not hampered even though he has lost feeling in the tip of the middle finger on his left hand.


Steinberg Defense Disputes Account of Child's Death
LEAD: Disputing the prosecution's theory of how Lisa Steinberg was killed, a medical expert for the defense testified yesterday that the child was shaken, then thrown against a hard surface, causing the head injury that killed her.


Quake Felt in Las Vegas
LEAD: A mild earthquake was felt in the Las Vegas area Sunday night, but the authorities received no reports of serious damage or injury.
The tremor, centered 10 miles northeast of Las Vegas, came at 9:08 P.M. and measured 3.2 to 3.5 on the Richter scale of ground motion and energy released, according to the United States Geological Survey.


A Consortium Will Acquire Cooke's Cable TV Systems
LEAD: A consortium of cable operators said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the cable systems owned by Jack Kent Cooke, which have a total of 700,000 subscribers.
No price was disclosed.


Hear the Voice of the Endangered Farmers
LEAD: To the Editor:


From Russia, With Love for U.S. Goods
LEAD: In Brooklyn, Queens, New Jersey and on Long Island, wherever Russian is spoken these days around New York, you can hear variations on amused laments about the ''vacuum cleaners,'' one of the latest phenomena spawned by a changing Soviet Union.


Ruling on N.F.L.
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday denied a request by National Football League owners for permission to continue to hold the college draft through 1992, but declined to rule on its legality.
District Judge David Doty said that until the N.F.L.
Management Council, which represents the owners, and the N.F.L.


Briton Links Ties With Iran To Movement on Hostages
LEAD: British officials told Iran today that relations could not improve without progress on freeing British hostages believed to be held by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon.


Noxell Replaces Rabbits In Tests of Cosmetics
LEAD: THE Noxell Corporation, maker of Noxzema skin creams and Cover Girl cosmetics, has decided to screen new cosmetics and skin care products for safety by applying them to tissue cultures in laboratory dishes instead of injecting them into the eyes of rabbits.


Consumer Debt Rose $4.5 Billion in November
LEAD: Americans took out $4.5 billion more in consumer debt in November than they paid off, as consumers increased purchases for the holiday season.


Review/Music; Some Basics and a Tribute
LEAD: Michael Morgan, a 31-year-old assistant conductor of the Chicago Symphony, led the New York Philharmonic in 1986 and began conducting at the New York City Opera this season.
This weekend, he made his debut with the Brooklyn Philharmonic at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and at the last of his three performances, on


In Beijing, a Bold New Proposal: End State Ownership of Industry
LEAD: In a bold proposal for change, three influential Chinese economists with close ties to the Government have called for China to abandon state ownership of industry.


Healthvest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthvest (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,260,000
11,475,000
Net inc
5,729,000
5,950,000
Share earns
.49
.51
Yr rev
53,734,000
36,055,000
Net inc
24,009,000
21,237,000
Share earns
2.06
2.01
Shares outst
11,661,000
10,567,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Busy Week For Ellis Verdi
LEAD: It is a busy week for Ellis Verdi &amp; Partners.


Polaroid Stock Off After Court Ruling
LEAD: Investors sold off shares in the Polaroid Corporation after a court ruling cast doubt on whether Roy Disney's Shamrock Holdings Inc. could win its $2.4 billion bid to acquire the instant photography company.
The stock of the Cambridge, Mass., company dropped $1.875 a share yesterday, to $36.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Results Plus
LEAD:  TENNIS  Saceanu Upsets Chesnokov: Christian Saceanu of West Germany upset second-seeded Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the $350,000 New South Wales Open in Sydney, Australia.
Olivier Delaitre, a French-born resident of Belgium, surprised Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 6-2, 6-4.


Scientists Find Lasting Damage From Oil Spill
LEAD: IN the first comprehensive ecological study of oil spills in tropical waters, scientists have found that, contrary to widely held assumptions, the damage to coral reefs is not only immediate and severe but also can leave the organisms vulnerable to devastating disease and blight for years to come.


Steinbrenner Files a Suit On Winfield Foundation
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, sued last week by Dave Winfield for his failure to make some $450,000 in payments to the Yankee outfielder's charitable foundation, filed his own lawsuit yesterday in an attempt to remove Winfield as head of the New Jersey-based organization.


TALKS BROKEN OFF BY AFGHAN REBELS
LEAD: Afghan guerrilla leaders refused today to resume direct talks with Soviet representatives, accusing Moscow of playing political games to obtain a place in a postwar government for members of the Kabul Government.


Tutors for Disk Jockeys
LEAD: WHEN you need to learn anything about using computers, no book or series of lectures can substitute for putting your fingers on the keyboard and making things happen on the screen.
Here are some software packages to help guide your fingers.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Firstbank of Illinois Co., Springfield, named as chief financial officer Chris R. Zettek.
He replaces Mark H. Ferguson, who was elected president and chief operating officer last year.


Car Export Limits Kept By Japanese
LEAD: Despite strong opposition in Japan, the Japanese Government has told American trade officials that its restraints on automobile exports to the United States will be maintained for another year.


Scientists Link Some Breast Cancer to Loss of Protective Gene
LEAD: NEW evidence linking some breast cancers to loss of a protective ''anti-oncogene'' has strengthened the theory that loss of such genes is a major factor in the complex process by which many human cancers arise.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adia S.A., Zurich, the world's No. 2 temporary employment agency, expressed interest in buying ''substantial portions'' of Blue Arrow P.L.C., also an employment concern.


Equity Bank reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equity Bank
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b355,000
-
Per share
.79
-
b-Included a gain of $142,000 from a tax loss carryforward.
Comparable year-ago figures are not available because the bank began operating in August 1987.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hi-Shear Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,601,000
18,775,000
Net loss
400,000
b1,038,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo rev
35,867,000
37,534,000
Net inc
100,000
2,024,000
Share earns
.02
.40


Military Request Includes Tempting Targets
LEAD: The $315.2 billion President Reagan requested today for the military, already singled out by budget cutters, includes several tempting targets, especially the program to develop an antimissile defense system.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Excerpts From the Final Budget Message by President Reagan to Congress
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Reagan's budget message today to Congress: EIGHT YEARS OF ACCOMPLISHMENT Working together, we have accomplished much over the last eight years.
The Economy


Patterns
LEAD:  Cold Comfort for Furs


Settlement by Rocky Mount
LEAD: The Rocky Mount Undergarment Company and two of its principals today settled Federal civil charges that the company's 1985 annual report was deliberately falsified to increase reported net income.


Robeson Industries Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robeson Industries Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Sales
11,152,805
13,428,277
Net inc
b709,546
c781,031
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
2,475,030
1,650,020
9mo sales
29,772,165
35,072,506
Net loss
b179,295
3,980,953
Shares outst
2,200,027
1,650,000


The New Couple On the Block
LEAD: Would you like to buy Dan and Marilyn Quayle a showerhead?
A washer-dryer set?
Spring for some historic molding for the family room?
The Quayles are accepting contributions from friends to raise up to $150,000 for renovations to their new official residence.


Colorado Prime reports earnings for Year to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado Prime (AMEX)
Year to Oct 28
1988
1987
Revenue
93,794,000
84,547,000
Net inc
5,629,000
3,681,000
Share earns
1.15
.95


Plane-Device Merger Set
LEAD: Two Massachusetts companies that are the leading rivals in the fledgling business of providing airplane security devices announced Friday that they were merging.


Hewlett-Packard's New Work Station
LEAD: Broadening its technical computer line at the low end, the Hewlett-Packard Company introduced the HP 9000 Model 340 SRX work station, which it said is the first 3-D graphics work station priced under $15,000.
Hewlett-Packard also announced big price cuts on several related products.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Speechwriting Bork
LEAD: Robert H. Bork Jr., son of the former Federal judge and Supreme Court nominee, has become a speechwriter for Senator Gordon J. Humphrey, Republican of New Hampshire.


On Campus in Japan, Taking Stock
LEAD: Amid the familiar, the reassuring and the everyday, the students who will help shape the era of a new Emperor pondered today whether it will really mean a new Japan.


Business and Health; The Effort to Curb Caesarean Rate
LEAD: EMPLOYERS and insurers have been fighting an uphill battle to get expectant mothers and their doctors to think twice before a baby is delivered by Caesarean section.


Dr. Milton J. Brothers, Diabetes Specialist, 62
LEAD: Dr.
Milton J. Brothers, an internist who specialized in the treatment of diabetes, died of bladder cancer yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 62 years old and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.


Yastrzemski and Bench Voted to baseball Hall
LEAD: The two favorites, Johnny Bench and Carl Yastrzemski, were swept into baseball's Hall of Fame last night, both gaining admission in their first year of eligibility and both becoming near-unanimous choices.


ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc reports earnings for 12mo to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc (OTC)
12mo to Oct 1
1988
1987
Sales
11,070,840
9,168,602
Net inc
b1,051,870
b4,113,508
Share earns
.10
.46
b-Included extraordinary income of $106,111 and $3,464,708 for the latest year and year-earlier period, respectively.


Critics Award Goes to Book On Dr. King
LEAD: ''Parting the Waters'' (Simon &amp; Schuster), Taylor Branch's detailed account of the rise of the American civil-rights movement, yesterday won the National Book Critics Circle award for general nonfiction.


Bizarre Explosions
LEAD: A team of American astronomers believes it has found evidence of a bizarre double supernova explosion -the explosion of a very massive star inside the blast debris of an earlier and similar explosion.


Bug Lover Explores Nature's Subtle Chemistry
LEAD: THOMAS EISNER had barely reached school age when he was smitten by a ''disease'' he calls biophilia - love of living things, especially the more than billion billion creatures with six or eight legs that crawl, swim and flit through nearly every conceivable habitat on earth.


Child-Abuse Cases Overwhelm Agency
LEAD: Despite strides toward improvement in the last two years, the agency charged with protecting New York City's children from abuse and neglect continues to be overwhelmed by its task, according to present and former officials, caseworkers and other experts.


Correction
LEAD: The Music View column in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday gave an incorrect date for a piano recital by Dmitry Rachmanov at Merkin Concert Hall in New York.
It is tonight at 8, not tomorrow.


U.S. Turns to Giant Blimp for Defense of the Nation's Shores
LEAD: A QUARTER century after the United States Navy consigned its last dirigible airship to the scrap heap of antiquated weaponry, a gigantic new blimp is taking shape to defend America against cruise missiles, drug smugglers and a host of other modern threats.


Deadline Is Off In Drexel Talks
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which has agreed to plead guilty to six felony charges to avoid an indictment for financial fraud, said yesterday that the initial deadline of today for reaching agreement with the Securities and Exchange Commission had been dropped.


Templeton Global Fund reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Templeton Global Fund
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
732,518,894
236,420,743
Per share
7.29
32.67
Shares outst
100,440,344
7,236,040
Assets represent net assets.
During the 12 months, dividends of 77 cents and capital gains of $3.52 were paid out.


Koch Affirmative-Action Program Used for Patronage, Panel Is Told
LEAD: A job-referral program set up in City Hall for affirmative action was used instead to dispense patronage on behalf of top political leaders throughout New York City, current and former Koch administration officials told an investigating state panel yesterday.


Epsilon Data Management Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epsilon Data Management Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
14,197,000
13,530,000
Net inc
225,000
575,000
Share earns
.07
.19
Shares outst
3,018,000
2,972,000
6mo sales
26,512,000
22,921,000
Net inc
475,000
475,000
Share earns
.16
.17
Shares outst
3,031,000
2,854,000


Templeton Foreign Fund reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Templeton Foreign Fund
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
320,858,998
261,150,415
Per share
19.28
17.35
Shares outst
16,639,284
15,053,459
Assets represent net assets.
During the 12 months, dividends of 62 cents and capital gains of $1.16 were paid out.


Judge Halts Rule Stranding Aliens in Rio Grande Valley
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Brownsville today issued a temporary restraining order suspending a new immigration policy that has left hundreds of Central American aliens stranded and homeless in the Rio Grande Valley.


Robert Pomeroy, 86, An Ex-Legislator, Dies
LEAD: Robert Watson Pomeroy, a former New York State legislator, died of heart failure on Jan. 4 at his home in Millbrook, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.


Times Co. Agrees to Sell Cable Unit for $420 Million
LEAD: In the largest sale under a Government program of tax breaks that is intended to increase ownership of broadcast properties by members of minority groups, The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its cable television system for $420 million in cash.


JUDGE WANTS U.S. TO JUSTIFY STAND ON NORTH CHARGES
LEAD: The Federal judge in the Iran-contra inquiry today declined to dismiss two of the main criminal charges against Oliver L. North until the Attorney General certifies that classified evidence in the case cannot be disclosed without damaging the nation's security.


Kenneth McMillan, 56, Actor In Numerous Stage and Film Roles
LEAD: Kenneth McMillan, the prolific charactor actor with a burly policeman's demeanor who won critical praise for his often lovable performances, died of liver disease Sunday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 56 years old and lived in Studio City, Calif.


Effect of Abortion on Women Is Discounted
LEAD: No conclusive evidence exists on how abortions affect a woman's mental or physical health, C. Everett Koop, Surgeon General of the United States, told President Reagan in a report today.


Supreme Court to Hear Argument On Law Limiting Abortion Access
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide the constitutionality of a Missouri law intended to limit access to abortions.
The case offers the Court a vehicle for reconsidering its abortion precedents, a step urged by both Missouri and the Reagan Administration, but the brief order issued today gave no indication whether the Court would take that opportunity.


U.S. Pilots Got Caution Warning
LEAD: The Navy pilots who downed two Libyan fighters last week received orders moments beforehand to act with caution and fire only in self-defense, the Pentagon said today.
The pilots had not received orders to fire at will.
A Pentagon spokesman, Daniel Howard, said the cautionary advice means that ''weapons are to be fired in self defense.


Pentagon Expected To Bar Some Figures In the Fraud Inquiry
LEAD: Defense Department officials said today that the Pentagon is expected to move on Tuesday against several companies, consultants and Government employees, including a former assistant Navy secretary, implicated in the Federal procurement fraud investigation.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court to Rule on 'Dial-a-Porn' Law
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a new Federal law banning sexually explicit telephone message services violates the First Amendment right to freedom of speech.


Rescue Promissory Notes Under Fire
LEAD: With savings and loan rescues coming under greater Congressional scrutiny, the $18 billion of promissory notes issued by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to help sell off insolvent institutions have become a pawn in a fierce political debate.


War and Finger-Pointing; Odds of Progress at Poison Gas Conference Are Dimmed Amid a Welter of Accusations
LEAD: A conference of 145 nations summoned to galvanize world opinion against chemical weapons has partly proved to be an exercise in moral ambiguity, since none of its key participants can claim spotless records.
Fingers of accusation wag in many directions.


Defenseman Snaps Late Tie as Devils Win Third in a Row
LEAD: Joe Cirella banged in the rebound and the Garden groaned last night.
For the Rangers, the sound was as foreign as it was audible.
They had manufactured a lot in the third period this season - thrills, comebacks, defensive stands - and the Garden had been their most rewarding workplace.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chiat/Day In Accord To Buy Mojo
LEAD: CHIAT/DAY, the Los Angeles-based agency whose West Coast unconventionality helped Apple Computer take on I.B.M. and Nynex sell Yellow Pages, announced late yesterday that it had entered into an agreement in principle to purchase Mojo MDA Group Ltd., the Australian ad agency that made ''G'day, mate'' part of the


The Facts on the Fax
LEAD: TODAY is National Fax Day.


Nelson Is Said to Have a Recurrence of Cancer
LEAD: Karl Nelson, who missed the Giants' 1987 season because of Hodgkin's disease but played this season, has a recurrence of the cancer, sources close to the team said yesterday.


BARRY THREATENED WITH RECALL DRIVE
LEAD: Mitch Snyder, the leader of the drive to get shelter and care for the homeless in Washington, warned Mayor Marion S.Barry Jr. today that he might face a citizens' effort to remove him from office if the quality of government in the city did not improve.


Soviets Open Pre-1917 Files
LEAD: The Central State Archive has opened 500,000 secret files on such subjects as the Russian Orthodox Church and the White Guards' opposition to the Bolshevik Revolution, the press agency Tass reported today.
Records on organizations liquidated during the 1920's and 30s, at the height of the Stalinist repression, are being declassified, it said.


Blasius Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Blasius Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
12,791,000
13,017,000
Net inc
b641,000
c3,742,000
Share earns
.16
-
Shares outst
3,956,000
3,962,000
6mo sales
25,549,000
24,994,000
Net inc
b2,979,000
c3,266,000
Share earns
.74
-
Shares outst
3,956,000
3,965,000


Marines Are Faulted in Death
LEAD: The Marine Commandant, Gen.
Alfred M. Gray, today accepted a report concluding that there was a ''total breakdown'' in accountability procedures in a unit that left an enlisted man to die in the California desert during a training exercise in August.


Institute Plans to Revive 100-Inch Telescope
LEAD: THE historic 100-inch telescope on Mount Wilson, Calif., which closed down in 1985 despite its standing as one of the largest astronomical instruments in the world, appears to have gained a new lease on life.





Fire Island Deer Hunt Sanctioned for Research


Revived Air Express Picks Chief Executive
LEAD: The Air Express International Corporation, an air-freight company that has been turned around in the last three years, yesterday announced the appointment of a new chief executive, Guenter Rohrmann.


Bridge
LEAD: A useful book for the experienced player is one that tests him with miscellaneous play and defense problems.
This genre, common in England, is rather rare on this side of the Atlantic.
Helping to fill the gap is ''Spingold Challenge,'' in which the reader, by a set of curious chances, finds himself in the final of a national knockout team championship and plays 64 difficult deals.


Richard Barr, 71, Stage Producer And Theater League Head, Dies
LEAD: Richard Barr, the president of the League of American Theaters and Producers, died of liver failure yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Mr.
Barr, who as a producer brought to the stage the works of Edward Albee, Samuel Beckett and many other playwrights, was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Gulfstream Remembers Rocky Start
LEAD: Fifty winters ago, Sonja Henie, the Olympic skating champion, cut a ceremonial green-and-white ribbon and racing began at Gulfstream Park.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Addenda
LEAD: *
Act III Publishing has acquired the assets of Mix Publications, which includes Mix, the recording industry magazine; Electronic Musician magazine; Mix Bookshelf, a catalogue of technical resources for musicians, and the annual Mix Technical Excellence and Creativity Awards program.


Global Income Plus Fund Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Income Plus Fund Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Assets
229,522,334
-
Per share
9.50
-
Shares outst
24,160,753
-
Assets represent total net assets.
The company said the for the period from Sept.


Devil and Bruin Draw Suspensions
LEAD: Coach Terry O'Reilly of the Boston Bruins was suspended by the National Hockey League for four games and Jim Korn, a Devils' forward, was banned for three games yesterday in connection with their fight Dec. 29 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The league also fined each club $5,000, O'Relly $1,000 and Korn $500 for their fight in the runway under the stands at the end of Boston's 6-2 victory.


Stake in Unit Is Acquired By Memorex
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation said today that it had signed an agreement with Memorex Telex N.V. to form a joint venture in which each company would own half of National Advanced Systems, formerly National's wholly owned subsidiary, which distributes mainframe computers and peripheral equipment manufactured by Hitachi Ltd.


Review/Television; Robert Moses' Vision: Boon and Bane
LEAD: To his admirers, he was the greatest builder of all time, who transformed New York from a 19th- to a 20th-century city and paved the way for urban developers throughout America.
To his critics, he was a prodigious destroyer of neighborhoods, who cared less for flesh and blood than for steel and concrete.


Male Duck's Timidity Around Flashy Rivals May Threaten Species
LEAD: THE American black duck, whose numbers have shrunk by 60 percent in the last 30 years, may be on the road to extinction because males of the species are too timid to win females away from the flashier and more assertive mallard drake, a study by Canadian scientists suggests.


Lifecore Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifecore Biomedical
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,231,000
683,000
Net inc
132,000
23,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo net inc
2,417,000
1,458,000
Net inc
300,000
7,000
Share earns
.06
-


OPEC Sets Strategy Talks With Other Oil Producers
LEAD: Members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil-producing nations will meet on Jan. 26 in London to discuss ways to cooperate in an attempt to stabilize the world oil market, the Secretary General of OPEC said today.


William Powers, 81, A Rhode Island Judge
LEAD: William E. Powers, the victim of an accident that left him blind, who become a Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court and the state's Attorney General, died Saturday at the Wayland Health Center in Providence.
He was 81 years old.


Crownamerica Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crownamerica Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Revenue
18,686,000
27,606,000
Net inc
b1,022,000
c1,316,000
Share earns
.97
1.15
Shares outst
1,055,314
1,144,251
b-Included after-tax gains of $349,000, or 33 cents a share, from the sale of Crownamerica's U.K.


Gresham Isn't Father Of Gresham's Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Datavision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datavision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,078,000
3,237,000
Net loss
7,771,000
384,000
Yr rev
11,499,931
10,101,982
Net loss
9,285,398
1,296,221
The latest fiscal year included a total of $6 million in non-recurring charges in connection with a restructuring and increases in reserves for potentially uncollectable receivables.


Sallie Mae Prices $450 Million Issue
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday priced a $450 million issue of floating-rate notes due on July 13, 1989, through a group of various securities dealers.
Sallie Mae is a federally chartered stockholder-owned corporation that has financed about 4 in 10 of all guaranteed student loans outstanding today, Offered at a price of par, the notes are yielding a variable rate equal to 55-hundredths of a percentage point more than the bond-equivalent yield of the 91-day Treasury bill auction rate.


Discovery of Rare Stars
LEAD: The world's most powerful radiotelescope has pierced dense clouds of cosmic dust and gas to reveal scores of very young stars in much greater profusion than ever found before, astronomers at the University of Wisconsin have reported.


After the N.F.L. Huddles, Bengals Won't Have To
LEAD: The Cincinnati Bengals can continue doing what they did to get to the Super Bowl.


G.E. of Britain Vows to Fight Possible Offer of $12 Billion
LEAD: Britain's largest manufacturing concern, the General Electric Company, vowed today to fight a takeover bid estimated at $12 billion that an international consortium is apparently trying to put together.


GTE Reorganizes Into Six Units
LEAD: The GTE Corporation, which operates the largest independent phone network in the United States, reorganized into six operating units and eliminated a layer of management in the process.
GTE has been restructuring since March, selling various businesses and announcing big job cuts.


Vagrant Held In Slaying Of Pathologist
LEAD: A vagrant who had been living secretly on the 22d floor of the Bellevue Hospital Center was arrested and charged yesterday with the murder, rape and robbery of a pregnant doctor who was attacked as she worked alone in her office Saturday afternoon.


Our Towns; Open Any Door: You Can't Tell An Owner Is Poor
LEAD: If you really, really try hard, you might be able to tell which are the subsidized low- and moderate-income condominiums at the new Society Hill complex here, and which are the $140,000 market-priced units. ''Sometimes I can tell which people - I think I can,'' said Petra Catogge, who lives in a subsidized unit.


Unihorn China Venture
LEAD: Chinese software developers will write programs for overseas customers in a joint venture with an American company.
Unihorn Inc., a San Francisco-based subsidiary of Unison Inc., has joined with the Chinese Aerospace Ministry and the China Great Wall Industry Corporation, which sells satellite-launching services, in a venture that will develop and package software for international markets.


Pioneering Studies Find Surprisingly High Rate Of Mental Ills in Young
LEAD: AS many as one in five children suffer from psychiatric problems serious enough to impair their lives in some way, according to the surprising findings of several new surveys of the mental health of children.


Donors to the Neediest Cases List AIDS as a Major Concern
LEAD: ''How does one determine who the truly needy are?'' asks Arlene Solomon of Manhattan.
She notes that there are so many categories to choose from and mentions these: the homeless, battered women and children, people suffering from AIDS and animals abused in many ways.


Rig Count Falls Again
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs fell by 36, to 872, last week, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
It was the second consecutive decline.
The count dropped by 32 the week before.
A year ago, the number of working rigs totaled 1,102.
The count, a widely watched industry index of drilling activity, reflects the number of rigs exploring for oil.


How the Budget Would Allocate Funds for Big Domestic Programs
LEAD: President Reagan's budget for the fiscal year that starts Oct. 1 advocates ending 82 Government programs, cutting spending on farm programs by nearly 19 percent and trimming the growth in Medicare and Medicaid by about $5 billion.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helene Curtis Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
163,610,000
120,564,000
Net inc
3,616,000
1,988,000
Share earns
.81
.54
9mo sales
458,612,000
351,962,000
Net inc
10,234,000
8,244,000
Share earns
2.54
2.23


Walgreen Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walgreen Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,211,674,000
1,114,762,000
Net inc
24,726,000
18,813,000
Share earns
.40
.31
The company said the latest quarter sales figure no longer reflects food service sales, since it sold its 91 Wag's restaurants to Marriott Corp.


Libya Says It Can Make Chemical Arms if Others Do
LEAD: Libya today implicitly asserted its right to make chemical weapons as long as other nations have similar devices.


TI Selling Units
LEAD: TI Group P.L.C. said it had agreed to sell three of its United States plastics subsidiaries for $86 million to the Fluorocarbon Company of Laguna Niguel, Calif.
The three companies - Dixon Industries, CHR Industries and Bunnell Plastics - are subsidiaries of the Bundy Corporation, which TI acquired in April.


Market Place; Money Managers Beat Market in '88
LEAD: Institutional money management firms did something unusual last year: as a group, they outperformed the stock market, a feat they have accomplished only twice in the last six years.
The value of the average money manager's stock portfolio climbed 17.8 percent in 1988, according to C.D.A.
Investment Technologies.


Where Big Macs Grow
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Chief Medical Examiner Sworn In


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Alvin H. Schechter has been named chairman and chief executive and Jonathan J. Prinz has been named president of Schechter Design Group, a recently acquired subsidiary of the Omnicom Group.


The Conquest of Terrorism
LEAD: One day perhaps the West will summon the moral and political courage to face the truth about terrorism.
On that day, the conquest of terrorism will begin - but not until that day.


Argonaut Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Argonaut Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
122,000,000
115,700,000
Net inc
b17,500,000
c102,200,000
Share earns
1.68
8.73
Shares outst
10,429,549
11,704,146
Yr rev
467,100,000
425,600,000
Net inc
b101,800,000
c170,800,000
Share earns
9.41
14.59
Shares outst
10,821,414
11,708,134


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Saatchi Ad for Project To Aid the Homeless
LEAD: The throbbing beat of a Brian Eno composition lends insistence to the message of the Manhattan Bowery Project: ''No matter how many times you look away, turn away, walk away, the homeless are still there.''


Ingram Begins Bid For Micro D Shares
LEAD: Ingram Industries, a privately held Nashville-based company, began a tender offer for all outstanding shares of Micro D Inc. at $12.50 a share in cash.
Ingram, which operates inland marine transportation and distibutes books, videotapes and microcomputer products, already owns about 59 percent of Micro D, a Santa Ana,


Swedish Stock Market
LEAD: The Stockholm stock exchange closed at an all-time high today despite a 15 percent tax on 1989 company profits. which the Government announced Dec. 31.
The general index finished at 1,002.99 after climbing 1.57 percent for the day.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Abortion Case on Agenda  The Supreme Court will rule on a law limiting abortion access.
Page B5.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Ad Hoc Marketing Resources, New York, has agreed to create a campaign for New York City to decrease the number of non-emergency calls made to the city's 911 emergency telephone services.


Bonds Track Dollar's Vicissitudes
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed in moderately active trading yesterday, as dealers spent the session reacting to the dollar's twists and turns on the foreign exchange markets.


Joy Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Joy Technologies Inc
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Sales
132,800,000
134,400,000
Net loss
2,200,000
4,000,000
9mo sales
373,600,000
348,700,000
Net loss
11,300,000
27,600,000
The latest periods included non- recurring gains of $3.6 million for the quarter and $5.8 million for the 9 months.


Biotechnology Collaboration
LEAD: California Biotechnology Inc. and Genentech Inc. said today that they had agreed to collaborate on developing therapeutic uses of human lung surfactant.
Surfactant, a mixture of proteins and fats produced in late pregnancy, enables an infant's lungs to remain expanded after exhaling.


Measles Kills
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOCKEY: Law and Order Bring Success; Police Training Comes In Handy for Canadiens Coach
LEAD: In the curious nomenclature of professional hockey, the ''policeman'' is often the player who breaks the rules, the toughest guy on the roster, the one who protects weaker teammates and keeps foes in line with a timely stick poked in the ribs or a meaningful glove shoved in the face.


In China, Racism Serves Needs of Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Will Swear On the 1789 Bible
LEAD: Mr.
Bush will take the oath Jan. 20 on the Bible used by George Washington in 1789.
The Bible, from the St.
John's Masonic Lodge in New York, is the King James Version printed in 1767 in London.
After Washington was sworn by Robert Livingston, chancellor of New York State, the Bible was given to St.


Coffee Prices Drop Sharply As Speculators Quit Market
LEAD: Speculators bailed out of the coffee futures market yesterday in a frantic, technically inspired selloff on the New York Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, although fundamental factors continued to point toward higher prices.


Amid the Rustle of Finery, Fashion Celebrates Its Own
LEAD: American fashion was seeing red last night, but nobody was the least bit upset.
The annual gala awards dinner of the Council of Fashion Designers of America at the Metropolitan Museum of Art was more than a glittering occasion for the industry to celebrate its own.
It was also a last hurrah for Nancy Reagan, who appeared in a red satin dress by Oscar de la


SAKHAROV TOOK UP ENCLAVE'S STATUS
LEAD: Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and rights advocate, explored the possibility of direct rule from Moscow of an ethnic Armenian region in Azerbaijan when he visited the territory last month, according to an Armenian journalist who accompanied him there.


Export Scheme Charges
LEAD: The president of a Belgian company and three Dutch businessmen were indicted by a Federal grand jury today on charges that they tried to ship high-technology equipment to Eastern bloc countries.
Marcel Sanders, the president of the the Belgium Trading Company was arrested on Dec. 22 after trying to complete arrangements for an illegal shipment of American-made equipment to Bulgaria, the Government said.


Review/Television; A Lesson for Young Viewers
LEAD: ''Hope it wakes up a few of the dead brain cells in this town,'' says the high school student as he and a friend prepare to distribute, surreptitiously, their underground paper called Hatchet Job.
Most of the brain cells do respond, with fury.
Before the incident is over, the young journalists are involved in a court case, represented by an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer.


Soviets Designate a U.S. Dealer for Their Artists
LEAD: Thousands of contemporary Soviet artists are to be offered the chance to sell their works at art galleries around the United States as a result of a joint venture agreement signed yesterday between the Soviet Ministry of Culture, the Union of Soviet Artists and a New York art dealer who will act as wholesaler of the works.


Montclair Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Montclair Savings
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,051,000
923,000
Share earns
.42
.37
Yr net inc
3,787,000
3,920,000
Share earns
1.53
-
Prior-year share earnings are not available because the bank was not a capital stock savings bank throughout the period.


No Funds Provided for Grumman Navy Jet
LEAD: The Federal budget submitted yesterday provides no money for the A-6 Navy attack plane produced by the Grumman Corporation on Long Island, a move that will probably lead to another round of job cuts by the military contractor.
Grumman last month reduced its work force by 10 percent.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Move Over Madison
LEAD: Many are the perks that come with the Presidency.
To wit, George Bush, as a former member of the House Ways and Means Committee, now gets to have his picture hung in the committee's gallery of former members who went on to win the White House.


Jungle Fever Is Contagious In Cincinnati
LEAD: It is the kind of greeting that makes you consider reaching for your blunderbuss.


New Wind for the Panting Giant; Tasks for America: Compete, Save, Stimulate, Persist
LEAD: Twenty years ago, America's economy was the envy of friends and enemies, an engine of progress leading the world in virtually every branch of technology and generating the world's highest living standard.
Today it is a panting giant, increasingly on the defensive in global competition for markets and economic influence.


Some Daughters of Modern Dance Prepare Series
LEAD: Modern dance was formed by women like Loie Fuller, Isadora Duncan and Martha Graham, and although there has been more balance lately between the sexes, it remains a bastion of strong, inventive female choreographers.


Canonie Environmental Servces reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canonie Environmental Servces (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,984,000
9,797,000
Net inc
1,208,000
1,416,000
Share earns
.21
.25
9mo rev
38,957,000
27,917,000
Net inc
4,684,000
4,137,000
Share earns
.83
.73


Compromise On Allegheny Is Expected
LEAD: The two rival suitors for Allegheny International Inc. have worked out a compromise that would allow them to carve up the bankrupt consumer products company, people familiar with both sides said yesterday.


Residents of Welfare Hotel Seize City Office to Demand Permanent Housing


Seitel Inc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seitel Inc
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,500,000
7,411,643
Net inc
2,000,000
544,872
Share earns
.14
.06


Decor Corp reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Decor Corp (OTC)
13wks to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
6,452,681
5,839,275
Net loss
876,322
663,109
Shares outst
2,100,314
2,099,080
26wk sales
13,209,346
11,571,756
Net loss
1,368,039
1,033,835
Shares outst
2,100,245
2,099,080


Careers; A Good Year Is Seen for Managers
LEAD: MANAGEMENT recruiting and outplacement firms count on another good year for hiring, and cite new trends to reinforce that view.


New Swap Plan By Freddie Mac
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation yesterday announced the introduction of a weighted-average-coupon adjustable-rate mortgage guarantor program.
Under the program, Freddie Mac will swap its weighted-average-coupon adjustable-rate mortgage participation certificates for a like amount of adjustable-rate mortgages issued by lenders.


Sudan Rebels Say They Are Victims of Poison Gas
LEAD: A spokesman for the Sudanese rebels said today that Libyan forces supporting the Khartoum Government had used chemical weapons against them in the Sudan in the last six months.
American officials said they had been investigating the charges.


2 in Bank Fraud Indictment
LEAD: The former owner of the Central National Bank of New York and one employee were indicted yesterday on charges that they defrauded the bank, which is defunct, of more than $35 million.


Templeton World Fund reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Templeton World Fund
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
3,921,458,021
3,479,138,266
Per share
14.16
12.66
Shares outst
277,010,503
274,893,938
During the 12 months, dividends of 98 cents and capital gains of 38 cents were paid out.


Both Engines Apparently Failed On Airliner in Crash in England
LEAD: As the death toll rose to at least 44 in the crash of a British airliner in central England, Government investigators tried today to determine why both engines apparently failed on a three-month-old Boeing 737 jet.


Court Orders Guardian For Poisoned Jerseyan
LEAD: A New Jersey judge yesterday ordered that a legal guardian be appointed for a Haddonfield teen-ager who has been comatose since eating yogurt tainted with cyanide last week.


John William Bainton, Executive, 63
LEAD: John William Bainton, an engineering executive, died of melanoma Thursday at Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 63 years old and had homes in Lyford Cay, the Bahamas, and in Amagansett, L.I.


United Insurance Co of Amerca reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Insurance Co of Amerca
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
145,700,000
149,100,000
Net inc
b15,200,000
c59,900,000
Share earns
3.72
14.56
Shares outst
4,095,327
4,110,129
Yr rev
580,000,000
580,900,000
Net inc
b100,400,000
c109,500,000
Share earns
24.52
26.55
Shares outst
4,095,413
4,123,292


U.S. Says an Iraqi Had Role in Libyan Plant
LEAD: Administration officials said today that an Iraqi civil engineer who operates several companies in Switzerland and elsewhere in Europe played a central role in the construction of the Libyan chemical plant.


Interco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
683,293,000
680,752,000
Net inc
b10,506,000
c43,449,000
Share earns
.29
1.05
9mo sales
1,952,513,000
1,911,819,000
Net inc
b76,076,000
c108,392,000
Share earns
2.02
2.57


Books of The Times; In the English Gulag
LEAD:  Incline Our Hearts  By A. N. Wilson  250 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Lebanese Flee a Battle of Shiite Rivals
LEAD: Thousands of villagers fled their homes today as fierce fighting between rival Shiite Muslim militiamen continued in a district in southern Lebanon.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Wells, Rich, Greene Adds Outsider on I.B.M.
LEAD: Wells, Rich, Greene has brought in an outsider to help it run the International Business Machines account, which the agency won last summer.
David Sklaver, who managed several food accounts along with the account of NEC, an I.B.M. competitor, at DDB Needham, is joining W.R.G. as an executive vice president and group head for the technology company's account.


Closed Talks Bring GAF Trial to Halt
LEAD: The GAF stock manipulation trial was delayed again yesterday, as lawyers for the Government and the defendants tried in closed meetings at the Federal Court House in lower Manhattan to resolve a mistrial motion filed last week.


Two Reagan Mortgages on the Future
LEAD: President Reagan's final budget completes a transforming chapter in American fiscal history.
With eight years of deficits that will have tripled the national debt, this President, who wants a constitutional amendment to forbid all deficits, has made huge deficits acceptable.
Thanks to him, balancing the books in future years will be harder than ever.


More Black Rhinos Found in Kenya
LEAD: Kenya's population of black rhinoceroses, prized by poachers for their unusual horns, is on the increase, the minister of tourism and wildlife said in an interview published in the Sunday Nation, a newspaper.


28 More Bushes For White House
LEAD: Besides the 100 or so members of the sprawling Bush clan taking over the Jefferson Hotel near the White House for the inaugural festivities, 28 Bushes will be camping out at the White House. ''We have family members coming we didn't even know we had,'' joked Mr.
Bush's brother Jonathan. ''We're talking about cousins of a grandfather's second wife and that sort of thing.


Certron Corp reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Certron Corp (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
28,490,000
27,751,000
Net inc
b149,000
b492,000
Share earns
.05
.15
Shares outst
3,185,000
3,189,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $11,000 for the latest year and $120,000 for the year-earlier period.


Belfast Daily To Be Sold
LEAD: The News Letter, the Belfast daily that says it is the world's oldest surviving English-language newspaper, is to be sold, it was announced today.


Oliver North's Rights
LEAD: Oliver North will probably not be tried on the most serious offenses alleged against him, and that's too bad.
Substantial charges remain, however, and it's reassuring that he benefits from constitutional and legal ''technicalities'' of the kind he tried to subordinate to ''patriotism'' during his Congressional testimony in 1987.


Hear the Voice of the Endangered Farmers; Environmental Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


United Stationers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
248,848,000
210,898,000
Net inc
7,215,000
5,805,000
Share earns
.47
.38


DCNY Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
9,734,421
b22,083,558
Share earns
-
2.74
Yr net loss
8,570,572
b30,105,048
Share earns
-
3.74
b-Net income


Cox to buy Texas Papers
LEAD: The Herald Publishing Company, corporate owner of The Daily Sentinel and The Sunday Sentinel, announced last week that it had agreed to sell the Nacogdoches newspapers to Cox Enterprises Inc.
No price was disclosed.
Cox publishes 17 daily newspapers, including 6 in Texas.
The transaction includes not only the Sentinels but also Ad Extra and The Garrison News.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Eastern Gets $105 Million I.R.S. Waiver
LEAD: Eastern Air Lines Inc. was given some crucial financial relief yesterday when the Internal Revenue Service granted a waiver that enables the carrier to postpone paying $105 million into its employee pension fund that was due in September.


Performance of Mass Is Act of Affirmation For Soviet Composer
LEAD: The surprise in Moscow today is to find over and over that almost nothing is impossible anymore.
And so as 1988 ended, there was the composer Rodion K. Shchedrin sitting nervously in the sixth row of the Moscow Conservatory, for the premiere of his latest work, a Slavonic Mass called ''The Sealed Angel'' after a 19th-century Russian parable by the writer Nikolai


Harold H. Goldberg Jr., Realtor, 62
LEAD: Harold H. Goldberg Jr., a realtor who headed the American Jewish Committee in New Jersey, died yesterday at his home in Short Hills, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 62 years old.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Appeals on Bases
LEAD: Many Congressional protests against plans to close military bases so far seem to have been perfunctory objections lodged for the sake of appearances before constituents.


Park Electrochemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Electrochemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Sales
34,770,000
33,612,000
Net inc
1,201,000
1,810,000
Share earns
.23
.35
9mo sales
110,064,000
92,393,000
Net inc
5,304,000
4,943,000
Share earns
1.02
.96


Reagan's Final Budget Leaves Bush Tough Decisions - and Some Favors
LEAD: President Reagan has left his protege George Bush with a budget that could make it hard to start a new Presidency but one that also does him a few favors.


Tyson Seeks Purse
LEAD: In a deposition yesterday, Mike Tyson said he still has not been paid all the $21 million he said was promised to fight Michael Spinks nearly seven months ago.


Woman, 59, Is Found Slain In Upper Manhattan Home
LEAD: A 59-year-old resident of a high-rise apartment building in upper Manhattan, who had not been seen for a week, was found slain in her home yesterday, the police said.


Curfew Back At the Parks In New York
LEAD: New York City reimposed the late-night curfew at virtually all of its parks and playgrounds yesterday and planned to provide vans to take the homeless people now sleeping in them to shelters.


Leo H. Barry, Lawyer, 71
LEAD: Leo H. Barry, a lawyer, died Sunday at New York University Medical Center as the result of a stroke early last month.
He was 71 years old and lived in Astoria, Queens.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary on Friday about Dr.
Robert S. Coles, a New York City ophthalmologist, included erroneous dates given by Lenox Hill Hospital for some events in his career.
He retired in January 1988 as director of ophthalmology at the hospital and was a member of its medical staff until his death last Wednesday.


The Keeper Of the Tennis Court
LEAD: Marvin Bush has bagged one of the most powerful jobs in the new administration.
He'll be keeper of the White House tennis court.


Savings Industry's Costly Fraud
LEAD: Federal regulators examining documentation for thousands of multimillion-dollar loans now in default at insolvent savings institutions are finding that fraud was more widespread than had been thought.


Dukakis to Sit Out The Inaugural Ball
LEAD: Michael Dukakis will not be dancing at George Bush's Inaugural Ball.
Massachusetts's state office has sent the Democratic Governor's tickets back to the Presidential Inaugural Committee. ''He's got other things in the works up here,'' said James R. Dorsey, a Dukakis spokesman in Boston.


Review/Architecture; The Healing Murals of Richard Haas
LEAD: Richard Haas has, in all but name, become an architect.
He has not gone to school and got a degree, but no matter: Mr.
Haas's art, which has long taken architecture as its theme, has now expanded to the point where it plays as much of a role in the cityscape as many real buildings.


In Accessories, the Mood Is Softer
LEAD: When fashion follows a classic route, as it is doing for this spring, the extras make a difference.
Accessories can set a woman apart from the crowd and establish her personal style.
She can be as classic as a triple strand of pearls or as exotic as an armload of jangling charm bracelets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Yellow Spots Gets Job For Southwestern Bell
LEAD: Yellow Spots Inc., the company that sees value in unused space in the nation's Yellow Pages directories, has become the exclusive marketer of filler space for Southwestern Bell Media's blond books.


Default Case Jury Let Go
LEAD: The 17-member jury for the huge securities fraud trial involving the Washington Public Power Supply System's $2.25 billion bond default was formally dismissed today.


Bill Terry, a .400 Hitter for the Giants, Dies at 90
LEAD: Bill Terry, the Hall of Famer who was the last player to bat .400 in the National League, died yesterday in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 90 years old, and had been in failing health for several months.


Albany Urged to Keep Psychiatric Care Beds
LEAD: New York City Mental Health Commissioner Dr.
Sara Kellerman urged the state yesterday to relieve ''psychiatric gridlock'' by halting a state plan she said would reduce the number of beds for troubled patients.


Templeton Income Fund reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Templeton Income Fund
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
125,272,914
122,944,038
Per share
10.08
10.22
Shares outst
12,432,040
12,033,678
During the 12 months, dividends totaled about 72 cents and capital gains of 12 cents were paid out.


Washington Talk: Briefing; On Their Own
LEAD: The entire White House staff was asked by President Reagan in November to submit resignations effective ''at the pleasure of the President.'' So some staff members have set out on their own rather than hold out hope for a post in the Bush administration.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Syracuse Upset Again as Villanova Tiumphs
LEAD: Kenny Wilson scored 20 points tonight to lead Villanova to a 75-73 victory over No. 4 Syracuse.
It was the Orangemen's second Big East Conference loss in a week.


Mourning Fails to Slow Japan's Economy
LEAD: No sooner did Emperor Hirohito fall gravely ill than Japan starting projecting the economic cost of an imperial mourning and succession period.
Economists calculated that the country's ever expanding gross national product would be noticeably hurt by days of lost work, as the world's second-largest economy officially closed down.


Softer Tone at U.N. on Libya Incident
LEAD: A softening of a proposed resolution on the downing of two Libyan jets by United States planes over the Mediterranean last week was reported by diplomats today as the Security Council ended its third day of debate on the incident.


Marchi, After 16 Years, Loses Post On Finance Panel in Senate Shifts
LEAD: New York City lost a key ally on the Senate Finance Committee today and Long Island legislators gained new leverage in the first major realignment of the State Senate leadership since 1973.


Suburban Homelessness Is a Problem With an Illegal Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. Is it true that spare batteries last longer if they are kept in the refrigerator?
A.
It was probably true in the past, but consumers probably could not tell a difference now because of changes in the way batteries are made, battery manufacturers say.


Guilty Pleas Close Case Against 10 Klan Members
LEAD: Four members of the Ku Klux Klan pleaded guilty today just before their trial was scheduled to begin on Federal charges of conspiring to attack civil rights marchers in Decatur, Ala., in May 1979.


Jersey's Annual Report Previews Kean Address
LEAD: At a time when New Jersey faces growing fiscal woes, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean released today a summary of his proposed initiatives for 1989, including programs designed to create low- and moderate-income housing, and a bond issue that would preserve open lands in this, the nation's most densely populated state.


Israelis Wound 23, Arabs Say
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and wounded 23 Palestinians during clashes today, Arab reports said, as a general strike closed down the occupied territories.


Pernod Is Allowed To Sell Coca-Cola
LEAD: A Paris court has ruled that Pernod-Ricard S.A. would temporarily be allowed to continue to produce and sell canned drinks of the Coca-Cola Company in France, Pernod said.
An appeals court said on Friday that Pernod could continue its activities in canned Coca-Cola products pending a final decision in the case,


The Barber Of Pennsylvania Ave.
LEAD: Bush staff members are already scheming how to get prime office space in the White House.
One plot is to move the White House barber shop, where 67-year-old Milton Pitts snipped the manes of the last four Presidents.


Sausalito Journal; Cholesterol Battle Is a Cause Many Take to Heart
LEAD: At a sunny Sunday brunch on the terrace of the Alta Mira Hotel here, W. Patrick Holt dug into what could be called the restaurant's Cholesterol Special: steak, fried eggs and french fries.


Holly's Board Sets Auction
LEAD: Instead of appealing a Delaware Chancery Court ruling on its efforts to avoid being acquired by Tyson Foods Inc., the board of the Holly Farms Corporation will put the chicken-producing company up for auction for the shareholders' benefit.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Central Federal Savings, Mineola, L.I., to Lois Pitts Gershon Pon/GGK, with a $2 million budget.


Research Stirs Conflict By Suggesting Heredity Plays a Role in Inhibition
LEAD: A RADICAL new theory from respected researchers about Tourette syndrome and its genetic nature has aroused an extraordinary amount of emotion in the normally staid field of medical genetics.
The theory has been condemned by some geneticists, while others say they want to keep an open mind on an intriquing proposition.


Angolan Sanctuary Closing to Rebels
LEAD: After 13 years in Angola, two foreign armies are packing their bags here this week.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; FM Business Acquires Computer Decisions
LEAD: FM Business Publications, the new trade-publishing company, can lay claim to having a growing stable of publications.
The company has acquired Computer Decisions magazine, a 20-year-old publication aimed at corporate management information systems managers.


Submarine Contract To General Dynamics
LEAD: The Navy today awarded the General Dynamics Corporation a $726 million contract to build the first Seawolf attack submarine, a new class designed to hunt Soviet missile and attack subs.


Total System Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total System Services (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
15,195,000
13,773,000
Net inc
2,968,000
2,438,000
Share earns
.19
.15
Yr rev
56,200,000
46,285,000
Net inc
9,529,000
7,193,000
Share earns
.60
.45


New Age of Gerrymandering: Political Magic by Computer?
LEAD: When state legislators gather a year after the 1990 census to begin redrawing the nation's election boundaries, a profusion of new computer technology will make it possible for any political hack to be a political hacker.


Teledyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,247,300,000
1,071,900,000
Net inc
b98,200,000
c158,800,000
Share earns
8.68
13.60
Yr rev
4,597,800,000
4,245,600,000
Net inc
b391,800,000
c377,200,000
Share earns
34.03
32.25


Bush Urges His Aides to Hire Minority Talent
LEAD: President-elect George Bush told his personnel recruiters today that he had gained a firm political mandate in the 1988 election and that his administration must seek to carry out that mandate with groups often ''overlooked'' by Republicans: the disabled, blacks, Asian-Americans and Hispanic people.


Bears Only Human In Losing to the 49ers
LEAD: Last week, Mike Singletary, the Bears' wonderful middle linebacker, was asked what his team would have to do to play a perfect game against the San Francisco 49ers.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* River Forest Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,661,000
2,976,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Yr net inc
13,954,000
11,836,000
Share earns
1.72
1.37


Stephen Csoka, Painter, 92
LEAD: Stephen Csoka, a Hungarian-born realist painter who taught art in New York for four decades, died Thursday at his home in Kings Park, L.I.
He was 92 years old.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Monday about the Federal budget process misidentified the broadcast on which Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine appeared Sunday.
It was ''Meet the Press'' on NBC.


Koop's Stand on Abortion's Effect Surprises Friends and Foes Alike
LEAD: Once again Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, Surgeon General of the United States, has confounded the White House and Congress, liberals and conservatives.
This time he told President Reagan in a letter Monday that, after extensive study, he could not conclude one way or another that abortions were harmful to women.


France Delays Visa Changes
LEAD: A French Government spokesman says that plans to cancel the visa requirement for American visitors are still under negotiation and that France is seeking a reciprocal move by the United States.


A New Way to Save Electricity
LEAD: Electrical transformers, which reduce high voltages on power lines to levels useful in homes and businesses, are inefficient devices.
Their metal cores must be magnetized and demagnetized dozens of times each second, which wastes electricity.
But amorphous metals, in which the atoms are arrayed radomly rather than in tight rows, are much more efficient as transformer cores because they are more easily magnetized and demagnetized.


Correction
LEAD: A brief report in the Transition Watch column yesterday about the Bible that will be used in George Bush's inauguration misstated the date the Bible was given to St.
John's Masonic Lodge in New York.
It was in 1770, not after George Washington's inauguration in 1789.


Haas Hopes to Start Fast Again
LEAD: Jay Haas does not know why some players get off to a fast start on the PGA Tour swing through the West.
But he accepts the fact that some do just that and that he is one of them.
He won the $1 million Bob Hope Chrysler Classic last year, finished second in the San Diego Open and sixth in the Los Angeles Open, before the PGA Tour moved


Soviet Pullout in Hungary Soon
LEAD: The Hungarian Communist Party leader was quoted today as saying the Soviet Union would begin withdrawing troops from Hungary ''within weeks.''


Koch Doubts There is Patronage In Program for Affirmative Action
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch said yesterday that he did not believe an affirmative action program he established more than five years ago had been turned into an operation that systematically dispensed patronage jobs on behalf of top political leaders.


Filippo Berio Oil to Lempert
LEAD: After a four-month review of 20 agencies, Salov North America, the American and Canadian arm of a family-run olive oil company in Lucca, Italy, has awarded its advertising budget for Filippo Berio brand oil to the Lempert Company, Belleville, N.J.
The annual budget totals seven figures.


Bridge
LEAD: The first tournament of the year, for players in the New York metropolitan region is the Tristate Regional beginning today at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.


Prosecutor Ends Inquiry on Leak In Brawley Case
LEAD: The New York State special prosecutor for the criminal-justice system said yesterday that he had ended his inquiry into the disclosure to The New York Times of secret grand jury material in the Tawana Brawley case.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 6
Dec. 30
Jan. 8
1989
1988
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
6.7
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
229.2
228.6
231.7
Distillate stocks
127.5
126.8
135.9
Crude imports, daily
4.2
5.7
3.9
Product imports, daily
2.4
2.7
2.2
Crude stocks
328.9
334.4
343.1
Crude production, daily
8.0
8.0
8.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
84.6
83.4


Steinberg Lawyer Quiet On Psychiatric Exam
LEAD: A defense lawyer in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg refused to disclose last night whether the defendant would submit to a psychiatric examination ordered by the court, but officials in the Manhattan District Attorney's office said, ''we're assuming he has agreed'' and have scheduled the examination for 2 P.M.


What the Deadbeat Asks of the U.N.
LEAD: Hardly a week passes without the United States devising yet another task for the no-longer-scorned United Nations.
The most recent proposal is to give the Secretary General power to probe charges of chemical weapons use.
That's a sensible idea, and the larger policy change is surely welcome.
What's baffling, even shaming, is that these ideas are unblushingly promoted by the U.N.


Unilever Seeks Units Of Faberge
LEAD: The Unilever Group, one of the world's largest consumer products manufacturers, is negotiating to buy the cosmetics, fragrances and toiletries divisions of Faberge Inc., Daniel J. Manella, the chairman of Faberge, said yesterday.


Microcom Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microcom Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
14,823,000
8,876,000
Net inc
2,044,000
1,116,000
Share earns
.50
.29
Shares outst
4,115,000
3,895,000
9mo sales
41,446,000
23,887,000
Net inc
5,366,000
b3,541,000
Share earns
1.31
.94
Shares outst
4,095,000
3,754,000


Mayor Is a Mad Driver
LEAD: Mayor Charles Luken of Cincinnati, whose Bengals will play the San Francisco 49ers in the Super Bowl Jan. 22, was chagrined the other day when he realized that a city street on which he had once lived and which he still uses to drive his children to school is named Montana Avenue.


G.O.P. TO PAY BILL OF QUAYLE HOLIDAY
LEAD: The Republican National Committee will pay about $15,000 in costs related to Dan Quayle's requirements as Vice President-elect during his family's Christmas skiing vacation in Colorado, Mr.
Quayle's press spokesman said tonight.


Thou Shalt Not Mess With the Global Environment; Hot Summers in 1990's
LEAD: To the Editor:


And the Band Played On


Teamster Racketeering Trial Going to the Jury


Review/Dance; Journey to Strange Lands
LEAD: The dancers never left Performance Space 122 on Sunday evening.
Nevertheless, they visited many strange lands in ''Xanadu/The Millions,'' which Mark Taylor choreographed for his company, Mark Taylor and Friends.


Cooperation From Birth
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Rumblings Rise Anew On Status Of Capital
LEAD: Is the capital of the free world, a.k.a., the District of Columbia, free and democratic itself?


Nelson Remains Optimistic; Giants' Tackle Begins Treatment for Cancer Recurrence
LEAD: Karl Nelson confirmed today that his cancer had returned.


Frisch's Restaurants Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 11
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frisch's Restaurants Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 11
1988
1987
Revenue
34,606,354
33,609,375
Net inc
914,825
1,090,189
Share earns
.18
.21
6mo rev
81,015,362
79,000,869
Net inc
1,431,004
2,494,722
Share earns
.28
.47


Geodynamics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodynamics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Revenue
12,580,000
10,116,000
Net inc
900,000
752,000
Share earns
.31
.26
6mo rev
24,331,000
19,867,000
Net inc
1,659,000
1,479,000
Share earns
.57
.51


Loss at U.P.I. Of $16 Million
LEAD: United Press International said today that it had lost $16 million in 1988 and would lay off about 40 employees.


Student Loan Marketing Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
58,900,000
47,800,000
Share earns
1.41
1.11
Yr net inc
225,100,000
181,000,000
Share earns
5.34
4.14


CB&amp;T Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CB&amp;T Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,514,000
6,151,000
Per share
.24
.20
Yr net inc
26,838,000
23,553,000
Per share
.87
.77
The company said prior year results included a pre-tax gain of about $7.3 million from the sale of a mortgage banking subsidiary.


Lessons
LEAD: Americans admire competition in most areas of national life.
Why not then build it into public education?


St. John's Triumphs Over Connecticut


One Man's Fight for Free Software
LEAD: Richard M. Stallman is a computer programmer obsessed with a mission.
He wants to bring back the good old days when programming was a communal activity and those toiling at the craft freely shared their ideas - and their source code, the internal instructions that tell the computer what to do.


Pilots Scarce, Airlines See 30-Year-Olds as Captains
LEAD: Airline executives, concerned about an imminent world shortage of pilots, are taking steps that will place younger and less experienced fliers in command of airliners.


Barton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barton Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,855,082
1,434,234
Net inc
436,667
b776,622
Share earns
.06
-
Yr rev
10,041,732
4,542,563
Net loss
361,848
2,728,961
b-Net loss  The company said the latest year's results included the acquisitions of R&amp;G Supply Co., Duke Lubrication and Consulting Inc., and the Sentinel Manufacturing Co.


CASTRO SCORNING GORBACHEV MODEL
LEAD: For the last six months Fidel Castro has been kicking up a storm of protest about changes taking place in the Soviet Union, his closest ally and the source of enormous economic support that has been crucial to Cuba's survival.


MGM-UA Communications Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM-UA Communications Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
170,346,000
181,978,000
Net loss
39,470,000
b2,084,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income and after a gain of $3 million from the sale of the company's headquarters building.


Chemical Weapons Parley Labors On
LEAD: As the international conference on chemical weapons neared an end here, diplomats worked late tonight in an effort to fashion a statement reinforcing the ban on the use of such weapons in war.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark IV Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
236,965,000
110,128,000
Net inc
b4,801,000
4,001,000
Share earns
.44
.37
9mo sales
463,574,000
296,826,000
Net inc
b18,564,000
c12,887,000
Share earns
1.72
1.33


Israelis Say They Killed 8 Guerrillas in Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli troops killed eight guerrillas over the weekend north of the buffer strip in southern Lebanon that Israel calls its security zone, the army said today.


Kentucky Sale Plan Is Upheld as Legal
LEAD: Kentucky's plan to become the first state to sell bonds to Japanese investors in Tokyo's financial markets was upheld today by state Attorney General Fred Cowan despite the objections of state legislators.


450 Cubans Leave Angola as Withdrawal Begins


Economic Scene; Back to Basics On the Deficit
LEAD: IT'S budget season, and once again those pesky skeptics are asking the embarrassing questions.
If deficits really matter, why has America enjoyed six straight years of prosperity?
How can Japan, that rising economic sun, live with a debt that has grown faster than America's and represents a larger fraction of national income?


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: EVEN those who have little knowledge of Russian cuisine recognize the term stroganoff (or stroganov).
This popular winter dish has a French connection going back to the 19th century.
Aristocratic Russians of the time had a strong commercial and cultural connection with France, and many upper-class Russians employed French cooks, who were always looking for ways to give French dishes a


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: TOSTADA chips and hot sauce could well be the national dish of Texas.
So, it's not surprising that Texans hold strong opinions - with little consensus - about the perfect salsa.
Recently, some serious contenders have been produced by ambitious home cooks, like the former Austin radio talk-show host Patrick J.


U.N. Resolution on Dogfight Softened Again
LEAD: A proposed resolution on the downing of two Libyan jet fighters by United States planes over the Mediterranean last week was softened further today as the Security Council debate on the confrontation continued.


I.B.M. to Buy Stake In a Corning Unit
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation will buy 25 percent of a fiber-optics company owned by Corning Glass Works.
The value of the deal was not disclosed.
PCO Inc., based in the Chatsworth area of Los Angeles, specializes in devices that convert electronic signals to light and vice versa.


Tyson Becomes Punchy On the Subject of Money
LEAD: Mike Tyson is a closed-circuit attraction once again, but this time he is playing to a far smaller audience than the one that last June paid millions to watch him knock out Michael Spinks.


Ex-Biaggi Partner Gets Jail in Wedtech Case
LEAD: The former law partner of Mario Biaggi was sentenced yesterday to six years in prison and fined $222,000 for his role in the Wedtech racketeering case.


Dollar Up in Global Trading; Gold Prices Off in New York
LEAD: The dollar finished higher yesterday against most major currencies in global foreign exchange trading despite what dealers described as light dollar-selling by the Federal Reserve.


Mistrial in GAF Stock Case
LEAD: In an embarrassment for Federal prosecutors, a mistrial was declared in the GAF stock manipulation case and a new trial ordered.
Page D1.


Judge Rules Mistrial in GAF Case
LEAD: In a serious embarrassment to Federal prosecutors in New York, a judge declared a mistrial yesterday in the GAF stock manipulation case, the first prosecution based on information from the insider-trading scandals of 1986.


Texas Instruments Plans Plant in Italy
LEAD: Texas Instruments said it would build a $250 million semiconductor fabrication plant in Avezzano, Italy, about 65 miles east of Rome, to supply the European semiconductor market.
The plant will begin production of integrated circuit wafers, including dynamic random-access memory chips, in late 1990.


Giuliani Resigns as U.S. Attorney; Still Undecided on a Mayoral Bid
LEAD: Completing a term marked by unusual accomplishment, publicity and controversy, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would resign as United States Attorney in Manhattan.


Excerpts From Address by Kean
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the prepared text of Gov.
Thomas H. Kean's State of the State address to the New Jersey Legislature:


Review/Theater; Hanging On to All the Right Attitudes Articulately
LEAD: The relentlessly right-thinking and ferociously articulate characters in Susan Miller's new play, ''For Dear Life,'' are the kind of people who can't contemplate the change of seasons without anticipating nuclear winter.
They can't pour a glass of milk without crying over the snapshot of a missing child on the carton.


Police Begin Releasing Files On 1969 Raid on a Gay Bar
LEAD: Complying with a court order, the New York City Police Department began turning over confidential files yesterday that it had compiled in connection with a 1969 police raid on a gay bar called the Stonewall in Greenwich Village.


General Cinema Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Cinema Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
543,498,000
259,982,000
Net inc
2,097,000
c15,576,000
Share earns
.03
.21
Yr rev
2,323,826,000
1,039,743,000
Net inc
b87,744,000
c69,442,000
Share earns
1.19
.94


Canada to Open Drugs Hearings
LEAD: Federal Hearings into the use of drugs in amateur athletics prompted by the Olympic scandal involving the Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson start Wednesday.


OPEC Pact Lifts Oil Prices, But $18-$20 Goal Is Elusive
LEAD: Six weeks after reaching an agreement to cut its oil production by four million barrels a day, or about 20 percent, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has succeeded in propping up prices.
But it still faces obstacles in achieving its target range of $18 to $20 a barrel.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-10


About New York; From Underclass Come the Pros Of Produce
LEAD: This is a tale about New Yorkers who don't have much, the people who have come to be called the underclass.
It is equally a story about economic change, the importance of knowledge, the reality that a new generation has better things to do than follow in dad's footsteps and - most important - why you may have less trouble finding a decent tomato at the supermarket.


Fuller, H B Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuller, H B Co (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
180,909,000
153,227,000
Net inc
4,805,000
7,289,000
Share earns
.51
.76
Yr sales
685,034,000
597,061,000
Net inc
21,081,000
25,812,000
Share earns
2.20
2.69


Swearing In Quayle
LEAD: It is not the law, but it is tradition that the President is sworn into office by the Chief Justice, who, until 1977, also customarily swore in the Vice President.


Herbert Morrison, 83, Hindenburg Reporter
LEAD: Herbert Morrison, who 52 years ago broadcast an emotional description of the crash of the Hindenburg, died early today at a nursing home here.
He was 83 years old.


100 Approved for Soviet Legislature
LEAD: The Communist Party's Central Committee today approved a list of 100 candidates submitted by the ruling Politburo for the 100 seats that the party will fill in the new Soviet legislature.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Multi-faceted Diamond


Batus to Close Units in Europe
LEAD: All six European buying offices for Batus Inc., the American arm of B.A.T.
Industries, will be closed about April 1, retailing executives in New York said.
The offices buy apparel and home furnishings lines for Batus's American retail subsidiaries, including Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, Marshall Field in Chicago and J.


National Community Bank of New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Bank of New Jersey
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,300,000
9,300,000
Per share
1.09
.90
Yr net inc
42,000,000
34,500,000
Per share
4.05
3.34


Lady Tech Star Wins
LEAD: Teresa Weatherspoon, a guard on the Louisiana Tech basketball team and a starter on the Olympic gold medal team, was named collegiate woman athlete of the year last night and received the Honda-Broderick Award in San Francisco.(AP)


Winfield v. Steinbrenner: Charges Are Intensifying
LEAD: The mud-slinging that has been a part of the George Steinbrenner-Dave Winfield relationship intensified yesterday in the wake of the latest round of lawsuits by each side.


Chiron and Ortho Win Test Approval
LEAD: The Chiron Corporation and Ortho Diagnostic Systems, a division of Johnson &amp; Johnson, said that the Food and Drug Administration had approved Ortho's genetically engineered hepatitis B antibody test.
The test, the first of a series being developed collaboratively by Chiron and Ortho, uses a recombinant antigen developed by Chiron.


2 Taxi Panel Officials Resign Under Pressure
LEAD: The second in command of New York City's Taxi and Limousine Commission and another executive at the agency have resigned under pressure after it was discovered that they lied about the fact they live together, the Commissioner, Jack Lusk, said yesterday.


In Mayor Koch's Basement
LEAD: Edward Koch has always curled a mayoral lip at the concept of old-fashioned patronage, conceding its political value but boastfully banning it.
Now come allegations that his administration not only ran a patronage system but did so under the guise of an affirmative action job-referral service, the Mayor's Talent


WPP Buys Donahue
LEAD: The WPP Group has acquired for an undisclosed sum Donahue &amp; Associates Advertising, a firm that specializes in employment recruitment advertising.
Donahue, which has $20 million in billings, will be merged into Thompson Recruitment Advertising, a Los Angeles-based unit of J. Walter Thompson, whose billings exceed $130 million.


Riggs National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riggs National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
9,317,000
b4,765,000
Share earns
.65
-
Yr net inc
37,016,000
1,013,000
Share earns
2.54
.07
b-Net loss and that is attributable to special provisions of $53.5 million which the company made in 1987 in connection with problem country loans.


Wall St. to the Bronx: the Prosecutor's Unfinished Work
LEAD: The resignation of Rudolph W. Giuliani as the United States Attorney in Manhattan came as a number of major cases were unresolved or about to go to trial.
These are among the defendants in the cases:  Michael R. Milken Mr.
Milken, the head of the high-yield, or junk bond, unit of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., has been at the center of a two-year investigation of Wall Street.


G.M. Layoffs at Buick
LEAD: About 100 workers of the General Motors Corporation's Buick division will be laid off as the auto maker cuts production of its Reatta luxury two-seat car, a company spokesman said Monday.
Larry Gustin said production levels at the Reatta Craft Center in Lansing, Mich., would be cut Feb. 13, from 56 to 42 cars a day.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Friday about Ira D. London, the lawyer for Joel B. Steinberg, misidentified the lawyer who referred Mr.
Steinberg to Mr.
London.
He is Robert Kalina, not Galima.


A Champion Prosecutor Faces Politics of Nuance
LEAD: With crime and drugs topping the list of worries of New York City voters, a popular prosecutor who made his name fighting organized crime, municipal corruption and insider trading, would from the start be a formidable candidate for political office.


Stocks End Down 6.25 After Piercing 2,200
LEAD: Stock prices retreated broadly yesterday after four days of gains, but the decline was modest.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended 6.25 points lower, at 2,193.21, after once again piercing 2,200 in early trading.


Shipyard's Success Reopens Wounds From Bitter Strike
LEAD: These should be heady days here in submarine country, where the sleek gray war machines are a decorative motif on everything from diners to monuments.


Blue-Chip Job Recruits With Short-Term Goals
LEAD: Betrayed only by the evident newness of their dark suits and the slight flush in their cheeks, several dozen college seniors sat in a Bankers Trust conference room last week looking exactly like the bankers and executives they want to be.


Southwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
450,000
b337,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr net loss
1,136,000
3,427,000
b-Net loss


When Is Rice High Art? When It's Risotto
LEAD: NOW that Americans have assimilated pasta and no longer blanch at spending $15 for a plate of noodles, they are starting to embrace another emblem of Italy: risotto.


High Court Says A State Can Tax Interstate Calls
LEAD: The Supreme Court today opened the door to more aggressive state taxation of long-distance telephone calls and data transmission through phone networks.


Tyco Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
505,933,000
415,890,000
Net inc
22,883,000
15,585,000
Share earns
.57
.45
Shares outst
40,050,000
34,700,000
6mo sales
938,513,000
720,672,000
Net inc
44,169,000
28,659,000
Share earns
1.16
.82
Share outst
38,110,000
34,900,000


New O'Horgan Musical Has 2 Previews Canceled
LEAD: Preview performances of ''Senator Joe,'' a new musical composed and directed by Tom O'Horgan, were canceled Sunday and last night at the Neil Simon Theater.
The show had begun previews Saturday night.
A Jan. 19 opening has been announced.


50,000 in Yugoslavia Press For Ouster of Area's Leaders
LEAD: More than 50,000 people demonstrated today in the southern Yugoslav city of Titograd to press their demand for the resignation of the Communist authorities in the republic of Montenegro, but the leaders refused to yield.


U.S. Warns Europeans Of Possible Ban on Meat
LEAD: Escalating a trade conflict with the European Community, the United States has warned the community's meat-exporting nations that they could face a ban on $500 million of meat shipments unless they can prove that their inspection standards are being maintained.


Review/Television; Late-Night Chitchat Additions: Pat Sajak and Arsenio Hall
LEAD: One show is affably low-key, in the mode of Johnny Carson and easy-listening radio.


Head of Framatome Is Out to Diversify
LEAD: Jean-Claude Leny heads a huge French industrial enterprise with a problem.
Its principal product, nuclear reactors, is no longer in demand.


Data on Champion Is Given to Several
LEAD: Champion Products Inc. agreed to let Walsh Greenwood &amp; Company and other parties review its confidential financial data.
Walsh Greenwood, a New York investment firm, has offered $55 a share, or $220 million, for the company, but Champion, a Rochester-based maker of athletic wear, rejected the bid as inadequate.


Even Presidents Taste Frustration; N.C.A.A. Slow to Change
LEAD: When Dr.
Peter Likins volunteered to become a charter member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Presidents' Commission, he was, by his own admission, ''an impetuous, young college president,'' who wanted the commission to charge in like the cavalry and install new controls over intercollegiate athletics.


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Valley Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,253,000
535,000
Share earns
.76
.48
Yr net inc
3,505,000
1,503,000
Share earns
2.55
1.38
The 1987 share earnnings have been restated to reflect stock dividends paid in 1988.


Who Smokes Cigarettes?
LEAD: Twenty-five years after the first report, the Surgeon General tells of new data on perils.
Page A20.


Chicago Bank to Pay $14 Million In Resolving Discrimination Case
LEAD: A large Chicago bank has agreed to pay $14 million in back pay to women and minority employees as part of a record settlement of Federal charges of sexual and racial discrimination.


Wine Talk
LEAD: HOW much does anyone really know about wine?
There are sports fans who know every statistic, every player and every rule but who cannot throw a ball.
There are wine fans who know all the labels and all the vintages but who cannot tell hearty Burgundy from rare old Bordeaux.


M.H. Stone, Acclaimed Mathematician, Dies at 85
LEAD: Marshall Harvey Stone, a prodigious and influential American mathematician, died Monday in Madras, India, apparently of a stroke.
Dr.
Stone, who was 85 years old, had gone to India to attend a music festival.


Real Estate; A No-Frills Hotel Rises In Manhattan
LEAD: FOR more than two years, Journey's End Motels, a fast-growing chain based in Belleville, Ontario, has been trying to bring its no-frills concept to Manhattan.
Until recently the company's efforts to build in New York City have been thwarted by the high cost of land in acceptable locations.


House Unit Is Critical Of Bank Board's Deals
LEAD: In the first formal inquiry into the savings industry's problems by the new Congress, members of the House Banking Committee assailed regulators today for their flurry of December transactions that rid the industry of 75 insolvent savings and loan institutions at a cost of $16.7 billion.


Pacific Gas Sets $200 Million Offer
LEAD: The Pacific Gas and Electric Company is offering to the public $200 million of first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2022 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which made the winning bid on the competitive issue.


Staples to Keep a Dieter Out of the Deli
LEAD: THIS year's New Year's resolution was not to make any resolutions I didn't think I would keep.


Lillian Vernon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lillian Vernon Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 25
1988
1987
Revenue
56,577,000
50,832,000
Net inc
5,374,000
4,943,000
Share earns
.87
.81
9mo rev
102,143,000
97,119,000
Net inc
5,627,000
6,532,000
Share earns
.91
1.21


Blacks Fined in Protest on Confederate Flag
LEAD: A district judge today convicted the head of the Alabama National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Thomas Reed, as well as 13 black legislators on a misdemeanor trespassing charge in their protest against the Confederate battle flag flying atop the state Capitol.


REAGAN ADVISERS BLAME U.S. POLICY FOR SAVINGS CRISIS
LEAD: In their final annual report, President Reagan's economists today blamed Government regulatory policies for the savings and loan crisis and said the public would have to pay for much of the cure.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Monday about criticism of Finance Minister Shimon Peres over reports of a special account for the Finance Minister in the Israeli budget misstated the size of the account.
It is said to be equivalent to one-tenth of 1 percent of the overall budget reductions recommended by Mr.
Peres, not 10 percent.


Corporal Punishment In Schools Must End
LEAD: To the Editor:


BONN WILL TIGHTEN CURB ON EXPORTS OF DEADLY GOODS
LEAD: Under considerable American pressure, the West German Cabinet agreed today to tighter controls on the export of nuclear and chemical materials and technology and stiffer penalties for violators.


Marine's Death in Training Becomes a Harsh Lesson for Corps
LEAD: The Commandant of the Marine Corps, clearly angered over the death of a lance corporal who was abandoned in the California desert while on a training exercise, has turned an investigation into possible negligence into a sharp lesson for leaders of the corps.


Omaha Journal; Goal Is New Theater in an Old Market
LEAD: Dick Mueller is fighting for his professional life and for the life of his theater, which has long been a centerpiece of the Old Market section of downtown Omaha, a section known as the local Greenwich Village.


Andersen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andersen Group
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Revenue
11,197,000
13,374,000
Net inc
1,866,000
b432,000
Share earns
1.06
-
9mo rev
37,673,000
37,231,000
Net inc
2,661,000
b1,169,000
Share earns
1.51
-
b


Chicago Milwaukee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chicago Milwaukee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,179,000
8,485,000
Net inc
b7,726,000
c5,125,000
Share earns
3.15
2.10
Yr rev
41,909,000
102,108,000
Net inc
b27,086,000
c49,537,000
Share earns
10.40
20.21


Telecrafter Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telecrafter Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Sales
6,839,000
5,311,000
Net inc
492,000
297,000
Share earns
.07
.04


Changes in '91 Tourney Upheld
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association came out on top tonight in a dispute with the nation's two historically black Division I athletic conferences, the Mid-Eastern Athletic and the Southwestern Athletic.


Pan Am to Sell Services Unit
LEAD: The Pan Am Corporation, pressed by losses from its main airline subsidiary, announced yesterday that it had put another profitable unit up for sale.


Aliens Flee Border Area While Rules Are Lifted
LEAD: Chaos and confusion swept this border city today as hundreds of Central American refugees tried to get out of town and find shelter with relatives or friends by Thursday morning.
That is when a Federal judge will review an immigration policy that could keep them here for weeks or even months.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.13
9.19
6.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.30
8.28
5.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.44
8.50
6.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.31
9.31
8.73
30-YR.


Shamrock Appeals Ruling for Polaroid
LEAD: Shamrock Holdings announced yesterday that it had appealed a Delaware Chancery Court decision upholding the validity of the Polaroid Corporation's employee stock ownership plan, an important part of the instant photography company's anti-takeover defense.
Shamrock, controlled by the Roy Disney family, also said it would extend its $2.4 billion, or $42-a-share, tender offer for the Cambridge, Mass., company until Jan.


Rhoden Goes To Astros For Three From Minors
LEAD: The Yankees sent Rick Rhoden to the Houston Astros for three minor league players yesterday, accomplishing their goal of trading one of their veteran high-priced starting pitchers.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Climax Molybdenum Co., Greenwich, Conn., a division of Climax Metals Co., which is owned by Amax Inc., named James E. Gorman to the new post of president.


Leader of Mexican Oil Workers' Union Arrested
LEAD: A leader of the Mexican oil workers' union was arrested on weapons charges today, setting off a walkout by refinery workers and a confrontation between the Government and the country's most powerful labor group.


Costs of Special Education
LEAD: Schools spent $3,555 extra for each of the 4.4 million handicapped children receiving some form of special education in the 1985-86 academic year, according to a study prepared for the Government.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Murry's, Forestville, Md., formerly Murry's Steaks Inc., an East Coast chain of grocery stores specializing in meat products, to Weitzman/Dym/ Livingston, with a $2.5 million budget.


Diasonics Settles With Ex-chairman
LEAD: Diasonics Inc. has reached a settlement with its former chairman, Albert S. Waxman, under which Mr.
Waxman agreed to end his battle to seek control of the Milpitas, Calif., medical equipment manufacturer.
Mr.
Waxman and his partner, the New York financial services concern Integrated Resources Inc., had offered to buy


Push Is On for Overhaul Of Vocational Training
LEAD: Floyd Fowles, an electronics teacher, has tacked up signs on his classroom walls carrying a simple, direct message: ''Think.''


Pentagon Defends Tactics of Pilots Off Libya
LEAD: Vigorously defending the American fighter crews that shot down two Libyan warplanes last week, Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said today that the Navy fliers may have waited too long before launching their missiles.


Nets Alter Lineup Again
LEAD: The Nets, who have lost three of their last four games, are making two lineup changes for their game tonight at Philadelphia.


Rumors Rise On Takeover Of Ogilvy
LEAD: IS Ogilvy in play?
Once upon a time, it was assumed that advertising agencies could not be subjects of hostile takeovers.
Then a British knight named Martin S. Sorrell stuck a lance through the JWT Group, the parent of the venerable J. Walter Thompson, and demolished that fairy tale.


Imre President Seeking New Product Exposure
LEAD: Paul W. Self, named this week as president and chief operating officer of Imre Inc., a biomedical company in Seattle, said he had been hired to push the company's therapeutic products out of the research stage and into national markets, a feat he accomplished at two other medical equipment companies.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Bank board deals which privatize profit, while socializing risk, amount to nothing less than a societal decision to allow those with potentially large tax liabilities - that is, the rich -to get richer.''  - Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa.  [ D5:1. ]


Food Notes
LEAD:  The Way to Win


Favor Fading, Premier Faces Turkish Vote
LEAD: A chance decision not to sit down one day last June may have saved the life of Prime Minister Turgut Ozal of Turkey and preserved political stability in his country.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Winners in Print


City University Has a Proud Academic Record
LEAD: To the Editor:


FORMER NAVY MAN IS CHARGED AS SPY
LEAD: A former Navy technician was arrested today on charges of trying to sell secret information on antisubmarine warfare to the Soviet Union.
Federal investigators said he was seeking revenge because the Navy had discharged him for indecent exposure.


International Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,500,000,000
2,000,000,000
Net inc
206,000,000
125,000,000
Share earns
1.81
1.14
Shares outst
111,100,000
105,600,000
Yr sales
9,500,000,000
7,800,000,000
Net inc
754,000,000
407,000,000
Share earns
6.57
3.68
Shares outst
111,600,000
105,200,000


Panel Spawned By Corruption
LEAD: The New York State Commission on Government Integrity was appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on April 15, 1987, as a response to unfolding corruption scandals on both the state and municipal levels.


DMI Furniture Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMI Furniture Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
12,861,000
11,341,000
Net inc
1,171,000
626,000
Share earns
.19
.11


Journalists Donate to Neediest
LEAD: For the second year in a row, Dan Rather has chosen to honor colleagues at CBS News by making gifts in their names to the Neediest Cases Fund.


Conston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conston Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Revenue
44,437,000
44,715,000
Net loss
1,763,000
b242,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
144,819,000
139,483,000
Net loss
1,313,000
b3,597,000
Share earns
-
.47


Rangoon Journal; A Daughter of Burma, but Can She Be a Symbol?
LEAD: In the six days between the death and the Jan. 2 funeral of Daw Khin Kyi, the widow of the founder of Burmese independence, more than 20,000 people flocked to her house and garden off University Avenue, near Inya Lake.
They came to show reverence and respect, but also resistance, for Daw Khin Kyi's daughter, Aung San Suu Kyi, has become the foremost symbol of Burma's hopes for democracy.


K Mart Loses Court Fight
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation, the discount retailer, breached its contract with a wholesaler clothing buyer and must pay $73 million in damages, a Federal jury decided today.


Eastern and Machinists Near a Showdown
LEAD: A showdown appears to be drawing closer between Eastern Air Lines Inc. and its largest union, the machinists.
And the National Mediation Board is moving nearer to deciding whether to declare an impasse in negotiations that have dragged on for 15 months.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airbus Industrie, the European consortium, received an order for four A310-300 jets from Pan American World Airways.
The value of Pan Am's order was estimated at $240 million.


Thou Shalt Not Mess With the Global Environment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adobe Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adobe Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
25,265,000
12,308,000
Net inc
6,659,000
2,715,000
Share earns
.31
.13
Yr rev
83,483,000
39,324,000
Net inc
21,080,000
8,982,000
Share earns
.98
.43


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Kings 106, Lakers 97: The Los Angeles Lakers lost their eighth straight road game, tying a club record, as La Salle Thompson had 23 points and 11 rebounds to lead Sacramento.
The last time the Lakers lost eight consecutive road games was 13 years ago.
Thompson also had four blocks for the Kings.


Bhutto Makes Pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia


E-Z-EM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
18,340,000
14,418,000
Net inc
1,995,000
1,941,000
Share earns
.25
.24
6mo sales
35,393,000
27,821,000
Net inc
3,633,000
3,498,000
Share earns
.46
.44


Books of The Times; Grappling With a Changed Life and Language
LEAD:  Lost in Translation  By Eva Hoffman  280 pages. E. P. Dutton. $18.95


GTech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTech Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Revenue
43,686,000
39,754,000
Net inc
b2,687,000
c2,509,000
Share earns
.28
.26
Shares outst
9,631,621
9,607,085
9mo rev
106,901,000
97,340,000
Net inc
b4,199,000
c4,898,000
Share earns
.44
.51
Shares outst
9,623,589
9,588,909


Cuba Pulls 450 Soldiers Out of Angola
LEAD: Thirteen years after a Cuban force came to Angola, 450 Cuban soldiers left here today, marking the start of a Cuban military withdrawal scheduled to be complete by mid-1991.


Penguins Gang Up on Islanders
LEAD: Tonight was only a relatively triumphant return for the flu-plagued Brent Sutter, who had two goals, because Mario Lemieux went one better by scoring his fifth hat trick of the season and 17th of his career.
For the Islanders, merely playing better isn't close to being good enough.


The Outcasts Challenge The Famers
LEAD: Reserve Doubleday Field for the night of the Baseball Hall of Fame induction next summer.
Don't worry about turning on the lights.
We can play this one from memory.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hi-Shear Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,601,000
18,775,000
Net loss
400,000
b1,038,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo rev
35,867,000
37,534,000
Net inc
100,000
2,324,000
Share earns
.02
.40


Japan Confirms Extension of Its Car Quotas
LEAD: The Japanese Government confirmed today that it would continue its ''voluntary'' restraints on automobile exports for another year.


'Romance' Extends Run
LEAD: ''Romance Romance,'' a musical that was to have closed last Sunday, is extending its run at the Helen Hayes Theater, the show's producers have announced.
The four-character musical was written by Keith Herrmann with book and lyrics by Barry Harman.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Giuliani Departs
LEAD: Some prosecutors are quietly efficient.
Rudolph Giuliani, who now announces that he's quitting this month, is loudly so.
In five years as United States Attorney in Manhattan, he raised the visibility of an office long known for effectiveness and professionalism.
He recognized an important part of his job: tell the public what you're doing.


The Rink New York Fixed All by Itself
LEAD: To the Editor:


Astronomers Miss the Mark On Rays by 340 Light-Years
LEAD: An intense source of gamma radiation long believed to be at the center of the Milky Way actually lies at least 340 light-years from the true nucleus of Earth's galaxy, a balloon-borne telescope has revealed.


Personal Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Personal Diagnostics
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,235,641
1,965,218
Net inc
180,709
22,379
Share earns
.06
.01
Shares outst
3,126,500
2,551,500
Yr rev
9,589,811
8,196,629
Net inc
519,506
b77,761
Share earns
.18
.03


More Revlon to Tarlow
LEAD: Tarlow Advertising, which received a portion of Revlon Inc.'s Almay account several weeks ago, said yesterday that it had picked up the rest from its former agency, Korey, Kay &amp; Partners.
Revlon spent $9.36 million advertising the Almay line during the first nine months of 1988, according to Leading National Advertisers.


No Headline
LEAD: THE goods, so to speak, were on the table, and 50 high-school and college students were bidding fiercely for the job attributes that would satisfy them most. ''How much for intellectual status?'' It starts at $50 and is quickly bid up to $650. ''What about working alone?'' Sold, to the young lady in the front row for $450.


Probation Dept. Had Lost Track of Suspect in Bellevue Slaying
LEAD: The man charged in the murder of a pregnant pathologist at Bellevue Hospital Center was on probation for stealing a refrigerator in Brooklyn four years ago, and probation officials lost track of him last April, according to police and Probation Department records.


Review/Film; 'Kupalo,' Ukrainian Folk Tale
LEAD: For a couple of minutes at the start of ''The Eve of Ivan Kupalo,'' you can tell what is happening.
An old man in a boat is admiring a young woman -''my black-eyed daughter'' - on shore.
But when a young man appears and embraces her, the father jumps into the water and gets into a clownish splashing match with him.


High Court Eases Appeals On Curb on Access to Counsel
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that a conviction must be set aside whenever a trial judge has interfered with a criminal defendant's constitutional right to the assistance of counsel.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Bush, Wooing Educators, Urges Choice in Schools
LEAD: In one of his first major appearances since the election before a constituency he ardently wooed, President-elect George Bush told educators today that parents should be able to choose the best public schools in their neighborhoods, not necessarily the ones nearest their homes.


Topics of The Times; Red Stars
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev, a Pisces, has the stars pulling for him, according to the first horoscope published in a Soviet Communist newspaper.
The signs promise a harmony between earth and sky, the astrologer Eremei Parnov writes in Moskovskaya Pravda.
Thus a whole universe opens for Kremlinologists.


What a Jim Dandy Ending
LEAD: In Washington George Bush was being a swell guy again. ''What a swell guy!'' everybody was saying.


Bush to Attend Hirohito Rites
LEAD: President-elect George Bush will lead a United States delegation at the funeral of Emperor Hirohito of Japan on Feb. 24, a Bush aide said today.
Mr.
Bush is to be inaugurated on Jan. 20, and the trip to Japan is likely to be Mr.
Bush's first visit abroad as President.


Cunningham Selected As Top N.F.L. Player
LEAD: Randall Cunningham, who directed the Philadelphia Eagles to their first playoff berth since 1981, yesterday was named winner of the Bert Bell Trophy as the National Football League player of the year.
Cunningham won by a 3-1 margin on first-place votes in balloting by Maxwell Football Club members, Pro Football Writers Association members, the Philadelphia news media and all 28 N.F.L.


Coping With Twins
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Retail Sales Up In New York
LEAD: A number of the largest New York retailers had their best sales gains of the year in December, averaging increases of 7.2 percent in the city and 7.1 percent in the metropolitan area from the year before, a spot-check found yesterday.


Soviets Say Afghan Deadline Is in Danger
LEAD: A top Soviet diplomat warned today that there is ''serious danger'' that his country will not meet the Feb. 15 deadline for withdrawing its last troops from Afghanistan.


People
LEAD: *
John J. Fraser has been named senior vice president, management supervisor of Lintas: New York, part of the Lintas: Worldwide network.


Rates Increase At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
The bank holding company sold $50 million of 91-day paper at an average rate of 9.0437 percent, up from 8.952 percent last week and the first increase in three weeks.


'Black and Blue' Postpones Opening
LEAD: ''Black and Blue,'' the jazz-and-blues revue that was to open Sunday at the Minskoff Theater, has postponed its official opening until Jan. 22 or 26, Marilyn LeVine, the show's press agent, said yesterday.
The postponement was caused by the illness of one of the show's stars, Ruth Brown, who suffered an angina attack last Friday, complicated by pneumonia, Ms.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Security Council


S.E.C. Seeks Wider Fines
LEAD: The head of the enforcement division of the Securities and Exchange Commission said today that the Federal agency would ask Congress to pass legislation allowing the S.E.C. to seek monetary penalties for all civil violations of the Federal securities laws.
At present, the S.E.C. can seek monetary penalties only for civil charges of insider trading.


Plane Engine Shut Down Before Crash, British Say
LEAD: Investigators said today that an engine on a British airliner was inexplicably shut down before the plane crash landed in central England on Sunday night, killing 44 people.


No-Huddle Rule Wasn't An Easy Snap for Esiason
LEAD: Confused about the no-huddle, quick-snap penalty ruling for the American Conference championship game last Sunday?


Mexico Inflation Down
LEAD: A wage and price freeze reduced inflation last year to 51.7 percent, down two-thirds from the 1987 rate, Mexico's central bank said on Monday.
The Bank of Mexico noted that consumer prices rose by 159.2 percent in 1987.
Last Feb. 29, the Government froze the peso's exchange rate against the dollar.


Allegheny Plan Spurs Opposition
LEAD: A compromise plan that two rival suitors for Allegheny International Inc. have reached to avert a bidding war has provoked a backlash among the company's advisers and shareholders.


Criticare Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Criticare Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,422,522
3,443,347
Net inc
76,994
694,536
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo sales
6,388,886
6,195,724
Net inc
85,726
1,096,145
Share earns
.01
.18


Nevada Scholarships Stem Student Exodus
LEAD: On a campus where basketball players are recruited with a religious zeal, Nevada's brightest students are getting a second look, thanks to a university president who resolved to stop this state's ''brain drain.''


California's 6-Year Boom May Be Over
LEAD: California's six-year economic boom, which strengthened the state's image as a land of boundless opportunity, may be coming to an end.


Independent Bank Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Group
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,203,000
676,000
Per share
.60
.34
Yr net inc
4,028,000
2,776,000
Per share
2.02
1.39





Evans Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
40,345,000
37,020,000
Net loss
631,000
375,000
9mo sales
74,776,000
73,482,000
Net loss
4,325,000
4,497,000


We Can Teach Growth by Deficit Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor:


Volt Information Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volt Information Sciences Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 28
1988
1987
Revenue
125,104,000
128,867,000
Net inc
375,000
672,000
Share earns
.06
.10
Shares outst
6,288,808
6,896,634
Yr rev
472,649,000
467,267,000
Net inc
b4,505,000
c2,689,000
Share earns
.68
.39
Shares outst
6,585,803
6,899,887


Father Flees Court in Case On Medicaid
LEAD: On the day of his sentencing for participating in a $16 million Medicaid fraud, Sheldon Weinberg failed to show up in a Brooklyn court yesterday and was declared a fugitive from justice.


Chefs Search for the Perfect Version
LEAD: RISOTTO is causing quite a stir in restaurants these days.
As diners become more knowledgeable about this versatile northern Italian staple, chefs are responding with an ever-increasing variety of preparations.
The accompanying recipes are a testament to the dish's versatility.


A Franc on the Cabernet Front
LEAD: ALTHOUGH cabernet sauvignon is the dominant red grape in California, trend-spotters predict that it will be challenged by varietal wine made from another family member - cabernet franc.


Kean Urges Ending 'No Fault' Car Insurance
LEAD: Reflecting the growing rage of car owners over soaring insurance premiums, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean today proposed scrapping New Jersey's 16-year-old system of ''no fault'' automobile insurance, an experiment originally intended to save drivers money.


William J. McDonald, A Catholic Bishop, 83
LEAD: The Most Rev.
William J. McDonald, a nationally known cleric who served as Auxiliary Bishop of the San Francisco Archdiocese for 12 years before his retirement, died of a heart attack Saturday.
He was 83 years old, Bishop McDonald, a native of Ireland, was president of the International Federation of Catholic Universities from 1960 to 1963 and editor of the Catholic Encyclopedia.


Atlanta Official Fined on Gun
LEAD: Atlanta City Councilman Hosea Williams, who was arrested in March for trying to carry a .38-caliber pistol past security at Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport, was fined $1,000 Monday after pleading no contest to carrying a concealed weapon and carrying a pistol without a permit, misdemeanor charges.


Suns Beginning to See the Light
LEAD: Two occurrences best highlight the five-year fall and resurgence of the Phoenix Suns.
The decline began in June 1983 with the trade of Dennis Johnson to the Celtics for Rick Robey.
The trade considerably strengthened Boston and proved disastrous for the Suns.
Phoenix has finished at or below the .500 mark ever since and has missed the playoffs the last four seasons.


2 Groups Discuss Offers for G.E.C.
LEAD: Two international groups are talking about bidding for Britain's huge General Electric Company, industry sources said.
One is headed by General Electric of the United States, which is not linked in any way with G.E.C., and the other by G.E.C.'s chief British rival, Plessey P.L.C.


With a Microwave Oven, Relief From Constant Stirring
LEAD: THE very notion of cooking risotto in a microwave oven may seem as close to culinary blasphemy as one can get.
In reality, however, it is one of the most alluring recipes in the microwave cooking repertory.
Risotto cooked this way is not cooked more quickly than the traditional stove-top version, but the quality is excellent and the cook is liberated from the endless standing and stirring.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: AFTER a brunch of beef sausages, fried chicken, macaroni salad and Tater Tots, the 114 members of the Corsi Senior Center on East 116th Street in East Harlem donned party hats, decided who should have which noisemakers and strolled - some with canes, some with walkers - from the center's dining room into the lounge.


Moody's Reduces Rating On Outstanding Sears Debt
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service has reduced the debt rating for more than $5 billion in outstanding debt issued by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and of Sears Roebuck Acceptance and Sears Overseas Finance.


John F. Hennessy, 60, Construction Engineer
LEAD: John Francis Hennessy, a consulting engineer who supervised the design of major buildings in New York City and Washington, died of a heart attack Monday.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Pentagon Moves Against Figures Cited in Inquiry
LEAD: The Navy has initiated actions against more than a dozen individuals and companies involved in the Federal inquiry into military procurement fraud, including the suspension without pay of a Navy employee who was indicted in the case last week, the Pentagon announced today.


Gulf &amp; Western Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gulf &amp; Western Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,488,400,000
1,462,500,000
Net inc
144,000,000
130,000,000
Share earns
1.21
1.05
Yr rev
5,107,800,000
4,701,000,000
Net inc
384,700,000
356,100,000
Share earns
3.21
2.88
Shares outst
119,500,000
123,400,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  President Reagan's economists blamed regulatory policies for the savings and loan crisis and said the public would have to pay for much of the cure.  [ Page A1. ]  Members of Congress assailed regulators for December transactions, which rid the industry of 75 insolvent institutions at a cost of $16.7 billion.


First American Tennesse Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Tennesse Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b3,400,000
c7,100,000
Per share
-
.31
Yr net inc
30,441,000
50,503,000
Per share
1.32
2.20
b-After a charge-off of $31.3 million in problem loans and an increase of $31.4 million in loan loss reserves.


Donald Voorhees, 85, Conductor Who Led 'Bell Telephone Hour'
LEAD: Donald Voorhees, for 28 years the conductor and musical director of the ''Bell Telephone Hour,'' one of the most popular musical programs in broadcasting history, died of pneumonia yesterday at Tomlin Memorial Hospital in Cape May Court House, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Stone Harbor, N.J.


U.S. Report Raises Estimate of Smoking Toll
LEAD: Twenty-five years after the Surgeon General of the United States jolted the nation with the first official warning of the health perils of cigarettes, a Federal report has concluded that smoking has caused more death and disease than previously believed.


Counter-Inaugurations
LEAD: The counter-culture lives, also in the context of the Presidential inauguration festivities that are to take place next week.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Surgeon General's Surprise


Why Not a Methadone Clone for Cocaine?
LEAD: Nothing would help the medical and public health communities fight substance abuse more than a chemical treatment that works against cocaine addiction much as methadone works against heroin.


Urban School District For Indians Is Urged
LEAD: The Minnesota Legislature should start the nation's first urban school district run by American Indians to focus on the special educational needs of native American children, a group of educators has recommended.


Giants Sued for Bias in Coach Hiring
LEAD: Lance Hamilton, the former Penn State linebacker, has filed a suit charging the Giants and the National Football League with racial discrimination.
He contended in a suit filed yesterday in State Superior Court in Hackensack, N.J., that the Giants had reneged on a promised offer of a coaching job because he is black.


Arum Makes Big Plans
LEAD: Predicting that 1989 would be ''the year of the middleweights,'' Bob Arum announced yesterday that he planned to promote a series of middleweights bouts that would unify the title.
And if everything works the way the president of Top Rank Inc. believes it will, the series will lead to a fight that might gross more than $30 million.


Holly Farms to Set New Bid Deadline
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation, the Memphis chicken producer, said its two suitors, Tyson Foods Inc. of Springdale, Ark., and Conagra Inc. of Omaha, would not be required to have their best proposals to acquire the company ready for Wednesday's board meeting.


Jackson Talks Resume
LEAD: After a hiatus of almost two months, the Knicks resumed negotiations yesterday on a new contract for Mark Jackson, their star second-year guard.
Al Bianchi, the club's general manager, and Don Cronson, Jackson's agent, met for about an hour in Bianchi's office at Madison Square Garden.
Bianchi said he had given Cronson an opportunity to make a counterproposal to the Knick offer that Bianchi had called ''final'' at the previous session on Nov.


End of Jersey's No-Fault System Would Surprise Few Auto Insurers
LEAD: The proposal by Gov.
Thomas H. Kean that New Jersey abandon its no-fault system for automobile insurance is unlikely to be viewed as a decisive blow to the no-fault concept in insurance circles.
The New Jersey version of no-fault has long been regarded as so weak as to be no-fault in name only.


Redmen's Fortune Turns for The Better
LEAD: Contrary to the assortment of twists and turns that have lurked along the path to victory for teams in the Big East Conference this season, something straight and narrow transpired last night before a sellout 6,008 fans at Alumni Hall: St.
John's defeated Connecticut, 71-63.


Market Place; Warning Signs For Stock Prices
LEAD: THE Dow Jones industrial average is trading at its highest levels since the 1987 crash, to a chorus of disbelief.
Contrarians can take comfort in just how much doubt there is, but in the meantime there are signs that the stock market is not nearly so healthy as the Dow would seem to indicate.


British List Bill On Steroid Use
LEAD: A bill that would impose a criminal penalty on anyone caught taking or supplying anabolic steroids without a prescription was introduced in the House of Commons today.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were generally higher in erratic trading yesterday.


Cocoa Prices Fall Sharply Amid Selling by Arbitragers
LEAD: Cocoa futures prices dropped sharply yesterday amid heavy arbitrage selling and rumors of large export shipments from the Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer.


Universal Foods Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Foods Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
187,690,000
187,047,000
Net inc
10,848,000
8,609,000
Share earns
.66
.50
Shares outst
16,551,000
17,264,000


Gordon Jewelry Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gordon Jewelry Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
86,677,462
87,089,185
Net inc
b1,162,687
c2,298,685
Share earns
.14
-
b-Includes a pre-tax gain of $2,218,337 from the sale of real estate.
c-Net loss


Dream of White Christmas Is Now Family's Nightmare
LEAD: Carlos Fajardo is sick of snow. Just last month, it was all he wanted.


Jackson as African-American
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson is here, telling leaders at the conference of the African-American Institute what they want to hear from the U.S.


Washington Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Seattle reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Seattle (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,822,000
12,541,000
Share earns
1.05
.96


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  YANKEES (AL) - Traded Rick Rhoden, pitcher, to Houston for John Fishel, outfielder, and Pedro DeLeon and Mike Hook, pitchers.
Assigned Hook and DeLeon to Albany of the Eastern League.
MONTREAL (NL) - Agreed to terms with Mike Fitzgerald, catcher, on a one-year contract.
OAKLAND (AL) - Agreed to terms with Matt Young, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Newspaper Ads Up
LEAD: Spending on newspaper advertising for the first three quarters of last year totaled $22.68 billion, an increase of 5.9 percent over the comparable period in 1987, according to preliminary estimates from the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.
National spending rose by 2.5 percent, to $2.66 billion, while retail advertising climbed by 3.5 percent, to $11.08 billion, and classified increased by 6.8 percent, to $3.01 billion.


Boom Ends As Minorities In the Region Lag Behind
LEAD: The metropolitan region's six-year economic boom has ended but without any progress in drawing a large part of the population into the mainstream workforce.


Eating Well
LEAD: IT seems as if everyone is talking or writing about nutrition these days.
Even if you seldom follow the subject, you might be surprised at the amount of information you have absorbed subliminally.


Interim U.S. Attorney: 'Street Smart' and Fair
LEAD: Benito Romano brings to the job of interim United States Attorney ''street smarts,'' a fervent intolerance for corruption and a sense of fairness that comes from growing up poor in the South Bronx, his friends and colleagues say.


India's Claims on China
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television; Smoking: From Flirtation to Peril
LEAD: ''Smoking: Everything You and Your Family Need to Know,'' on Home Box Office tonight at 10:30, marks the 25th anniversary of the Surgeon General's report linking cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
Nothing good has been discovered about smoking in the interim.


Rostropovich to Conduct Premiere Of Unpublished Shostakovich Work
LEAD: Mstislav Rostropovich, the Soviet expatriate cellist and conductor of the National Symphony, will present the world premiere of an unpublished and unperformed satirical cantata by Dmitri Shostakovich tomorrow night in Washington.
The National Symphony is to play the same all-Shostakovich program Sunday afternoon in Carnegie Hall.


Carnegie Plans Centennial
LEAD: Carnegie Hall officials announced preliminary plans yesterday for the hall's centennial season in 1990-91, highlighted by a commissioning program to link 10 composers with 10 performers and ensembles.


Time for Mr. Mosbacher to Come Clean
LEAD: Robert Mosbacher, who served as George Bush's chief campaign fund-raiser, now reaps his reward; he is the President-elect's choice to be Secretary of Commerce.
But before he is confirmed he needs to take care of some unfinished business: clearing the air about the millions he raised in so-called ''soft-money'' campaign contributions.


Record at Burson
LEAD: Burson-Marsteller, the public relations unit of Young &amp; Rubicam, said yesterday that its 1988 revenues totaled a record $148.7 million.
The revenues increased 17.6 percent over those of 1987.


Children's Book Awards For Writers and Illustrators
LEAD: Paul Fleischman has won the 1989 John Newbery Medal for his book ''Joyful Noise: Poems for Two Voices'' (Charlotte Zolotow/Harper &amp; Row).
The award is given annually for the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children.
The books honored have been published the previous year.


Review/Music; Pavarotti and Guests In a Program of Arias
LEAD: Luciano Pavarotti presided over a gala concert of opera excerpts at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening, bringing with him eight colleagues - four sopranos, a tenor, two baritones and a bass - as well as the New York City Opera Orchestra.
The concert, offered under the title ''Pavarotti Plus,'' was televised as part of the ''Live From Lincoln


Arbitration for Joyner
LEAD: Wally Joyner, the California Angels first baseman, filed for salary arbitration yesterday.
Three players who were eligible to file yesterday agreed to one-year contracts: Mike Fitzgerald with the Montreal Expos, Ken Howell with the Philadelphia Phillies and Pat Clements with the Padres.
Players can file through Monday.


8 Desktop Computers Introduced by Digital
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation introduced eight desktop computers today and outlined a new software strategy that company executives said would give the company an advantage by allowing its different models to be coupled more closely.


Cyril A. Zebot, Professor, 74
LEAD: Cyril A. Zebot, a retired professor of economics at Georgetown University and a Slovenian nationalist who vigorously opposed the postwar Communist regime in Yugoslavia, died of lung cancer Monday at his home in Washington.
He was 74 years old.
Professor Zebot, a graduate of the University of Ljubljana, came to the United States in 1947 and taught at Duquesne University before joining the Georgetown faculty in 1958.


Nuclear Plant Decision Is Limited
LEAD: Experts on utility regulation said the Supreme Court's decision that utilities do not have a constitutional right to bill customers for the costs of unfinished plants had limited applicability to the scores of nuclear plants abandoned around the country.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Pacers 127, Celtics 108: Indiana beat Boston at Boston Garden last night for the first time in 18 regular-season games since April 2, 1978.
Chuck Person scored 29 points and Rik Smits had 21 as the Pacers gained their first victory in 16 road games this season.
It was the fourth consecutive victory for the Pacers, including three straight under Dick Versace, their new coach.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If we forget what we did, we won't know who we are.
I am warning of an eradication of the American memory that could result, ultimately, in an erosion of the American spirit.''  - President Reagan. [ A1:3. ]


RICO Shouldn't Be Used to Clog Federal Courts With Civil Suits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; Happy Sounds, Dissonantly
LEAD: The Americas Society, which pro-motes cultural interchange between hemispheres, offered an evening of music by the Mexican-American composer Max Lifchitz at Merkin Concert Hall on Monday evening.
Mr.
Lifchitz, who holds academic posts in Albany and New York City, writes a busy, rhythmically active, upbeat-sounding kind of music in a dissonant idiom.


Tultex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tultex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Sales
150,607,000
126,886,000
Net inc
14,539,000
13,237,000
Share earns
.53
.48
Yr sales
339,129,000
348,692,000
Net inc
21,235,000
28,805,000
Share earns
.77
1.05


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Alexander's Inc., the department store chain, elected Leon Peck executive vice president, finance, succeeding William H. Pavony, who left the company.
It also named Brian M. Kurtz senior vice president and controller.


Stock Units Are Opposed
LEAD: A representative of some of the nation's leading institutional investors has asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to reject a New York Stock Exchange proposal that would allow companies listed on the Big Board to break their stock into a package of new securities that have come to be known as ''unbundled stock units.


Two Pipelines Get Approval
LEAD: The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission gave initial approval today to two pipeline projects that developers hope will bring Canadian natural gas to the Northeast by 1991.
In a unanimous vote, the


New Look for a Famed Hotel
LEAD: The landmark Sheraton Palace Hotel, a home away from home for several Presidents and armies of celebrities since 1875, has closed for the first time since the great earthquake of 1906 for a $60 million, 18-month renovation.


Continental to Buy 6 Eastern Planes
LEAD: Eastern Air Lines Inc. said yesterday that it was planning to sell six of its A300 airplanes to Continental Airlines for $170 million to provide cash for its operations.
The carrier, which has been losing money and traffic in recent months, said the transaction would not reduce the size of its fleet because the planes have been on lease to


Karl Geiringer, 89, Musicologist And Composers' Biographer, Dies
LEAD: Karl Geiringer, a leading figure in musicology since the 1930's, died Tuesday at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif., from complications arising from a fall.
He was 89 years old and lived in Santa Barbara.


Powerful Chip Due From Intel
LEAD: The Intel Corporation is preparing to provide details of an extremely powerful new chip for the microprocessor business.


Bush Will Name Retired Admiral As Energy Chief, Filling Cabinet
LEAD: President-elect George Bush has decided to name a retired admiral, James D. Watkins, as Energy Secretary, filling the last Cabinet position, officials on Mr.
Bush's staff said tonight.


Sensible Modesty in New Jersey
LEAD: Gov.
Thomas Kean's final New Jersey State of the State Message this week was notable mainly for its modesty, both for the few initiatives proposed and for the demands they would place on the budget.
The modesty is a tribute to the Governor's sense of political realism and the prospect of growing revenue shortfalls.


China Buys More Wheat
LEAD: Private exporters have sold an additional 360,000 metric tons of United States wheat to China at subsidized prices, the Agriculture Department said on Tuesday.
Melvin E. Sims, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said the wheat was part of one million tons authorized for China on Dec.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Lofty View of a Pole
LEAD: What, one may well ask, do public television, hot air balloons and Tadeusz Andrzej Bonawentura Kosciuszko have in common?


Bush's Shell Game
LEAD: President-elect Bush has earned extra brownie points as an ''environmentalist'' for naming a well-regarded professional to head the badly crippled Environmental Protection Agency.


PARIS CONFERENCE CONDEMNS THE USE OF CHEMICAL ARMS
LEAD: Diplomats from more than 140 nations today condemned the use of chemical weapons and called for a stepped-up effort to complete a treaty banning the development, production and possession of such weapons.


American Nursery Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Nursery Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,895,000
3,261,000
Net loss
1,182,000
704,000
6mo sales
8,227,000
6,099,000
Net loss
2,107,000
1,316,000
Shares outst
3,662,956
3,621,509





Racially Mixed Couple Attacked In Bias Incident on Midtown Street
LEAD: A real-estate broker and his wife walking with their infant daughter were attacked in midtown Manhattan Monday afternoon by a knife-wielding black man who resented that the couple was racially mixed, the police said last night.


As a City's Wealth Grows, So Does Its Drug Problem
LEAD: Some big-city problems have infiltrated this compact community of 45,000 people on the banks of the Connecticut River.
Caught in a local eddy of the nationwide flood of cocaine, the Middletown police last year saw the number of drug arrests climb to 227, more than double the previous year's total.


Ralston Purina
LEAD: The Ralston Purina Company accepted about 5,525,000 shares of its common stock for payment at $84 a share in accordance with its previously announced tender offer.
Based on an early count, the human and pet food products group said about 5,538,000 shares had been tendered at or below $84 a share.
Ralston Purina's offer expired Tuesday night.


Circon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,715,000
10,400,000
Net loss
274,000
342,000
Yr sales
41,420,000
41,338,000
Net loss
2,433,000
1,941,000


Bonn Relents Somewhat on U.S. Charges
LEAD: West German officials indicated today that they were no longer ruling out that a German chemical company may have taken part in the outfitting of a Libyan plant that Washington says is intended for the manufacture of chemical weapons.


Anti-Sandinistas Say U.S. Should End Embargo
LEAD: Leaders of the political opposition in Nicaragua are virtually unanimous in urging the United States to end its four-year-old trade embargo against the Sandinista Government.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Warner Merges With Lorimar
LEAD: Warner Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had completed its long-delayed $1.2 billion merger with the Lorimar Telepictures Corporation in the wake of the sale by Lorimar of its last television station.


Falcon Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Falcon Products Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
8,763,000
8,643,000
Net inc
888,000
794,000
Share earns
.53
.49
Yr sales
31,690,000
32,583,000
Net inc
1,219,000
1,108,000
Share earns
.73
.69


States Could Provide the Housing for Congress; Their Market Price
LEAD: To the Editor:


Calvin DeWitt Jr., 94, Brigadier General
LEAD: Brig.
Gen.
Calvin DeWitt Jr., a career Army officer who commanded the New York Port of Embarcation after World War II, died Tuesday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 94 years old.


Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia Pictures Entertainent Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
386,564,000
274,826,000
Net inc
b9,437,000
1,115,000
Share earns
.07
.01
Shares outst
112,643,000
75,211,000
9mo rev
1,170,189,000
803,533,000
Net inc
b19,938,000
c24,915,000
Share earns
.14
.33
Shares outst
112,045,000
75,211,000


Washington Talk: Briefing; New Winds on Trade
LEAD: In what promises to be a somewhat quieter year for trade legislation, Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, is taking over as chairman of the Trade Subcommittee of the Senate Finance Committee from Senator Spark M. Matsunaga, Democrat of Hawaii.


Safety Rules Proposed for the Handling of Blood
LEAD: The Labor Department, responding to concern among health care workers about AIDS and other blood-borne diseases, has proposed regulations requiring that all blood and body fluids be handled as if they were infected.


Green Proposes to Trim School Staff


Suspect in Slaying Was Treated at Bellevue
LEAD: The homeless man charged in the murder of a pregnant doctor at Bellevue Hospital Center was hospitalized there for nine days last month after he told doctors that he had swallowed rat poison in an attempt to kill himself, according to officials familiar with his case records.


Memorial for Wien
LEAD: A memorial for Lawrence A. Wien, the lawyer, real-estate investor and philanthropist who died Dec. 10, will be held tomorrow in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University at 2 P.M.
Tributes will be offered by officials of Columbia, Brandeis University, the New York City Opera and Lincoln Center.
Mr.


Kimball Pleads Guilty In a Surprise Decision
LEAD: As testimony began today in his drunken-driving manslaughter trial, Bruce Kimball, the 1984 Olympic diver, switched his plea to guilty, admitting that he drove into a crowd of teen-agers last summer, killing two and injuring four others.


EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
7,733,100
4,314,000
Net inc
347,500
271,800
Share earns
.14
.11
Shares outst
2,455,100
2,552,400


British Order Inspections
LEAD: Britain's Civil Aviation Authority today ordered British airlines to increase inspections on engines similar to those on the Boeing 737-400 aircraft that crashed Sunday and said the inspections would continue until the precise cause of the accident was determined.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A New Start In Direct Marketing
LEAD: TOSS a marketing dollar in the air these days and the breeze is likely to waft it away from large advertising agencies and toward small sales-promotion companies or Yellow Pages specialists.


Arrest of Oil Union Chief in Mexico Sets Off Strike
LEAD: Striking oil workers disrupted production throughout Mexico today, protesting the dramatic arrest of their longtime union leader.
But their strike did not spread and there were signs that the bold step by the Government might pass without embroiling it in a national labor crisis.


Lazare Kaplan International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lazare Kaplan International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
20,731,000
14,145,000
Net inc
239,000
54,000
Share earns
.08
.02
6mo sales
36,590,000
24,076,000
Net inc
340,000
b506,000
Share earns
.11
-


Too Long at the Fair
LEAD: Silky Sullivan, the race horse, used to thrill his fans with a come-from-behind rush in the homestretch - sometimes.


Review/Theater; Certain Friendly Skies
LEAD: In ''Skin - a State of Being'' (at La Mama Annex), Ping Chong takes his audience aloft into a cloudland of airy activities.
As cumulus images drift by in the background, offstage voices of polite flight attendants settle us into our seats, preparing travelers for an armchair theatrical adventure.
A real airline should be so soothing and accommodating.


NBSC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBSC Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,100,000
1,074,000
Per share
.35
.35
Yr net inc
3,854,000
3,776,000
Per share
1.23
1.21


Reagan's Economic Critics: Wrong
LEAD: Everyone knows that the Reagan Administration's economic forecasts are always too optimistic, and this year is no exception, the pundits assure us.
Real growth in 1989 of 3.5 percent?
Inflation at only 3.7 percent?
Go on, they scoff.


In Uruguay, Immunity Repeal Has Wide Support
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transcript of Reagan's Farewell Address to American People
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Reagan's speech to the nation last night from the White House, as recorded by The New York Times:


Ogrin Lets Tournament Score Speak for Itself
LEAD: The First Amendment to the Constitution does not really come into play for the golfers on the PGA Tour.
Many pros, including such players as Mac O'Grady, J. C. Snead and David Graham, have paid the price for speaking their minds or writing what they believe.
The going rate has been $1,000 or more in fines.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: ALEXANDRA LOGUE was the sort of finicky eater who drives parents to distraction.
At 1 year of age she wouldn't touch anything except bread and milk.
Fifteen years later she couldn't stand such teen-age staples as spaghetti or Coke.
She still refuses to eat fish.


More Punished in Marine's Death
LEAD: The Marine Corps punished more officers today for abandoning a 19-year old lance corporal in the California desert, where he died last summer.


Scientists Find How Allergic Reaction Works
LEAD: Scientists have discovered the structure of a substance that is a key to allergic reactions, and they expect to use the knowledge soon in searching for new treatments for these widespread and varied forms of illness.


Holmgren Is a Coach After His Players' Hearts
LEAD: The night he found out he wasn't a Flyer anymore, a devastating tidbit of news that came to him from his car radio, Paul Holmgren drove the car into a ditch.
His body, already battered from eight years as a Flyer henchman, wasn't hurt, but his pride was, and at that moment the ditch seemed like the place to be.


Special Agency for Air Traffic Urged by Transportation Chief
LEAD: Transportation Secretary Jim Burnley today proposed restructuring his department in a way that could lead to the establishment of a semiprivate organization to control the nation's air traffic.


Surgeon General Rebukes Tobacco Industry Over Combative Ads
LEAD: C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General of the United States, criticized the tobacco industry today for advertisements in many newspapers that maintain that smokers are a put-upon group and that ''enough is enough!''


Hickory Dickory Dine
LEAD: ''IT'S called Restaurant 10-10,'' explained Jean-Pierre Heim, ''because that's always the time when photographers take pictures of clocks and watches.''


German Growth in '88 Is Put at 3.4%, Exceeding Forecasts
LEAD: The West German economy defied the gloomy forecasts of a year ago to post its strongest growth since 1979, according to provisional figures on 1988 performance released today by the Federal Statistics Office.


Sheldahl Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sheldahl Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Sales
21,608,000
19,576,000
Net inc
687,000
453,000
Share earns
.15
.10


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; B.S.B.W. Names Backer President
LEAD: William M. Backer, the author of ''It's the real thing'' for Coca-Cola and the mastermind of the ''Tastes great/less filling'' campaign for Miller Lite beer, has been elected president and worldwide creative director of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.


Canadiens Tough to Beat at Home, but Devils Try
LEAD: The Devils and the Canadiens played hockey tonight the way it should be, fast end-to-end action with no fights, crisp and accurate passing and inspired goaltending from both teams.


Ballet Theater Plans 50th-Anniversary Gala
LEAD: American Ballet Theater plans to celebrate its 50th anniversary with extended United States and international tours, a retrospective of the company's repertory, a ''Dance in America'' program for public television, and a touring exhibition of Ballet Theater memorabilia.


U.S. ORDERS CHECKS ON 300 JETLINERS
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration instructed United States airlines tonight to inspect 300 Boeing aircraft within 72 hours to make sure that their engine warning systems and monitoring circuits are not flawed.


1% OF EMPLOYEES TESTED FOR DRUGS
LEAD: Despite intense publicity about the magnitude of the nation's drug problem, less than 1 percent of the nation's workers were subjected to drug tests by their employers from the summer of 1987 to the summer of 1988, the Labor Department said today.


90 Feared Dead in Pakistan On Boat Carrying Mourners
LEAD: A river boat crowded with funeral mourners and goats broke apart and capsized after hitting an obstruction, and 90 people were missing and feared dead, newspapers said today.


Mary Field Twombly, Teacher, 79
LEAD: Mary Field Twombly, a former member of the New York City Hospital Visiting Committee, which monitored patient care for the United Hospital Fund, died of Alzheimer's disease Tuesday at the Duncaster retirement community in Bloomfield, Conn., where she lived.
She was 79 years old.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
41,545,000
31,410,000
Net loss
b10,574,000
c26,033,000
b-Included net from discontinued operations of $12,216,000.
c-Included loss from discontinued operations of $4,405,000 and a gain of $3,353,000 from an accounting change.


Crude Oil Tops $18 a Barrel; Coffee Prices Fall the Limit
LEAD: Crude oil futures prices topped the $18-a-barrel mark yesterday, six weeks after OPEC agreed to cut back its production.


Pepperell Appeals Ruling on Defense
LEAD: West Point-Pepperell Inc. asked an appeals court today to reinstate the textile company's ''poison pill'' defense as it tries to fend off an unsolicited $1.4 billion tender offer from Farley Inc.


The Hammer That Threw Bill Cosby
LEAD: With the rubbery face that has turned Dr.
Cliff Huxtable into a household name, Bill Cosby stared at his visitors.


SBE Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SBE Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,286,000
2,631,000
Net inc
248,000
347,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Yr sales
13,920,000
8,671,000
Net inc
943,000
849,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
17,718,000
16,774,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertisign; New Publisher Named For Endless Vacation
LEAD: Robert F. Young has been named publisher of Endless Vacation, another step in the travel magazine's effort to make itself a significant consumer publication.
Mr.
Young, who is 54, was the founding publisher of Good Food, which Rupert Murdoch recently bought and closed.
Before that, he spent 13 years at The New Yorker.


2 KOCH AIDES DENY PATRONAGE IN JOBS
LEAD: Contradicting earlier witnesses before a state investigating committee, two Koch administration officials who supervised a job referral program in the basement of City Hall denied steadfastly yesterday that the program was used for political patronage.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Principal, Not Partner
LEAD: With one lawyer for every 22 residents, the District of Columbia may have the highest density for the profession in the United States.


Poll Finds Blacks and Whites 'Worlds Apart'
LEAD: A national survey has found that blacks and whites are ''worlds apart'' in their perception of race relations, with large majorities of whites believing that blacks are treated equally in America and similarly large majorities of blacks disagreeing.


Seat Belt Study Assesses Savings in Medical Costs and Injuries
LEAD: A pioneering study by researchers at the University of Illinois has quantified the value of seat belts in preventing injuries in motor vehicle accidents.


Stage Set for Congressional Battle With Elderly on Tax for Medicare
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee today all but ruled out changes in the new health insurance law covering catastrophic costs of major illness, setting the stage for a battle with groups protesting the surtax that older people must pay to finance it.


Jole Veneziani, Designer, 87
LEAD: Jole Veneziani, an Italian clothing designer, died Tuesday at her home in Milan.
She was 87 years old.


Trip for His Workers Is a Dying Man's Gift
LEAD: Francis Sennott, a business executive who died in October, left his employees something to remember him by: They are going to Hawaii next month.


Digital Solutions Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Solutions Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,660,000
3,200,000
Net loss
406,000
b174,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


Carolinian Ordered Extradited
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York has ordered the extradition of a Tuscarora Indian who fled kidnapping charges in North Carolina and sought haven at an Indian reservation in New York, a spokeswoman for the Governor said Tuesday.


Triton Lifts Stake In Fuqua to 9.9%
LEAD: Triton Group Ltd., moving toward its goal of obtaining control of Fuqua Industries, increased its stake to 9.9 percent by exercising an option for 1.3 million shares owned by the Georgia company's founding chairman and largest shareholder, J. B. Fuqua, for $36 a share.
Fuqua's stock rose $1.75 to close at $32 on the New York Stock


HEI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HEI Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
2,107,000
1,715,000
Net inc
18,000
101,000
Share earns
.01
.07


States Could Provide the Housing for Congress; Buy Them Apartments
LEAD: To the Editor:


Battleground Of Mexicans; President Takes Aim At the Unions' Power
LEAD: With the dramatic arrest Tuesday of the powerful leader of Mexico's Oil Workers' Union, the long-simmering feud between President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and the country's restless labor unions has erupted into virtual open warfare.


CVB Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,809,000
1,145,000
Per share
.74
.47
Yr net inc
5,780,000
4,037,000
Per share
2.36
1.67


4 Customs Workers Are Among 14 Held In Drug Crackdown
LEAD: Federal agents yesterday arrested 14 people, four of them Customs Service employees, in a crackdown on drug trafficking at Kennedy International Airport.


Bronx Kindergartner Shows Up With Loaded Gun
LEAD: A 5-year-old kindergartner took a loaded .25-caliber pistol to school yesterday, and on orders from his teacher, handed it over, barrel first, as hundreds of pupils ate sandwiches, milk and cookies in a crowded cafeteria in the Bronx, officials said.


Aspin Asks Long-Term Budget for Strategic Arms
LEAD: The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee said today that to save taxpayers money and yet make military outlays more effective, all strategic weapons should be put on long-term budgets and their funds should be collectively frozen for 10 years.


High Court Rejects Charges by Utilities For Unused Plants
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that the Constitution does not guarantee utility companies the right to recover the costs of uncompleted or abandoned power plants.


City National Inc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* City National Inc (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
49,312,000
40,851,000
Per share
2.02
1.68
Shares outst
24,468,566
24,309,761
The company said per share earnings included non-recurring income equal to 8 cents a share and 22 cents a share for the latest year and 1987, respectively.


Power Failure in Jersey Causes Transit Delays


Adtec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adtec Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,506,000
4,003,000
Net inc
89,000
263,000
Share earns
.04
.13
6mo rev
7,775,000
6,568,000
Net inc
211,000
367,000
Share earns
.10
.18


Jersey Is Moving Cautiously Against Accused Polluter
LEAD: New Jersey authorities are moving cautiously against a barge company accused of dumping ''mind-boggling'' amounts of hazardous wastes into New Jersey and New York waterways, for fear of driving the company, a major disposer of sewage sludge for the metropolitan region, out of business.


110 degrees Heats Kills Baby; Mother Is Charged
LEAD: A 10-month-old boy died after the temperature in the Bronx apartment where he was sleeping reached 110 degrees, the police said yesterday.
His mother, who had turned on a gas heater and then left the child unattended for about 12 hours, was charged with manslaughter.


Soviets Say Foreigners Will Need AIDS Certificates
LEAD: The Soviet Government said today that it would require foreigners planning to stay here for longer than three months to present a certificate showing they do not carry the AIDS virus, starting Feb. 1.


U.S. and Allies Veto U.N. Move on Libyan Planes
LEAD: A resolution that deplored the downing of two Libyan fighter planes by American fighters over the Mediterranean last week was vetoed in the Security Council tonight by the United States, Britain and France.


Now, the Hard Part on Poison Gas
LEAD: Ridding the world of chemical weapons, George Bush declared in his campaign for the White House, would be a topmost priority of his Presidency.
With two very small steps this week in Paris and in Bonn, the Reagan Administration has pushed matters along.
It's now up to Mr.
Bush to overcome the still- substantial obstacles to a new and tougher treaty banning the scourge of chemical war.


'The Heidi Chronicles' Moving to Broadway
LEAD: ''The Heidi Chronicles,'' the Wendy Wasserstein play featuring Joan Allen that is now at Playwrights Horizons, is to move to the Plymouth Theater on Broadway next month.
It will finish its run - the rest of which is sold out - at Playwrights Horizons on Feb. 19 and begin performances at the Plymouth on Feb.


Drexel Said To Pursue Shad for Job
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. is negotiating with John S. R. Shad, seeking to persuade the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission to join the firm as chairman, people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.


A Glance Outdoors Gives the Lie to 'the Dead of Winter'
LEAD: THE conventional wisdom about a garden in winter, except in states like California and Florida, is that it is dead, or at best asleep.
There is little to do in the garden and not much to see, unless you count the activity at the bird feeder.


Chrysler May Raise Capital Spending
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation is considering raising its capital spending goal for the next five years to $14.1 billion to pay for new and redesigned products, the trade publication Metalworking News said today.
Chrysler officials were not immediately available for comment on the report.


Ex-Professor Criticizes N.C. State
LEAD: A controversy started by the jacket cover of a forthcoming book charging wrongdoing within the North Carolina State basketball program intensified yesterday when a retired professor at the school said that grades had been changed to maintain the eligibility of Chris Washburn, one of the school's former star players.


Sound Warehouse Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sound Warehouse Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
43,978,000
41,019,000
Net inc
261,000
163,000
Share earns
.05
.03
6mo rev
90,712,000
84,497,000
Net inc
1,900,000
1,506,000
Share earns
.37
.28


Review/Television; Fighting for the Country That Seizes One's Family
LEAD: ''The Color of Honor'' tells the story of the Japanese-American men who served in the United States Armed Forces in World War II, while other Americans of Japanese descent, including some of the soldiers' families, were being held in Government internment camps.
The 90-minute documentary, at 9 o'clock tonight on


Tyson Says He Signed More Than One King Pact
LEAD: Mike Tyson, in a deposition he gave in his suit to break his managerial contract with Bill Cayton, has said he signed more than one contract with Don King over the past year.


Regan Agrees To a Shift On Pensions
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Comptroller have agreed on a plan to help New York State close its budget gap by lowering the state's contribution to its pension fund by about $600 milllion over the next year.


Bush Pledges Angola Rebel Aid
LEAD: President-elect George Bush has written to Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan rebel leader, offering ''all appropriate and effective assistance'' during the Bush Administration.


Save the Next Jessica Cortez
LEAD: Who's to blame for the death of Jessica Cortez, an apparent victim of child abuse?
Her mother and a companion have been indicted for second-degree murder.
What remains a mystery is whether New York City agencies could have done more to protect the child.
The mystery endures because of a state law requiring confidentiality.


Diamond Trade Spurts
LEAD: Belgium's diamond trade, the world's largest, reported a 27 percent gain in business last year, to 461.5 billion francs ($12.5 billion), the industry said on Tuesday.
The country's diamond sales rose 25 percent, to 229.6 billion francs ($6.2 billion), while imports climbed 30 percent, to 231.9 billion francs ($6.3 billion).


Lloyd's Stand On Liability
LEAD: Lloyd's of London, which prides itself on having never failed to settle an insurance claim, said today that it would maintain its policy of unlimited liability.


Allegheny Spurns Compromise Plan
LEAD: The board of Allegheny International Inc. voted late yesterday to reject a compromise plan of reorganization that was supported by the company's creditors.
The plan would have allowed Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. to buy Allegheny in exchange for selling its profitable patio furniture and outdoor grill units to an investor group led by Paul S.


Prime Files Motion Against MAI Basic
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc., which is facing a hostile $1.3 billion bid from MAI Basic Four Inc., filed a court motion contending that MAI Basic violated Federal Reserve Board margin requirements in arranging financing on its $20-a-share tender offer.


Sandata Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandata Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,977,476
2,152,485
Net inc
113,498
102,511
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
2,444,745
2,419,182
6mo rev
5,272,297
4,289,158
Net inc
117,653
176,431
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
2,444,745
2,417,230


States Could Provide the Housing for Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drought Leaves Nets High and Dry
LEAD: The Nets used their new starting lineup tonight, featuring Chris Morris at forward and Dennis Hopson at guard.
They overcame a 15-point deficit and got a career-high 20 points from Morris.


Part of Chrysler Legacy To Be Sold at Sotheby's
LEAD: Art from the collection of Walter P. Chrysler Jr. - Old Master and 19th-century paintings by Bernardo Bellotto, Lucas Cranach, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres and Theodore Gericault, and Art Nouveau glass by Tiffany and Galle - is to be sold by Sotheby's in June.


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Standard
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,438,830
5,583,488
Net inc
85,707
1,201,257
Share earns
.01
.09
Shares outst
12,647,260
12,310,000
6mo sales
31,500,534
8,517,710
Net inc
526,764
1,064,001
Share earns
.05
.08


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-15  More Russians can come to the U.S., President Reagan has decided.
This 39 percent increase will be offset by reducing the number of places reserved for Southeast Asian refugees.
Page A1


TV Notes
LEAD:  Bilateral Dramas ''American Playhouse,'' which begins its eighth season on the Public Broadcasting Service next month, has agreed to co-produce two feature films with Soviet film makers this year.
The films are to be released first in Soviet and American theaters, probably in 1990, and are to be shown on the PBS series at a later date, the executive producer of the series, Lindsay


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day on Tuesday, about Ellis Verdi &amp; Partners, now called Follis &amp; Verdi, misstated the budget of the account of the Financial Services Corporation of New York.
It ranges from $100,000 to $200,000.


P.&amp;G. Plans to Add $1 Billion To Its Employee Stock Plan
LEAD: In the largest action of its kind to date, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company announced yesterday that it would add $1 billion to its employee stock ownership plan in a move that will provide substantial tax benefits and offer a shield against a hostile takeover.


Need for High-Tech Consortiums Stressed
LEAD: Executives in several high-tech industries and some academics and Government officials say that if the United States is to remain competitive, it must begin forming a large number of cooperative research and development consortiums.
The joint research efforts would substantially alter traditional relationships among business, universities and the


Banks Ask for Backing For Third World Loans
LEAD: An organization representing 186 banks in 40 countries today called for changes in third world debt strategy, asking in particular for governments of creditor countries to guarantee bank lending to debtor nations.


SFE Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SFE Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
8,789,000
9,576,000
Net loss
3,053,000
2,310,000
Yr sales
36,182,000
39,482,000
Net loss
b4,268,000
5,666,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $683,000.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Shoe-Town, a 250-store retail chain, to Solin Associates, with a budget exceeding $3.5 million.


Convention Tightens Scholarship Eligibility
LEAD: In a turn of events that could dramatically affect the ability of certain high school athletes to attend college, Division I delegates to the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention today approved a proposal that will prevent incoming freshmen who do not meet prescribed academic standards from receiving athletic scholarships.


Fine-Tuning for First Nationwide
LEAD: The First Nationwide Financial Corporation's name has long been more an expression of its desire to expand than a reflection of its actual operations.


Employers Match Donations, Multiplying Gifts to Neediest
LEAD: Thomas Clemmons of Pawling, N.Y., sent $100 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ''to help provide aid to the homeless and hungry of New York City.'' His gift was made under the matching-gifts program offered by his employer, The Reader's Digest Foundation of Pleasantville, N.Y.


A City Without Sirens: Quiet Views of Gotham
LEAD: TWO new books - ''Frontier New York'' (Hudson Hills Press), top, and ''Urban Wilderness: Nature in New York City'' (Earth Environmental Group), above - offer fascinating, silent views of a city often thought of as boisterous, crowded and noisy.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: APPLYING fresh paint to walls and ceilings is one of the most common home-improvement projects that amateurs undertake.
The experience is often marred by dismay at the mess created and sometimes even with the results.
But thorough preparation of rooms and surfaces to be painted can usually prevent both disappointments.


Quiet Figure in the Dispute Over Koch's Talent Bank
LEAD: He is the quiet man with the dark eyebrows who stands with a knowing smile in the back of the room at his boss's news conferences, or who buttonholes officials intently in the corridors of City Hall.
He has endured more than a few public putdowns from his patron, yet remains his friend and adviser, even when his advice goes unheeded.


A Debt Swap To Aid Nature
LEAD: The American Express Company has completed the largest private ''debt for nature'' swap to date in conjunction with the Nature Conservancy, a Washington-based land conservation group.
Such a swap supports conservation at the same time that it enables a nation to reduce its foreign debt and a bank to get troubled loans off its books permanently.


Laker Road Is Paved With Losses
LEAD: The headline in the Los Angeles Times read: ''Lakers' Road Streak Reaches 8 in Sacramento.''


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mercantile Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
913,000
707,000
Per share
.49
.38
Yr net inc
2,719,000
1,613,000
Per share
1.39
.86
The per share figures reflected 10 percent stock dividend paid in August.


DSC Settles S.E.C. Action
LEAD: The DSC Communications Corporation and a senior company official settled Federal disciplinary proceedings on Tuesday.
The Securities and Exchange Commission contended that the company had misstated its net income on certain financial statements in 1984 and 1985.


Let That Anger Out, It's Good for You
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israel Court Rebuffs Army Censor
LEAD: The High Court has overturned an Israeli military censor's ban for the first time, allowing the publication of criticism of the head of the Mossad intelligence agency.


U.S. Halts Navy Maneuvers That Libya Calls Provocative
LEAD: The United States has canceled plans for naval fighters to hold aerial maneuvers near Libya next week, American diplomats said today.


Kollmorgen Will Get Offer From Vernitron
LEAD: The Vernitron Corporation said yesterday that it would make a tender offer today for the Kollmorgen Corporation for $23 a share in cash, or about $294 million.


Metro Matters; Mau-Mauing Flak Catchers On the East Side
LEAD: The presidency of the 70-year-old East Sixties Property Owners Association has never been a hotly contested job, and the reluctant incumbent shuns the suggestion that his civic activism might be perceived as the incarnation of preservationist chic.


McCormick &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McCormick &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
349,298,000
324,458,000
Net inc
16,375,000
14,677,000
Share earns
.71
.63
Shares outst
22,961,000
23,572,000
Yr sales
1,183,894,000
1,078,453,000
Net inc
b42,674,000
b30,578,000
Share earns
1.83
1.30
Shares outst
23,267,000
23,602,000


Review/Music; From a Popularity Contest
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center handed over the stage of Alice Tully Hall this weekend to its resident string quartet, the Emerson, for a program that included two works from the society's Subscribers' Choice list of 20 chamber favorites, and the world premiere of Richard Danielpour's Piano Quintet.


Knowledge Is Power
LEAD: Turn down a dusty dirt road, go a mile or two past small cornfields and round peasant huts, and you come to a group of brick buildings set about with shade trees.
At the gate a sign says Kawere School, and another: Knowledge Is Power.


Hearing Is Set In GAF Trial
LEAD: A Federal appeals court is scheduled to hold a hearing this morning to decide whether to halt the criminal stock manipulation trial of the GAF Corporation and a senior executive.


Ransburg Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ransburg Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
62,833,000
51,411,000
Net loss
7,565,000
cd1,045,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
236,717,000
194,874,000
Net loss
b7,514,000
d15,792,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $3,250,000.


Among Europeans, Less Skepticism
LEAD: As the international conference on chemical weapons adjourned, the Reagan Administration appeared today to have made considerable progress in convincing its Western European allies of its assertion that Libya is building a chemical-weapons plant.


Investment Firm Started
LEAD: Peter R. Fink, who resigned as president and chief executive of the R. P. Scherer Corporation in November after losing a proxy fight against his estranged wife and other heirs of the company founder who want to sell, said Tuesday that he had started his own investment company.
The Quantum Corporation, of which Mr.


Self-Chilling Can Fraud
LEAD: The mastermind of a $2.4 million fraud involving claims of a self-chilling beverage container was sentenced to 12 years in prison today.


Review/Music; 44th Street Boogie-Woogie
LEAD: Harry Connick Jr., a 21-year-old singer and pianist from New Orleans, brought an aura of backroom honky-tonk to the normally staid Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, on Tuesday evening as he opened a four-week engagement there.


SafeCard Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SafeCard Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,847,000
33,386,000
Net inc
2,386,000
4,453,000
Share earns
.07
.14
Yr rev
107,000,000
118,673,000
Net inc
23,303,000
28,479,000
Share earns
.71
.87


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Fed Proposes Loan Rules
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board today proposed new rules requiring lenders to provide home equity loan borrowers with more information about the cost of such loans.


A Marketing Specialist Leads Funk &amp; Wagnalls
LEAD: Edward A. Volkwein, having made the marketing switch from Ragu spaghetti sauce to Prince tennis racquets already in his career, doesn't mind his latest leap - to Funk &amp; Wagnalls encyclopedias.


Lord &amp; Taylor to Bolster Presence in New Jersey
LEAD: Lord &amp; Taylor, the New York-based fashion chain that has been expanding rapidly around the nation in recent years, will soon have a stronger presence in New Jersey.


Centaur Extends Bid for Pennwalt
LEAD: Centaur Partners said its offer of $100 a share, or $765 million, for the Pennwalt Corporation, scheduled to expire at midnight yesterday, was being extended by two weeks, to Jan. 25.
Centaur also said it was voluntarily submitting unaudited financial information on itself and some of its limited partners to the Securities and Exchange


Jose Bustamante, 94; Peruvian President Ousted in '48 Coup
LEAD: Former president Jose Luis Bustamante y Rivero, who was ousted in a 1948 military coup and later became president of the International Court of Justice, died Wednesday, a hospital spokesman said.
He was 94.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about an imminent shortage of airline pilots misstated the number of flight hours required for an air transport pilot's license.
It is 1,500.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Heritage Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,164,000
2,256,000
Share earns
.61
.25
Shares outst
8,462,106
9,118,930
Yr net inc
21,435,000
16,706,000
Share earns
2.54
1.82
Shares outst
8,452,979
9,161,017


Books of The Times; Through a Dark Boyhood to a Place in the Sun
LEAD:  This Boy's Life  A Memoir  By Tobias Wolff  288 pages.
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Shopping for the 'Right' Summer Camp
LEAD: WHEN Barbara Wagner was shipped off to summer camp as a 10-year-old, she hated it so much that her parents had to whisk her back home before the end of the session.


Household to Quit Manufacturing
LEAD: In a major restructuring, Household International Inc. said today that it would leave the manufacturing business and return to its roots - providing financial services to individuals and small businesses.


Irving Officer Gets New Post
LEAD: The Bank of New York Company announced yesterday that Samuel F. Chevalier, 55 years old, had been appointed a vice chairman of both the bank and the holding company.
Mr.
Chevalier is the president of the Irving Bank Corporation and a vice chairman of its banking subsidiary.
The Bank of New York acquired Irving in


Quayle Takes Bush Vice Presidency as Model
LEAD: For more than eight weeks, Dan Quayle has prepared for the Vice Presidency by meeting with foreign policy and domestic specialists, shaping a staff largely made up of Republican moderates, and remaining - as George Bush was to Ronald Reagan - as discreet and deferential as possible.


Leaders of a Republic In Yugoslavia Resign
LEAD: Government and Communist Party leaders in the republic of Montenegro resigned today in the face of widespread protests over the economy and abuse of power.


Movie Buffs Find a Trove on Cable
LEAD: Howard Mandelbaum, the owner of Photofest, a Manhattan movie-photo archive, says the unthinkable has happened - he's become a slave to his video recorder.
Meryl Mintzer, an administrative assistant, says she no longer has time to shop, let alone clean her apartment.
Bill Dworkin, the vice president of sales at Rizzoli Publishing, confides that what he really likes to do these days and nights is stay at home in front of his television.


Where's the 'Mona Lisa'? Just Follow the Map
LEAD: LESLIE SMOLAN and Kenneth Carbone have worked together since 1977, but they consider their victory in the competition for the visitor information and sign system at the Louvre a plum, one of their best assignments to date.


Replacing Giuliani: A Familiar List
LEAD: Otto G. Obermaier, a top defense lawyer in New York, emerged yesterday as the leading candidate to succeed the United States Attorney, Rudolph W. Giuliani, people close to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said.


Independent Bank Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Group
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,203,000
676,000
Per share
.60
.34
Yr net inc
4,028,000
2,776,000
Per share
2.02
1.39


Jorge Bolet Cancels
LEAD: Because of illness, Jorge Bolet has canceled a piano recital on Sunday at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
He is to be replaced by John Browning.
A Carnegie Hall appearance by Mr.
Bolet, scheduled for Wednesday at 8 P.M., has been rescheduled for April 16 at 8 P.M.


Market Place; Realty Concern's Rapid Collapse
LEAD: IT may be a record for speed.
In just 201 days, the Residential Resources Mortgage Investment Corporation went from being an initial public offering to a Chapter 11 case in bankruptcy court.


Nu Horizons Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu Horizons Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,604,644
7,016,326
Net inc
152,209
b157,759
Share earns
.03
-
9mo sales
28,442,800
21,102,341
Net inc
608,072
219,777
Share earns
.13
.05


Review/Television; 'Reality' Rears Its Head in New Shows
LEAD: In an unusually busy week for new series and formats, ''reality'' programs and public-affairs projects have been competing for attention with the celebrity-laden talk shows.
In syndication, ''Inside Edition'' -being locally broadcast weeknights at 7:30 on Channel 4 - is still another electronic tabloid exercise, this one featuring David Frost as anchor.


Merrill Lynch Names Official
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said this week that it had named Christopher Reeves, formerly deputy chairman of Morgan Grenfell Group P.L.C., as chairman of its Merrill Lynch Europe and Middle East unit.
The appointment was made last month.
Mr.
Reeves resigned from


A Student Calls for Harder Schools
LEAD: A task force on youth held its first meeting here Tuesday and got a bit of a lecture from a high-school sophomore.


Israeli Jets Raid Bases in Lebanon
LEAD: Israeli planes tonight bombed bases of the Palestinian guerrilla group led by Abu Nidal, the police said.


More Icons of the 80's
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Review/Dance; Women With Whimsy
LEAD: Womanworks, a two-week modern-dance series devoted to female choreographers, got under way Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater with two experimental troupes.
The first was Sally Silvers and Performers.
The second was Yoshiko Chuma/The School of Hard Knocks, which incorporated some of Miss Chuma's recent students from the


Yields Rise For Week
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose for the week ended yesterday.


Heldor Industries reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heldor Industries (AMEX)
Year to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
96,962,000
98,507,000
Net inc
656,000
b2,132,000
Share earns
.18
.59
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $1,024,000 and a $970,000 extraordinary credit from the settlement of its business interruption insurance claim which arose from the spa plant fire in 1986.


Perry Gets Settlement
LEAD: Gaylord Perry, the star pitcher who retired in 1983, and his family accepted a $1 million settlement yesterday for a lawsuit involving his wife's death in a car wreck.
The agreement came as attorneys were preparing for closing arguments following two days of testimony in Bartow, Fla.
Perry's wife, Blanche, died after an accident near Lake Wales, Fla., in September 1987.


Winfield Case Likely to Center on Payment Dispute
LEAD: If George Steinbrenner and Dave Winfield eventually meet in court to resolve questions regarding their contributions to the Yankee outfielder's charitable foundation, the case will likely focus on each person's obligations to meet his financial promises and on alleged misuse of funds by Winfield, not on allegations of loans from


N.F.L. Plan Announced
LEAD: National Football League owners yesterday approved unanimously a free-agency plan the league will put into effect Feb. 1 unless an agreement is negotiated with the players' union.
The original plan allowed the 10 playoff teams to protect 40 players, the next 10 teams to protect 42 and the 8 teams with the worst records to protect 44.


A Texas Park For Opryland
LEAD: Opryland USA Inc. and the insurance company USAA said this week that they planned to develop a musical theme park here that would resemble one in Nashville.
Opryland's president, E. W. Wendell, said that no cost or starting date for construction had been determined but that he hoped to have details worked out by the end of the first quarter.


Medical Circles Take Fresh Look At Proposals on Health Insurance
LEAD: In another sign of growing concern about the financing of health care, The New England Journal of Medicine has published two alternative plans for universal health insurance.
One plan was proposed by a nationwide group of physicians and the other by an economist at Stanford University.


U.S. Electronic Sales Up
LEAD: American factory sales of electronic equipment, components and related products rose by more than 8.7 percent, to $242 billion, last year.


Designcraft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designcraft Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
13,654,000
17,435,000
Net inc
28,000
b1,519,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
2,402,000
2,415,000
9mo sales
36,372,000
48,153,000
Net loss
193,000
26,000
Shares outst
2,398,000
2,467,000


SHIITE WAR SPLITS SYRIANS AND IRAN
LEAD: Bitter fighting between Shiite Muslim factions in Lebanon appears to have strained a decade-old alliance between Syria and Iran as a Teheran newspaper today waged a scathing attack against Damascus.


Automotive Industries reports earnings for Year to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automotive Industries (OTC)
Year to Oct 1
1988
1987
Revenue
56,378,904
-
Net loss
b1,687,835
-
Share earns
-
-
Shares outst
2,160,566
-
b-After a income tax benefit of $879,000.
The company said comparable figures for fiscal 1987 are not available; the 1987 figures only include results from Dec.


Heroin Distribution Network Said to Be Broken


Westchester Poll to Assess Racial Attitudes
LEAD: Westchester residents will be polled on their attitudes about race relations and housing on Jan. 25 at an ''electronic'' town meeting at the County Center in White Plains.


Demand Strong for 7-Year Notes
LEAD: Credit market participants were very active bidders at yesterday's auction of new seven-year Treasury notes, but showed little interest in secondary issues of Treasury notes and bonds.


Starting Over, Once More With Style
LEAD: THE piercing blue eyes in the 1964 portrait by Richard Avedon are clearly the same.
So are the fair hair with the ruler-straight part and the meticulous bespoke clothing.
With his feet up on a small English tray table in front of an 18th-century Venetian painted desk he has had since he was 22 years old, J.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Smoky Response
LEAD: In the time-honored tradition of bureacratic documents, a spade is never a spade but rather a hand-manipulated tool for displacing and removing earth and other materials.


Hubco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubco Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,263,362
1,166,915
Per share
.31
.28
Yr net inc
5,253,084
5,251,002
Per share
1.28
1.28
Prior year results included a non- recurring after-tax gain of $400,157, or 10 cents per share, from the sale of an office and an after-tax loss on the sale of securities of $143,773.


Tale of a Soviet Cap and a Missing Flight Recorder
LEAD: First the flight recorder from an American missile was missing.
Then a few empty vodka bottles and a Soviet sailor's cap turned up on a remote South Pacific beach where there were not supposed to be any Russian seamen.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Birth Control Choices:


Barnett Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
59,000,000
50,300,000
Per share
.98
.83
Yr net inc
226,400,000
188,900,000
Per share
3.75
3.14


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
Berkeley Heights, N.J., said its microelectronics unit planned to make a new version of its 32-bit floating-point semiconductor that would cut the chip's cost by 65 percent.


Talking Deals; Film Processing's Latest Name
LEAD: QUALEX INC., the result of the recent merger of the photo-processing labs of the Eastman Kodak Company and Fuqua Industries, knows the value of a good name.
And in this case that name is Kodalux, the new name for the processing that used to be done by Kodak.





Security for Connecticut Bills
LEAD: Bill boxes outfitted with combination locks to foil would-be thieves at the new Legislative Office Building here work so well that they even keep out their owners.


More U.S. War Dead Pledged
LEAD: The Vietnamese Government will give more remains of Americans missing in action to a United States team arriving Thursday, and joint excavations of crash sites will be conducted, an official said today. ''I think there will be quite a number,'' said Nguyen Can, acting director of the office dealing with the servicemen missing in action from the Vietnam War.


When Inspiration Strikes Twice
LEAD:  A. Calvet armchair by the Catalan architect Antoni Gaudi dates from 1904.
B.
Ceccotti armchair, 1988, is by Roberto Lazzeroni and Allessandro Celleno, two Italian designers.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.20
9.15
6.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.24
8.30
5.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.42
8.44
6.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.30
9.31
8.67
30-YR.


Volt Information Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volt Information Sciences Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 28
1988
1987
Revenue
125,104,000
128,867,000
Net inc
375,000
672,000
Share earns
.06
.10
Shares outst
6,288,808
6,896,634
Yr rev
472,649,000
467,267,000
Net inc
b4,505,000
c2,689,000
Share earns
.68
.39
Shares outst
6,585,803
6,899,887


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: MY rituals are few but faithfully observed, which means that one Sunday every January will find me in a large and floridly decorated roadhouse called the Venus de Milo Lounge, strolling through aisles of junk, not-quite-junk and several gems.
The gems are hard to spot, but I know they're there.
So do most of my fellow prowlers: we are primed to pounce.


ROUND OF SELLING ENDS DOLLAR RALLY
LEAD: A new, coordinated round of dollar selling by central banks, led by the Federal Reserve and the West German Bundesbank, stopped a new year's rally in the dollar yesterday.


Personal Health
LEAD: Chances are that as soon as wisdom teeth begin struggling to emerge, a dentist will recommend that they come out.
But should they?


Bridge
LEAD: Half a century ago a young New York bridge expert was embarking on a brilliant career that was to bring him a string of national titles, three near-misses in world championships and the reputation of being the greatest bidding innovator of all time.


Canada Pork Imports Inquiry
LEAD: The United States International Trade Commission said today that it was undertaking an investigation to determine whether imports of pork from Canada have injured United States producers.


After 9 Months of Delays, U.S. Tries 3 for Sedition
LEAD: Nine months after lawyers began jury selection, opening arguments have begun in the trial of avowed revolutionaries that has already cost the Government millions of dollars.


Rights Group Criticizes U.S. Over Refugees in Indochina
LEAD: A human rights group has asserted in a report on Indochinese refugees that United States immigration and screening procedures are unfair.
It also criticized Thailand, along with Malaysia and Hong Kong, for trying to shift the burden of asylum elsewhere through harsh policies toward refugees.


Rockwell Ends Bid To Buy Eaton Unit
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said it had ended negotiations about purchasing a troubled Eaton Corporation unit that makes electronic jamming equipment for Rockwell's B-1B bomber.


Incentives Extended By Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company extended its buyer-incentive programs today and offered some through low-rate financing and cash rebates.


Walker Street Unable to Get Data
LEAD: Walker Street Associates L.P. disclosed that it had been rebuffed in an attempt to examine confidential financial information of National Intergroup Inc.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Walker Street said it had met on Tuesday with the management of National Intergroup but the two sides ''were not able to reach any agreement or understanding and do not plan to meet any further,''


RSI Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RSI Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
22,093,000
22,009,000
Net inc
1,516,000
2,489,000
Share earns
.20
.33
Year-ago figures are restated.


Gene Accord For Cetus
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation and Hoffman-La Roche Inc. said they had agreed to collaborate on the development and commercialization of in-vitro human diagnostic products based on Cetus's Geneamp polymerase chain reaction technology.


Soviets Seen Retiring Warsaw Pact Chief
LEAD: The Soviet leadership has decided to replace Marshal Viktor G. Kulikov, the Warsaw Pact military commander in chief, as part of a shake-up tied to cutbacks in the armed forces, Soviet and Western officials say.


Central Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Pacific Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,789,000
1,180,000
Per share
.33
.21
Shares outst
5,589,544
5,588,494
Yr net inc
5,630,000
b2,472,000
Per share
1.01
-
Shares outst
5,589,294
5,581,096


Council Is an Issue in Chicago Mayoral Race
LEAD: Not for the first time, a group of civic and business leaders complained here this week that the Chicago City Council was a bloated and wasteful body interested in government mainly for the spoils it offers.


DeKalb Genetics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DeKalb Genetics Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,300,000
28,100,000
Net inc
1,300,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.22
.21


HEALTH: Birth Control; For Those Concerned With Pill's Risk, a Look at the Choices
LEAD: With new studies hinting that birth control pills may be linked to an increased risk of breast cancer, many women and doctors are taking a closer look than ever at contraceptive choices, weighing the risks and benefits of the various methods.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
83,019,000
66,730,000
Net inc
7,095,000
5,177,000
Share earns
.34
.24
Shares outst
20,877,000
21,174,000
9mo rev
200,041,000
195,258,000
Net inc
b16,049,000
15,021,000
Share earns
.77
.70
Shares outst
20,917,000
21,230,000


St. Augustine Beach Journal; Even in a Sanctuary, the Birds Can Outstay Their Welcome
LEAD: It was duck against woman, woman against duck, a desperate struggle best left to the police report, No. 88-241099-7-B, for description:


WestPoint Pepperell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WestPoint Pepperell Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 24
1988
1987
Sales
683,127,000
480,951,000
Net inc
10,800,000
b19,886,000
Share earns
.37
.64
Shares outst
29,555,221
31,128,997
b-Included a gain of $6,299,000 from the sale of discontinued operations and a charge of $7,865,000 from the cumulative effect on prior years of change in accounting for income taxes.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,553,000
2,293,000
Per share
.25
.32
6mo net inc
2,873,000
4,632,000
Per share
.46
.64


Jesse Jackson Gains Backers
LEAD: Five African leaders support the movement by some American blacks to call themselves African-American, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson said today at the end of a 16-day tour of Africa.


Knicks' Long-Range Shooters Are on Target
LEAD: The Bomb Squad is the name the Knicks' 3-point shooters have given themselves.
The squad, made up of Mark Jackson, Gerald Wilkins, Trent Tucker, Rod Strickland and Johnny Newman, had been slumping lately.


U.S. Suspends Teledyne Unit
LEAD: The Defense Department said yesterday that it had suspended Teledyne Electronics, a division of Teledyne Inc., from doing work on Government contracts because the company was implicated in the Federal procurement fraud investigation.


Chip Orders Behind Sales
LEAD: After a small rise in November, the semiconductor industry's leading indicator dropped in December, as chip makers based in the United States, Europe and Japan reported increased sales but decreased orders, a trade group reported Tuesday.


City of Freeways Plants An Idea to Help Nature
LEAD: If any city has a moral obligation to do something about global warming, this is it.
And so today the city of angels and internal combustion took action.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.The floors in our bathrooms are covered with small hexagonal tiles that I feel look old-fashioned.
I would like to re-cover these floors with a vinyl or with some other type of tile.
Can I apply the new floor covering directly on top of the old tiles, or must they all be removed first?
A.As long as the old tiles are still bonding firmly you can apply a new floor covering directly over them.


Reagan, in Farewell, Warns Against Loss of Spirit
LEAD: President Reagan said goodbye to the American people tonight as his 96 months in office neared an end, warning them that the revival in patriotism he helped to foster ''won't count for much and it won't last'' unless they learn more about their country's history and ideals.


Calendar: Japanese Lacquered Carvings
LEAD:  Kamakurabori, Japan Society Gallery, 333 East 47th Street; 212-832-1155.


Amtech Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amtech Systems Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,388,171
893,153
Net inc
b191,889
c62,805
Share earns
.09
.03
Shares outst
2,027,000
1,893,299
Yr sales
10,793,820
3,569,642
Net inc
b445,730
c296,471
Share earns
.22
.16


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Bills' Star Investigated
LEAD: Bruce Smith, the Buffalo Bills' All-Pro defensive end, was followed for three weeks in November by private investigators hired by the Bills because of concerns about drug abuse, according to a published report.
The Buffalo News, citing police sources, reported Tuesday that the Bills had off-duty detectives follow Smith and watch his home.


Suspect Freed Without Bail In Bronx Assault on Teacher
LEAD: A Bronx judge yesterday released without bail a man indicted for attacking a teacher in a crowded school hallway last month.
The teachers union strongly criticized the action.


Tesoro Petroleum
LEAD: The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation, which recently rejected a takeover offer of $189 million by an investor group including Pentane Partners L.P., may face other would-be suitors, a director of the company, Charles Luce, said.
Asked about other prospective bidders, Tesoro's senior vice president of finance, James R.


Raden Haji Harsoyo, U.N. Commander, 63
LEAD: Gen.
Maj.
Raden Haji Harsoyo, former commander of the Indonesian contingent of United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Vietnam War, died of heart disease Tuesday.
He was 63 years old.


Library Cat Is Out, and So Is Library
LEAD: The local library's eviction of Muffin, a cat that had lived there for seven years, may cost it as much as $30,000.


Washington Talk: Diplomacy; What Makes Washington Tick? Ask a Canadian
LEAD: When Allan E. Gotlieb arrived here seven years ago as Ambassador from Canada, he labored under some misconceptions.
Among them, he recalled, was the impression that there was a single point of power in Washington: the Presidency.
He soon learned that a diplomat must also pay a great deal of attention to


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Manning to Miss Season Because of Knee Injury
LEAD: The Los Angeles Clippers' worst fears about Danny Manning's injured right knee were realized yesterday. ''I am 95 percent cerain that the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee is torn,'' said Dr.
Tony Daly, the team physician, after studying computer-enhanced X-rays. ''The degree to which it is torn will have to be determined through diagnostic arthroscopic surgery.


Moving of Homeless Barred
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice yesterday temporarily barred New York City from moving homeless families from the Brooklyn Arms Hotel.
The order, by Justice William Bellard, is in effect until Tuesday, when another hearing is due.
A lawyer for the 200 families in the hotel, Colin Moore, had charged that the alternative housing offered by the city was unacceptable.


States Could Provide the Housing for Congress; Average Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Is Said to Agree To East-West Meeting
LEAD: The United States has agreed to convene a major East-West economic conference in Bonn early next year.
The meeting could lead to expansion of trade and financial relations between Washington and Moscow, Administration and Congressional officials said today.


Suffolk Video-Terminal Law Takes Effect Today
LEAD: Despite a legal challenge, a landmark law that requires work breaks and special training for many operators of video display terminals in Suffolk County will go into effect today.


Penny Wise, Tax Foolish
LEAD: There's a lot of wishful thinking in every Presidential budget, and even more when the President is about to leave office.
Now President Reagan proposes that the Internal Revenue Service charge a fee for the phone-in tax help it currently provides free.
The I.R.S. could save time and expense by ditching the plan after Mr.


Westerbeke Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westerbeke Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
4,197,100
4,572,600
Net inc
37,900
b543,500
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,174,449
2,033,750
Yr sales
18,228,900
19,269,100
Net inc
114,700
b1,096,200
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
2,139,511
2,033,750


Smuggling Pop LP's Out of the U.S.S.R., Thanks to McCartney
LEAD: Not long ago, music fans in the Soviet Union had to search the black market for European and American pop recordings and pay exorbitant prices for them.
But now, for once, the tables have been turned.


Labor Backing Jackson Aide
LEAD: Ronald H. Brown, a Washington lawyer who was the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's convention manager, received a major boost today in his campaign to be chairman of the Democratic Party when he was endorsed by the A.F.L.-C.I.O.


London Journal; To Barricades! Bureaucrats Fault French Cuisine
LEAD: For the last week a headline-grabbing confrontation has been unfolding in a London court that pits French gastronomy against British bureaucracy.


Green to Reassign 348 Headquarters Workers
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Richard R. Green yesterday presented the latest phase of his plan to reduce the size of the central Board of Education staff, reassigning 348 employees to local districts.


Scientists Find A Fault in Earth At Atomic Plant
LEAD: A previously unknown fault in the ancient rock layers beneath the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina has been detected and mapped by geologists, the Energy Department announced today.


Rising Rents Threaten Theater Companies
LEAD: A study prepared by an association of Off Broadway and Off Off Broadway nonprofit theaters in New York City has found that rising rents are endangering the theaters' future and could force many of them to leave the city.


John Allston Sargent, Executive, 79
LEAD: John Allston Sargent, a retired executive and former chief financial officer of the General Dynamics Corporation, died of a stroke Monday in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 79 years old and lived in Greenwich.


South Africa Moves to Curb 3 More Journals
LEAD: The South African Government signaled its intention today to suspend three anti-apartheid publications under censorship laws.


Sri Lanka's New President To End State of Emergency''
LEAD: President Ranasinghe Premadasa of Sri Lanka promised today that the five-and-a-half-year-long state of emergency would be lifted at midnight, providing for the release of hundreds of political prisoners, a Government spokesman said.


Restoring Old Pianos To Historic Dimensions
LEAD: KALMAN DETRICH says he repairs pianos inside and out. ''Most people get involved with one part or another,'' he said. ''But in order to do a good job, you should do both in the same place.''


Seton Hall Struggles Before Defeating Iona
LEAD: The emotional reconstruction of the Seton Hall basketball team was supposed to begin with tonight's game with Iona.
The Pirates figured to rout the Gaels and heal some of the wounds left from their embarrassing 90-66 loss to Syracuse last Saturday night.


Bids for G.E.C. Put in Doubt
LEAD: A possible hostile takeover bid for the General Electric Company, Britain's biggest manufacturing company, was put in doubt today.


California Utility In Bond Offering
LEAD: The Southern California Edison Company, a subsidiary of SCEcorp, is offering $150 million of first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2020 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc., which made the winning bid in competition yesterday.


Immucor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
2,173,652
2,044,022
Net inc
274,532
b359,102
Share earns
.07
.09
6mo sales
4,530,983
3,969,540
Net inc
551,667
b655,476
Share earns
.14
.18
b-Included tax credits of $142,386 for the quarter and $249,081 for the 6 months.


Angry Drivers Win Victory, of Sorts
LEAD: The suggestion by Gov.
Thomas H. Kean on Tuesday that New Jersey scrap its no-fault insurance system marked a victory of sorts for a guerrilla campaign of angry motorists who have struck fear into the hearts of politicians here in an election year.


Hungary Eases Dissent Curbs
LEAD: Hungary paved the way for political opposition to the Communist authorities today when Parliament voted to allow independent parties and public demonstrations.


Steinberg Has Mental Exam; Answers Are Called 'Evasive'
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg submitted to a three-hour examination by a prosecution-appointed psychiatrist yesterday to determine his mental condition on Nov. 1, 1987, when the prosecution says he beat 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg to death.


Review/Piano; A Premiere for a Rarity: A Pasternak Sonata
LEAD: Dmitry Rachmanov is a Soviet emigre pianist who has plenty of interesting musical ideas and a technique that is sizable, if not always foolproof.
On Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall, he played a recital of Russian music that included the American premiere of a recently discovered sonata by the author Boris


Shadow of Talent Bank May Fall on Koch's Bid
LEAD: The documents sat in an old file cabinet in Nydia Padilla-Barham's basement.
She had been told to remove them from her office in the Mayor's Talent Bank in 1986, she told the State Commission on Government Integrity, but not to throw them out at City Hall.


Latshaw Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Latshaw Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 29
1988
1987
Sales
5,473,000
5,235,000
Net inc
224,000
210,000
Share earns
.40
.37
Yr sales
22,905,000
21,302,000
Net inc
1,191,000
1,047,000
Share earns
2.10
1.84


'Black and Blue' Sets Date
LEAD: ''Black and Blue,'' the jazz-and-blues revue at the Minskoff Theater, has rescheduled its opening for Jan. 26.
The opening was delayed from Jan. 15 because of the illness of one of its stars, Ruth Brown.
Previews are continuing in her absence.
Until Ms.
Brown returns, some of her material will be performed by Dakota Staton.


Orion Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Pictures (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
92,385,000
87,567,000
Net inc
1,204,000
1,137,000
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo rev
307,507,000
280,283,000
Net inc
6,284,000
8,386,000
Share earns
.34
.48
Shares outst
17,374,000
20,909,000


Text of the Declaration From the Paris Conference on Chemical Weapons
LEAD: Following is the official text of the declaration issued today at the end of the international conference on chemical weapons:


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* River Forest Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,661,000
2,976,000
Share earns
.47
.35
Yr net inc
13,954,000
11,836,000
Share earns
1.72
1.37


U.S. RAISES QUOTA OF SOVIET REFUGEES BY CUTTING ASIANS'
LEAD: President Reagan has decided to increase the number of Soviet refugees who can come to the United States this year by 39 percent, to a total of 25,000, and will offset the change by reducing the number of places reserved for Southeast Asian refugees, Administration officials said today.


States Could Provide the Housing for Congress; What of Rank and File?
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Savings Official Quits
LEAD: The president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Topeka, Kan., Kermit Mowbray, took early retirement last week, bank board officials said today.


Dispute Seen as Threat to Arms Talks
LEAD: A last-minute dispute between Greece and Turkey threatens the completion of an East-West agreement that would open the way to new talks on reducing conventional forces in Europe, State Department officials said today.


Where Farm Animals Are Living Antiques
LEAD: AT Firestone Farm, a re-creation of a 19th-century sheep farm in Dearborn, Mich., the curators want everything to look as it did in 1882: the guides' costumes, the farming tools, the outbuildings.
But finding old-fashioned sheep is not as easy as it sounds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  COMPANIES  New England's largest utility offered to buy the nonnuclear assets of Public Service of New Hampshire, the first utility to file for bankruptcy protection since the Depression.
But the deal would not resolve the principal roadblock to opening the Seabrook nuclear plant, the issue of emergency evacuation planning.


International Paper Seeks French Concern
LEAD: The International Paper Company said today that it planned to begin a takeover bid for Europe's largest paper maker.


Sergeant's War Story: The Shame of the Whites
LEAD: When Bruce Moore-King was fighting for the Rhodesian Army more than a decade ago, he thought the war was a brave and noble affair.


Review/Film; Kevin Kline On the Trail Of a Killer
LEAD: ''The January Man'' is well titled.
It's a big-budget mainstream production that, in spite of its first-rate writer, director and cast, manages to fail in just about every department.
It couldn't have stood up to the competition from the slightly less bad films released in December.


About Real Estate; In Rockaway, a Project on the Shore
LEAD: As a seagull traced lazy circles overhead and a wintry wind blew spray in from the Atlantic Ocean, Charles Reis, a Manhattan developer, walked around a litter-strewn vacant lot near 99th Street on the Rockaway peninsula - the former site of the Rockaway Playland - and talked of his plans for 309 stucco and clapboard year-round town houses and apartments.


Palestinian Uprising Isn't Nonviolent
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kinard Makes Pro Bowl
LEAD: Terry Kinard, the Giants' free safety, was chosen yesterday to play in the Pro Bowl game Jan. 29 in Honolulu.
Each coach is allowed to add one ''need player,'' and the Bears' Mike Ditka, who will coach the National conference, picked Kinard.


Soviet-Israeli Diplomacy Is Winner in a Court Test
LEAD: Zvi Sherf stood on the sidelines of the basketball court at the Central Army Sports Club here and could not quite believe what he was seeing.


Pro-Israel Lobbyists Face Charge on Election Role
LEAD: Former United States officials filed a complaint today against an influential pro-Israel lobbying group and 53 political action committees, charging they had violated Federal election laws.


Showing Beats Telling in Many Courtroom Cases
LEAD: In the lobby area of Elizabeth Browning's office here is an illustration simple enough for a school child to understand.


Dukakis Seeks $730 Million In New Massachusetts Taxes
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis tonight proposed tax increases for Massachusetts residents that would raise about $730 million in the next 18 months to head off budget deficits.


Grade-Change Denial
LEAD: The former North Carolina State basketball player Chris Washburn said yesterday that his grades were not changed while he was playing for the Wolfpack, disputing the allegations of a former department head at the school.
Speaking in an article in yesterday's Atlanta Constitution, Washburn said, ''If they changed some grades, why didn't they change enough to get me a diploma instead of just playing basketball for two seasons?


Moscow Puts Disputed Region Under Direct Rule
LEAD: In an attempt to defuse the violent ethnic dispute that has brought virtual martial law to the republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan, the Soviet Government decided today to put a disputed territory under direct rule from Moscow, an Armenian journalist said.


Andrea Roschelle, Lawyer, And Howard Leader Wed
LEAD: Andrea Leslie Roschelle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Roschelle of New York, was married at the Stanhope Hotel in New York last evening to Howard Leader, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Leader of Scottsdale, Ariz.
Judge Joel Blumenthal of the Criminal Court in Queens, performed the ceremony.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-17


MAI Basic's Tally Of Prime's Shares
LEAD: MAI Basic Four Inc. said it had received 29.3 million shares of Prime Computer Inc. under its tender offer of $20 a share, or $1.3 billion.
Added to the stock it already owns, this would give MAI Basic nearly 65 percent of Prime's shares on a primary basis, or 48 percent on a fully diluted basis.


Cold Brown Fields
LEAD: The meadow beneath my window is brown and the mountains beyond are more nearly gray with mist than white with snow.
Is this merely a momentary setback for skiers - or a harbinger, in the middle of a cold Vermont winter, of another damaging drought next summer?


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adolph Coors Co., Golden, Colo., reported record beer sales in the fiscal year 1988 of 16.5 million barrels, a 5.6 percent increase over the previous year.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Brazil's Power Vacuum


Nellcor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nellcor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1987
Revenue
31,826,000
22,780,000
Net inc
3,136,000
2,041,000
Share earns
.22
.14
6mo rev
60,850,000
46,688,000
Net inc
6,136,000
5,418,000
Share earns
.42
.37


Ford Raises Dividend By 25%
LEAD: The cash-flush Ford Motor Company raised its quarterly dividend 25 percent today, which made Ford's dividend yield comparable to the yield of the General Motors Corporation's common stock.


Chemical Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
288,500,000
229,600,000
Per share
4.66
3.83
Yr net inc
753,600,000
b853,700,000
Per share
12.02
-
b-Net loss  The latest periods' nets included the recognition of the receipt of about $161 million, net of withholding taxes, of past-due interest on Brazilian loans for the period from Feb.


Review/Film; A British Cause Celebre
LEAD: Bill Douglas's ''Comrades,'' opening today at the Public, is an elaborately misconceived three-hour movie that apparently means to be both a meditation on the heritage of cinema and a tribute to the ''Tolpuddle martyrs,'' six farm laborers who became early heroes of England's labor movement.


Dr. King Remembered


Our Towns; Creating Castles At a Discount For Playgrounds
LEAD: No one at Fairmount Elementary School had ever met a celebrity architect before.
And what a celebrity.
Robert Leathers has built 450 playgrounds all over America. (How do you get a job like that, they wanted to know. Might as well be eating ice cream for a living.) At each school he mobilizes hundreds of children and parent volunteers, showing them how to construct a playground in practically no time for a fraction of the normal cost.


Met-Coil Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met-Coil Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
17,442,000
13,455,000
Net inc
634,000
571,000
Share earns
.32
.26
6mo sales
31,649,000
21,460,000
Net inc
745,000
280,000
Share earns
.36
.13


Emigrant Bids for Greater New York
LEAD: In the latest example of pressures to consolidate the savings bank industry, the Emigrant Savings Bank made a $200 million unsolicited offer yesterday to acquire the Greater New York Savings Bank.


Town &amp; Country Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Town &amp; Country Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
65,912,909
46,383,535
Net inc
4,939,452
3,501,991
Share earns
.47
.34
9mo sales
146,707,798
109,036,492
Net inc
6,700,528
5,310,472
Share earns
.65
.56


A Family Of Gospel Singers
LEAD: A gospel family reunion should raise the rafters tomorrow night at Greenwich House.
Martha Bass, a traditional gospel singer who was a soloist with the Ward Singers in their heyday, will share the stage with her two children: Fontella Bass, best known for the 1965 soul hit ''Rescue Me,'' and David Peaston, whose electrifying high tenor has won him top prizes and national television appearances at Apollo


To Our Readers
LEAD: Because of computer problems at The Associated Press, today's Options on Futures table does not include figures for sales and open interest.


U.S. and Japan End Dispute On Development of Fighter
LEAD: Japanese and American officials said today that the two countries had resolved a dispute over the exchange of military technology that had threatened cooperation on a new fighter plane for the Japanese Air Force.


Chip Shots Put Bryant In Front In Classic
LEAD: During the final round of the MONY Tournament of Champions last Sunday, four golfers chipped into holes a total of five times.
In each case, the successful chip shot involved a player finishing first or tied for second in the regular and senior divisions.


Bomb Suspect's Driver Says He Was Informer
LEAD: A man who has acknowledged driving an animal-rights advocate armed with a bomb to the headquarters of the United States Surgical Corporation last November now says he was a paid informer cooperating with the company and the police.


Sri Lankan Authorities Begin Releasing Political Detainees
LEAD: The Government released more than 200 political prisoners today after the new President, Ranasinghe Premadasa, lifted a state of emergency in this ethnically troubled land, the military said.


BB&amp;T Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BB&amp;T Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,452,000
7,964,000
Per share
.55
.43
Yr net inc
38,693,000
33,545,000
Per share
2.05
1.79


Review/Theater; Turgenev, With License And Without Reverence
LEAD: Brian Friel labeled his recent adaptation of the novel ''Fathers and Sons'' ''after Turgenev'' to indicate that he had taken certain artistic liberties with the original.
In his version, ''Nothing Sacred'' (at Hartford Stage), the Canadian playwright George F. Walker has assumed artistic license.


Moscow's Warning and Washington's Silence
LEAD: And now let's take a look at one of the more interesting Soviet statements of the New Era.
It is important in itself but mostly because Washington acts as if it had never been made and somehow will go away, which it won't.
The statement: ''There is a serious danger that things may develop in such a way that the Soviet Union might not be able, within the nearest future, to do what we have in principle decided to do.


Basque Separatist Leader Is Seized in France
LEAD: The French police have arrested a leader of the Spanish Basque independence movement, dealing a heavy blow to the group and underscoring increased antiterrorist cooperation between France and Spain.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Schneider Sings Weill Helen Schneider, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street (244-3005).
Over the last five years, Helen Schneider has grown into a cabaret performer of exceptional breadth and theatrical command.
In her new show, devoted to the songs of Kurt Weill, Ms.
Schneider dives fearlessly into the tempestuous emotional world of the songs, rather than taking the ironic distance that an older generation of Weill interpreters used to adopt.


Nikos Psacharopoulos, 60, Co-Founder of Theater
LEAD: Nikos Psacharopoulos, artistic executive director and a co-founder of the Williamstown Theater Festival more than 30 years ago, died yesterday in the Virgin Islands.
Mr.
Psacharopoulos, who lived in New York and was 60 years old, had colon cancer and was vacationing on St.
John Island after surgery, a festival spokesman said.


Southeast Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeast Banking Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
24,933,000
24,555,000
Per share
.79
.79
Yr net inc
75,303,000
23,402,000
Per share
2.35
.62
The latest and year-ago figures have been restated to reflect the Dec.


Touring the Brooklyn Museum: An Art Explorer's Selection
LEAD: Doubtless it is from professional deformation that this critic has, every so often, an irresistible dream.
He is in a city unknown to him.
On the top of a hill, there is an enormous house.
He walks up to it.
The door opens to his touch.
He gets inside.
Before him is an encyclopedia for the eye.
The art of all times and all places is documented there, together with human nature in all complexities.


Judge Said to Back Popeye's on Offer
LEAD: A. Copeland Enterprises Inc., the owners of Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken fast-food restaurants, said a Federal judge in Louisiana had ruled that the company could proceed with its $8-a-share offer for Church's Fried Chicken Inc.
The ruling reverses a preliminary decision made against Popeye's last week.


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Empire State (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
9,291,000
6,013,000
Per share
1.28
1.29
Shares outst
7,265,000
5,676,000
Yr net inc
44,458,000
40,258,000
Per share
6.02
4.78
Shares outst
7,385,000
5,547,000


Cherry Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherry Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
51,347,000
50,337,000
Net inc
750,000
2,368,000
Share earns
.17
.52
9mo sales
161,126,000
144,820,000
Net inc
5,063,000
5,077,000
Share earns
1.12
1.12


Treasury Notes and Bonds Climb
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes moved higher yesterday, touched off at first by a technical short-covering rally that later turned in to broad-based buying.


Tokyo Funeral Forces Choice By Old Foes
LEAD: Emperor Hirohito's death is forcing Japan's trading partners to decide which Japan looms larger, the wartime aggressor of the past or the economic giant of the present.


A Smetana Opera
LEAD: The Bronx Opera Company is presenting Bedrich Smetana's ''Secret'' at the Hunter College Playhouse, 68th Street at Lexington Avenue, tonight at 8.
The principals include Lori Phillips, a soprano; Lori-Carol Brown, a mezzo-soprano; John Vergilii, a tenor, and Mark Johnson, a baritone.
Michael Spierman, the company's artistic director, will conduct.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Below are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Special delivery and Express Mail only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.


Green Tree Acceptance Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Green Tree Acceptance Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,159,000
4,714,000
Share earns
.24
.19
Shares outst
12,027,740
13,752,178
Yr net inc
27,640,000
39,582,000
Share earns
1.47
2.15
Shares outst
12,437,800
16,161,718


U.S.-Greek Talks Recess
LEAD: Greek and American officials ended another round of talks on United States military bases today without making much headway toward a new agreement, a Greek Government spokesman said.
A spokeswoman for the American Embassy declined to comment on the three-day talks, the first round since a five-year operating agreement for the four installations expired Dec.


State Street Boston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
24,281,000
22,384,000
Share earns
.68
.60
Yr net inc
92,348,000
83,133,000
Share earns
2.51
2.23


Freedom Man, Mocked
LEAD: On Wednesday night President Reagan recounted the story of an Indochinese refugee calling from his crammed and leaky boat to a crewman on the carrier Midway: ''Hello, American sailor -Hello, Freedom Man.'' Yet his Administration proposes to make room for more Soviet refugees mostly by lowering the quota for Southeast


Clemente Brings S.E.C. Into Battle With Suitor
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today found its name bandied about in the middle of a takeover battle.


Ithaca Coach Honored
LEAD: Jim Butterfield, the football coach at Ithaca College, was selected yesterday as the Kodak Division II coach of the year by the American Football Coaches Association at its convention in Nashville.
Butterfield, 164-59-1 in 22 years at Ithaca, coached the Bombers to a 13-1 record and the N.C.A.A.
Division III national championship this season.


SEABROOK'S OWNER GETS TAKEOVER BID
LEAD: New England's largest utility yesterday offered to buy the nonnuclear assets of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire, the first utility to file for bankruptcy protection since the Depression.


Reporter's Notebook; The Traffic Is Romantic On the Road in Mandalay
LEAD: Even under martial law, love will find a way.


Review/Art; For Keith Sonnier, Two Shows 20 Years Apart
LEAD: Keith Sonnier then and now is the subject of a pair of exhibitions in SoHo.
One at Barbara Gladstone Gallery, the other at Leo Castelli, they focus, respectively, on the artist's early and current work.


Capital's Man in Congress Is Subject of F.B.I. Inquiry
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation is seeking to determine whether Walter Fauntroy, the District of Columbia's Delegate to Congress, broke Federal law by employing the son of a Congressional colleague at a time when records show the son had sworn he was living in Illinois.


Jazz India Group
LEAD: Badal Roy, a tabla drummer, will lead his group Jazz India tonight at 8 at Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street.
Admission is $10.
Information: 206-1050.


Bush Completes His Choices for Cabinet
LEAD: President-elect George Bush completed the selection of his Cabinet today and challenged its designated members to ''think big'' about the budget deficit, the narcotics crisis and other issues.


Brazil High-Speed Train
LEAD: Brazil has announced plans to introduce Latin America's first high-speed train.
The train, which will exceed 132 miles an hour, will reduce the travel time between the country's two main cities, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, to two hours, the authorities said.
The cities are 280 miles apart.


Review/Opera; Premiere Of 'Desire,' Based On O'Neill
LEAD: ''Desire Under the Elms,'' an opera by Edward Thomas, was composed in 1978 and has been performed in several workshop productions since then.
The work's official world premiere, however, was on Monday evening, when the New York Opera Repertory Theater performed it at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.


Now, Novels Are Turning Promotional
LEAD: IT'S not as if Proust had traded his madeleines for pumpernickel in return for a payment from Pepperidge Farm, but Beth Ann Herman has raised hackles by putting her novel's protagonist in a Maserati.


Murray Industries Supports Proposal
LEAD: Murray Industries, the parent of the Murray Chris-Craft Boat Companies, said it had tentatively approved an offer from Genmar Industries to buy a substantial part of the boat maker's assets.
Terms were not disclosed.
The offer is subject to court and regulatory approval and any higher or better offer, said Mary Glass, a Chris-Craft spokeswoman.


Johnny Coles's Trumpet
LEAD: Johnny Coles, a trumpeter, is leading a quartet tonight and tomorrow at Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street (749-2228).
Sets begin at 9:30 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.; there is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.


Power Agency's Revenue Bonds
LEAD: The Northern Municipal Power Agency, based in Minnesota, is tentatively offering a total of $302.8 million of electric-system revenue bonds to raise new money and retire previously issued debt in advance, with a maximum yield of 7.60 percent for an issue due in 2016.


Rangers Find Tactics for Lemieux Hard to Compute
LEAD: Michel Bergeron lugged his brand-new computer, a gift from his superiors in the organization, into his office before practice today.
Bergeron, the coach of the Rangers, was pleased but realistic about the present.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  ICE HARVESTING, a demonstration by the Philip Whitney family from Fitchberg, Mass., and the Stamford (Conn.) Museum and Nature Center farm staff, who will be cutting the ice and removing it from the lake, using antique tools.
Duke and Diamond, the farm's oxen, will move the cakes of ice, 11 A.M.


McDonald's Notes Total $100 Million
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation is offering $100 million of 9 3/4 percent notes due in 1999 at 99.575 to yield 9.817 percent through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


Tyson Visits Givens in Canada, and Controversy Again Tags Along
LEAD: A television station in Vancouver, British Columbia, was considering yesterday whether to file charges against Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, after a scuffle in a hotel lobby on Wednesday involving Tyson, a television cameraman and a still photographer.


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,502,000
4,524,000
Per share
.65
.54
Yr net inc
18,331,000
15,904,000
Per share
2.16
1.88


Review/Concert; 83 Minutes of Bruckner
LEAD: Klaus Tennstedt and the Philadelphia Orchestra devoted their entire program Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall to Bruckner's Symphony No. 8 in C minor.
That meant the concert, without intermission, began at 8:05 and ended two minutes before 9:30.
But it would seem unlikely that anyone in the nearly full auditorium felt cheated of their customary two-hour concert span.


Thomas Brennan, 81, Trade Group Official
LEAD: Thomas M. Brennan, an official of the National Association of Manufacturers for 28 years before his retirement in 1965, died of cancer on Tuesday at his winter home in Lake Wales, Fla.
He was 81 years old and also had a home in Westhampton Beach, L.I.


Staff Builders Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
47,019,298
37,851,516
Net inc
b1,042,544
649,316
Share earns
.14
.09
Shares outst
6,630,263
6,072,889
9mo rev
125,861,122
86,127,857
Net inc
b2,813,776
1,432,697
Share earns
.38
.25
Shares outst
6,530,873
4,849,766


Review/Art; Straitened Landscapes Of a Post-Modern Era
LEAD: Suddenly there is a spate of landscape shows in New York.
Several have a post-modern feeling to them, which is surprising since post-modern landscape painting has almost seemed like a contradiction in terms: post-modernism has a lot more to do with sitting around theorizing about ''nature'' than setting hand and foot to earth and stone.


Washington Talk: Briefing; They Also Serve
LEAD: There was an unusual ceremony Wednesday honoring a Foreign Service wife, Emily Vest.
She was given a ''tribute of appreciation'' and a plaque by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who said of her four decades of service to the country, ''You have represented America with distinction.''


Bear Stearns Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bear Stearns Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
624,600,000
442,000,000
Net inc
63,300,000
500,000
Share earns
.73
-
Shares outst
84,011,142
84,828,528
6mo rev
1,096,500,000
906,600,000
Net inc
83,800,000
27,400,000
Share earns
.94
.26
Shares outst
84,322,614
84,845,016


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Space Shuttle Will Not Carry Civilians on Its Future Flights
LEAD: The space agency, scarred by the explosion of the Challenger in which a teacher was killed, announced today that it will no longer carry civilians on the space shuttle.


William Chaison, 44, Dancer and Teacher
LEAD: William Chaison, a dancer and choreographer and associate professor of physical education at Kean College in Union, N.J., died last Friday at Doctor's Hospital in New York City.
He was 44 years old.


Meridian National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
15,331,434
6,579,496
Net inc
180,424
41,961
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
4,107,290
4,099,090
9mo rev
44,180,378
19,619,051
Net inc
326,340
b543,040
Share earns
.07
.13
Shares outst
4,106,742
4,095,534


Assessing the Johnson Debacle
LEAD: The specter of the sprinter Ben Johnson and his Olympic fiasco hung over a hearing room this week as Canada's judicial inquiry into drug use by athletes began taking testimony in an attempt to get to the bottom of the country's worst sporting embarrassment.


Experimental Ulcer Drug Held Superior to Current Mainstay
LEAD: Researchers have found that a new ulcer drug is superior to one of the mainstays of ulcer treatment because it promotes healing and relieves symptoms more quickly.


Opus Computer Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Opus Computer Products Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,702,571
3,252,537
Net loss
26,535
b191,522
Share earns
-
.06
Yr sales
14,611,812
12,281,309
Net inc
138,593
c474,147
b-Net income and included a $262,830 gain from the sale of the company's Irish subsidiary.


Sudan Train on Rebuilt Track Takes Food to Starving Town
LEAD: Railway workers, rebuilding track as they went, crossed 175 miles of Sudan's civil war zone to reach the starving town of Awiel with 30 carloads of cornmeal, the Government reported today.


First Commerce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commerce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,302,000
4,841,000
Per share
.52
.38
Yr net inc
23,502,000
19,210,000
Per share
1.91
1.51


Review/Film; 'Sucka,' a Sendup
LEAD: A decade and a half after their heyday, the grand old men of the blaxploitation genre can be heard complaining about their bunions in ''I'm Gonna Git You Sucka,'' a cheerful and gag-filled (though not terribly sharp-toothed) sendup that actually owes less to blaxploitation than to the anything-goes humor of the ''Airplane!


Spinal Osteoporosis Reported Halted by New Drug Therapy
LEAD: Texas researchers reported evidence today that a new treatment halts the progress of spinal osteoporosis and reverses bone loss.
The disease, which can cause a curved spine and stooped posture, afflicts millions of people, primarily elderly women.


Knight-Ridder to Sell 2 Daily Papers
LEAD: Knight-Ridder Inc. announced plans today to sell two of its daily newspapers - The Star-News in Pasadena, Calif., and The Post-Tribune in Gary, Ind.


Housing Street People Better, Cheaper
LEAD: Shelter number 1 offers hundreds of beds on the noisy, open floor of an armory.
Privacy is impossible and there are too few security guards to assure personal safety.
The most fragile homeless street people, the mentally ill, shrink from such a place.


Miami Upsets Kansas on Foul Shot With 2 Seconds to Play
LEAD: Joel Warren made a foul shot with two seconds remaining for his only point of the game tonight and Miami upset No. 16 Kansas, 87-86, ending the Jayhawks' 11-game winning streak.


Data Med Clinical Support Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Med Clinical Support Services Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
302,925
168,395
Net loss
123,687
599,076
Shares outst
6,248,200
6,150,475
9mo rev
936,621
544,785
Net loss
609,790
1,016,983
Shares outst
6,235,113
5,947,796


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 453 money market mutual funds increased by $4.36 billion, to $282.4 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 137 institutional funds rose by $519.2 million, to $72.94 billion.
The assets of the 225 general-purpose funds were up by $239.5 million, to $90.17 billion.


New Arrivals: Hustlers Vying With the Skycaps at Kennedy
LEAD: In the year since self-service baggage carts were introduced at Kennedy International Airport, hundreds of free-wheeling hustlers who retrieve the wagons for their 25-cent return fee have taken to cruising the terminals, stealing baggage from the carts and fleecing passengers with a host of confidence schemes.


Drug Nominee Vows He'll Kick the Habit
LEAD: In accepting his new assignment to coordinate the Federal attack on drug abuse, William J. Bennett promised today to give up a drug habit of his own: cigarette smoking.


Airlines Begin Checking Jets' Engine Circuits
LEAD: Airlines began an urgent safety inspection of Boeing 737's around the country today, but as the work progressed no flaws were reported in the wiring of engine monitoring and fire alarm systems.


2 Finalists at Columbia
LEAD: Walt Hameline, caoch at Wagner, and Ray Tellier, coach at Rochester, are the finalists to succeed Larry McElreavy as head football coach at Columbia, several sources told The Associated Press yesterday.
Hameline, who led Wagner to the Division III title in 1987, and Tellier each declined comment except to say he wanted the job.


THE LAW: At the Bar; Conclave in herringbone ponders lofty and mundane in legal education's muddled mission.
LEAD: Speaking to a packed house of his peers, James Boyd White of the University of Michigan talked of Shakespearean sonnets, Burmese art and the evolution of the Gothic arch.
And Dante, Gertrude Stein and Jaroslav Pelikan.
And Picasso's ''Guernica,'' Mont St.
Michel and the cathedral of Chartres.


How Opium Became Burma's Cash Crop
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thomas Will Return
LEAD: The Penn State tailback Blair Thomas, a third-team all-America selection in 1987 who was sidelined by a knee injury last season, announced yesterday that he would return for his final season.
Thomas ran for 1,414 yards on 268 carries in 1987. (AP)


NERVE GAS SCHEME STOPPED IN JERSEY
LEAD: A Short Hills businessman was arrested today by Customs Service agents and charged with participating in a conspiracy to buy and export 125 tons of an illegal nerve gas for $5 million.


PRETORIA MINERS FEUD WITH OWNERS
LEAD: Fifteen months after South Africa's longest and costliest mine strike ended, residual bitterness over mine violence and working conditions has erupted in a war of words between the Anglo American Corporation and the black miners' union.


Reported AIDS Cases Increase in Connecticut
LEAD: Reported cases of AIDS in the state's three biggest cities were up last year, with the largest increase in Bridgeport, the state's Department of Health Services reported.


Holly Farms Sets Deadline for Bids
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation said it had given its two potential buyers, Tyson Foods Inc. and Conagra Inc., until next Wednesday to submit their best and final offers for the company.
The Memphis-based chicken producer said its board would meet then to consider the proposals and to determine which is the most attractive for Holly


Oil Prices End Unchanged After Day of Wild Swings
LEAD: Domestic crude oil prices closed unchanged yesterday after a day of wild price swings caused by heavy selling at the opening of the New York Mercantile Exchange and fresh buying late in the session.


On Stage
LEAD: 'American' on Broadway Wouldn't it be nice if the year continued with news like this?
And the news is that a show called ''An American in Paris'' (yes, it is the ''American in Paris'' you're thinking of) will, if everything goes as planned, be on Broadway sometime next year.


Delta Government Options Given Approval by S.E.C.
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission approved the Delta Government Options Corporation yesterday as the first registered clearing organization for over-the-counter options on Treasury securities.


Israeli Jets Raid Base Of Palestinian Group
LEAD: Israeli Air Force jets attacked a base in southern Lebanon today that belongs to the hard-line Palestinian guerrilla group led by Abu Nidal.
It was the second day of air raids.


Restaurants
LEAD:  La Boite en Bois Just a few years ago, when someone seeking restaurant advice asked me what to look for around Lincoln Center, my response was ''a cab.'' I was only half joking, for pickings in the neighborhood were lean.
Cafe Luxembourg was always a solid choice, but it is difficult to reserve on short notice.


Recycling Plant for Rockland
LEAD: The Rockland County Executive, John T. Grant, is proposing a $3 million bond issue to plan and design a countywide recycling plant.
He said he would submit the proposal to the County Legislature at the end of the month, along with legislation on the management of recycling in the county.
The proposals are part of his plan to develop a countywide recycling program by 1990.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Aunt Sonia Aunt Sonia is not a matronly relative who loves to cook.
It's a down-home, no-frills restaurant in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn - named for the nearby Ansonia Clock Building - that turns out some engaging fare at budget prices.
The chef and co-owner, Michael Schrieber, is a self-taught cook who took over a bric-a-brac shop in a landmark building two and a half years ago and with his partner, Wayne


Dining Out Guide: Near Galleries and Museums
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
The Gibbon


Retirement at McCann
LEAD: John J. McNamara announced his retirement yesterday as president and chief operating officer of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, but not his retirement from the larger world.
His first book, ''Advertising Agency Management,'' will be published this summer.
What is more, Mr.
McNamara, 54, is running for mayor of Pelham Manor, N.Y.


No Headline
LEAD: Alain Chevalier resigned today as chairman of LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, the apparent loser in a bitter board-room power struggle with Bernard Arnault, the largest shareholder.


Electro Rent Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
28,880,000
28,290,000
Net inc
2,215,000
2,052,000
Share earns
.46
.33
Shares outst
4,812,000
6,180,000
6mo rev
58,263,000
55,647,000
Net inc
4,388,000
4,082,000
Share earns
.89
.64
Shares outst
4,958,000
6,397,000


Marine Officer Charged in Death
LEAD: The Marine Corps said today that an officer had been formally charged in the case of a lance corporal who was abandoned and died in the California desert last summer and that technicalities had been cleared away so that courts-martial of two sergeants could proceed.


Swing for Dancing
LEAD: Spanky Davis, a trumpeter, and the Jimmy Ryan All-Stars will play swing music for dancing in a program presented by the New York Swing Society on Sunday at the Cat Club, 76 East 13th Street (505-0090).
Doors open at 7 P.M., with music beginning at 8; tickets are $8, $4 for the elderly.


Allegheny Plans to Sell Key Units to Rival
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. disclosed yesterday that its 13 directors had unanimously approved a plan of reorganization that involves selling the company's prized Sunbeam and Oster appliance units to one of its largest competitors, the Black &amp; Decker Corporation, for about $260 million.


Mayoral Credibility and the Talent Bank
LEAD: Six years ago Mayor Koch did something naive or sloppy, or more likely disingenuous.
He established a job-referral service that he said was designed to ''attract women and members of minority groups to city service.''


U.N. Seeks Procedural Shifts For Poison Gas Investigations
LEAD: To improve compliance with a 1925 ban on chemical and germ warfare, the United Nations is preparing a code of conduct to govern investigations into reported violations, officials say.


2d Daughter for Nelson
LEAD: Karl Nelson, the Giants' offensive tackle, has become a father for the second time.
His wife, Heidi, gave birth yesterday to a daughter, Lindsay Rae, at the Pascack Valley Hospital in Westwood, N.J.
The Nelsons also have a daughter named Brittany, who will be 3 years old in March.
Nelson began chemotherapy treatment Tuesday after a recurrence of Hodgkin's disease, a cancer of the lymph-node tissue.


Inauguration With a Mission
LEAD: The five-day inaugural gala has been packed with symbols carefully planned to convey the tone of the Bush administration.
Page D28.


Murder Suspect Flees Rikers Unnoticed
LEAD: A man awaiting a second trial on murder charges left Rikers Island last month after an accomplice falsified jail records to make him eligible for bail, a spokeswoman for the City Corrections Department said last night.


Economic Scene; The Budget Gap: Failed Forecasts
LEAD: PRESIDENT REAGAN has delivered his farewell address and his final budget.
His one great regret, he said, was ''the deficit.'' But the least surprising thing about his final budget is that it shows the deficit declining well within Gramm-Rudman-Hollings targets: to $98.6 billion in 1990, $66.8 billion in 1991, $32.2 billion in 1992, and then swinging above the balanced-budget line to surpluses of $2.4 billion in 1993 and $33.4 billion in 1994.


Whittle Chief Executive Announces Resignation
LEAD: Nicholas Glover, president and chief executive of Whittle Communications, announced his resignation yesterday after five years at the Knoxville, Tenn., publishing partnership he helped to build.
Time Inc. bought a 50 percent interest in the company last month for $185 million, with provisions to increase its stake over the next five years.


First Financial Savings Assn Pennsylvania reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Savings Assn Pennsylvania
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
377,000
255,000
Share earns
.33
.22
6mo net inc
705,000
504,000
Share earns
.61
.44


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amity Bank, Woodbridge, Conn., which is owned by Amity Bancorp, New Haven, said Joseph V. Ciaburri had been elected president and chief executive of both the bank and the parent company.


Southern National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern National Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,300,000
5,200,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Yr net inc
21,600,000
18,000,000
Share earns
1.70
1.42


Judge Drops Counts Against Ex-Police Chief
LEAD: A State Supreme Court justice has dismissed a 32-count indictment accusing the former chief of Metro-North's railroad police of conducting illegal background checks on job applicants and people who had sued the railroad.


Family Dollar Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Dollar Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
171,771,349
146,508,964
Net inc
5,419,653
4,756,312
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
27,739,665
28,805,145


Nussbaum Seen By a Witness As Competent
LEAD: The defense in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg tried to portray Hedda Nussbaum to the jury yesterday as having been a mentally competent, functional woman immediately after the death of Lisa Steinberg and not the helpless, incoherent victim who the prosecution said was incapable of saving the life of the 6-year-old child.


Seeking Audiences Unafraid to Laugh
LEAD: ''VOLTAIRE once said that God is a comedian; it's just that His audience is afraid to laugh,'' said Steve Kaplan, the artistic director of Manhattan Punch Line Theater.


Punjab Militants Said to Kill 36
LEAD: Sikhs waging a separatist war in Punjab killed 36 people, hanging 4 in revenge for the executions of two Sikhs convicted in the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, the police said today.


First Federal of Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Michigan (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,400,000
cd21,931,000
Per share
.22
-
Yr net inc
b36,564,000
d33,448,000
Per share
3.31
3.01
b-After extraordinary gains of $972,000, net of tax, from the early retirement of debt.


Peru Rebels Blamed in Death Of Jersey City Mayor's Wife
LEAD: A New Jersey mayor's wife who died in a rail crash Dec. 1 in Peru was probably the victim of sabotage by leftist guerrillas, the United States Embassy said today.


BEATING IN PANAMA PROTESTED BY U.S.
LEAD: The United States has strongly protested the severe beating and threatened killing of an American sailor by Panama's Defense Forces, Pentagon officials said today.
The Panamanian Government has acknowledged that the incident occurred, but made no apology.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  ALPINE SKIING  Figini Leads Swiss Sweep: Michaela Figini, the defending World Cup champion, led the Swiss to a sweep of three of the top four places in a World Cup downhill race yesterday at the new Tschuggen course on Mount Eiger in Grindelwald, Switzerland.
Figini was timed in 1 minute 55.82 seconds down the tough, bumpy course.


Giuliani Finds His Is the Head Now Hunted
LEAD: Rudolph W. Giuliani, undoubtedly the nation's best known United States Attorney, is not the only one now contemplating his future.
So are some of the major law firms in New York.


Nomura Cuts Staff in U.S.
LEAD: Nomura Securities International, the American affiliate of the world's largest securities firm, is again trimming its United States staff, particularly in the equities securities area.


Planters Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,651,000
2,177,000
Share earns
.38
.31
Yr net inc
10,544,000
8,819,000
Share earns
1.51
1.27


'At the Chelsea' Festival Looks at Hotel's History
LEAD: ''At the Chelsea,'' a festival of performance art, music and theater based on the Chelsea Hotel's history, is being presented through Feb. 5 in three rooms of the hotel at 222 West 23d Street.
Among the artists who have created and are to perform works during the festival in tribute to the hotel are David Van Tieghem with Tina Dudek, Penny Arcade, John Kelly, Frank Maya, Squat Theater and Ann Carlson.


Luciano Berio Speaks of Virtuosos and Strings
LEAD: For 30 years Luciano Berio has cultivated, alongside his ambitious and once-controversial works for the stage and concert hall, a special genre of solo music that he calls the ''sequenza'' (sequence).
Each one is a short but substantial unaccompanied virtuoso work, theatrical and full of contrast, usually exploiting unconventional playing techniques.


More Comedy USA
LEAD: Funny men tell no jokes in the new 64-page directory of comedians just published by Barry Weintraub.
Instead, their names lie on the page, waiting to be plucked by casting directors and promotions organizers.
Mr.
Weintraub is a 28-year-old entrepreneur whose previous ventures include Comedy USA, a semiannual magazine distributed at some 300 comedy clubs around the nation, and Comedy USA Newswire, a trade journal.


Coin Savers Help the Neediest
LEAD: Elizabeth Kellerman of Douglaston, Queens, has embarked on a personal mission to keep the Little Neck Bay shorefront free of litter, going out daily to pick up cast-off cans and bottles.
Then as a double good deed, she sent the refunds on the cans and bottles, amounting to $100, to The New York Time Neediest Cases


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.14
9.10
6.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.27
8.24
5.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.40
8.42
6.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.08
9.30
8.65
30-YR.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics
Qtr to Dec 24
1988
1987
Sales
6,161,719
5,409,664
Net inc
879,446
701,567
Share earns
.44
.35
9mo sales
15,437,625
12,753,308
Net inc
1,838,666
1,391,865
Share earns
.92
.70


BELGIAN CHARGED IN ILLICIT SHIPMENT FOR LIBYAN PLANT
LEAD: The expanding search for participants in the building of a suspect Libyan chemical plant produced its first arrest today - that of a Belgian shipping agent charged with disguising a shipment of German goods - while the West German Government officially acknowledged ''indications'' that German companies had been involved in the


G.M.'s Saturn Unit
LEAD: The Saturn Corporation, a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said it would hire 1,000 people and spend $1 billion on capital equipment this year to prepare for the introduction of its cars by the fall of 1990, as planned.
The company now employs 500 people at its complex in Spring Hill, Tenn., where buildings are still being completed.


Vermont Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,228,000
2,037,000
Share earns
.77
.69
Yr net inc
7,573,000
6,438,000
Share earns
2.48
2.19
Year-ago per share earnings were adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend to be paid Jan.


What's Cooking in Park Slope; Strolling Seventh Avenue With Food in Mind
LEAD: As the gentrification of Park Slope in Brooklyn continues, its major commercial artery, Seventh Avenue, is experiencing dramatic change.
Small ethnic groceries and storefront service businesses are fast giving way to specialty grocers, upscale carryouts, wine shops, bars and trendy restaurants - from bagels to brioche, so to speak.


State Antitrust Laws Regulate Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor:


For All the Talk of New Faces, the Cabinet Shapes Up as a Group of Government Pros
LEAD: Michael S. Dukakis promised a campaign about competence, not ideology.
George Bush, who beat him, today completed the selection of a Cabinet that might be described with the same words.


G.M.'s Dispute Over Hughes
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has made only two major strategic acquisitions in recent history, and both have proved troublesome.
Its $2.5 billion purchase of the Electronic Data Systems Corporation in 1984 led to an embarrassing public dispute with the E.D.S. founder, H. Ross Perot.
Now G.M. is embroiled in a potentially costly wrangle over its 1986 purchase of the Hughes Aircraft Company.


In Brazil, an Isolated Leader Struggles to Be Heard
LEAD: In a somber mood some weeks ago, President Jose Sarney threw out the dark prediction that Brazil is ''marching toward totalitarianism'' as a result of leftist gains in recent municipal elections.


Review/Art; Image Manipulation
LEAD: Barbara Kruger's latest exhibition at the Mary Boone Gallery includes a lenticular photograph depicting five apparently healthy babies who, when seen from one angle, disappear behind block letters spelling out phrases like ''feed me,'' ''hug me,'' ''need me.'' Viewed from another angle, the faces reappear above the words ''psychotic,'' ''neurotic,'' ''schizophrenic,'' ''hysterical'' and ''paranoid.


Time for Truce Talks in U.S.-Europe Beef War; What They Want
LEAD: To the Editor:


It's Business as Usual for Undaunted Capital Mayor
LEAD: The Mayor, as usual, is running a good half hour late.


Ogilvy Adopts A 'Poison Pill'
LEAD: The Ogilvy Group announced yesterday that its board had adopted a shareholder rights plan intended to deter a hostile takeover.


Student Takes Gun to School; Another Is Caught With Fake
LEAD: A 16-year-old student was arrested yesterday at his high school in Manhattan and charged with carrying a loaded .38-caliber revolver, and, in a separate incident, a 15-year-old student in the Bronx was charged with menacing a teacher with a fake gun, the police said.


In First Year, Tunisia Chief Makes Strides
LEAD: The smiling pictures of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, next to those of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia, were still fresh on building walls weeks after the Libyan leader's third visit of 1988.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Vietnamese Classics Nguyen Dinh Nghia, Uris Auditorium, Metropolitan Museum of Art (206-1050).
Nguyen Dinh Nghia is a master of the sao, a Vietnamese bamboo flute.
Along with his family - two daughters and a son, who double as his band - he'll play transcriptions of classical European music on Vietnamese ethnic instruments.


U.S. Report Shows Decline in Air Crash Fatalities
LEAD: Accidents involving United States commercial air carriers and private airplanes killed 875 people in 1988, the lowest number this decade, Government figures indicate.


Home Savings &amp; Loan Assn Inc of Duram, North Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings &amp; Loan Assn Inc of Duram, North Carolina
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
811,867
820,027
Share earns
.48
.49


N.C.A.A. Is Called Biased After Change on Scholarships
LEAD: Until Wednesday's final session, it seemed as if the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 83d convention would be remembered more for the beauty of the host city than for what happened inside the convention hall.


Kentucky Utilities Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Utilities Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
128,632,000
124,983,000
Net inc
12,876,000
13,689,000
Share earns
.30
.32
Yr rev
559,808,000
553,245,000
Net inc
79,346,000
73,651,000
Share earns
1.94
1.72


For Schultz, Bad News Is No News
LEAD: Dick Schultz, the executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, has either had a vision or his standards are lower than the grade-point averages of some college athletes.
There is no logical explanation for Schultz's rose-colored state-of-the-N.C.A.A. address to the convention in San Francisco earlier this week, in light of the almost daily revelations of scandals in big-time college sports.


Art and Conscience Mix In King Observances
LEAD: There are some who argue that art and politics do not mix well, and some who insist that art unsupported by a political conscience is meaningless.
But there have always been statesmen whose principles have inspired not only those artists who see their work as part of a social force, but also those who prefer to think of art in more abstract ways.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
752,000
3,970,000
Per share
.12
.66
Yr net inc
6,240,000
16,350,000
Per share
1.04
2.74


Sorrow and Grace Mix As Pathologist Is Buried
LEAD: Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant and the son she was carrying were buried today beneath a stand of loblolly pines far from the Bellevue Hospital office in which she was killed five days ago.


Review/Violin; Webern Pieces By Rony Rogoff
LEAD: Certain aspects of Rony Rogoff's violin playing at Alice Tully Hall Tuesday evening were unusual and satisfying.
In a recital of Mozart, Beethoven, Webern and Franck, Mr.
Rogoff fought shy of the muscle-bound, cutting tone that is favored by many of his colleagues, shaped his lines with sensitivity, and thoughtfully matched his tone and vibrato to the expressive purpose of the phrase at hand.


First Illinois Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,957,000
6,061,000
Per share
.31
.24
Yr net inc
29,210,000
22,866,000
Per share
1.13
.88


Peru Rebels Kill 9 Policemen
LEAD: Left-wing rebels killed nine policemen Wednesday, raising the toll to 33 this month in a surge of violence as Peru's army retreats from the countryside.
Guerrillas of the Shining Path group shot dead five policemen and two civilians who had been traveling on a bus near the port city of Huacho in central Peru, and attacked a power station near the central city of Huaras and shot dead four policemen.


Unitel Video Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitel Video Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,500,000
9,181,000
Net inc
b655,000
b696,000
Share earns
.29
.30
Shares outst
2,247,294
2,296,977
b-Included equity in earnings of 50 percent-owned affiliate of $71,000 for the latest quarter, and equity in loss of 50 percent-owned affiliate of $18,000 for the year-ago period.


WASHINGTON TALK: State Department; Wordsmiths of the Mideast Move
LEAD: When Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced that the United States was opening a dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization, he drew on a large amount of preparatory work by a small group of policy advisers at the State Department.


Review/Film; Science Fiction in Jordan
LEAD: ''Friendship's Death'' was shown as part of the 1988 New Directors/New Films festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 25.
The film opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, 144 Bleecker Street.


Accelerator Is Proposed for Making Bomb Material
LEAD: The Department of Energy could use a linear accelerator to produce tritium for nuclear weapons, a process that would be cheaper and safer and would produce less radioactive waste than a reactor, according to an unreleased Department of Energy study.


Sorg Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sorg Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
24,263,000
16,530,000
Net inc
545,000
bc1,642,000
Share earns
.23
-
6mo sales
41,554,000
35,069,000
Net loss
665,000
c1,913,000
b-Net loss  c-Included losses from discontinued operations of $58,000 and $145,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canandaigua Wine (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
40,245,150
41,320,412
Net inc
635,877
b1,935,410
Share earns
.13
.41
b-Included a gain of $1,031,364 from an accounting change.


Utah Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utah Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
250,694,555
242,011,322
Net inc
35,001,028
39,551,702
Share earns
.58
.66
12mo rev
1,027,917,394
982,796,701
Net inc
160,583,508
144,806,012
Share earns
2.67
2.39


Market Place; Cyclical Stocks Seem Depressed
LEAD: THE United States economy is in the seventh year of expansion, and nothing lasts forever.


Review/Piano; Pogorelich, Dapper but Otherwise Recognizable
LEAD: Ivo Pogorelich has cleaned up his act a bit, sartorially speaking.
The Yugoslavian pianist, who made his annual recital appearance at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, used to look like a romantic punk.
This year, he was coifed and conventional in attire, although his slack posture and wan appearance still bespoke the matinee idol.


ReadiCare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ReadiCare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 3
1988
1987
Revenue
4,780,000
4,928,000
Net inc
218,000
424,000
Share earns
.03
.05
9mo rev
14,776,000
14,669,000
Net inc
843,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.10
.16


Facing a Big Job With Limited Tools
LEAD: President-elect Bush's choice for Secretary of Energy is being asked to lead one of the most complex and expensive environmental and rebuilding programs in history with only a fraction of the financial resources experts have said are needed to complete the work.


Chemical Net Rose 25.7% in 4th Quarter
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation, one of the nation's largest banking companies, reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 25.7 percent, bolstered by the receipt of past-due loan interest from Brazil.


Mayor Seeks Panel Records On Job Bank
LEAD: Reacting to a possible scandal in his own office, Mayor Edward I. Koch asked a state investigating commission yesterday to turn over to him its files on the how a City Hall agency handled job referrals from Democratic politicians.
The agency was supposed to place minorities and women in city jobs.


Angola Says Rebels Still Hold Border in Southeast
LEAD: Five months after South Africa and Angola agreed to jointly patrol Namibia's border, a 300-mile gap remains under the control of Angolan rebels supplied by South Africa, an Angolan Army officer asserted here today.


What to See and Hear
LEAD: The Brooklyn Museum is presenting these exhibitions, talks and concerts, all free with the suggested admission of $3 for adults, $1.50 for students and $1 for the elderly.
The museum, at 200 Eastern Parkway and Washington Avenue, is open 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily except Tuesday.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Laidlaw Transportation Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Transportation Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
351,472,000
286,612,000
Net inc
42,918,000
33,694,000
Share earns
.22
.17
Shares outst
189,856,000
175,940,000
The year-ago figures are restated.


N.A.A.C.P. Sues The Times Over Real-Estate Advertising
LEAD: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the New York Open Housing Center, an organization that advocates fair housing, sued The New York Times yesterday, asserting that The Times carries racially discriminatory housing advertisements.


Hinson and Nets Miss Their Big Shot
LEAD: There were 18 seconds remaining in tonight's game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets trailed the Boston Celtics by a point.
And Roy Hinson, New Jersey's forward, had the ball exactly where he wanted it: 12 feet from the basket in the lane.


GAF Loses Plea for Stay
LEAD: A two-judge panel from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit yesterday denied a request by the GAF Corporation and its vice chairman for a stay that would halt the selection of a new jury for a trial on stock-manipulation charges.
A judge this week declared a mistrial in their original trial.


Last Mob at Maxwell's Plum Bids on Glass and Menagerie
LEAD: Jennifer Carter returned yesterday to the restaurant where, way back in 1976, she met the man she married.
This time she did not get what she wanted.


Tyson Involved in a Scuffle in Vancouver


Washington Talk: Briefing; Tariff Trouble
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, apparently influenced by complaints from Suzuki and other Japanese automobile manufacturers, is reviewing a decision by the Customs Service last week that set sharply higher duties on imported multipurpose vehicles like vans.


TV Production Unit Set Up
LEAD: The Republic Pictures Corporation and United Artists Communications Inc. have formed a joint venture to develop and produce television programs and have committed $60 million in the next five years to support it.


Dionex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,005,000
16,726,000
Net inc
3,392,000
2,835,000
Share earns
.35
.30
6mo sales
37,369,000
32,745,000
Net inc
6,706,000
5,504,000
Share earns
.69
.58


Patronage And Koch
LEAD: For the most part, Mayor Edward I. Koch has reserved judgment on the hearings this week by the State Commission on Government Integrity on his Talent Bank, waiting until he and his staff can examine the transcripts and related documents.
But some people at City


Strikes Wane at Mexico Oil Sites; Union Leader Faces New Charges
LEAD: After two days of labor disruptions, Mexico's sprawling oil refineries appeared today to be returning to normal operations even as new charges were brought against the leader of the nation's oil workers.


Auctions
LEAD:  From a Master's Hand


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
8,218,000
7,075,000
Per share
.77
.69
Yr net inc
28,901,000
25,413,000
Per share
2.76
2.48


Excerpts From News Session by Bush, Watkins and Bennett
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a transcript of President-elect George Bush's news conference with Adm.
James D. Watkins and William J. Bennett in Washington yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of ABC Radio News:
OPENING STATEMENTS
George Bush


Despite Revisions, Few Blacks Passed Police Sergeant Test
LEAD: Despite the involvement of minority officers in helping to prepare a new promotion examination for the New York City Police Department, 94.7 percent of the latest group of officers promoted to sergeant are non-Hispanic whites.


Review/Dance; Balanchine and Robbins, by the City Ballet
LEAD: That the New York City Ballet is blessed with talent was evident Tuesday night at the New York State Theater when the company danced works by George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins that enabled many dancers to appear in major roles.


F.B.I. Is a Strange Hero for 'Mississippi Burning'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Small-Town Feeling on Brooklyn's Gold Coast
LEAD: Park Slope has a large collection of Victorian town houses, one of America's greatest urban parks and a grand arch unlike any this side of the Arc de Triomphe.
But perhaps the most notable hallmark of this central Brooklyn community is that, in many ways, it feels like a small, friendly college town.


Pity the Serfs at Our Medieval Universities
LEAD: Universities glory in the study of feudalism, but where they truly excel is in the practice of it.


Drexel Talking to Shad on Chairman's Job
LEAD: In addition to trying to persuade John S. R. Shad, the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, to become its chairman, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. is trying to recruit another former S.E.C. chairman as a director.


Chicago Journal
LEAD: Cathy Barrett's children hadn't been born when she wrote a letter to WGN-TV nine years ago, requesting tickets to ''The Bozo Show.'


Chemical Weapons, Cloudy Thinking
LEAD: Inconsistencies of United States chemical weapons policy lie exposed by the unhappy conjunction of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi's big new poison gas factory with Secretary of State George P. Shultz's cautious avoidance of specifics in his address to the Paris chemical weapons conference that ended Wednesday.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  FRIDAY  McPARTLAND PLAYS


Ehrlich Pleads Guilty to Charges of Bribery
LEAD: Bernard Ehrlich, a former New York National Guard general, pleaded guilty yesterday to state charges that he accepted a bribe to get the Guard to buy the same hand-held computer that the Citisource Company sold to the New York City Parking Violations Bureau.


Concept 90 Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concept 90 Marketing
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,909,000
987,000
Net loss
341,000
382,000
9mo rev
5,305,000
2,737,000
Net loss
1,139,000
1,106,000


Correction
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press yesterday about a sedition trial in Springfield, Mass., cited the defendants' previous convictions incorrectly.
Two defendants, Raymond Luc Levasseur and Richard Williams, have been convicted on bombing charges; they have not been convicted of bank robbery.
Another, Patricia H.


Intech Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 9
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intech Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 9
1988
1987
Sales
2,692,000
2,921,000
Net loss
77,000
105,000
36wk sales
9,537,000
9,627,000
Net inc
27,000
26,000
Share earns
.01
.01
The year-ago share earnings adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend paid in August 1988.


Entronics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entronics Corp
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,212,765
439,583
Net loss
54,559
b32,482
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
2,480,485
917,112
Net inc
66,112
49,314
Share earns
.02
.01
b-Net income


Electronics Units Study TV Venture
LEAD: Sixteen American electronics companies, including several leading computer companies, are actively looking at banding together to get the United States into the emerging high definition television business.


DOCUMENTS FILED ON NORTH CHARGES
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh today filed a sealed statement in Federal District Court buttressing the request by the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra case to drop the main criminal charges against Oliver L. North, Government officials said.


Principal Says A Local Group Forced Him Out
LEAD: A Brooklyn elementary school principal who has been involved in a bitter community dispute was transferred yesterday to the District 16 office.


Bassett Foods To Fight Proposal
LEAD: The British maker of jellybabies, a popular gelatin candy, has vowed to fight a hostile takeover offer of $:63 million, about $112 million, from the Swedish company Procordia A.B.
Bev Stokes, the chief executive of Bassett Foods P.L.C., said the offer by Procordia, Sweden's 10th-largest business, badly undervalued the company.


McGirt's Hooks Halt DeLeon In Six
LEAD: Buddy McGirt, the former International Boxing Federation junior welterweight champion, stopped Manuel DeLeon last night at 29 seconds of the sixth round at the Felt Forum.


Bellevue Slaying: Gaps in Mental Care
LEAD: The arrest of a homeless man with a history of psychiatric illness in the murder of a pregnant doctor at Bellevue Hospital Center reflects a failure by New York City and State agencies to concentrate mental-health services on the most seriously ill, mental health care experts say.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amsouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
20,178,000
5,334,000
Per share
.83
.22
Yr net inc
79,804,000
61,027,000
Per share
3.30
2.57


OSHA Investigators Charging West Point With 156 Violations
LEAD: Federal investigators have cited the United States Military Academy at West Point for 156 violations that have threatened the health and safety of many of the academy's civilian workers, officials said today.


TV Weekend; An Ex-Steelworker Loose at England's Controls
LEAD: Just when the label liberal is deemed to be a liability in mainstream circles, along comes British television with a riveting, walloping, unapologetic celebration of left-of-center politics. ''A Very British Coup'' is certain to knock a good many Reagan-Thatcher noses out of joint, but the production is so remarkably good - it won the 1988 International Emmy for Best


Aouita Will Challenge O'Sullivan Indoors
LEAD: Marcus O'Sullivan of Ireland, who has lost only two indoor races in the last three years, both to his countryman Eamonn Coghlan, will get a stiff test again this winter, even though Coughlan is retired.
Said Aouita of Morocco, who holds world records outdoors at 1,500, 2,000 and 5,000 meters and ran the second-fastest mile in history, 3:46.76, will compete against O'Sullivan in three American indoor meets: the 3,000-meter run in the Panasonic Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden, the 5,000 meters at a meet at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., and the mile run at the Vitalis


Marshall &amp; Ilsley reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall &amp; Ilsley (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
20,206,000
12,037,000
Per share
.92
.54
Yr net inc
76,201,000
58,485,000
Per share
3.48
2.63


Elcor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
35,005,000
30,245,000
Net inc
388,000
88,000
Share earns
.06
.01
6mo sales
74,064,000
63,464,000
Net inc
1,892,000
1,502,000
Share earns
.27
.21


At the MoviesLawrence Van Gelder
LEAD:  Writing Movies Not content with a formidable reputation as a novelist and short-story writer, Joyce Carol Oates is off on what she calls ''a delightful excursion into another dimension.''


Poles to Cut Coal Export
LEAD: The Government expects to reduce coal exports to almost nothing by the year 2000 because of rising domestic demand and increasing costs of extraction, the Industry Minister, Mieczyslaw Wilczek, said on Wednesday.
Poland, the world's fifth-largest coal exporter, will instead try to increase exports of other products, Mr.


Michael V. Forrestal Dies at 61; A Lawyer and Ex-U.S. Official
LEAD: Michael V. Forrestal, an international lawyer and former Government official who frequently served as an intermediary seeking to improve relations between the United States and the Soviet Union, died of a ruptured aneurysm Wednesday.
He was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Knogo Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knogo Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
16,184,000
12,060,000
Net inc
1,287,000
1,396,000
Share earns
.25
.21
Shares outst
5,188,469
6,684,864
9mo rev
45,668,000
37,794,000
Net inc
4,147,000
4,641,000
Share earns
.80
.68
Shares outst
5,197,809
6,808,836


Silicon Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Systems Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,146,000
25,714,000
Net inc
2,533,000
2,408,000
Share earns
.32
.34


Unifirst Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifirst Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Revenue
53,490,000
47,824,000
Net inc
2,948,000
2,473,000
Share earns
.58
.49


Pentagon Says Farewell to Reagan


Crazy Eddie Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crazy Eddie Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Sales
56,736,000
68,651,000
Net loss
7,983,000
d73,042,000
9mo sales
176,341,000
227,180,000
Net inc
b26,226,000
cd83,336,000
Share earns
.86
-
b-After an extraordinary gain of $48,226,000 from an exchange offer related to Crazy Eddie's convertible subordinated debentures.


Hawaii Company Seeking Property
LEAD: Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc., a Hawaiian land, shipping and agriculture company, said it was seeking to buy $100 million worth of property in the Western United States in the next six months.


U.S. Honed Tactics Used Against Libyan Jets
LEAD: The American fighter crews that shot down two Libyan warplanes last week used tactics developed through mock combat exercises that include missions against Soviet-built warplanes that have been obtained by Western intelligence agencies, a Pentagon official said today.


6 Found Alive in Armenia 35 Days After Quake
LEAD: Six men were found alive Wednesday after 35 days in the basement of a nine-story apartment building that collapsed in the earthquake in Armenia, official Soviet news accounts said today.


Soviets Say Car Bomb Blasted an Afghan City
LEAD: A car bomb exploded in the western Afghan city of Herat, killing or wounding 20 people, the Soviet press agency Tass reported today.


Hospital Murder Victim Buried in South Carolina


Green Helps Out
LEAD: The uniforms of the Thomas Jefferson High School basketball team were stolen a few weeks ago.
When Sidney Green, the Knick forward who was a basketball star at the Brooklyn school 10 years ago, learned of the problem, he ordered a new set of 15 uniforms, costing about $2,500.
He will present the new outfits to the team today before the school's home game against Wingate High School.


Automobile Protection reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automobile Protection
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,659,458
1,989,955
Net inc
176,697
b180,807
Share earns
.04
.07
Shares outst
4,107,600
2,520,000
b-Includes a tax credit of $50,937.


U.S. Sees a Possibility Libya Will Return Body of Airman
LEAD: Libya has indicated it will return the remains of an Air Force officer killed in the 1986 American air raid on Libya, United States officials said today.


Hartmarx Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartmarx Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
309,888,000
292,939,000
Net inc
15,335,000
15,660,000
Share earns
.82
.77
Yr sales
1,174,314,000
1,080,420,000
Net inc
38,015,000
41,265,000
Share earns
2.03
2.01
Shares outst
18,727,000
20,547,000


Time for Truce Talks in U.S.-Europe Beef War; The 1880-91 Pork War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are at war.
Drugs are a terrifying, insidious enemy.''  - George Bush.  [ D17:1. ]


Washington Talk: Briefing; Deal 36
LEAD: They may not displace baseball cards, but among political junkies ''Iran-Contra Scandal Trading Cards'' are gaining popularity.
Eclipse Enterprises of Forestville, Calif., has sold nearly 10,000 decks.


Review/Film; In a Wet And Scary Place
LEAD: Even the fish lack personality in ''Deepstar Six,'' a film that makes the exotic undersea world not much more interesting than the average bedroom closet. ''Deepstar Six'' is supposed to take place six miles beneath the ocean's surface, but in fact it unfolds on a drab, colorless command-module movie set where the blinking lights on the control panels don't even blink very well.


On Nicaraguan Range, Assault Rifles for Hire
LEAD: There are signs that civil conflict in Nicaragua may be ending after six years, but those who feel nostalgic for the crack of rifle fire can indulge themselves just 15 miles from the capital.
Here anyone with cash can legally rent a rifle or a submachine gun for target practice.


Books of The Times; Bob Shacochis's Stories of Dreamers Who Are Seeking a New World
LEAD:  The Next New World  By Bob Shacochis  209 pages. Crown Publishers. $16.95.


Time for Truce Talks in U.S.-Europe Beef War
LEAD: To the Editor:


21% Southmark Stake for Sale
LEAD: The top officers of the Southmark Corporation, Gene E. Phillips and William S. Friedman, are trying to sell their 21.7 percent stake in the ailing real estate and financial services concern, the company said today.
According to a Securities and


Cruising to Louisville
LEAD: For Shug McGaughey and Easy Goer, these are the sweetest and easiest days of winter.


Valentin Glushko, 80, Rocket Pioneer For Soviet Program
LEAD: Valentin P. Glushko, who in the 1930's pioneered the development of Soviet liquid-fueled rockets, then played a prominent but secret role in Russia's postwar space program, has died at the age of 80, the Soviet press agency Tass announced yesterday.


Racial Differences Found in Care Heart Patients Obtain at Hospitals
LEAD: A team of researchers has found one of the strongest indications so far of racial differences in the kind of medical care Americans receive.
The researchers at Harvard University found that a significantly higher proportion of white people admitted to Massachusetts hospitals with heart problems undergo coronary bypass operations and cardiac catheterizations than do blacks.


Marietta Names Head Of Its Space Venture
LEAD: The Martin Marietta Corporation yesterday named Edward M. Browne to lead its commercial space venture.


Bush Inaugural Will Signal Open, Accessible President
LEAD: President-elect George Bush's five-day inaugural gala is being packaged down to the last waltz to suggest an administration that will be more open and more engaged than President Reagan's.


Bear Stearns Has Record Profits in Quarter
LEAD: The Bear Stearns Companies said yesterday that the quarter just ended was the most profitable in its history and announced that it planned to buy back 4 million of its shares outstanding.


Dollar Steady On Threat of Intervention
LEAD: The threat of further, coordinated central bank intervention held the dollar relatively steady yesterday.


Knicks Turn Up Defense And Roll Past Hornets
LEAD: In the same way the Hornets have awakened fans in Charlotte, N.C., to becoming a part of the National Basketball Association, they put the crowd to sleep in the second half last night at Madison Square Garden in a 106-89 loss to the Knicks.


Nominee for 'Drug Czar' Has Tough-Talking Past
LEAD: William J. Bennett, President-elect George Bush's choice to coordinate the Federal Government's battle against illegal drugs, has always spoken bluntly when he felt strongly about something, and the drug problem in the United States is something he feels strongly about.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Common Stock


Gen. John Knight Waters, 82; Fought in World War II and Korea
LEAD: Gen.
John Knight Waters of the Army, retired, a highly decorated veteran of World War II, died of heart failure Monday at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 82 years old and lived in Potomac, Md.


Canadiens Top Bruins
LEAD: Stephane Richer scored one goal and assisted on two others tonight as the Montreal Canadiens continued their domination of Boston with a 5-3 victory over the Bruins.


King Musical Celebrations: Where and When
LEAD: Many schools, libraries and churches have scheduled events to honor the 60th anniversary of the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. (Although the actual birthday is Jan. 15, it will be observed on Jan. 16 this year.) Here is a sampling.
GOSPEL AND SPIRITUALS, Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, junction of Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush.


New Housing Down by 5.6%
LEAD: Completions of new homes and apartment buildings in the nation declined by 5.6 percent in November from October, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.42 million units, the Commerce Department said today.


Bush Completes Cabinet and Pledges Cleanup of Nuclear Weapons Plants


Correction
LEAD: A picture in Business Day on Wednesday with a Business People report about Jean-Claude Leny, chairman and chief executive of Framatome &amp; Company, was published in error through a misidentification by the Camera Press agency.


Richard Davis Quintet
LEAD: Richard Davis, a bassist, is leading a quintet - with Cecil Bridgewater on trumpet, Ricky Ford on tenor saxophone, Sir Roland Hanna on piano and Freddie Waits on drums - tonight through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, below 11th Street (255-4037).
Sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M.


Battle for Plessey Is Put on Hold
LEAD: The British Government and the European Commission called a temporary halt today to one of the biggest and most significant takeover battles ever seen in Europe.


Communications Transmision Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Transmision Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
107,500,000
20,900,000
Net loss
5,800,000
b2,200,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
219,900,000
39,600,000
Net loss
7,400,000
b3,600,000
Share earns
-
.21


SHAMIR IS JEERED AT SETTLERS' RITES
LEAD: Angry Jewish settlers shouted down Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today at a memorial service for two Israelis killed in the occupied West Bank as settlers staged an unprecedented general strike.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square Industries
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,378,000
13,246,000
Net inc
b534,000
507,000
Share earns
.45
.44
6mo rev
41,698,000
38,098,000
Net inc
b955,000
1,032,000
Share earns
.81
.89
b-Included a gain on the sale of real property of $313,000, or 27 cents a share.


Group Sells Stake In Liberty All-Star
LEAD: An investment group led by the Continental Casualty Company, a unit of the CNA Financial Corporation, has sold its entire 5.8 percent stake in Liberty All-Star Equity Fund.
The sale by the Continental group is a blow to certain of the mutual fund's shareholders, who are planning a shareholder vote to convert Liberty All-Star Equity Fund from a closed-end fund, with a fixed number of shares, to an open-end fund.


John Unterecker, 66, A Poet and Biographer
LEAD: John Eugene Unterecker, a poet, biographer and educator, died after heart surgery Monday at Straub Hospital in Honolulu.
He was 66 years old and lived in Hawaii.


Fernandez Eyes Arbiter
LEAD: Sid Fernandez, the left-handed pitcher, filed for salary arbitration yesterday.


The Coach Has a Head Of Wild Curls
LEAD: It's late, 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, and the man of the house taps the woman of the house on the shoulder.
She stirs in bed. ''Huh?'' she says foggily. ''Sweetheart,'' he says in typically dulcet tones for that hour, ''can you do me a favor?''


U.S. Urges 2 Steps on Measles
LEAD: A decade after predicting that measles was on the verge of eradication, Federal health officials have proposed two new steps to try to wipe out the persistent disease.


Quayle Says He'll Play Important Role for Bush
LEAD: One week before taking office, Vice President-elect Dan Quayle is undertaking a public campaign to present himself as a leading player in the Bush administration who will actively seek to reshape the image of the Republican Party.


Burning Memories, Mississippi 1964
LEAD: As I watched ''Mississippi Burning,'' a new film about civil rights unrest in the South in 1964, I found myself remembering.
I recalled the lost moral universe relegated to the background of the film.


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation; Ultimate Put-Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


7 Die at French Ski Resort
LEAD: Seven technicians testing a cable car at a ski resort in southeastern France were killed today when it broke loose and plunged 200 yards into the snow, police said.
The new cable car was being installed at the Alpe d'Huez resort.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  TENNIS  Shriver Upset: In the $350,000 New South Wales Open Championships in Sydney, Australia, yesterday Top-seeded Martina Navratilova beat Patty Fendick, 6-1, 6-1, and Pam Shriver, seeded second, was beaten by 16th-seeded Terry Phelps, 6-3, 6-3.
In men's action, Aaron Krickstein, seeded third, beat Carl Uwe Steeb of West Germany, 2-6, 6-3, 6-3.(AP)


Reagan Hints Rights Leaders Exaggerate Racism to Preserve Cause
LEAD: President Reagan has suggested in a television interview that some civil rights leaders exaggerate the degree of racism in America to keep their cause alive and to maintain their own prominence.


From Shop to Lab to Farm, Animal Rights Battle Is Felt
LEAD: Irwin Roberts, whose Roberts Furs has been at the same downtown location here for 30 years, has taken to having customers who buy fur coats escorted out a back entrance by a security guard.


Retail Sales Rose by 0.2% In December
LEAD: Nationwide retail sales ended 1988 with a whimper.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 13.


Reagan Vows to Continue Battle on Abortion
LEAD: One week before he leaves office, President Reagan declared that he will never ''leave the battle'' to reshape Federal policy on abortion and welfare reform, two issues that have emerged as political litmus tests for conservatives in the Reagan years.


Israel Uses New Bullet Against Arabs
LEAD: Israeli forces in recent weeks have been using a new type of bullet against Palestinian protesters in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Palestinians and Israelis say.


Houston's Schools Offer Rest to Troubled Young
LEAD: The Houston Independent School District opened gymnasium doors Thursday night to schoolchildren who had no other place to sleep, and eight children 5 to 18 years of age spent the night.


Japanese Company Buys Hotel
LEAD: The luxurious Stanhope Hotel on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan was bought for $76 million by Tobishima Associates Limited, a real-estate investment subsidiary of Tobishima Corporation of Tokyo, a construction company, said Roland Kluver, the subsidiary's president, in a release yesterday.
Tobishima Associates had the high bid in a Nov.


Limits on Help for Libya
LEAD: American officials say that they have blocked West German and other European help for Libya's chemical plant, at least for now, but that they are still concerned about West German technology exports.
Page 5.


Thompson to Leave Bench in Protest on Scholarships
LEAD: John Thompson, the Georgetown University basketball coach, said today he would leave the bench at the start of Saturday night's Big East game with Boston College as a protest against a new scholarship regulation approved this week by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
He called the regulation ''discriminatory.


Reviews/Pop; A Bassist Plays Free Jazz With Design
LEAD: Reggie Workman's music swirls around melodies like undersea currents around a reef.
Mr.
Workman played bass with John Coltrane and other 1960's innovators and has collaborated often during the 1980's with the choreographer Maya Milenovic.
He brings a sense of dramatic, sometimes cinematic narrative to free jazz.


Andrew Jackson, 81, Retired Vice Admiral
LEAD: Andrew McBurney Jackson Jr., a retired vice admiral of the Navy who also served as vice chairman of the United States delegation to the United Nations, died of congestive heart failure Wednesday at a nursing home in Edgewater, Md.
He was 81 years old and lived in Annapolis.


Reviews/Pop; Singer of Songs With a Political Edge
LEAD: Chris Cochrane, who played at A-Mica (324 East Ninth Street) on Sunday, performed two different types of music.
Mr.
Cochrane, a guitarist and co-leader of the group No Safety, sang several songs that referred to regular songwriting conventions.
And he played industrial, metallic soundscapes that fit into the Lower East


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Biotechnica International Inc., Cambridge, Mass.,a genetic engineering concern, signed a letter of intent to acquire the plant business of Molecular Genetics Inc., Minnetonka, Minn., for $4.1 million.


Disciplining Pentagon Suppliers
LEAD: The suspension this week of two large companies in the arms industry from doing business with the Federal Government has overshadowed a far more prevalent trend, a steady increase in the number of small companies being banned from dealing with the military.


Executive Sentenced To 13 Years in Jail In $5 Million Fraud
LEAD: The president of a major mass-mailing and bill-collection company who was convicted of orchestrating a $5 million postal fraud was sentenced yesterday to 13 years in prison and ordered to pay full restitution.


New Chairman and Panel Are Named at Moet Vuitton
LEAD: As expected, Bernard Arnault, the 39-year-old French financier, was elected chairman today of the world's largest luxury- goods group, LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, and a new executive committee was formed that for the first time includes no representative of the Moet-Hennessy faction.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Reagan View of Racism


Redmen Seek 3d in Row
LEAD: St.
John's will seek its third consecutive victory in the Big East Conference today when it is host to Syracuse, ranked fourth in the latest Associated Press poll, at 2 P.M. at Madison Square Garden.


Mexican Oil Prices
LEAD: Mexican oil prices rose an average of more than $2 a barrel in December in the wake of the new OPEC quota agreement, Pemex, the Government oil monopoly, said.
The price of light Isthmus crude in the Americas was $13.93 a barrel in December, up from $11.62 in November, Petroleos Mexicanos said late Thursday.


Board of Estimate Approves Twin Towers for First Ave.
LEAD: The New York City Board of Estimate, in a pre-dawn vote yesterday, approved zoning changes to allow construction of a twin-tower condominium, hotel and shopping complex on First Avenue at 60th Street, overshadowing the Queensboro Bridge.


Transactions
LEAD: Baseball


Blue Arrow Chief Executive Replaced by Man He Ousted
LEAD: The board of Blue Arrow P.L.C., the world's largest employment agency, ousted Tony Berry as chief executive today and replaced him with a man he had dismissed last month.


Bell Atlantic Unit Gets U.S. Contract
LEAD: The United States General Services Administration awarded a contract that it estimated would be worth between $221.3 million and $282.1 million for replacing parts of the Federal Government's telephone systems in the Washington area with a digital system.
The contract was awarded to the Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, a unit of the Bell Atlantic


Correction
LEAD: A headline in some editions yesterday on the obituary of John Knight Waters, a retired Army general, misstated a position he held at the United States Military Academy.
He was commandant of cadets, not Superintendent of the Academy.


U.S. Report Stirs Furor in South Africa
LEAD: A Pentagon report listing an anti-apartheid group, the African National Congress, as a terrorist organization has touched off a furor in South Africa, and the State Department today repudiated that characterization.


Patents; An Implantable Device Checks Blood Pressure
LEAD: Data Sciences Inc. of St.
Paul won patent approval this week for an implantable device that monitors blood pressure.


Shearson to Take Write-Off Of $105.5 Million for the Year
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it would take $105.5 million in pretax write-offs this year to reflect a decline in value on nearly $150 million of stock and bonds it owns in Mcorp, one of the biggest financially troubled banking companies in Texas.


Protecting Skin in Winter
LEAD: Moisturizers soothe dry skin and protect it from low temperatures and high winds.
With winter here in earnest, the question is: which products work best?


New York Housing Policy Should Solve, Not Worsen, Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Argentine Inflation Curb
LEAD: The Argentine Government and industry leaders have agreed to extend until the end of June the anti-inflation package announced Aug. 3.
Economy Ministry officials said today that rises in the price of a wide range of goods and public-sector tariffs would continue to be limited to 4 percent monthly.


The Quayles (&amp; Co.) on Vacation
LEAD: Considering all the flap about his family's recent Colorado ski vacation, Vice President-elect Dan Quayle may regret he ever took the trip.
Yet he did nothing wrong in asking the Republican National Committee to pick up a portion of the cost.


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation; Social Sports
LEAD: To the Editor:


William Michelson, 74, Ex-Union Leader
LEAD: William Michelson, a former president of the United Storeworkers Union, died of a heart attack Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Correction
LEAD: An obituary by The Associated Press on Thursday and its headline, about Gen.
Maj.
Raden Haji Harsoyo of Indonesia, incorrectly described a peacekeeping unit in which he was an officer.
He was deputy commander of an Indonesian contingent in Vietnam created under the Paris peace accords of 1973; the operation was not affiliated with the United Nations.


Review/Revue; Songs of 60's That Retain Their Bite
LEAD: More than two decades after many of them were written, the songs of Tom Lehrer still feel remarkably contemporary.
Writing about politics and culture in a relatively optimistic time, Mr.
Lehrer distilled a snobbish, cold-blooded misanthropy that went sharply against the cultural grain.


U.S. Expatriate Held by Costa Rica as a Spy
LEAD: An American expatriate rancher living in Costa Rica has been arrested on charges of spying for the Central Intelligence Agency and links with arms and drug smugglers and with the Nicaraguan rebels, a justice official said today.


BONN SAYS IT KNEW OF A GERMAN ROLE IN A LIBYAN PLANT
LEAD: West Germany said today that its intelligence services had warned of possible participation by German companies in a suspect Libyan chemical plant almost a month before President Reagan told Chancellor Helmut Kohl of similar concern.


Goetz Is Given One-Year Term On Gun Charge
LEAD: An unrepentant Bernhard H. Goetz was sentenced yesterday to one year in jail for possessing an unlicensed gun when he shot four men he thought were going to rob him on an IRT train on Dec. 22, 1984.


Patents; Four-Wheel Steering, For Stability
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company this week received the first of what appears to be a series of patents for its system of four-wheel steering in automobiles.
The company introduced its first four-wheel steering system last year, as an option in the Prelude, and the new patent sheds considerable light on how it works.


Custom-Made Dress for Next First Lady
LEAD: Arnold Scaasi said yesterday that Barbara Bush would select one of his made-to-order dresses to wear to the parties in Washington Friday night after her husband's inauguration.
The designer, who completed the fitting on several evening dresses Thursday, is not sure which she will select.
In addition to the long dresses, he made a number of daytime outfits in silk and in wool.


Coach to Protest Rule
LEAD: John Thompson of Georgetown intends to walk out of tonight's basketball game to protest a new N.C.A.A. rule on scholarships.
Page 45.


General Electric and G.E.C. Set Joint Deals
LEAD: The General Electric Company and the General Electric Company P.L.C., Britain's largest manufacturing concern, yesterday announced an agreement to create joint ventures in consumer products, medical equipment and electrical distribution equipment.
The companies, which are not related, will also cooperate in the gas turbine business.


Libya Returns Body of Pilot in '86 Raid
LEAD: Libya today returned the body of a United States Air Force officer who was killed in the bombing raid on Tripoli in 1986.


U.S. Sees Gains in Effort to Stop West German Aid to Libya Chemical Plant
LEAD: Administration officials say the American campaign to stop Libya from acquiring expertise and materials from West German and other European companies for its vast chemical plant has succeeded, at least temporarily.


Dow Adds 3.75, to 2,226.07, in Slow Trading
LEAD: Stock prices gained slightly yesterday and the Dow Jones industrial average inched up to yet another post-crash high.


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation; Practical Pens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bid for Tidewater
LEAD: Tidewater Inc. said it had received an unsolicited letter from a group led by Irwin L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis-based investor, offering $9.50 a share in cash to acquire the company.
Tidewater, which operates vessels for the offshore oil and gas industry, has almost 22.5 million shares outstanding, giving the offer a prospective total value of about $213 million.


Student Had Gun, Police Say
LEAD: A 16-year-old student at a Roman Catholic diocesan high school in Manhattan was arrested yesterday after he brought an unloaded .38-caliber revolver to school and hid it in his locker, the police said.
They said five cartridges were found in his pockets.
The student, Anthony Reyes, of 220 East 102d Street in Manhattan, brought the revolver to Immaculata High School, at 317 East 33d Street, yesterday morning the police said.


Bush Begins Fishing Trip
LEAD: His Cabinet was finally set, but President-elect George Bush had one more announcement to make as he landed here today for a weekend of angling for tarpon and bonefish.


California Moves to Bolster Teaching of Evolution
LEAD: The California Board of Education today unanimously adopted a policy intended to strengthen the teaching of evolution in California schools and in textbooks purchased by the state.


Soviet Press Casts Doubt on Quake Survivor Story
LEAD: Soviet press agencies and television cast doubt tonight on reports that six survivors were found Wednesday under the rubble of an apartment building that collapsed in the Armenian earthquake 35 days earlier.
But the news organizations did not retract the reports.


Art for Religious Rituals
LEAD: ''On the Sacred in Art: Receptacles of Spirit,'' an exhibition of work by six artists, will be on view at the Rotunda Gallery in the Brooklyn War Memorial, Cadman Plaza West and Orange Street, through Feb. 11.
Many of the works, from a variety of traditions, are used in specific religious rituals.


William Chaison, 44, Dancer and Teacher
LEAD: William Chaison, a dancer and choreographer and associate professor of physical education at Kean College in Union, N.J., died last Friday at Doctor's Hospital in New York City.
He was 44 years old.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Saturday about the Pentagon procurement case described Stuart Berlin, a defendant in the case, incorrectly in some copies.
He continues to work for the Defense Department.


Justice Dept. Removes 21 in Budget Cutback
LEAD: Budget worries have left 21 employees of the Justice Department's press and legislative affairs offices looking for work this week.


Sadler's Wells Ballet to Quit London Next Year
LEAD: Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet, the sister company and touring wing of the Royal Ballet, is leaving London in August of next year to make its home in Birmingham, England's second-largest city.


Michael N. Katzoff, Principal, 79
LEAD: Michael M. Katzoff, a retired principal at the High School of Fashion Industries, died of heart failure Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.


Kimball May Shift Plea
LEAD: Bruce Kimball, the former Olympic diver, may be allowed to change his guilty plea in a drunken-driving manslaughter case to safeguard insurance money for victims and their families, his attorney said yesterday.


Cardinal and Reagan
LEAD: President Reagan is to be interviewed during his stay in New York this weekend by John Cardinal O'Connor.
Mr.
Reagan is in New York to receive an award from the Knights of Malta.
The interview is to be shown on ''Face to Face With John Cardinal O'Connor'' on Channel 2 at 7:30 A.M.
Sunday.
Cardinal O'Connor is expected to speak with the President about religious issues during Mr.


Mr. Cuomo's Insurance Addiction
LEAD: Gov.
Mario Cuomo would raid the state insurance fund to balance New York State's budget, in deficit by $2.04 billion.
This reckless proposal raises serious questions about his understanding of both budgeting and insurance.


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo-Regan Pension Pact: How They Agreed to Changes in the System
LEAD: When Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Comptroller announced a plan this week to save the state hundreds of millions of dollars in pension costs, the announcement raised questions about whether the state's pension fund could be manipulated to yield savings.


Coping: With Financial Planning
LEAD: Like sports records, New Year's resolutions often seem made to be broken.
Perhaps it is because they tend to be made in haste or because the carrying-through must start just when post-holiday letdown comes face to face with January.


Adjust Deficit Figures To Show Inflation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bridge; Post-mortem arguments tend to dominate partnerships after every duplicate event.
LEAD: After every duplicate event, almost every partnership tends to be embroiled in post-mortem arguments: ''Why did you bid this?'' Or ''Why did you play that?'' The maximum dispute potential comes from mixed-pair events, since more than a third of the participants are combinations of husbands and wives who drive home together and can bicker, if they choose, far into the night.


Hartsburg Retires
LEAD: Craig Hartsburg, a 10-year veteran with the Minnesota North Stars and the team's captain for the last six seasons, retired yesterday, citing injuries.(AP)


Turks Enjoy More Freedom but Torture Continues
LEAD: Turkish newspapers are increasingly free-wheeling and unafraid to challenge Prime Minister Turgut Ozal.
Old taboos are being broken, or at least tested for the first time in years: there is public debate on whether to legalize a Communist party, to give more latitude to Islamic fundamentalists, to abolish the death penalty and to expand cultural rights for the country's large Kurdish minority.


Keeping A Medical History On Hand
LEAD: As the winter vacation season reaches its peak, travelers are packing their clothes, sports equipment and, in more and more cases, their medical records.


Midseason Clash for Powerhouses
LEAD: The game of the season comes up today in Canton, N.Y., where Harvard plays St.
Lawrence.
Both teams are expected to be undefeated after games last night against lesser opponents, and a midseason clash such as this one between two major unbeaten teams is rare.


Review/Concert; Soviet Emigre Conducts Prokofiev Sixth Symphony
LEAD: Felix Kruglikov, who immigrated to this country from the Soviet Union in 1979 and became assistant conductor of the New York Philharmonic in 1984, led a stirring account of Prokofiev's chilling, historically important Symphony No. 6 on Friday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert was part of a subscription series that will continue tonight at 8 and Tuesday at 7:30 P


Pepsico in New Deal With General Cinema
LEAD: The sale of the General Cinema Corporation's soft-drink bottler to Pepsico Inc. is on again, but at a higher price of $1.75 billion, the two companies said yesterday.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about a book written by a former soldier in the Rhodesian Army misidentified the publisher of Baobab Books.
He is Hugh Lewin, not Lewan.


Vehicle Sales Up Slow 5.7%; Light Trucks a Bright Spot
LEAD: Sales of domestic cars and light trucks opened the year at a sluggish pace that analysts said reflected the last-minute efforts of several companies to bolster their 1988 results.


PROODUCER PRICES UP 0.4% IN MONTH AND 4% FOR 1988
LEAD: In a report signaling that inflationary pressures are still growing, the Labor Department said yesterday that producer prices rose by four-tenths of 1 percent in December.


Royal Little, Pioneer in Forming Of Conglomerates, Is Dead at 92
LEAD: Royal Little, the shrewd Rhode Island entrepreneur who is widely regarded as the inventor of the modern conglomerate, the highly diversified breed of corporation that became the rage on Wall Street in the late 1960's, died Thursday night at his home in Nassau in the Bahamas.
He was 92 years old and also had a house in Narragansett, R


Verplank Leads Hope By Two
LEAD: Scott Verplank just didn't feel comfortable on the PGA Tour.
For the first year or two, he struggled on the circuit.
That was ''just a feeling'' he said, even though he was the rookie in 1986 who everybody thought would be the next big star.


Islanders End Losing Streak As Hrudey Makes 40 Saves
LEAD: All the Islanders, young and old, responded favorably tonight to Coach Al Arbour's promise to emphasize youth against the Devils.


Sheets Paved With Gold?
LEAD: Always the last to know what's going on, I discovered just two days ago that it is now possible to spend $540 for a bedsheet and that people are actually doing so.


Venality So Bald It's Now Intolerable
LEAD: In a country where, the saying goes, only ''prostitutes, blacks and the poor'' end up in jail, Brazilians have long shrugged cynically at corruption scandals involving top officials and prominent businessmen, and even at killings carried out by police officers and soldiers.


Import Vehicle Duties Studied
LEAD: The Treasury Department has taken under advisement a Customs Service decision to classify imported sport-utility vehicles like the Suzuki Samurai and most small vans as trucks, subjecting them to duties 10 times higher than those for cars, a spokesman for the agency said Thursday night.


Draw in Australia
LEAD: The defending champions, Mats Wilander and Steffi Graf, were matched against relatively easy first-round opponents yesterday for the $1.5 million Australian Open Championships, the year's first Grand Slam tournament.
Wilander, ranked No. 1 in the world and seeded first, will open against a fellow Swede, Tobias


Quayle Trip May Be in Store
LEAD: Dan Quayle's first trip out of the country as Vice President is likely to be to Caracas, Venezuela, for the inauguration of Carlos Andres Perez as president on Feb. 2, an aide to President-elect George Bush said Thursday.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about the arrest of a Spanish Basque separatist leader in France referred incorrectly in some copies to the period in which a conservative Parliament and Cabinet shared power with President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist.
It was March 1986 to May 1988.


Anti-abortion Protesters Defy Court Order


A Third Career for Admiral Watkins
LEAD: James D. Watkins, the retired admiral chosen by President-elect Bush to be Energy Secretary, faces one of the harder tasks of any cabinet member.
He must clean up the appalling mess at the nation's nuclear bomb factories, modernize the aging plants to avert unilateral nuclear disarmament and persuade a deficit-ridden


N.A.A.C.P. Quits Times Suit
LEAD: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People yesterday suspended its involvement in a lawsuit charging The New York Times with publishing racially discriminatory housing advertisements.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.08
9.15
6.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.21
8.27
5.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.31
8.40
6.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.10
9.21
8.43
30-YR.


Jewish Group Is Optimistic After India Visit
LEAD: An American Jewish delegation has ended a visit to India, saying it is hopeful that the time is right to upgrade relations between India and Israel and end Indian discrimination against Israelis.


Susan Parmenter Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: Susan Jane Parmenter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Parmenter of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Brian Scott Walters, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Walters of Chatham, Ontario, were married yesterday in Scarsdale.
The Rev.
Robert S. MacLennan performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.


Yugoslavia Ad Came From Nazi Terrorists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Allegheny Gets An Extension
LEAD: The Federal Bankruptcy Court in Pittsburgh granted Allegheny International a three-week extension yesterday to file the plan of reorganization that its directors had approved unanimously on Wednesday.
That plan, backed by the company's shareholders, involves selling Allegheny's Sunbeam and Oster appliance units to a rival, Black &amp; Decker, for about $260 million.


The Steinberg Defense Rests Without Calling Defendant
LEAD: The defense rested yesterday in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg without introducing an insanity defense and without calling the defendant to the witness stand.


Followers of Many Religions Contribute to Neediest Fund
LEAD: Bishop G. P. Mellick Belshaw of the Episcopal Diocese of New Jersey has sent $100 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Tenneco Unit Sale
LEAD: Tenneco Inc., the Houston-based diversified industrial corporation, said it had reached a definitive agreement to sell its Louisiana Intrastate Gas Corporation unit and related assets.
Terms were not disclosed.
The company is being acquired by a new corporation formed by Wasserstein Perella Partners, Gale L.


Promise to Prominence: Crossing the Distance
LEAD: A long practice session was nearing its close in the gymnasium of Elizabeth High School, and Ben Candelino had seen enough.
For two hours, Candelino, the basketball coach at Elizabeth, had watched the most gifted player in New Jersey jog up and down the court, lumber through drills and allow smaller players to score and rebound inside without fear.


Winfield Says He'll Block Trade
LEAD: Dave Winfield's latest feud with George Steinbrenner has begun to produce a modicum of trade interest around baseball, but the Yankee outfielder yesterday repeated his pronouncement of the past: No trade.


Patents; Device to Help Mothers Store Breast Milk
LEAD: John Hauk, an inventor in Oakland, Calif., won patent approval for Lactote, a device to help working mothers store breast milk while they are on the job.


About New York; Locksmith Binds The Wounds Of a Fearful City
LEAD: Miguel Martinez enters apartments and the darkest corners of people's deepest fears, fixes their locks and leaves them feeling they might survive in this city for one more day.


CAMPEAU'S OPTIMISTIC SCENARIOS
LEAD: Robert Campeau sits animatedly in his office on the 20th floor of the Federated/Allied Stores headquarters building here and shuffles his scenarios.


Review/Music; Shakespeare and a Cellist
LEAD: The Pro Musicis Foundation, which presents young musicians in concert and requires that they also perform in prisons, hospitals and shelters, is celebrating its 20th annivesary with a series of five free concerts at Florence Gould Hall.
The first was offered by Sharon Robinson, the cellist, on Thursday evening.


Times Appoints 2 in Photos and Design
LEAD: Appointments of a picture editor and a deputy design director at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor.


N.C.A.A. to Look at North Carolina State
LEAD: Bruce Poulton, the chancellor of North Carolina State, said today that the National Collegiate Athletic Association would investigate allegations of grade-fixing at the school.


Two Killed as Military Jets Collide in West Germany


2 Palestinians Dead, 17 Hurt in Army Clashes
LEAD: Israeli soldiers opened fire on Arabs in the West Bank city of Hebron today after a confrontation with Jewish settlers, Israeli radio and Arab reports said.
Two Palestinians died and 17 were wounded in separate clashes.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 14, 1989
LEAD:  Economy


Intervention Fails to Halt Dollar Rise
LEAD: The dollar surged again yesterday, overcoming a round of coordinated central bank intervention led by the Federal Reserve with repeated dollar selling.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on Dec. 23 about Representative Manuel Lujan Jr., who has been selected as Interior Secretary, discussed his background, his record in Congress and the response to his selection.
In describing Mr.
Lujan's family, the article noted that he is a Roman Catholic.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Below are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Special delivery and Express Mail only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.


Doubts on Quake Survival
LEAD: The Soviet press cast doubt on reports that six survivors, including Aikaz Akopyan, above, were found in Armenia's earthquake ruins.
Page 3.


The Teen-Agers Goetz Shot: 4 Years Marked by Struggle
LEAD: At first, Troy Canty enjoyed the attention that engulfed him after he and three other teen-agers had been shot by Bernhard H. Goetz in an IRT subway car, Mr.
Canty's lawyer said yesterday.


'Disposable' Diapers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation; Puzzling Confession
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rockland Jury Hears Evidence In Murder Trial
LEAD: A Rockland County jury began hearing evidence today in the murder trial of 18-year-old Alonzo Williams, who shot his mother five times after, he said, she had sexually abused him since he was 6 years old.


New Limits Imposed On 376 Substances Found in Workplace
LEAD: The Labor Department today broadened its regulation of toxic and hazardous substances in the workplace, putting new limits on such substances as grain dust and gasoline fumes while strengthening existing limits on others.


String Band Festival
LEAD: The 1989 String Band Festival, at 8:30 and 11:30 tonight at the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street (228-7880), will include the Nashville Bluegrass Band, Major Conte and the Canebrake Rattlers, Pat Cannon's Foot and Fiddle Dance Company and the Wretched Refuse String Band.
Tickets are $13.


Rushdie Novel Brings Bomb Threats
LEAD: Several anonymous bomb threats by telephone have been directed against the New York publisher of Salman Rushdie's new novel, ''The Satanic Verses,'' and thousands of threatening letters have been sent to the publishing house.
The book, which has been banned in India, Pakistan, South Africa, Egypt and other countries with many Muslims, is regarded as blasphemous by fundamentalist


BENEFICIEARIES OF THE TALENT BANK
LEAD:  Highest-paid city workers hired through the Mayor's Talent Bank, a job-referral program operated out of the basement of City Hall, according to a list taken home in a shopping bag by Nydia Padilla-Barham, the program's former director.
List covers period between 1981 and July, 1985.
Salary is as reported in that list.


Asia Upset Over U.S. Quota Cuts
LEAD: Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong and other countries where Vietnamese boat people seek asylum are upset with President Reagan's decision to increase the number of Soviet refugees allowed into the United States at the expense of Southeast Asians, Thai officials and Western diplomats said today.


Phillies Sign Samuel
LEAD: Juan Samuel, a second baseman turned outfielder, has agreed to a two-year, $2.8 million guaranteed contract, the Philadelphia Phillies announced yesterday.
Samuel, 28 years old, who is moving from second base to the outfield this year, batted .243 in 157 games with 12 homers, 67 runs batted in and a club-high 33 stolen bases.(


Chip Maker Posts Loss
LEAD: Advanced Micro Devices, a semiconductor manufacturer, said today that it lost $34.1 million in the fourth quarter of 1988.
Sales in the quarter were $248.1 million, down 5.5 percent from $262.5 in the fourth quarter of 1987.


Kean Fights Gym Rule, And It's Fitness vs. Flab
LEAD: Pity the poor New Jersey nerd.
For a moment this week, it seemed that the calculator-toting legions and others who dread the prospect of another high school gymnasium class appeared to have a gained a powerful ally in Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.


Review/Ballet; A Many-Faceted Revival of 'Jewels'
LEAD: ''Jewels,'' a three-act plotless work that George Balanchine created in 1967, has always had a special place in the New York City Ballet's repertory, and on Thursday night it was presented as part of a special occasion.


2 Teamsters Convicted in Payroll-Padding Scheme
LEAD: After deliberating 16 hours over three days, a Federal jury today convicted two top officials of the Ohio teamsters' union of racketeering and embezzlement.


Koch Proposes Higher Taxes In 9-Point Plan
LEAD: The Koch administration proposed a list of tax increases yesterday intended to help balance New York City's budget without conflicting with Albany's efforts to fill a much larger hole in the state's spending plan.


Computer-Imaging and a Satellite To Aid Search for Pan Am Dead
LEAD: An international group of scientists is planning to use satellite photography and other sophisticated computer-imaging techniques to aid searchers still looking for the remains of 28 passengers in the widely scattered wreckage of a Pan Am Boeing 747 in Scotland.


Rochester Coach Appears In Line for Columbia Job
LEAD: There were indications yesterday that Ray Tellier, the head coach at the University of Rochester, would be appointed the next football coach at Columbia University.
But Al Paul, the Columbia athletic director, and Tellier refused to confirm that a choice had been made.


Miami, Saying It's Overburdened, Tells Nicaraguans to Stay Away
LEAD: After three decades of welcoming Hispanic immigrants with open arms, officials here said today that Miami could not cope with the latest wave of Nicaraguans and had no jobs or housing for them.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5  West German intelligence warned its government of possible involvement by German companies in a disputed Libyan chemical plant almost a month before President Reagan expressed similar concern.
Page 1  Israelis have been using a new bullet against Palestinian protesters.


Copper Prices Rise Sharply In Reaction to Chile Blast
LEAD: Copper futures prices rose sharply yesterday in reaction to reports of a disastrous explosion at the smelting operations of the world's largest copper mine near Chuquicamata, Chile.


Nations Seek Banks' Help For 3d World
LEAD: Citing social and political tensions in impoverished Latin America, the United States and other major industrial nations are trying to induce their commercial banks to lend the countries much more and to absorb some losses on loans they have already made, American officials and officials of other leading governments said.


Jerome P. Dean Jr. Weds Marcela Davison Aviles
LEAD: At St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Tucson, Ariz., Marcela Consuelo Davison Aviles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Beatty Davison of Tucson, was married last evening to Jerome Paul Dean Jr., the son of Mr.
Dean of Falmouth, Mass., and Mary Jane Dean of Gold River, Calif., Msgr.
Arsenio


(A Pop Quiz) Leveraged Buyouts Are: Good for U. S. Business
LEAD: Somewhere, in the midst of the public clamor about leveraged buyouts, a small but persistent voice is trying to be heard.
If we listen carefully, we will hear some things that may surprise us: that disassembling inefficient conglomerates can be good for American business, that when managers own equity in their corporations they perform better and that L


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost; Saving Indoor Plants
LEAD: Pots of gardenias, geraniums, African violets and ficus sit serenely near the window.
But look again.
When the heat is on, insects multiply indoors.
These minute nuisances often live their lives undetected until leaves turn yellow or drop, or the plant fails to thrive.
An arsenal of chemical weapons is not necessary to get the insects under control.


Central Banks' Action Drops Rates
LEAD: Interest rates continued to plunge yesterday, largely because of coordinated actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks to reduce the dollar's value.


Patents; Preventing a Car From Rolling Over
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation received a patent this week for a computer-controlled system that anticipates the likelihood of a car to roll over and tries to prevent it.


Gordon Wright, 85, Riding Team Founder
LEAD: Gordon Wright, a noted horseman and riding instructor who helped establish the United States Equestrian Team after World War II, died Jan. 5 at a nursing home in Tryon, N.C.
He was 85 years old and had lived at Wright Way Farm outside nearby Landrum, S.C.


Sooner Lineman Shot
LEAD: Prosecutors in Norman, Okla., have charged Jerry Parks, a starting cornerback for Oklahoma, with shooting with intent to injure after a teammate was wounded during an argument in an athletes' dormitory early yesterday morning.


KEY NORTH COUNTS DISMISSED BY COURT
LEAD: Federal District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell today dismissed the main criminal charges against Oliver L. North in the Iran-contra case, saying he was ''totally powerless'' to try the two charges without classified documents the Reagan Administration had ordered withheld.


The Cost of an Honest Congress
LEAD: To his credit, President Reagan is putting his last days in office to good use indeed by joining the campaign for sizable salary increases for members of Congress and other Federal officials.
He also endorses a ban on members collecting speaking fees.
Citizens interested in enhancing the appearance and reality of ethical behavior in


James E. Hurtubise, Race-Car Driver, 56
LEAD: James E. Hurtubise, a race-car driver who once held the average qualifying speed record for the Indianapolis 500, died Jan. 6 after suffering a heart attack near his home in Port Arthur, Tex.
He was 56 years old.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Florida has suffered enough.


Mets-Padres Trade
LEAD: In a trade of minor leaguers, the Mets have traded Rich Rodriguez, a pitcher, to the San Diego Padres for Brad Pounders, a first baseman.
Pounders, 25 years old, hit .279 in 110 games for Class AAA Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League last season.
He had 14 home runs and drove in 74 runs.
Rodriguez, 25, a left-hander, was 2-7 with six saves and a 2.87 earned run average in 47 games with the Class AA Jackson Mets of the Texas League.(


Fire Damages 11 Businesses
LEAD: Eleven businesses were heavily damaged yesterday when a wind-whipped fire burned through the roof of a one-story row on upper Broadway, the Fire Department said.
Thirteen firefighters suffered minor injuries, but no one else was injured in the fire that was reported at 6:58 A.M.
The cause of the fire is under investigation, but was believed to have started in the Dyckman House restaurant, which has entrances both on Broadway and Dyckman Street, said a Fire Department spokesman, Joseph Addonizio.


All-Star Jazz Reunion
LEAD: Art Farmer on fluegelhorn, Clifford Jordan on tenor saxophone, the singer Chris Connor and many other musicians will perform at J's All-Star Jazz Reunion at 6 and 9 P.M. tomorrow.
J's is on the second floor at 2581 Broadway, above 98th Street; admission is $15, with a two-drink minimum.
Information: 666-3600.


Review/Opera; 5 New Singers Instead of 7 In the Cast of 8 for 'Aida'
LEAD: In the steadily shifting panoply that counts as casting coherence at the Metropolitan Opera these days, Thursday night's performance of ''Aida'' included five singers and a conductor who did not perform the opera at the opening night of this new production five weeks ago.
It would have been a nearly clean sweep - an entirely different cast apart from Paul Plishka's Ramfis - except that two original cast members, Leona Litchell in the title role and John Gilmore as the Messenger, substituted for Aprile Millo and Charles


Bareheaded Motorcyclists Pressed Anew to Cove Up
LEAD: While Gary Busey, the actor, recovers from head injuries caused by a motorcycle accident last month, legislators in several states are drawing attention to his case as they revive attempts to require motorcyclists to wear safety helmets.
The well-publicized accident has also given lawmakers and safety experts an opportunity to promote the use of helmets in many other recreational sports, like bicycling, skiing, skateboarding and roller-skating.


Chang Is Selected For U.S. Davis Team
LEAD: Michael Chang, the 1988 rookie of the year in men's tennis, will join Andre Agassi, Ken Flach and Robert Seguso on the United States Davis Cup team, which will meet Paraguay in Fort Myers, Fla., Feb. 3-5.


Crossword Is a True Anglo-American Creation; Better After 40
LEAD: To the Editor:


Woman, 18, Is Shot to Death At a McDonald's in Brooklyn
LEAD: A man sprayed the inside of a McDonald's restaurant with gunfire last night in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, fatally wounding an 18-year-old woman, the police said.


New York, Because of Spills, To Cover Its Garbage Barges
LEAD: New York City, while sharply disputing the state's assertion that large amounts of garbage fly off the barges that travel to the city landfill on Staten Island, will begin placing covers over the barges next Tuesday.


Ban Disappears, and a New Hotel Appears
LEAD: The developer Harry Macklowe, who illegally tore down four buildings in Manhattan in 1985, has started building a hotel on the site two years before he was supposed to because the New York City Council - apparently unknowingly - removed a ban on the construction.


Traffic Controllers and U.S. Reach Tentative Agreement
LEAD: Air traffic controllers have negotiated the first labor agreement with the Federal Government since 1981, when a strike led to the mass dismissal of controllers and the abolition of their union.


British Computer Users Have an Unlucky 13th
LEAD: A computer virus struck personal computers in Britain today, wiping out program files and causing problems for businesses, a computer expert said.


New Order on Aircraft Wiring
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration today issued its second order in two days for checks of possible miswiring of aircraft emergency systems, requiring inspection of all Boeing 757 airliners.


Car Bomb Kills a Woman in Lebanon


Air Incident Worsens Greek-Turkish Ties
LEAD: Units of the Greek armed forces in the eastern Aegean have been put on limited alert after a confrontation between Greek and Turkish fighter planes, a Greek Foreign Ministry official said today.


Lotus Shipments
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation said it had started shipping its new microcomputer and mainframe software that will allow Lotus 1-2-3 and Symphony software users to gain access to mainframe data.
The company said the new software, Application Connection Release 5.0, was priced at $40,000 without volume discounts.


S.R.O. Inspection Ends in Arrest
LEAD: The manager of a single-room-occupancy hotel in midtown Manhattan was arrested yesterday after a building inspector found evidence that the hotel was being renovated without a permit.


'Black Book' Tells Tale of Jobs and Politics
LEAD: The highest-paying jobs allocated through Mayor Edward I. Koch's Talent Bank - an office set up in part to promote the hiring of black and Hispanic applicants - went overwhelmingly to whites, a review of city records shows.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 48.


Peter Nichols, Journalist, 60
LEAD: Peter Nichols, for 30 years the Rome correspondent of The Times of London, died Wednesday of a brain hemorrhage in Bracciano, Italy, where he lived.
He was 60 years old.


Human Rights in China: The Aggrieved Cry Out
LEAD:  Seeds of Fire  Chinese Voices of Conscience  Edited by Geremie Barme and John Minford  Illustrated. 491 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $25.


Accord at Vienna Conference
LEAD: NATO and the Warsaw Pact announced an agreement clearing the way for conventional-arms talks and a human rights declaration.
Page 4.


Parents Should Teach A Love of Books
LEAD: WHAT is wrong with today's children?
They just don't seem to be reading anything and, what is worse, they don't seem to have any desire to.


Thompson Walks and So Do Hoyas
LEAD: Cynics might suggest that John Thompson chose the perfect time and place for his protest.


An Encore For Instrument Sales
LEAD: Twelve-year-old Robert Camp takes private saxophone lessons at New York City's Collegiate School, where he is a seventh grader.
He says he likes the kind of music - jazz, rock, pop - that can be played on the alto sax he is renting.


THE NATION: Governing in the 'Feel-Good Era'; What Congress Really Does Between Elections
LEAD: AMERICANS will watch on their television sets this week the grand ceremony of inauguration, when those chosen by politics are invested as the leaders of Government.
As he takes the oath of office Friday as the 41st President, George Herbert Walker Bush will be surrounded on the steps of the Capitol by the members of the 101st Congress.


Maine Rejects Plan to Import Electric Power From Canada
LEAD: The Maine Public Utilities Commission has refused to allow the state's largest utility to buy electrical power from Canada, a plan that would have required laying a 140-mile power line.


Paige A. Gilbert Engaged To Wed Daniel Goldfarb
LEAD: A June wedding is planned by Paige Alison Gilbert and Daniel Jon Goldfarb, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Gilbert of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced.
Mr.
Goldfarb is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin F. Goldfarb of Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Beuys and Warhol Still Set the Tone - Even After Death
LEAD: The two ubiquitous artists of the late 1980's are Joseph Beuys and Andy Warhol.
Beuys was featured in last year's inaugural exhibition of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and given prime place in the 1987 Documenta, whose theme was social and political art.
Warhol had a museum and gallery show in New York City last fall.


ETHICAL QUESTIONS THAT ARISE WHEN IT'S EASY TO DOCTOR IMAGES
LEAD: Want a photograph of Alf, the lovable TV space alien, presiding at your company's board of directors meeting?
Or how about the Eiffel Tower in the middle of the Manhattan skyline?
Such doctored photographs have always been possible, of course, through tedious cut-and-paste operations.
But the advent of still video photography, in which images can be stored in digital form in computers and manipulated on the screen, enables users to arrange tricks - or, more typically, to improve existing photos - at the touch of a button.


The Layered Look Was Pioneered By Laquerware
LEAD: Lacquering, an ancient craft combining exotic imagery, exquisite detailing and satiny finishes, has transformed a stunning variety of ordinary and esoteric objects over many centuries.
The proof is seen in a selection of delightfully dissimilar works assembled in the exhibition ''Lacquer - A Panorama of Asian Decorative Arts,'' at the Brooklyn Museum, through


Reviews/Dance; A Diverse Program By 5 Choreographers
LEAD: Soundance, a repertory company that features dances in a variety of styles, was enterprising enough to present works by five choreographers on Thursday night at the Dia Dance Foundation.
But its laudable intentions did not produce equally laudable results.


Heidi H. Wasch to Marry Robert Leversee in June
LEAD: The engagement of Heidi Helm Wasch to Robert Owen Leversee, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack H. Leversee of Bellevue, Wash., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Wasch of Middletown, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


About Cars; A Cadillac Long on Luxury
LEAD: My friend McCutcheon was wallowing in richness, breathing in the aroma of new leather. ''One thing you got to say,'' he said, ''this thing is luxurious.''


To Create the Ideal Employee, Bridge the Generations
LEAD: IF you were asked to create a workplace Frankenstein as a paradigm for the ideal employee, where would you begin?
When observing co-workers, have you noticed that certain glaring behavioral differences often follow patterns related to age?


Thompson Keeps the Faith
LEAD: We were at somebody's 40th birthday party the other night, mourning the 60's.
My friend said he missed the time when people took a stand if they thought something was unjust.


Ray Morehart, Yankee With Ruth, Dies at 89
LEAD: Ray Morehart, a reserve infielder on the 1927 New York Yankees, died at home Friday.
He was 89 years old.


DARWIN MEETS THE KAWESKAR
LEAD:  WHO WILL REMEMBER THE PEOPLE . . .
By Jean Raspail.
Translated by Jeremy Leggatt.  213 pp.
San Francisco:  Mercury House. $18.95.


When Accountants Function as Brokers
LEAD: Millions of Americans will soon be knocking on their accountants' doors, an annual rite as the tax-filing deadline nears.
Besides seeking the obligatory help in cutting their tax bills, many clients will ask the accountants to go one step further and provide broad financial assistance and investment advice.


Kate J. Horning To Wed in June
LEAD: Kate James Horning and Mark Spencer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Spencer of Annapolis, Md., plan to marry in June, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Horning of Fairfield, Conn., have announced.


Thurber's Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


John Norris, 85, Led Alcoholics Anonymous
LEAD: Dr.
John L. Norris, a former chairman of Alcoholics Anonymous, died of complications from pneumonia Friday in New London Hospital in New Hampshire.
He was 85 years old and lived in New London.


When Swans Cry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music; Organ Recital By German
LEAD: The centerpiece of Hans Uwe Hielscher's organ recital last Sunday afternoon at St.
Bartholomew's Church was a big four-movement sonata by the French Romantic composer Alexandre Guilmant.
Guilmant's name and some of his work are known to organists - he was a notable teacher, of Nadia Boulanger among others -but his music rarely turns up in recitals.


A Debate Heats Up: Is It News or Entertainment?
LEAD: After years of dancing around the edge of sensationalism, television leaped enthusiastically into the pit last year with the kind of journalism many newspapers have practiced for a hundred years or more.
The half-dozen or so new shows and the old ones that remade themselves on a sex-and-mayhem model proved so successful that they have spawned a multibillion-dollar industry: reality-based television.


A DEATH IN LENINGRAD
LEAD:  STALIN AND THE KIROV MURDER  By Robert Conquest.  164 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $16.95.


Meaning Is in the Ears of the Beholder
LEAD: Pop musicians and their advisers slave to make themselves clear.
They agonize over lyrics, try dozens of takes on solos, mix and remix arrangements, scrutinize album packages, fiddle with advertisements and re-edit videos according to private combinations of game plan and instinct.
At some point in the project, they'll try to think like a casual listener, a radio program director or a longtime fan, all in attempts to guarantee that their initial inspiration comes through just the way they planned it.


Judge Rejects Boat Searches
LEAD: A Superior Court justice in Maine has ruled that game warderns' searches of boaters along the Saco River last summer were unconstitutional.
Game wardens conducting the searches cited rowdy and potentially dangerous behavior by some boaters.
But Justice Donald Alexander said there was ''no significant connection'' between the behavior the wardens sought to stop and the charges that were subsequently filed.


Spain, Losing Backward Image, Booms as It Lures Foreign Money
LEAD: With Europe's fastest economic growth rate and foreign investment that has tripled in five years, Spain is turning into the continent's Sun Belt.


Agreement Clears Way for New East-West Talks
LEAD: NATO and Warsaw Pact negotiators in Vienna announced an agreement today that cleared the way for the start of new negotiations on reducing conventional armed forces in Europe and for a major East-West document on human rights and economic cooperation.


Ellen R. Dickman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Ellen R. Dickman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin L. Dickman of New York, was married in New York last evening to Steven Koch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Koch, also of New York.
Rabbi Jacqueline Koch Ellenson, a cousin of the bridegroom, and Rabbi Gunter Hirschberg officiated at the Rainbow Room.


The Strategy and Tactics Of Mothering a Sportsman
LEAD: ANYONE who has ever raised a boy knows that gym class is a metaphor for life.
Here in the sports arena of junior athletics, the boys are separated from the men, wimps are weeded out from winners and coach is a deity second only to the Highest Power.
I should know.
I'm a sports mother, dedicated to the care and feeding of the next lean, mean money machines: two young athletes in the making.


'THE MAYOR WHO DIDN'T WANT TO KNOW'
LEAD:  CITY FOR SALE  Ed Koch and the Betrayal of New York.
By Jack Newfield and Wayne Barrett.
Illustrated. 466 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $22.50.


Of Pigs and Hot-Dog Trees
LEAD:  BIG TOP PEE-WEE  Starring Pee-wee Herman (in photo), Penelope Ann Miller, Kris Kristofferson, Valeria Golino, Wayne White, Susan Tyrrell.
Directed by Randal Kleiser. 1988.
Paramount Home Video.  86 minutes. $89.95.
Rated PG - though even its strongest double-entendres are harmless.


THE CONNOISSEUR AS SURVIVOR
LEAD:  UTZ  By Bruce Chatwin.  154 pp. New York:  Viking. $16.95.


A Down-to-Earth Tenant For an Exclusive Address
LEAD: With a laugh, Barbara Bush acknowledges that she now views herself as a role model for many American women.


Too Many Bugs In Replay System
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Frozen Pipes
LEAD: FREEZING winter weather brings with it the threat of frozen plumbing.
To minimize the risk, most household water pipes are deliberately situated away from unheated areas.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have been caring for our teak furniture by rubbing it periodically with an oil sold specifically for this type of unvarnished furniture.
However, the wood seems to have darkened over the years.
The other day I repaired the top of one piece, and I first cleaned off the surface with acetone.
I was amazed to see how clean and light the finish looked after cleaning it with this solvent.


Four Artists at Gallery Shows
LEAD: THIS has not been one of Westchester's glittering art seasons and, viewed from the halfway point, it offers little promise of improvement.
Apart from the Neuberger's artists' books show (closing today), most of the action for county residents has been at nearby museums in the Bronx, specifically at the Lehman College Art Gallery, whose 1960's exhibition has just closed, and at the Bronx Museum of the Arts, where the massive roundup of Hispanic artists remains through Jan.


A Case of Xenodochiophobia
LEAD: IT'S a jawbreaker of a word: xenodochiophobia.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: IF there are two overworked words in the English language at the moment, they must be ''kinder'' and ''gentler.'' Since President-elect George Bush chose them to convey his vision of the country and the future, they have filled newspaper columns and airwaves, have been sprinkled in countless conversations, have jumped out of advertisements and commercials and have been used in almost every context, with a grand disregard for accuracy.


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: No!
The pressure to win: too great.
The money involved: too much.
The coaches' situation: too desperate.
And a kid with talent: too vulnerable.
MACK MORGAN  New York





Winter Golf, and 'the Course Is Mine'
LEAD: THE lazy days of summer are gone.
The Mets have left Shea and the Great Pumpkin is memory.
The earth is cold.
Boy, am I glad.


Leader's Swing


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have been caring for our teak furniture by rubbing it periodically with an oil sold specifically for this type of unvarnished furniture.
However, the wood seems to have darkened over the years.
The other day I repaired the top of one piece, and I first cleaned off the surface with acetone.
I was amazed to see how clean and light the finish looked after cleaning it with this solvent.


KOOP CHALLENGED ON ABORTION DATA
LEAD: Many experts in reproductive health and psychology challenge the contention of Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, the Surgeon General of the United States, that scientific data on the health effects of abortion are inconclusive.


4-Year Status Urged For Medgar Evers To Stabilize College
LEAD: Medgar Evers College, a two-year community college in central Brooklyn with a long history of administrative problems, should be turned into a four-year institution to give it greater stability and status, an independent consulting firm has recommended.


State Is Lauded On Reform Of Welfare
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S Reach program, which gives welfare recipients training and helps them find jobs, was developed along with similar national welfare reform.
But in the end, New Jersey got ahead of the Federal Government and helped guide the national effort.


Mexican Union Chief Is King To the Oil Workers at Home
LEAD: In this drab industrial city on the Gulf Coast, the main supermarkets are owned by the Mexican oil workers union.
So is the only funeral home and so are some of the auto repair shops and gasoline stations.


Fresh Herbs at Hand No Matter What the Season
LEAD: AS more companies go into the business of growing herbs hydroponically, various fresh herbs are now available all year.
A few sprigs of fresh thyme, rosemary or tarragon can be found in many produce markets, sealed in plastic.
In winter they usually cost $1.25 to $2 a package.


The Hearty Breads Of Portugal's Hearths
LEAD: DESPITE attempts to introduce modern, refined bread, the Portuguese by and large prefer the old-fashioned country kind, loaves that are big and rough and the color of earth, with crisp crust and a moist interior.


Shelley R. Berson To Wed in April
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard H. Berson of Pomona, N.Y., and Peru, Vt., have announced the egagement of their daughter, Dr.
Shelley Rose Berson, to Jack Weinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Weinstein of Monsey, N.Y.
An April wedding is planned.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have been caring for our teak furniture by rubbing it periodically with an oil sold specifically for this type of unvarnished furniture.
However, the wood seems to have darkened over the years.
The other day I repaired the top of one piece, and I first cleaned off the surface with acetone.
I was amazed to see how clean and light the finish looked after cleaning it with this solvent.


Hoping Selfishness Goes Out of Style
LEAD: I RECENTLY watched Frank Capra's ''It's a Wonderful Life'' for the eighth time.
As always, I was emotionally uplifted by the story, which paints good and evil in broad strokes, letting the former prevail.
But I was also saddened, for the movie highlighted a major failing of too many of my contemporaries - their need to measure success in terms of material wealth.


Study Links Male Unemployment And Single Mothers in Chicago
LEAD: Researchers at the University of Chicago say a new social survey of low-income inner-city residents here offers evidence of a strong correlation between unemployment among men and the growing number of children who are being reared by single mothers.


Seeking Facts On Back Pain
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NEW YORK WIDENS BILINGUAL STUDIES
LEAD: A broadened policy of bilingual education in New York's public schools to meet the anticipated needs of a growing population of students with limited skills in English has been announced by the state's Commissioner of Education, Thomas Sobol.


Diana Pietraszewski Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York, Diana Beth Pietraszewski, a daughter of Mrs.
Frank P. Pietraszewski of Simsbury, Conn., and the late Mr.
Pietraszewski, was married yesterday to Edward Frederick Wagner Jr., the son of Mr.
Wagner of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Columbus, Ohio, and the late Margaret Wagner.


When a Doctor Is Worth a Tax
LEAD: IT WAS at the time a big step for Fort Cobb, Okla., population 722.


Miss Greenwald To Marry in May
LEAD: Jill Greenwald and Jonathan Roy Liebman, a son of Muriel Liebman of Hartsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Theodore Liebman, plan to marry in May, the the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
James H. Greenwald of Olympia Fields, Ill., have announced.


Hoping to Salvage Desert Rail Depot
LEAD: THERE is something about a ghost railroad stati, , ananding forlorn vigil in a lonely town, that grabs many city dwellers.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''Dr.
Greenspan is administering the medicine the economy needs.
The unintended side effect is that the dollar gets too strong.''  Neal M. Soss,
chief economist,
First Boston Corporation.


Tight Money Slows Drive to Integrate
LEAD: JUST over a year ago, Education Commissioner Gerald N. Tirozzi denounced what he called an ''educationally, morally and legally wrong'' condition in the state's public schools: racial segregation.
And he said the local school districts could correct the imbalance on their own, or be forced to.


IT'S A SMALL WORLD
LEAD: Angel Antonio Sanchez-Cabanas turns away from the glare of Madrid's midday sun and leans his frame against a wall, the better to show off his garb.
He wears a snug-fitting toreador-style jacket, a black ribbon tie - the sort of thing that Zorro might have fancied - and a Mexican belt with a hand-tooled silver buckle.


Reagan Gives Final Goodbye, Ending Eight Years on Radio
LEAD: President Reagan, saying ''Saturdays will never seem the same,'' delivered his final weekly radio talk to the nation today, thanking the American people for the chance to lead them in pursuit of ''the American saga.''


Oklahoma Shooting
LEAD: The shooting of one Oklahoma football player by another was an accident after a series of arguments ''about stupid stuff,'' according to a third Sooner player who said he witnessed the incident early Friday morning.
Rod Fisher, a halfback, told The Daily Oklahoman that he was present when Jerry Parks, a freshman, shot Zarek Peters, a third-year lineman, during a scuffle in Peters's dorm room.


PERSPECTIVES: Downtown Brooklyn; Another Big Rental Hits the Co-op Road
LEAD: A CO-OP conversion is under way at a large development called University Towers in downtown Brooklyn that has much to say about housing conditions in New York City and the role of conversions in improving them.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  The Thin Blue Line  Featuring the principals in the case and, in re-enactments, Adam Goldfine, Derek Horton, Ron Thornhill, Marianne Leone, Amanda Caprio and Michael Nicoll.
Directed by Errol Morris. 1988.
HBO Video.  101 minutes. $89.99.
Not rated.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page contents listing on Dec. 18 for an article about Rio de Janeiro characterized the city incorrectly.
The capital of Brazil is Brasilia.


'Fiddler': Endearing Classic
LEAD: A FRIEND of mine says that she can see ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum'' as many times as it is produced, regardless of the quality of the production.
She never tires of it.


2 Palestinian Girls Die of Israeli Gun Wounds
LEAD: Two Palestinian girls died today of head wounds from Israeli gunfire, bringing to four the number of Palestinian teen-agers who have been killed in the last 36 hours.


On a Stage, Making Music, For the First Time
LEAD: THE phone call comes on a Friday afternoon while I am at the home of friends, playing oboe with fellow music lovers.
On the line is a student conductor from a local college orchestra.
Would I like to play second oboe in the Prokofiev Symphony No. 6?
The concert is in a few weeks.


THE AMBIGUOUS YASIR ARAFAT
LEAD: Marie Colvin's article ''The Ambiguous Yasir Arafat'' (Dec. 18), is accompanied by a large picture of Mr.
Arafat addressing the Palestine National Council in Algiers.
It was at this conference that he renounced terrorism.
In the picture, Mr.
Arafat is wearing army fatigues and has a large gun in a holster at his right side.


POSTINGS: The Last Apartments?; Plan B For Madison
LEAD: The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission will decide whether to allow the construction of what could be the last apartment house on upper Madison Avenue.
As the public hearing on Jan. 24 approaches, its developer is stressing one point: Not one brownstone will be harmed.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD: A BURNS BIRTHDAY Did you know that Robert Burns, the great Scottish poet, was born in January - Jan. 25, 1759, to be exact?


Frozen Pipes
LEAD: FREEZING winter weather brings with it the threat of frozen plumbing.
To minimize the risk, most household water pipes are deliberately situated away from unheated areas.


Experts on Deficit Defend the 1986 Tax Changes
LEAD: Is the 1986 overhauling of the Federal tax code raising havoc with the budget?


Rough Week for Valvano and North Carolina St.
LEAD: Considering all that happened the previous week, it was perversely appropriate that the long-scheduled kickoff dinner for a North Carolina State fund-raising drive fell on Friday the 13th.


German Press and Foes Attack Kohl Over Libya
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl came under strong attack from the political opposition and the press today over his Government's disclosure that it had known since October of potential West German involvment in the construction of a suspect Libyan chemical factory.


IRONING OUT THE WRINKLES
LEAD: An article about a municipal building getting a face lift appeared in The New York Times on the same day that Melvin Konner's Body and Mind article ''Mortality'' did (Dec. 4).
I doubt whether anyone would object to the ravages of time, weather and pollution being effaced from the building; one would rejoice, rather, that the landmark was being restored to its former splendor.


Evacuation Fears Unfounded
LEAD: Re: ''To the Reagans: Happy Trails''  [ Letters, Jan. 8 ] .
Those who read the papers and watch TV know that evacuation around a nuclear power plant in the event of emergency is required only for those within a 10-mile limit of the plant.
Physicists are confident only two miles is necessary because of the improved safety of our U.S.


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; The Judgment Is Premature
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Exhibit Examines South America's Tribes
LEAD: Just past the stuffed bird displays and behind the Aztec statues, a new exhibition on South American tribes will open this Friday at the American Museum of Natural History.


Church Seeks Bigger Home as Ethiopians Flock to Its Doors
LEAD: In the late 1960's a small group of American and West Indian blacks, caught up in the move to regain their lost African heritage, established Holy Trinity Ethiopian Orthodox Church in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx.


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; Remember The 'Failures'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holli Gunther and Alan H. Roth Marry in Boston
LEAD: Holli Georgia Gunther, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Gunther of Arlington, Vt., and Alan Harry Roth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Roth of Patchogue, L.I., were married last night at the Parker House in Boston.
Justice of the Peace Vivian T. Burns of Woburn, Mass., performed the ceremony.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom
Wolfe. (Bantam, $5.95.) A bond trader caught in
the jungles of New York.
2
4
ROCK STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $4.95.)
The glory and anguish of three rock-and-roll
performers in tinselly southern California.


Abortion: The Justices' Ambiguous Move
LEAD: THE Supreme Court's intentions for the abortion case it accepted last week are mysterious even as the case becomes the latest lightning rod for the never-ending debate about abortion rights.


L.I. Radio: Two Markets
LEAD: The article regarding Long Island radio  [ ''Radio Redux: Frequencies Are in Demand,'' Dec. 25 ]  was interesting but made a common mistake, namely, that Long Island radio is one market.
It is not.
It is two.
Nassau and western Suffolk is one and Long Island's East End is the other.
While Arbitron does not measure them separately, Birch Research does.


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; All Hope Abandoned?
LEAD: To the Editor:


PROGRAM HELPING YOUNGER REFUGEES
LEAD: When Ila Roy asked a group of 8-year-old Central American immigrants to draw a scene from their lives, she got some surprising results.


Lisa F. Fairburn, Student, to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Fairburn of Greenwich, Conn., have made known the engagement of their daughter Lisa Farnsworth Fairburn to Todd Rhoads Clark,the son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
William Clark Jr. of Harvard, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in June.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Scottsdale, Ariz.; Reservation Shopping
LEAD: SCOTTSDALE PAVILIONS, a 600,000-square-foot shopping center, is scheduled to open in March on the Salt River Indian Reservation just outside this city of 126,000 residents.
It will be the country's largest private commercial development on Indian land.


Freighters
LEAD: To the Editor: The Dec. 18 Q &amp; A included a California couple's request for sources of information on freighter travel.
Besides the two publications suggested, freighter information of a different nature is available from the Freighter Travel Club of America (Post Office Box 12693, Salem, Ore. 97302).


THE REGION: Kean's Frustration; Compromise On Insurance Isn't Working In New Jersey
LEAD: NEW JERSEY'S Insurance Commissioner, Kenneth D. Merin, once suggested that the chief reason for the state's high automobile insurance rates was that it had more people and cars per square mile than any other state, ''and they keep bumping into each other.''


TALKING: Age Limits; New Law Troubles Condos
LEAD: WHEN Congress modified the Fair Housing Act last September to insure that families with children would no longer face discrimination in buying or renting a home, it included a provision intended to exclude retirement and ''adult only'' communities.


Agents Arrest Five in an Attempt to Sell Explosive
LEAD: More than 300 pounds of a powerful plastic explosive stolen from a mine were seized in a raid by Federal agents posing as buyers for the material, the authorities said today.


Article Led to Punishment, Child-Abuse Workers Assert
LEAD: A New York City child-protection caseworker and her supervisor who talked publicly last week about problems in their agency, are being punished by their superiors, officials of their union have said.


POSTINGS: Near Spring Lake; Basic Colonial
LEAD: The 65 houses of Old Mill Estates in Wall Township, N.J., will look so much like those from the 1790's that, if not for their obvious newness, they would seem straight out of the 1970's.
Their architect, Tom Schauvette, said that while the Colonial style, marked by shutters, shingles and simplicity, remains as popular in the 80's as in the 70's, such houses today usually are dressed up.


Shot-Putter Wins Despite Incident
LEAD: Randy Barnes, a 1988 Olympic silver medalist, overcame the loss of sleep following an early morning confrontation with an Arkansas gunman and recorded the second-best American indoor shot-put today.


Woman Is Killed by a Train
LEAD: A 33-year-old woman was struck and killed Friday night by a Long Island Rail Road train as she walked along the tracks, the police said today.
The woman, Teresa Bustos, of 26A Town Path in Glen Cove, was walking on the tracks between Glen Street station and Seacliff station at 7 P.M.
Friday when she was struck by a westbound express train, said a police spokesman, Officer Frank Messana.


Group of New Yorkers Face a Proposed Move
LEAD: The Koch administration has offered a plan to force many residents of middle-income subsidized housing into smaller apartments, and many of the residents are bitterly opposed to the program.


Rosemarie Connors to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Rosemarie Patricia Connors to Vincent Gerard McCallion, a son of Rosetta McCallion of New York and the late Vincent McCallion, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Connors of Brooklyn.
Miss Connors, a graduate of Fordham University, is the director of research in Mayor Edward I.


Fictitious Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


'The January Man' Dossier: The Force Is With It
LEAD: As law enforcement officers go, the New York City Police have never had a reputation for being particularly conformist.
And Nick Starkey, the shaggy, mustachioed protagonist of ''The January Man,'' an offbeat political melodrama that opened Friday, is hardly your average Gotham police officer.
Not by a long shot.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''My mail tells me a lot of fat, white-haired, wrinkled ladies are tickled pink.''  - Barbara Bush.  [ 1:1. ]


RUSSIANS DISCLOSE SATELLITES CARRY NEW REACTOR TYPE
LEAD: Soviet scientists have disclosed that they have launched satellites carrying an advanced new class of nuclear reactor that is the most efficient, long-lived and powerful ever to orbit the earth.


Casino Funds To Aid Projects In Urban Areas
LEAD: AS soon as the ground thaws enough in the spring, construction is to begin to transform a blighted block of Monticello Avenue here into modern apartments and shops.
The $2.9-million project will be the first investment of casino funds in urban redevelopment in northern New Jersey.


Common Denominator Is Millions
LEAD: If the nuns at Our Savior elementary school in the Bronx could see Sheelah Ryan now: being toasted with champagne on the deck of the yacht Trump Princess, talking about the hundred marriage proposals she has turned down, counting her millions.


The Bottom Line of Sponsoring Sports
LEAD: FOR corporations, sports-sponsorship programs are effective and prestigious sales tools.
For fund raisers, they are a fine source of financial benefit.
For sports-marketing companies, which bring the parties together, they have become a big industry.


In Search Of Opals in South Australia
LEAD: IN mid-August, in the small Outback town of Coober Pedy, South Australia, thieves broke into the home of an opal buyer and removed a safe containing about $750,000 in stones and cash.
The local police began their investigation assuming that the valuables were still in the safe, that the safe was still in or around Coober


The 'Lost' Private Steps Forward
LEAD: FROM the hundreds of soldiers who marched along the Champs Elysees in August 1944, one more has stepped forward to identify himself on the 1945 stamp that honored the United States Army.
The soldier is Alfred G. Gilbert, who has retired from the dressmaking industry in New York City and lives in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.


General Hospital, New York City Style
LEAD: THE public long imagined the general hospital, that sturdy device of television serials, to be a bustling but orderly fortress where hourlong crises arose only to be struck down through the efficient wonders of science.


Revving It Up In Leather Coats
LEAD: THE leather coat has frequently been cast in the role of bad boy; you know, the back-talking punk who's never going to amount to anything unless he changes his tune.


G.M. Executive Is Expected To Get No. 2 Pentagon Job
LEAD: Donald J. Atwood Jr., vice chairman of the General Motors Corporation, is expected to be named to the No. 2 post at the Pentagon, officials involved in the transition to a new administration said today.


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: Of course they can play strictly by the rules, just as soon as they decide that education is more important than athletics, even for athletes.
BERNARD LIEBMAN  Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


A Lesson of Sorts in Italian Geography
LEAD: IN Italy, La Sila is a lovely mountain in Calabria.
On Long Island, it's an Italian restaurant on a quiet street in Inwood.
A taste of La Sila's food is an instant lesson in Italian geography.
Robust red sauces all point to a restaurant whose heart and soul are near that mountain in the south of Italy.


Ticket Lottery At Meadowlands
LEAD: The Meadowlands has issued rules for the lottery drawing to obtain tickets to the Eastern Regional collegiate basketball tournament there March 24 and 26.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have been caring for our teak furniture by rubbing it periodically with an oil sold specifically for this type of unvarnished furniture.
However, the wood seems to have darkened over the years.
The other day I repaired the top of one piece, and I first cleaned off the surface with acetone.
I was amazed to see how clean and light the finish looked after cleaning it with this solvent.


THE CZARS NEVER HAD IS SO GOOD
LEAD: In 1770, eight years after she became Empress of Russia, Catherine the Great established the workshops that would lavishly and permanently furnish the imperial palaces.
Catherine's move gave birth to the Russian furniture industry - and the Russian style.
Antoine Cheneviere, a Swiss-born London antiques dealer specializing in Russian furniture, has written RUSSIAN FURNITURE: The Golden Age 1780-1840 (Vendome Press, $65), the first major book outside of the Soviet Union on the style as it evolved over a 60-year period.


PERU'S TWIN CRISES RAISE COUP RUMORS
LEAD: With President Alan Garcia seemingly overwhelmed by the challenges posed by wild inflation and mounting terrorism, Peru has been shaken over the last two weeks by intense rumors of an imminent military coup.


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: Of course college sports can play by the rules.
It is just a question of whether or not universities want to, and if they're willing to risk being caught by the sometimes-alert N.C.A.A.
SARA BENNETT  Great Neck, L.I.


The Appointment Book Rules: A Life Down in Black and White
LEAD: THE voice coming from my answering machine was brusque, the message explicit.


Fresh Herbs at Hand No Matter What the Season
LEAD: AS more companies go into the business of growing herbs hydroponically, various fresh herbs are now available all year.
A few sprigs of fresh thyme, rosemary or tarragon can be found in many produce markets, sealed in plastic.
In winter they usually cost $1.25 to $2 a package.


Harbingers of Spring Enliven January
LEAD: ALFRED KRAUTTER begins to ''think spring'' in January.
While the rest of us burrow in for the worst of winter, Mr.
Krautter, owner of the Sprainbrook Nursey in Scarsdale, envisions the bouquets of May.


Fishing for Laughs


Shadow On the Future
LEAD: In many ways Zimbabwe is the success story of black Africa.
Food production is booming.
The country's foreign debt is low.
Visitors arriving here from elsewhere in Africa, or from abroad, remark on the prosperity in this capital city.


Patience and Then the Classical Clobbering
LEAD: THE classical prescription for winning was to more or less slowly outmaneuver the opponent by trenchant positional play and, when all was in readiness, to strike with the decisive combination.


New Charges Are Traded in Playland Case
LEAD: THE ousted director of the Playland Amusement Park in Rye, indicted for having used park employees to assist in Republican Party mailings, has responded by accusing the District Attorney, Carl A. Vergari, of conduct ''virtually identical'' to that attributed to the director.


WHEN IN DOUBT, DUEL
LEAD:  ROMANTIC AFFINITIES  Portraits From an Age, 1780-1830.
By Rupert Christiansen.
Illustrated. 262 pp.
New York:  G.P.
Putnam's Sons. $18.95.


Window on a Memory
LEAD:  KENNEDY  Starring Martin Sheen (in photo), Blair Brown (in photo), Vincent Gardenia, E. G. Marshall, Geraldine Fitzgerald, J. R. Dusenberry (in photo).
Directed by Jim Goddard. 1983.
Prism Entertainment.  278 minutes. $79.95.
Not rated.


In Debt to Dante
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviets Pledge Continued Aid to Afghan Leaders
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, visiting Kabul, pledged continued ''all-around assistance'' to Afghanistan's beleaguered Government, the Soviet press agency Tass said today.


The Camera Lens as Two-Edged Sword
LEAD: Except in rare and wonderful moments like Edward R. Murrow's 1960 documentary ''Harvest of Shame,'' television traditionally follows rather than leads when it comes to social movements.
It is, of necessity and leaning, a cautious medium, licensed by the Government and influenced by the seesaw rhythms of public policy and piety.


PUTTING A LID ON THE MELTING POT
LEAD:  THE PARTY OF FEAR  From Nativist Movements to the New Right in American History.
By David H. Bennett.  509 pp.
Chapel Hill:  The University of North Carolina Press. $29.95.


Burma Becomes a Test Case in Human-Rights Politics
LEAD: BURMA'S new military leaders paid dearly for their brutal crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations in September.
Not only were they shunned diplomatically, but nearly all the country's foreign aid - including $300 million from the Japanese, $100 million from the West Germans and $12 million from the United States - was suspended.


N.Y.U. Plan Is Undeterred by a Fire
LEAD: A fire that swept through a historic town house in Greenwich Village this month will not stop plans to convert it into a New York University center for Greek studies, the people in charge of the project say.


Brecht and Weill Meet the 'Cinema Man' Weill and Brecht Go On the Screen
LEAD: On a vast lot of former farm land outside Budapest, corn growing had given way to film making and a grimly realistic vision of the lower depths of Dickensian London had risen.


CONFESSIONS OF A LOVING ANALYST
LEAD:  THE CLINICAL DIARY OF SANDOR FERENCZI  Edited by Judith Dupont.
Translated by Michael Balint and Nicola Zardy Jackson.  227 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Just Another Quick Fix?
LEAD: On the eve of the Presidential inauguration, members of the incoming Bush administration are reviving an old complaint about American businessmen: they concentrate too much on earning fast profits, sometimes wrecking their companies in the process.


John Duncan Engaged To Heather Hawkins
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Gaynell L. Hawkins and Walter E. Hawkins Jr., both of Shreveport, La., of the engagement of their daughter Heather Covell Hawkins to John Bruce Duncan, a son of J. Bruce Duncan of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Leila H. Duncan.
The couple plan to marry in April.


In Defense of Adam Smith
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brazil Raises Prices Ahead of Devaluation
LEAD: Brazil authorized large price increases today, a day before the announcement of a new anti-inflation plan that officials said would include a devaluation of the country's currency.


Blacks' Charities Struggle To Meet Cosby Challenge
LEAD: When Bill Cosby gave $20 million to Spelman College in Atlanta, the largest individual donation ever made to a black college, he made it clear that he intended the money not just as a gift but as a challenge to other black Americans to support black colleges.


Prospects; A High-Flying Dollar
LEAD: Since the beginning of the year the dollar has been surprisingly strong.
To bring down its value, central banks in Europe and Japan sold dollars on Wednesday and Friday.
But despite a high level of intervention into the currency markets, the dollar continued its rise, closing out the week in Europe at 126.65 yen and 1.8275 West German marks to the dollar.


Jerry Lee Lewis Can Still Stir Things Up
LEAD: It's a sunny, sweater-weather winter afternoon, and as Jerry Lee Lewis's ''High School Confidential'' blasts from an eight-foot-high tower of speakers, the actor Dennis Quaid, playing the wild and legendary rocker, bounces up the steps of a Memphis elementary school to grab Winona Ryder, who portrays Lewis's 13-year-old bride, Myra, in the film ''Great Balls of Fire!


Review/Dance; New Leads, New Look In Balanchine 'Apollo'
LEAD: ''Apollo,'' which George Balanchine choreographed in 1928 to Stravinsky's ballet score ''Apollon Musagete,'' refers to Greek mythology but has also acquired a mythical aura of its own.
A virtually all-new cast in a seminal Balanchine work, then, is a major event at the New York City Ballet.


Marjorie Curran Wed To Dr. Thomas Ptak
LEAD: Marjorie Ann Curran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Curran of Ashland, Mass., was married yesterday in Framingham, Mass., to Dr.
Thomas Ptak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Ptak of Fitchburg, Mass.
The Rev.
William H. McLaughlin performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church.


Downtown, Downplayed
LEAD: Gentrification, a New England woman complains, is not exactly the word for what's happening to her town.
Cute is more like it.


Battle is Renewed Over AIDS Shelter
LEAD: THE number of new AIDS cases in Hartford last year grew faster than in any other city in the state, triple over 1987, city officials said.


685 ARE ARRESTED OPPOSING ABORTION
LEAD: The police arrested 685 abortion opponents yesterday demonstrating outside Manhattan abortion clinics for the second consecutive day.
Many of the protesters had stopped traffic, blocked sidewalks and, in once case, chained themselves together, the police said.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: ISSUES AND ANSWERS By BILLY PACKER; Billy Packer is the principal college basketball analyst for CBS Sports. As a player, he led Wake Forest to the Final Four in 1962, and was an assistant coach there from 1965 to 1970.
LEAD: Despite the serious issues considered at the just-concluded National Collegiate Athletic Association convention and the recent controversy involving Jim Valvano and North Carolina State, I think the status of collegiate basketball has never been better.
The quality of coaching, the new rules that have dramatically improved the style and flow of the game, the incredible individual talent and the dozens of teams that can realistically set their sights on the national championship all combine to enhance the already grand expectations for the 1990's.


Early Works by Escher in Norwalk
LEAD: MAURITS CORNELIS ESCHER probably had himself in mind when, in a 1957 essay, he compared the graphic artist to ''a blackbird singing at the top of a tree.'' Unlike the painter or sculptor, said Escher, the printmaker ''repeats his song over and over again, and it is complete in each print that he makes.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Melvin Bolton's first novel, ''The Softener,'' was published about three years ago, and it was respectfully greeted.
It is nice to report that the British author's second book, THE TESTING (Gollancz/David &amp; Charles, $19.95), carries on the good work.


Instant Snapshots for Your TV Screen
LEAD: For the consumer who has everything, a new toy will soon be beckoning.
It is the electronic still video camera, a device that looks like a bulky 35-millimeter camera but captures images on electronic sensors instead of film.
The images are then stored on built-in magnetic disks that can be played back with a machine connected to a TV.


In Mourning, Japan Reopens a Debate From Another Era
LEAD: EVEN in the aftermath of his death, the world is not sure which Emperor Hirohito to remember: the warrior on a white horse or the kindly old marine biologist who saw his nation transformed into an economic superpower.


Professors' Tax Break Phasing Out at Brown
LEAD: A tax break for Brown University professors that dates to the days of King George III is being phased out but still gives 32 faculty members a discount on their property taxes, officials say.


Miss Weiler To Be Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Eileen C. Weiler of New York and Sun Valley, Idaho, of the engagement of her daughter, Pamela Brooke Weiler, to Douglas Keane Grayson, the son of Dr.
Isabel T. Whitehill-Grayson and Dr.
Bernard N. Grayson of Brooklyn.
Miss Weiler, the daughter also of the late Henry Weiler, and her fiance plan to marry in


POSTINGS: Downtown Ecletic; Hands-Off Condo
LEAD: Hard by the Manhattan entrance to the Holland Tunnel are new headquarters for Local 28 of the Sheet Metal Workers International Association and the Community Literacy Research Project, a new outlet for a Washington art gallery and new homes for an insurance company and a jewelry manufacturer - all in one building.


Memphis Blacks Charge Calendar Slurs Dr. King
LEAD: On the eve of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, black residents of the city where he was slain are reeling over a McDonald's promotional calendar that labeled the holiday ''National Nothing Day.''


Bellevue Board Members Seek Official's Resignation
LEAD: In a bitter dispute over the creation of a program to train emergency-room doctors at Bellevue Hospital, the hospital's community board has called for the resignation of its longtime chief of medicine, Dr.
Saul J. Farber.


AIDS Scare Leaves a Supplier With a Glut of Latex Gloves
LEAD: Months after concern over the spread of the AIDS virus caused a shortage of rubber gloves, a New Britain-based medical supplier is stuck with millions of them.


Stuart Kensinger, Angela E. Webb, Exchange Vows
LEAD: Angela Ellis Webb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Gaynor Webb of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Stuart Roben Kensinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Kensinger of Houston.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.


Trade and Credits With Soviet Union Are Near
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plots That Balzac Would Have Savored
LEAD: The days before christmas were made lively to some and hideous to others by the emergence - thanks primarily to the investigations of a provincial examining magistrate with a flair for publicity - of a truly French scandal.
It ran the gamut of society from the former keeper of a dubious bar in Toulon to one of the most flamboyant trial lawyers of the day.


Man Convicted in Cow Deaths
LEAD: A Bethel man on Wednesday was convicted of cruelty to animals for letting his cows starve to death and will spend nine days in prison, a court spokeswoman said Thursday.
The man, David Townsend, 46 years old, who is now a truck driver, had farmed for 20 years before the discovery of dead and dying cows drove him out of business.


Kathleen Christian to Marry Charles Francis Morgan Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn W. Christian of Independence, Ohio, have made known the engagement of Mr.
Christian's daughter Kathleen Estelle Christian to Charles Francis Morgan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morgan of New York and Oyster Bay, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.


BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Morrow, $19.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a
struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque
separatists.
2
2
24
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom
Clancy.


A Regular Guy Goes to the White House
LEAD: GEORGE BUSH insists that nothing is going to stop him - not rain, nor sleet, nor Secret Service, nor press corps - if he decides to leave the White House and run down to the local deli to buy some bagels. ''I've got to do this,'' he says ominously.
His ''read-my-cream-cheese'' tone of voice signifies something important about the Bush


A 'Pinafore' Sails In On a Fresh Breeze
LEAD: What is the British theater coming to?
A current hit at London's National Theater dares to have Queen Elizabeth II represented on the stage.
And the New Sadler's Wells Opera production of ''H.M.S.
Pinafore'' that sails into the City Center on Tuesday features a Sir Joseph Porter done as ''a wicked takeoff of our own dear Prince of Wales,'' as the critic for the Sunday Daily Telegraph wrote.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Dec. 31  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $117,000  100 West 15th Street  470-sq.-ft. prewar co-op studio; 14-ft. ceilings, sleeping loft over kitchen; maintenance $404, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)  Madison Square Area


NETS HIT IN CLUTCH TO DEFEAT PACERS
LEAD: Roy Hinson scored 10 of his 23 points in the fourth quarter, including four free throws in the final two minutes, to lead the New Jersey Nets to a 106-97 victory tonight over the Indiana Pacers.


Man Dies as Car Hits a Midtown Work Site
LEAD: A Queens man was killed early yesterday and two other men were seriously injured when a car crashed into trucks being used by workers removing a snowflake decoration from above a midtown Manhattan intersection, a police spokesman said.


Ruth Ann Brophy Wed to Executive
LEAD: Ruth Ann Brophy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles George Brophy of Southport, Conn., was married at the Southport Congregational Church yesterday to Frederick Chorlton Mitchell 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Jr. of Newark, Del.
The Rev.
Loring Sabine Ensign performed the ceremony.


The Trials And Errors Of Boyd Jefferies
LEAD: Boyd L. Jefferies puffed nervously on a Benson &amp; Hedges cigarette while pacing the hallway of a Federal courthouse early last week.
With anxiety clouding his tanned and deeply lined face, he could not conceal his unease over the prospect of another day of vigorous questioning by Arthur L. Liman, a lawyer for the GAF


West End Risks and Rewards
LEAD: An expatriate American freind of mine who has devoted five years to voracious London theatergoing is thinking of moving home to New York.
I asked him what he would miss most about the theater in London and wasn't surprised when he failed to answer ''musicals on roller skates.'' But I was wrong to assume that he would rhapsodize about ''the classics'' or the Royal Shakespeare Company or the National Theater.


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: A resounding yes!


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Carle Place  $242,000  4 Midtown Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement, eat-in kitchen, dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,400.
Hauppauge  $190,000  22 Saturn Boulevard  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old split level; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,800.


U.S. RELINQUISHES ALABAMA PRISONS
LEAD: Alabama's state prisons are back in state hands, more than 16 years after a Federal judge cited them for ''barbarous'' and ''shocking'' treatment of inmates and 13 years after he took control of the entire system.


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; Flowers In the Desert
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHAT'S DOING IN: Katmandu
LEAD: Katmandu, capital of a kingdom closed to all but a few official foreigners until 1951, has done a lot of catching up, particularly in the last decade.
While much of the country remains medievally rural, steeped in social traditions, religious customs and even superstitions established by centuries of practice, the outside world has made inroads all over Nepal, especially in the capital.


The Anti-Patronage Mayor Finds He Has Explaining to Do
LEAD: IN 1977, Edward I. Koch, who had made a career out of battling the political bosses, met with one of the biggest of the bosses, Meade H. Esposito, the Brooklyn Demo-cratic leader, to win Mr.
Esposito's blessings in the New York mayoral primary runoff against Mario M. Cuomo.
Mr.
Koch and Mr.
Esposito agreed that Mr.


SOUND
LEAD: Henry Ford didn't believe in giving his customers much of a choice.
When he launched his famous Model A in the l920's, he thought that painting the cars in different colors was wasteful. ''They can have any color they want,'' he declared, ''as long as it's black.''


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: In Monet's Gardens TERE are few opportunites to paint what the great masters painted.
After all, most of what the great masters painted has long since departed.
But Ora Lerman, a professor of art at Suffolk Community College in Selden, recently had the opportunity to step back in time.
She spent six months painting Monet's gardens in


Frozen Pipes
LEAD: FREEZING winter weather brings with it the threat of frozen plumbing.
To minimize the risk, most household water pipes are deliberately situated away from unheated areas.


With Rival Coaches, Playbook's the Thing
LEAD: Super Bowl XXIII next Sunday showcases head coaches who, offensively speaking, are wild and crazy and fast friends.
Both are coaches who gleefuly tinker with offenses like locksmiths in a maze of doors.


Calcavecchia Leads By Two Strokes
LEAD: Mark Calcavecchia would prefer playing golf in wide-open spaces.
It better suits his game, with those gigantic drives.
He won the Honda Classic two years ago with an 8-iron shot from way out in left field to reach a green after a wild drive.


High-Tick
LEAD: MOST CENTURIES, IN ORDER TO compensate for the accumulated irregularities of measured time, the calendar skips a leap year Feb. 29.
There are watches complex enough to adjust for this.
However, at the turn of every fourth century (the year 2000 is one), the one leap year day must be reinstated, compensating for a slightly out-of-whack compensation.


TWO LIVES ON HOLD
LEAD: I can empathize with the anguish and frustration experienced by William and Joan Squadron.
My husband waited eight anxiety-ridden months for a desperately needed heart transplant, which he was lucky enough to receive last August.
He, like Joan, was running out of time, and we will be eternally grateful to an anonymous family in Cleveland, who offered John the gift of life in the midst of their grief.


Image in Film Worries Mississippians
LEAD: To many Mississippians, the first public screenings of ''Mississippi Burning'' here Friday revived painful memories of the state's violent past and raised concern that the movie would negate the progressive image the state has been trying to project nationally.


PRESIDENTS: THE POWER AND THE MEDIOCRITY
LEAD: James Bryce and Harold Laski, household names in another era - at least in certain intellectual circles - appear to have receded into that decent obscurity reserved for those whose major works, still in print, are rarely read.
In a world of thermonuclear weapons and booming new industries, of innovative and complex communications systems and news media held to be immensely influential, with vastly expanded public bureaucracies expending money in amounts once never conceived of, books published in 1888 and 1940, purporting to treat what is putatively the most powerful position in the world,


Comedian's Forte: Scenes, Not Jokes
LEAD: ON the ''Tonight'' show one night last month, the comedian Larry Miller was describing a Thanksgiving family dinner that ''starts out great, with the kids in polo shirts chasing puppy dogs through piles of leaves,'' until animosities surface.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.40
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.63
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.24
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.59
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
17.25
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


A Hazard at Home: Air Pollution
LEAD: HE person next door to you could be living in a home that is environmentally safe, but, depending on ventilation and chemical use within your household, you may be living in an environment that's hazardous to your health.


THE AMBIGUOUS YASIR ARAFAT
LEAD: Marie Colvin tells us that Yasir Arafat has ''launched a campaign to convince the world - and Washington in particular - that there is now a new, moderate, realistic P.L.O.''


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Asbestos; Cleanup Worries Tenants Renting Out Surplus Space
LEAD: TWO years after New York City began enforcing cleanup procedures for asbestos, owners of office buildings are adjusting to the financial and legal burdens, but many tenants with surplus space are finding themselves in costly predicaments.


Elizabeth Emmons to Wed Ames Colt
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Emmons 3d of South Salem, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Harley Emmons to Ames Borden Colt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard B. Colt Jr. of Little Compton, R.I.
A June wedding is planned.


The Homey Carpets Of County Cork
LEAD: IRELAND has its rains and winds; it also has some of their most effective antidotes.
Irish civilization at its best puts sufficient warmth inside the home to counter the deepest chills or damp.
The heat of a good peat fire penetrates; steaming tea and fresh wholemeal scones brace one against the elements.


Seeing Red
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Clues in African Jet Crash
LEAD: A voice recorder salvaged from the Indian Ocean has failed to explain the cause of an airliner crash in which 160 people died, officials said today.
The South African Airways Boeing 747 crashed en route to Johannesburg in November 1987.


Granato's 3d Goal Gives Rangers a Tie
LEAD: Tony Granato, a towel draped around his stiffening neck, stood in the Ranger locker room and ran a hand softly across his face, assessing the afternoon's damage.
There was a nasty gash under his right eye and a red welt covering his forehead, and his ears had the look of cauliflower.


Vermont Case May Upset Transplant Policy
LEAD: Varian D. Schmokel won her court case but died before she ever knew it.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Proposals for Punishment; The Case of the Criminal Corporation
LEAD: THE criminal justice system has never really known how to punish corporations.
If convicted of a crime, a company cannot be handcuffed and thrown into prison.
The usual answer is a fine, and in most cases the amount assessed is little more than pocket change to a big company.


Tennis
LEAD:  Navratilova Eliminates Mandlikova: Martina Navratilova advanced yesterday to the final of the New South Wales Open in Sydney, Australia.
Navratilova, a three-time winner of the tournament, scored her 25th victory in 32 matches against Hana Mandlikova, winning, 6-3, 6-2.
Catarina Lindqvist of Sweden also moved into today's final with a 5-7, 6-3, 7-6 victory over Terry Phelps of Larchmont, N.Y.(AP)


January Light: A Rosy Blush From a Distant Sun
LEAD: THERE is very little I like about winter except the light on a clear day.
Winter light on a clear day has special qualities: oblique rays and a rosy blush around the horizon.


Burlesque, Gospel and Gershwin
LEAD: FROM Baroque to burlesque, from gospel to Gershwin, from song to symphony, the Connecticut music scene has definitely returned to its pre-holiday level of activity.


CAUTION AT THE FED
LEAD: ALAN GREENSPAN, CHAIRMAN OF THE FEDERAL Reserve Board, comes quickly across the office from his big, mahogany-brown desk, and greets his visitor with a nod and a gentle handshake.
A friend of his says that Greenspan looks like Woody Allen, and there is a resemblance.
But the thick, horn-rimmed glasses are gone; Greenspan has switched to thinner frames.


SCENES FROM A SEEDY COMMUNE
LEAD:  THE WOMAN WHO WAS GOD  By Francis King.  296 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $18.95.


Easy Go
LEAD: 'A lot of money got put into people's pockets and they've rat-holed it somewhere.
Some of it is in artwork, fancy homes, fancy airplanes and Rolls-Royces.
Some of it went to Rolex watches, lizard shoes, hunting parties and yachts.' - H. Joe Selby, former chief regulator for the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas, discussing abuses in some savings and loan associations in Texas.


Another View On the AIDS Risk
LEAD: The Dec. 18 article ''Link Between AIDS and Drug Abuse Is Studied in State'' is insensitive and misleading.
It contains racist, classist and sexist overtones, and muddies important points about AIDS transmission and prevention.


First Lady Hopes for Unglamorous Legacy
LEAD: Despite ''terrible press'' over such matters as her fondness for designer gowns and expensive china, Nancy Reagan hopes that history will remember her for her efforts to solve America's social problems, the First Lady said in an interview made public today.


With Aquino Popular, the Philippine Rebels Tread Tricky Political Waters
LEAD: When the founder of the Communist New People's Army, Bernabe Buscayno, began talking about shifting to a peaceful political struggle a couple of years ago, he set off a furious debate within the top echelons of the party that still has not been resolved.


Important Chores For the Season
LEAD: WHEN studying catalogues from nurseries and seed houses, don't get lost in colorful pictures; look for unusual and challenging introductions to make this year a particularly rewarding one in horicultural expertise.
Keep bird feeders stocked with fresh supplies of their favorite seeds; provide water daily, if an outdoor heater is available so the water does not freeze.


The Drug Czar's First Battle
LEAD: The newly appointed Federal ''drug czar'' sits at his desk, putting the finishing touches on a new strategy to stop traffic in addictive substances that can threaten health and life itself.
Satisfied with his work, he leans back and lights up a cigarette.


Thriving with Turgenev
LEAD: WHILE one might wonder just what it is about ''Fathers and Sons'' that has drawn one playwright after another - all of different nationalities - to dramatizing Ivan Turgenev's 1862 Russian novel, it is clear that George F. Walker's version is the popular play of the regional theater season.


A Shifting African Mood
LEAD: The library of the American Cultural Center here is dedicated to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
At the conclusion of the African-American Institute's conference this weekend, a memorial ceremony was held at the center to honor Dr.
King.


Day of the Insider: Members of the Bush Club
LEAD: WITH the choices of James D. Watkins, a retired admiral, to be Energy Secretary, and William J. Bennett, President Reagan's former Education Secretary, to fill the job of ''drug czar'' that Congress created last year, George Bush last week put the finishing touches on his Cabinet and his group of top advisers - a close circle that is dominated by that elite group of professional operatives known as


Raises for Officials Recommended Again
LEAD: THE issue of pay raises for legislators and other top elected officials is back before the General Assembly.


Ready-Made Alibi
LEAD: Coaches are forever dreaming up excuses to account for a poor record, but Jes Hutson, the coach of the Thiel College basketball team in Greenville, Pa., outside Pittsburgh, has a ready one to explain why the Tomcats have lost 9 of their first 10 games this season: a shortage of players.
It seems that a combination of injuries, fouls and academic problems has left the


Cut Down by The Hairdresser
LEAD: ONCE I TRIED TO find a hairdresser less expensive than the one I usually use.
Calling in August, I got an appointment in late October.
My hair grew.
Ends split.
Eventually I drove the two hours from my home to Manhattan.


Frozen Pipes
LEAD: FREEZING winter weather brings with it the threat of frozen plumbing.
To minimize the risk, most household water pipes are deliberately situated away from unheated areas.


THE AMBIGUOUS YASIR ARAFAT
LEAD: In her article, Marie Colvin writes, ''After 1967, when the Arabs lost the last inch of Palestine. . . .'' Our modern definition of Palestine is derived from the British Mandate on Palestine, which defines an area including Jordan and Israel as ''Palestine.'' Although it may hardly satisfy the Arabs on the West Bank, who want an independent state, the fact remains that there is an Arab Palestine - it is called Jordan.


FUGITIVE CHILDHOODS
LEAD:  THIS BOY'S LIFE  A Memoir.
By Tobias Wolff.  288 pp.
New York:  The Atlantic Monthly Press.


College Testing Is A Hard Habit To Break
LEAD: STANDARDIZED college admissions tests have often been criticized as inaccurate and biased against women and members of minority groups.
But many critics of the tests admit that they are fighting a losing battle.


POSTINGS: New Chairman; A Problem of Perception
LEAD: On Thursday, the 93d annual dinner of the Real Estate Board of New York will be presided over by its 43d chairman.
The new year brought Burton P. Resnick to the helm of the city's largest realty trade group.
He succeeds Jerry I. Speyer and will serve a three-year term.
The biggest problem facing the board, he said, is the ''perception of the real estate industry in the eyes of the city.


Flight 103 Explosive Didn't Need Sophisticated Trigger Device; Send Bags Separately
LEAD: To the Editor:


Providence Shocked By Villanova, 76-67
LEAD: Rick Barnes, the first-year coach at Providence, took his first loss of the season the same way he did the news the Friars were ranked No. 20 last Monday, in stride.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  A SOVIET ODYSSEY.
By Suzanne Rosenberg. (Oxford University, $19.95.) As a child in the Ukraine, Suzanne Rosenberg would be awakened by the gunfire of the Russian civil war.
But she spent her formative teens in Montreal, where she was taken by her mother at the urging of their Canadian relatives.


Knicks' 3-Point Shots Hit The Spot
LEAD: It was a first-half laugher at Madison Square Garden last night.


Akiyama to Conduct New Orchestra
LEAD: AS music director of orchestras in Syracuse and Tokyo, Kazuyoshi Akiyama commutes regularly between both cities, but next weekend the man Paul Dunkel has called ''the greatest Japanese conductor in the world today'' adds Purchase to his itinerary, becoming the first guest maestro in the six-year history of Mr.


Immigrant's Daughter Takes Talent to India
LEAD: When Leela Raja was growing up in an affluent suburb of Philadelphia, her classmates thought of her Indian face and clothes not as exotic or interesting, but only as different - and that put a distance between her and them.


LIFE IN GLEIWITZ WAS NEVER NORMAL
LEAD:  EARTH AND FIRE  By Horst Bienek.
Translated by Ralph Manheim.  257 pp.
New York: Atheneum. $19.95.


A Living Definition Of Acting
LEAD: What Irish actor can boast a longer and more impressive bio than Ray McAnally?
None, surely.
He's appeared in over 250 theater productions, 150 television dramas and a score of movies.
Back home on Dublin stages, he's played Macbeth and Arthur Miller's Willy Loman and heroes and non-heroes galore.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Cesar Pelli Seeks the Perfect Skyscraper
LEAD: Cesar Pelli has struggled, perhaps more earnestly than any other commercial architect, with the problem of making a skyscraper form suitable for our time.
An architect whose initial fame came from his attempts to use glass to make patterned and colorful facades (Mr. Pelli did Museum Tower in New York and Four Leaf Towers in Houston, among others), his quest clearly has been to find a way to make buildings that are richer than the austere Mies van der


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: College football and basketball should take their cue from college baseball, about which we rarely hear news of rule-breaking.
The N.F.L. and N.B.A. should establish minor leagues.
They should recruit high schoolers and make no bones about what is already obvious.
A student could enter college to get an education, and yet not eliminate himself from the pro ranks (e.g., Ron


Staging Joyce, in His Own Words
LEAD: ON the impact of James Joyce, a writer once commented: ''He made it impossible to be unaware of word choices.'' Another said, ''I don't think there's a writer alive who's escaped his influence.''


WINTER WARMTH
LEAD: The descent of winter on the garden and the produce market colors everything green, brown and ivory.
People shopping wear looks of resignation.
They may fill their baskets with bright red tomatoes or strawberries, knowing that lively color disguises something that tastes more like styrofoam than food.


The Chill Joys of Sailboarading the Sound
LEAD: WHEN the wind is blowing over 20 knots, Wayne DeVingo, a hair stylist at Guy Sasson in Stamford, stops cutting hair and starts windsurfing.
It has been arranged with the shop that when the wind is up, Mr.
DeVingo can get out.


Moonlight on Judea
LEAD: As the bright, full early evening moon cast its glow on the Judean Desert, turning the Dead Sea beyond an unexpected pink, my reverie was broken by the sound of my stepson munching on his cucumber sandwich.
A loud ''shhhhh'' punctuated the still air.


Role Models and Robbins
LEAD:  Big Brothers' Helpers


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: The birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually today, will be observed tomorrow.
Below are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Special delivery and Express Mail only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.


Will Success Spoil the Double Cheese With Anchovies?
LEAD: There are times when Stephen J. Zelepos wonders if things have got out of hand.


THE ROOT OF ALL SPORTS: $$$$
LEAD: When that ol' devil auditor comes to mark against your name, He marks not if you won or lost but how much you banked from fame.


Selling Grain
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jennifer Conlin To Wed in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Conlin of Ann Arbor, Mich., Harbor Springs, Mich., and Red Hook, V.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne Conlin to Daniel Hirsch Rivkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Rivkin of New York and Westport, Conn.
Miss Conlin and her fiance, graduates of the University of Michigan, plan to marry in


Hanoi Aide in Beijing; Cambodia Talks Seen
LEAD: A high-ranking Vietnamese official arrived here tonight for talks apparently aimed at settling the conflict in Cambodia.


Lexanne Johnson to Marry
LEAD: Announcement has been made by the Rev. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Johnson of Philadelphia and Siasconset, Mass., of the engagement of their daughter Lexanne Johnson to Christopher Cunningham Abbott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Abbott Jr. of Manchester, Mass.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Rebel Hunters in Namibia Train for Less Violent Times as Ordinary Police
LEAD: The police counterinsurgency teams that have ruthlessly hunted down guerrillas from the South-West Africa People's Organization are being retrained for a more mundane role in anticipation of Namibia's independence.


Fellow Owners Keep Close Eye On Steinbrenner
LEAD: Usually, it's George Steinbrenner who is the scrutinizer.
He scrutinizes his manager, he scrutinizes his pitching coach, he scrutinizes his players, he scrutinizes his general manager, not to mention everyone else who works for him.
Now, however, the Yankees' owner has become the scrutinized.


Lakers Rookie's Search for Solace
LEAD: THE basketball court has long been a sanctuary for David Rivers.
Whether it is a shiny wooden floor in a famous arena, or bent rims on a glass-strewn playground, all he needs is a basketball to control the action.


Dr. Mark Lowitt Planning to Wed Dr. Nancy Ryan
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Ryan of New Canaan, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Nancy Lyn Ryan to Dr.
Mark Harris Lowitt, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Saul Lowitt of Sarasota, Fla.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Environmental Worry Over Ferry


Pitching Is More Than Statistics
LEAD: The Sports Editor:


A NATION DIVIDED
LEAD: MUBASHIR HASAN, who was Finance Minister in Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's Government during the early 1970's, was serving tea at his house in Lahore.
We were joined by the editor of an Urdu-language newspaper and a businessman, both old members of Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party, the P.P.P.
I asked what they thought of the present leader of the party and now Prime Minister, Bhutto's daughter,


Canoeing Among Alligators
LEAD: Six canoes slipped through the dark bayou waters under a full moon.
But where was the moonlight?
Not over our left shoulders, where it should have been, beaming into the narrow stream that wandered through a patch of Louisiana wetlands.
That early autumn night all celestial rays were blocked by thick clouds just blown in from the Gulf of Mexico.


THE WORLD: A Vicious Circle Keeps Latin America in Debt; Where the Burden Is Heaviest
LEAD:
*8*ARGENTINA
(in
Foreign
New
Principal
Interest
Net
millions)
debt
loans
repaid
repaid
transfer*
1970**
$5,171
907
772
338
-203
1975**
6,581
920
1,422
723
-1,225
1980
27,157
4,708
1,853
1,337
1,518
1981
35,657
8,346
1,950
2,045
4,352
1982
43,634
7,054
1,294
2,435
3,325
1983
45,925
2,833
1,364
2,417
-948
1984
48,856
802
812
3,277
-3,268
1985
49,324
3,790
1,018
4,389
-1,617
1986
49,715
2,602
2,043
3,707
-3,147
1987
56,813
3,116
695
3,775
-1,354
1988!


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; A Particular Grail
LEAD: To the Editor:


South African Writer, Though Freed, Is Gagged
LEAD: To the Editor:


SENDING PHOTOS IN A FLASH OVER TELEPHONE LINES
LEAD: When Senator Edward M. Kennedy posed with his nephew, John F. Kennedy Jr., at the podium at last summer's Democratic National Convention in Atlanta, a photographer from USA Today snapped a picture of the scene at 9:07 P.M.
Twenty-one minutes later, editors in the newspaper's home office in Roslyn, Va., had the resulting photo in hand and were preparing color separations from it for the front page of the next day's edition, which had a 10 P.M.


For Moiseyev, Change Is Afoot
LEAD: To hear Igor Moiseyev tell it, Americans still insist inexplicably on seeing the same rosy-cheeked Russian maidens they remember from his theatricalized folk dances of more than 30 years ago.
But times are not the same since the Moiseyev Dance Company from Moscow made its wildly acclaimed United States debut in 1958.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Criticizing the Critic


Fresh Herbs at Hand No Matter What the Season
LEAD: AS more companies go into the business of growing herbs hydroponically, various fresh herbs are now available all year.
A few sprigs of fresh thyme, rosemary or tarragon can be found in many produce markets, sealed in plastic.
In winter they usually cost $1.25 to $2 a package.


The Time for Cuddling Is Now
LEAD: LENNY, my 3-year-old son, cries out:


Linda Gracia Married To Bruce J. Ruzinsky
LEAD: At Congregation Brith Shalom in Bellaire, Tex., Linda Eloina Gracia, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnoldo Gracia of Houston, was married last evening to Bruce Jay Ruzinsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin H. Ruzinsky of Old Tappan, N.J.
Rabbis Andre Ungar and Shaul Osadchey, assisted by Cantor David


From a Master Scarf-Maker
LEAD: SCARFS are making a strong fashion statement this year, so an exhibition opening Tuesday at the Hermes boutique at 11 East 57th Street is a timely one.
Called ''A Scarf Is Born,'' the show will include demonstrations of scarf-making as well as a display of 100 framed scarfs chosen from the 900 designs in the company archives in


STREETSCAPES: Rhinelander Industrial School; A $1.9 Million Effort to Rectify The Alteration of an 1891 Relic
LEAD: THE typical restoration story reads like a honeymoon, with a rosy aura of press releases, civic awards and back-patting.
But the story of the Children's Aid Society's old Rhinelander Industrial School at 350 East 88th Street is more like a tale of child abuse.


Budget Battles in Co-ops and Condos
LEAD: THIS is the time of year when co-op boards of directors and condominium owners associations send out their annual budgets.
For many, the statements will carry the message of assessments and higher monthly charges, provoking another round in the long and abrasive debates among New York's resident owners that turn on the question, '


Shin Hee Chung Weds F. A. Packer 3d
LEAD: Shin Hee Chung, the daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Yohan Hun Doo Chung of Seoul, South Korea, was married in New York yesterday to Francis Avery Packer 3d, the son of Comdr. and Mrs.
Packer Jr. of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
William E. Starr, an Episcopal priest, and the bride's father, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at St.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  ROMAN ART


At Long Last, dBase IV Arrives
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation has finally completed dBASE IV version 1.0, the latest revision of the most popular data base program for personal computers.
It offers a number of improvements over dBASE III-Plus and adds features that will make it attractive to the two million dBASE users.
And beginners will find it less intimidating than previous versions.


TWO LIVES ON HOLD
LEAD: William Squadron's story of his wife's agonizing wait for a suitable heart-lung organ transplant surely emphasizes the critical need for donors (''Two Lives on Hold,'' Dec. 18).
One can only hope that thousands will respond by making the decision to become donors.
In signing up with a human-parts bank, it is also helpful for the donor to inform his physician and lawyer, as well as next-of-kin.


The Lost Voice
LEAD: AT 6 O'CLOCK ON A FRIDAY night, Dr.
Robert F. Ward waits for his last patient of the day.
She rushes into his office at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, in Manhattan, and croaks a greeting.
The patient is a singer who goes on stage in two hours - and she has laryngitis.
Dr.
Ward asks her to stick out her tongue; he grasps it with a piece of cotton gauze.


Teddy Bears On Police Beats
LEAD: AFTER hearing that a handful of other police departments in the country had found teddy bears valuable assistants on the beat, the Dade County Police in metropolitan Miami decided to recruit their own.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  EXPRESSIONISM AT YALE  The Yale Art Gallery has gleaned ''Expressionist Prints: From Nolde to Kokoschka'' from its substantial collection of German and Austrian graphics by artists working in Dresden, Munich, Berlin and Vienna from the turn of the century to the 30's.


India Studying 'Accidental' Deaths of Hindu Wives
LEAD: All over India, where Hindu wives traditionally burned on their husbands' funeral pyres, brides in recent years have been dying in their husband's homes in fires that were called ''accidents'' until women's organizations began to demand an official accounting.


Paine and Chadwick Return to Favor
LEAD: Fashion can catch us up in the excitement of the moment, lending a surge of energy to contemporary artworks.
But fashion can be cruel, too, and nowhere is it crueler than in the consignment of once-honorable, once-popular composers to oblivion.


AIDS Cases in Hartford Tripled in 1988
LEAD: The number of new AIDS cases in Hartford last year grew faster than in any other city in the state, triple over 1987, city officials said.


Daniel Barenboim Is Dismissed as Chief Of New Paris Opera
LEAD: Daniel Barenboim, the artistic and music director of the new Opera de la Bastille, was dismissed on Friday in a dispute over duties and salary.


Reviews/Dance; Isolation of Traveler and Artist in Work by Gross
LEAD: One of the most interesting aspects of the Womanworks festival at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, is the chance it offers to see in a formal proscenium setting many pieces that have been performed primarily in small loft theaters and other alternative spaces.
A case in point is the work of Sally Gross, whose dances were performed on Thursday at the


...AND THEY LIVED HEARTLESSLY EVER AFTER
LEAD:  THE NOTEBOOK  By Agota Kristof.
Translated by Alan Sheridan.  183 pp.
New York:  Grove Press. $15.95.


Bolshoi to Tour in U.S.
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet is to tour the United States in the summer of 1990 under an agreement by Classical Artists International and the James Nederlander Organization.
The itinerary will be announced later.


Lincoln Center Theater: Act II; Artistic Agenda
LEAD: To the Editor:


Resolutions: For 1989, Clean Up Long Island Sound
LEAD: AS a resident of the North Shore of Long Island, I promise in 1989 to work for the protection of Long Island Sound.
I know the water in the Sound is seriously polluted in many areas.
This pollution is from people, boats and industry.
I know that oxygen levels have been dangerously low during the past two years; that copper, P


Schubert and Schumann From Three Masters
LEAD: Schubert and Schumann have been getting a workout by some of the biggest pianistic guns in the contemporary arsenal.
The most ambitious undertaking is a two-disk excursion into the last three Schubert sonatas, the three Klavierstueck and the C minor Allegretto played by Maurizio Pollini (Deutsche Grammophon 419 229-2).


Political Notes; Hearings on Koch Patronage: a Matter of Timing
LEAD: The timing of last week's headline-making hearings into Koch administration patronage could be highly significant - and certainly intriguing.


Bush Is Urged to Give Priority To Fighting Adult Illiteracy
LEAD: Backed by Barbara Bush, a research group on education policy has urged the incoming Presidential administration to give adult illiteracy a high priority.


N.C.A.A. Rule Called Result of Self-Interest
LEAD: For the last two decades, college athletes, black athletes in particular, have been pawns in a game designed to keep intercollegiate athletics, primarily football and basketball, on a prosperous course.


He'll Take Seattle (The Rain's Good For Business)
LEAD: When Daniel Sullivan, a veteran director of New York and California theatrical productions, moved to the Pacific Northwest nearly 10 years ago he was asked at a party about his private passions. ''Do you ski?'' the guest queried Mr.
Sullivan.  ''No.'' ''Do you like to climb mountains?'' ''No.'' ''Do you own a boat?


Baton Poised at Last in New Haven
LEAD: MICHAEL PALMER'S debut as music director of the New Haven Symphony, delayed since Nov. 15 because of a musicians' strike, will be Jan. 24 in Woolsey Hall.


George Bush's New World
LEAD: Has any new President ever been dealt a stronger hand in foreign affairs than George Bush?
Consider the opportunities for progress, some of which senior officials in the new administration say they are already looking into.


Correction
LEAD: A listing of Caribbean housekeeping accommodations on Dec. 11 included an erroneous report from the Cayman Islands Tourist Board about the status of the Driftwood Village apartments on Grand Cayman Island after Hurricane Gilbert.
The resort remained open despite storm damage.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Montrealer Run Due to Resume This Year


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: The N.C.A.A., like OPEC, is a cartel, and any economist will confirm that cartel members gain a competitive advantage by cheating on their fellow members.
Since no big-time coach willingly yields or fails to pursue an edge, cheating naturally inheres in big-time college sport.
It is one more way our major universities teach their students the futility of fairness and the wisdom of greed.


A Modest Proposal On the Homeless
LEAD: This year my Christmas spirit did not make it well into the New Year.
It exploded into thousands of angry fragments on Christmas morning, when I read the article, ''Taxes Will Rise by Average of 9 Percent for Homeowners.'' To tell someone, whose tax burden is already approaching five figures, that his liability will be upped another big notch so as to pay $150-per-night hotel bills for the ''underprivileged'' is enough to create total outrage.


Flight 103 Explosive Didn't Need Sophisticated Trigger Device
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trade and Credits With Soviet Union Are Near; Everybody's Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Allendale  $339,000  87 Homewood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old Tudor; deck, brick patio, beamed ceiling in living room; taxes $4,560.
Hanover Township  $404,000  16 Forest Way  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1-year-old colonial; family room, c/a, deck, landscaped; taxes $3,721.


Urban Crime Begins to Alarm the Spaniards
LEAD: Crime in general, and street crime in Madrid and other big cities in particular, has begun to alarm residents and Government officials concerned about the country's image.


THE STEINBERG TRIAL: SCENES FROM A TRAGEDY
LEAD: AT 2 O'CLOCK, WE turn on Channel 2.
There is a close-up of a crying woman.
A man, off-camera, is saying: ''You did what?''


All-World Tour
LEAD: The way Arnold Palmer sees it, if professional golf is to continue to prosper and expand there will have to be an end to the tugs-o'-war among rival national tours, including the separate United States, European and Japanese circuits.
What is needed, he says, is the creation of one super all-world tour.


THE PLAZA SUITE
LEAD: Perhaps no hotel in the world has as remarkable a past or as controversial a future as the Plaza.
Since the architect Henry J. Hardenbergh completed the French Renaissance-style structure in 1907, it has been the spot where gray-haired dowagers demurely sip tea in the Palm Court and giggling debutantes twirl through the Grand Ballroom until dawn.


HACKER FOR HIRE: Peter Goldis; Looking for the Loopholes
LEAD: Peter Goldis spent most of mid-December in Holland, breaking into the Amsterdam computer of a major international financial services firm.
Earlier in the fall, he did the same thing at corporations in Detroit, Chicago and Los Angeles.
This month, he has an assignment in Phoenix.


BUSH AIDES PLAN REVIEW OF POLICY TOWARD RUSSIANS
LEAD: The Bush Administration is preparing for a broad review of policy toward the Soviet Union that could lead to a reassessment of American positions on the full range of East-West issues.


Harriet T. Huber Weds a Physician
LEAD: At the Reformed Church of Bronxville, N.Y., Harriet Therese Huber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank L. Huber of Fond du Lac, Wis., was married yesterday to Dr.
Thomas L. Tuttle, the son of Mrs.
Ernest Harold Tuttle of Bronxville and the late Mr.
Tuttle.
The Rev.
Richard J. Lichti performed the ceremony.


CREATED BY THEIR ENEMIES
LEAD:  THE CONSTRUCTION OF HOMOSEXUALITY  By David F. Greenberg.  635 pp.
Illinois:  The University of Chicago Press. $29.95.


MADAME AMBASSADOR AND THE BOSS'S WIFE
LEAD:  AT REAGAN'S SIDE  By Helene von Damm.
Illustrated. 341 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $18.95.


Fresh Herbs at Hand No Matter What the Season
LEAD: AS more companies go into the business of growing herbs hydroponically, various fresh herbs are now available all year.
A few sprigs of fresh thyme, rosemary or tarragon can be found in many produce markets, sealed in plastic.
In winter they usually cost $1.25 to $2 a package.


SUMMARY JUDGMENT
LEAD:  IN BROAD DAYLIGHT  By Harry N. MacLean.  342 pp.
New York:  Harper &amp; Row. $18.95


One on the Fence
LEAD: After five and a half years as the very visible United States Attorney in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani announced last week that he was leaving the job, touching off speculation that he would run for Mayor of New York.


What Do You Tell Children About Terrorism?
LEAD: THE question came directly and clearly, in that way of asking questions that only children possess.
It came at breakfast in between orange juice and oatmeal.
I should have expected it and kept a more careful watch. ''What is terrorism?'' my 6-year-old daughter asked.


A SLOW SELL FOR A TECHNOLOGY WITH A HIGH MYSTIQUE
LEAD: Until recently, electronic still photography manufacturers had been chasing after the business and professional sector because of its specialized needs and ample budgets.
Now they are turning their attention to the average consumer.


Julia W. Pierson Is Married to Michael Mombello
LEAD: Julia Welles Pierson, a daughter of Mrs.
John Jay Pierson of St.
Paul and Gulf Stream, Fla., and the late Mr.
Pierson, was married yesterday to Michael Edward Mombello, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gary Mombello of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Lampert and the Rev.
Thomas Mitchell, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.


The Neediest, in Old Age
LEAD: Medical science and improved nutrition prolong life, but don't necessarily ease the burdens of age.
Social welfare advances of recent years have greatly relieved the economic torments faced by many older Americans, but even so many elderly Americans still live in poverty.
That is why The New York Times Neediest Cases


Zaire Seeks Another Country To Offer Idi Amin New Exile
LEAD: Zaire began looking today for a home for Idi Amin, the deposed Ugandan dictator who slipped out of exile in Saudi Arabia last week and is now without a country.


Kathleen Scully to Wed J. L. Weinstock in April
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Brian J. Scully of Villanova, Pa., have made known the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Ann Scully to James L. Weinstock, the son of Mrs.
John R. Shattuck of Cumberland Foreside, Me., and Harold B. Weinstock of New York.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Independent Pay Phones on Rise LBy DAVID WINZELBERG
LEAD: LOCAL independent pay-telephone companies have reached out and touched upon a new multimillion-dollar industry, creating big changes in phone booths, while leaving many customers calling for help.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Businessman for Pentagon


CONNECTICUT Q &amp; A: Caroline A. Dinegar; 'Terrorism Is a Crime Against Humanity'
LEAD: The end of 1986 brought the reality of terrorism home to many people in Connecticut.
First, the planting of a bonmb in a Norwalk pharmaceutical company, U.S.
Surgical, allegedly by animal rights activist, indicated that terrorism can and does happen in one's backyard.
With the bombing in December of Pan American's Flight 103, in which several


Judge Faulted in Departure of Discipline-Panel Aides
LEAD: Members of the committee that disciplines lawyers in Manhattan have charged that the court that supervises it improperly forced the committee's top two staff lawyers to resign.


September Songs From Two Seasoned Stars
LEAD: Ever since Walter Huston introduced ''September Song'' in the 1938 Broadway musical ''Knickerbocker Holiday,'' Kurt Weill and Maxwell Anderson's solemn meditation on aging has marked an unofficial rite of passage for pre-rock male singers seeking certification as pop interpreters.
Of course, this great song in which an older person reflects on the follies of youth and the shortness of life should not be restricted to men.


Thompson Walks Out


The Best Books of the Year
LEAD: To the Editor:


After Two Oaths, Lowey is 'Ready to Roll'
LEAD: HER Capitol Hill office is in disarray; her computers are not programmed, and she is still in the process of hiring most of her staff.
But Nita M. Lowey, the new Representive from Westchester County's 20th District, said she was ready to take on the United States Congress.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:  HAMPTON IN MONTCLAIR  Lionel Hampton, a giant of jazz who has performed with virtually all the other jazz greats, will appear with his orchestra Saturday night in Montclair.


Soviets Say Armenian Invented Ordeal in Quake
LEAD: Tass, the Soviet press agency, said today that Aikaz Akopyan and his sister had ''apparently'' invented an account of his rescue last week after being trapped 35 days with five companions beneath the rubble of the Armenian earthquake.


The Missing Millions: Where Are They?
LEAD: The article on the increase in county taxes for 1989  [ ''Taxes Will Rise by Average of 9 Percent for Homeowners,'' Dec. 25 ]  quoted the official explanation - rising corrections and homeless requirements.
The first increase by $13.4 million, the second by $13.1 million.
But the total budget rose from $847 million in 1988 to $930 million for 1989, a jump of $83 million.


Q and A
LEAD:  Unmarried Shareholders?


32 Rescued From Freighter Off Ireland


Racing Panel Ignores Facts
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Body of Pilot in Libya Raid Is Flown Home From Rome
LEAD: After a brief, silent ceremony at Rome's military airport, the body of an American pilot downed over Libya in 1986 was put on a United States Air Force plane today for the final journey home.


Scientists Favor Opening Shoreham
LEAD: The article ''Shoreham Impasse: Suggested Solutions'' (Jan. 1, 1989) failed to include comments from people representing the views of a majority of Long Island's scientists, engineers and physicians.
Having participated with many of my colleagues in the analysis of numerous Shoreham issues, I believe that the following conclusions represent the prevailing professional opinion of this group.


Pirates Solve Problems and UConn
LEAD: Whenever Seton Hall faced a problem tonight, someone solved it.


A Tourist Lost En Route To the Screen
LEAD: ''It's no accident that the critics agree,'' says an ad on behalf of ''The Accidental Tourist,'' going on to tout the fact that the film was voted 1988's best by the New York Film Critics' Circle.
Even in the world of movie promotions, where exaggeration is a way of life, this amounts to a monumental whopper.


The Dollar Shows Its Buoyancy
LEAD: The dollar kept bouncing up despite coordinated efforts by central banks to wrestle it down.
The gains were especially strong against the West German mark.
The dollar has risen more than 3 percent against the mark this year.
On Friday, the dollar reached three-month highs, trading above 1.84 marks in Europe before falling when the central banks began selling dollars in their fourth intervention of the week.


Gleanings From Catalogues
LEAD: THE gardener's candy store is open.
Seed and nursery catalogues are arriving in the mail and the winter ritual is beginning.


Question Of the Week; Can College Sports Play By the Rules?
LEAD: As long as academically unprepared students are accepted at colleges, college will be a business - a big business!
So let's stop pretending and get rid of the myth about halls of learning.


Let's Give the Analysts A Real Big Hand
LEAD: IF you fancy yourself as an analyst, cover the East-West hands shown in the diagram and prepare for work.
If you do not, look at all four hands and prepare for an unusual challenge that is as puzzling as the Chinese carved ivory spheres with a series of concentric layers.


A Vicious Circle Keeps Latin America in Debt
LEAD: IMAGINE a family that suddenly finds it can no longer keep up payments on its $80,000 mortgage and falls $6,000 behind.


A&amp;W: Prospering By Avoiding The Big Boys A&amp;W Avoids the Big Boys
LEAD: There are lots of things that tiny A&amp;W Brands Inc. just cannot do.
It cannot hype its sales and brand awareness by getting McDonald's or Burger King to serve its root beer; a contract with the A&amp;W restaurant chain prohibits the soft drink maker from selling to any other fountain operation.


Q and A
LEAD:  Mexican Trains


IT'S YOUR MOVE, CHARLEMAGNE
LEAD:  THE EIGHT  By Katherine Neville.  550 pp. New York:  Ballantine Books. $18.95.


State's Skiing Booms as Vermont's Lags
LEAD: CONNECTICUT ski resorts are collectively off to one of their best starts ever, largely because of an early-season dearth of natural snow in Vermont, a colder-than-normal December, relatively cheaper lift tickets and continuing expansion.


Jackson Calls Reagan Woeful on Civil Rights
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today condemned Ronald Reagan's record on civil rights and said the President had failed to meet black leaders in his years in the White House, according to an interview broadcast today.


Take It Easy! You're Going on Vacation
LEAD: A VACATION is - or should be - a time of relaxation, a time to put aside the daily routine and avoid petty annoyances.
In short, a time to escape from stress.
But vacation travel is fraught with situations that bring on stress: getting stuck in traffic on the way to the airport, waiting in line to check in, sitting on the runway wondering when the plane will take off, arriving at a hotel only to be told you have no reservation.


Franchise Brokers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Catherine Amdur Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Allen Amdur of Allenhurst, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Richardson Amdur, to Scot McCauley Small, a son of Karna Small of Washington and Francis M. Small Jr. of Aptos, Calif.
The couple plan to marry in September.


Lawyer's Words Cause Shock
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Trip Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor: I would like to warn Times readers about the amounts paid to a traveler who buys trip cancellation insurance.
The round-trip fare to Milan, for example, varies from as little as $400 to a high of about $660.
T.W.A. advertises round trip to Rome, which is farther, at $546.
These are restricted fares and are nonrefundable, noncancelable.


DATA UPDATE: January 15, 1989
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Nov. 88
Oct. 88
Nov. 87
New York
3,473
4,492
4,215
New Jersey
2,751
3,810
4,161
Connecticut
1,241
1,512
1,918
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Richard Goode
LEAD: The pianist Richard Goode will play works by Beethoven, Schubert, Chopin and Debussy at Alice Tully Hall today at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $17.50.
Information: 874-6770.


Review/Theater; The Fleshpots of Dublin, In 'Ulysses in Nighttown'
LEAD: If evocative language were the cornerstone of compelling drama, ''Ulysses in Nighttown,'' Marjorie Barkentin's dramatization of the Walpurgisnacht episode from Joyce's ''Ulysses'' might qualify as a modern classic.
Faithful to the letter of Joyce's prose, the play - a mosaic of scenes connected by a narrator - follows Leopold Bloom and Stephen Dedalus on a June evening in 1904 into the fleshpots of


Danbury Medal Maker Celebrates New Presidents
LEAD: Donald A. Schwartz, the president of the Medallic Art Company, was fidgeting.
With just days left before Inauguration Day, everything in his production room was at a virtual standstill while workers were taking inventory.


Surgery for Manning
LEAD: A year ago he was on his way to leading his Univerity of Kansas team to the national championship and being voted the college player of the year.
Yesterday, Danny Manning, the No. 1 draft pick in the National Basketball Association last summer, underwent reconstructive knee surgery in Inglewood, Calif., and will be in rehabilitation for up to a year.


Origins of Imperial Line
LEAD: To the Editor:


One on the Run
LEAD: This family fraud made the Medicaid mills of the 1970's look like small potatoes.
Sheldon Weinberg and his sons, Jay and Ronald, were sentenced to prison last week for stealing $16 million over seven years; essentially, they billed Medicaid for twice as much service as they actually provided to poor patients at the Brooklyn clinics they owned.


Who George Bush Is, And Is Not
LEAD: When Mr.
Bush moves into the Oval Office, he will put aside the isolated majesty that Mr.
Reagan brought to the Presidency and slip into something more comfortable.


FUGITIVE CHILDHOODS
LEAD:  LOST IN TRANSLATION  A Life in a New Language  By Eva Hoffman.  280 pp.
New York:  E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


In Election Year, Tax Rises at Issue
LEAD: REAL-ESTATE taxes have increased dramatically in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, and the extent of the rise not only has become a political issue but also is likely to be contentious through the local elections this year.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: She won two gold medals at the 1988 Olympics and now Jackie Joyner-Kersee has her sights set on a world record.
She will try to break the indoor mark for the 55-meter hurdles at the Panasonic Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden Feb. 3. . . .
James (The Heat) Kinchen and Chris Tiozzo of France will fight a 10-round super-middleweight bout in Paris March 10 under the aegis of the Houston Boxing Association.


Child-Care Resource: Au Pair Program
LEAD: The Dec. 18 article ''Nannies Are Striving to Upgrade Status'' was informative, underscoring the importance of having qualified caregivers in the home.
However, the article overlooked a resource that addresses the child-care needs of the family and is affordable and legal.


Canoe Trip Leads to a River's Adoption
LEAD: ONE spring morning last year, Bob Walters decided to commute between Pleasantville and Yonkers by canoe instead of by car.
For the environmental leader, the choice of a route less traveled - the Saw Mill River - and his successful navigation of it, ''made all the difference,'' as the poet Robert Frost once observed about such decisions.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the Theater View column on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today appears with a sentence omitted.
The sentence should have read, ''An old poster behind a refreshment stand at the Royal Shakespeare's present London base reawakened my memory of Mr.
Hall's restoration of another Broadway failure, Edward Albee's 'All Over,' with Peggy Ashcroft and Angela Lansbury, at the Aldwych Theater in 1972.


Four on the Outside
LEAD: Carlos and Bermaida Fajardo, who struggled for years to get to the United States from Cuba - he arrived in 1984, she in 1986 - find themselves outside the land of opportunity again.
Mr. and Mrs.
Fajardo, who live in Miami, wanted their two children to have a white Christmas, so they drove north to see snow - all the way to Niagara Falls.


FICTION
LEAD: RICOCHET.
By Ovid Demaris. (Scribners, $17.95.) Frank Conti is not your average bank loan officer.
True, he does have an M.B.A., an upscale wife and a nice house in the suburbs, but he also has a very heavy enemy in Tony Allio, leader of the Atlantic City mob, who has hated him since they were in high school together in south Philadelphia.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  ANOTHER LOOK AT CALLAS  Twenty-six years ago George Jellinek, the noted musicologist and host of WQXR's nationally syndicated program The Vocal Scene, wrote a book about Maria Callas titled ''Callas: Portrait of a Prima Donna.''


St. John's Rallies to Upset Syracuse
LEAD: In only 1 minute 12 seconds yesterday, the physical difference between St.
John's and Syracuse was drastically reduced.


THE REGION: The State's Rates; In Massachusetts, It's the Drivers' Turn
LEAD: ONLY in Massachusetts and Texas are automobile insurance rates set by state government.
In Massachusetts, the public control was meant to reduce differences in premiums between cities and suburbs, but the result has been a continuing wrangle over rates between the state and insurance companies.


3 Goals Don't Do the Trick
LEAD: Coach Al Arbour did a slow burn tonight behind the Islander bench in the first period, the one that wound up costing his team the game.


THE BOGSAT METHOD
LEAD: Helene von Damm's description of how Ronald Reagan formed his Cabinet read like a Doonesbury comic strip (''Out of the Kitchen, Into the Cabinet,'' Nov. 27).
In my headhunter days, we called it the Bogsat method - a Bunch of Guys Seated Around a Table, peddling those they knew best to the leader of the free world.


A Return to the Wooden Bridge
LEAD: A New 60-foot bridge in Middletown represents a step back in time, both in technology and price, but transportation planners hope that it also offers a glimpse of the future.


Andrid's Revenge
LEAD: WITNESS A WORD with its meaning being stretched.


Giving to Neediest to Honor Many Who Cared
LEAD: To honor the late Edward Torpey, superintendent for the buildings at 1604 and 1606 First Avenue in Manhattan, the landlord and tenants sent a gift of $200 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Maine Rabbi's Specialty Is Helping Counselors
LEAD: When a Protestant minister in Maine became overwhelmed by personal problems, he sought help not from a psychiatrist but from a rabbi.


What Hirohito Meant to a Boy of 5 Whose Father Went to War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stefanie Block Wed To Evan Jared Reed
LEAD: Stefanie Pam Block, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Jay Block of Miami, was married there last evening to Evan Jared Reed, a son of Heidi A. Hyman of Danbury, Conn., and Boca Raton, Fla., and Ary Reed of Bethel, Conn.
Rabbi Herbert M. Baumgard performed the ceremony at the Kings Bay Country Club.


Shortchanging Internees
LEAD: When President Reagan signed the authorization for reparations payments to 60,000 Japanese-Americans last Aug. 10, he said that ''no payment can make up for those lost years'' when the Government held them in internment camps during World War II.
Next year's budget provides virtually that - no payment.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Madison
LEAD: WHEN Mary Scranton was born in 1872, family homesteads along Route 1, Madison's Main Street, extended for almost a mile, down to Long Island Sound. ''Each house had a farmyard and access to the water for fishing,'' said her daughter, Charlotte Evarts, the town historian. ''Everybody had to be self-sufficient.


Why History Will Honor Mr. Reagan
LEAD: As a new President comes into office, it is commonplace to express hope for the future.
But even a cynic would have to acknowledge an extraordinary combination of events, at the end of the Reagan Administration, that offer the world more hope for peace and freedom than at any time in decades.
It is crucial that we understand how we reached this point.


A Moderately Priced Newcomer
LEAD: IT looks as though Danbury and Stamford are racing to see which city can open the most restaurants in the shortest space of time.
Every time diners turn around, a new restaurant has emerged.
For quality at moderate prices, however, the edge at this moment would go to Danbury.


WHAT MADE HIM A HERO
LEAD:  EDWARD R. MURROW  An American Original.
By Joseph E. Persico.
Illustrated. 562 pp.
New York:  McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. $24.95.


'Famous for 15 Minutes'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elizabeth C. Pille to Marry William Georges in April
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Eugenie Compton French of Hamden, Conn., of the engagement of her daughter, Elizabeth Compton Pille, to William Theodore Georges, the son of Theodore William Georges of Colts Neck, N.J., and the late Rhoda Brounstein Georges.
An April wedding is planned.


Moscow Chief Who Fought Party Seeking to Run for Soviet Congress
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the maverick populist who has won a huge following by waging political war within the Soviet leadership, today offered to quit his high-ranking job in the Construction Ministry to accept a popular draft as candidate for a new National Congress of Deputies.


INDUSTRY HOPING FOR AN ENCORE OF '88
LEAD: The baby boom generation embraced the marine industry last year as never before.
Industry officials say the union produced record sales and a period unmatched in boating history.


A WAKE IN CHARLOTTE
LEAD:  THE ANNA PAPERS  By Ellen Gilchrist.  277 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95.


Is Bush Prepared to Imagine the Future?
LEAD: NOT since Dwight D. Eisenhower has an incoming President had more foreign policy experience than George Bush.
As chief United States representative at the United Nations, as American liaison officer in Beijing, as Director of Central Intelligence and finally as Vice President, he has served a long, varied and testing apprenticeship.


Just a 'Watchword'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Getting Used to the Far Side of 50
LEAD: AS I watch the plumbing in my 35-year-old house get rusty and I realize I'm getting the same way, I wonder what the future holds for me.
At 50-plus (where did the time go?), when I squander my energies on a cleaning spree or on preparing fancy meals for 10, I find myself footsore, short-winded, exhausted.


Flight Delays
LEAD: To the Editor: In her ''Abroad but Aground'' (Practical Traveler, Nov. 6) Betsy Wade defines the flight delay problem well but does not point out that the most common example is not the long international flight but rather the everyday short-haul domestic flight.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Making It in Hartford as a Homesteader
LEAD: WHEN the Rev.
Julio Colon, a pastor at Hartford's Christian Pentecostal Church, took a second job as a state prison chaplain, his increased income cost him his Federal subsidy on his apartment and his rent soared from $476 to $966.
Such increases are applied to hasten the turnover of apartments to needier families.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Branford, Conn.  $275,000  21 Wilford Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old frame house; Long Island Sound views, cobblestone fireplace, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,373.
Guilford, Conn.  $193,500  98 Valley Shore Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old raised ranch; lake rights, finished basement, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,861.


Sampling New Terrain At Vail
LEAD: FOR a quarter of a century Vail has been one of America's big-league ski resorts.
Now Vail is twice the area it was a year ago.
That's not just a figure of speech.
Vail this season has opened the China Bowl Expansion, a shorthand reference to the opening of four bowls (large, deep expanses of terrain mostly free of trees) on the back of the mountain - China, Teacup, Siberia and Mongolia - all made accessible by two new lifts.


Outdoor Trips for the Active
LEAD: Adventure travel is not for watchers but for doers.
For some travelers, simply leaving the tour bus behind and striking out on an independent itinerary is adventure enough.
For others, the destination is the adventure - China before it had Western-style tourist facilities certainly qualified, but fewer travelers would categorize it that way today.


A JACKPOT IS STOPPED
LEAD: Pro golfers can make as much money as corporate sponsors are willing to put up in prizes.
That has been the theme of the PGA Tour under Commissioner Deane Beman: money, money, money.


Tne Courage of Dr. King: Challenging The Legacies of Other Black Leaders
LEAD: WHEN references are made to the courage of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. we may think of his willingness to challenge the system of segregation or his denunciation of our Government's involvement in the Vietnam War or his determination to continue his nonviolent protests despite persistent death threats, or all of these.


Review/Music; Two Composers' Odes to St. Cecilia
LEAD: Music becomes a little self-conscious when called upon to describe itself, whether in Mozart's ''Impresario'' and the whole tribe of parody operas about how funny opera supposedly is or in the family of rhapsodies and apostrophes to which the odes to St.
Cecilia by Purcell and Handel belong.
The two most substantial of those composers' Cecilian offerings - Purcell's ''Hail, Bright Cecilia'' of 1692, with words by Nicholas Brady, and Handel's 1739 ode to verses by Dryden - were sung by Musica Sacra under Richard Westenburg, with an orchestra of period instruments, at Alice Tully Hall


Ms. Bingham Plans to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel D. Bingham of New York and Argyle, N.Y., of the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Ann Bingham to Jeffrey R. Perry, a son of Beverly Perry of New York and the late Jay H. Perry.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Laura A. Zavatto to Marry
LEAD: Laura Anne Zavatto and Paul D. Dewsnap, the son of Frank E. Dewsnap of Boston and the late Anne C. Dewsnap, plan to marry in September, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Zavatto of Shelter Island, L.I., have announced.
Ms.
Zavatto, a graduate of Adelphi University and Teachers College of Columbia Univesity, is a physical education teacher at the Hewitt School in New York.


Multiple Transplants Put Off
LEAD: Doctors at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh have stopped performing multiple-organ abdominal transplants until they can find a better way of keeping the body from rejecting the organs.


Professional-izing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Outdoors; Guide to Fishing in Faraway Places
LEAD: Since late last fall, I have been sliding certain brochures and letters into a manila folder which bears the legend ''faraway places.''


Man Held in Student's Slaying
LEAD: A Brooklyn youth was arrested yesterday and charged in the inadvertent shooting death of an 18-year-old Brooklyn College student in a McDonald's restaurant in the Flatbush section, the police said.
They said the gunman had been aiming at another person.


Dede Desrochers to Marry Bradford McLane in April
LEAD: Dorothy M. Desrochers, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Desrochers of Baltimore, and Bradford L. McLane, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. McLane of New Canaan, Conn., plan to marry in April.





DATA BANK: January 15, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,009.4
$3,988.4
$3,831.1
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.0
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
169.1
$162.7
$149.5


Ms. Freeman, an Engineer, Is Engaged to Peter Roth
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey I. Freeman of New York of the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Brooke Freeman to Peter Robert Roth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Roth of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Transactions
LEAD:  FRIDAY  Baseball


On a Vacation
LEAD: VACATIONS, I've found, serve two purposes.
They let us shed the woes and cares we've been carrying with us for months.
They give us a chance to point ourselves in a new direction.


Making a Subtle Difference
LEAD: On Friday night, the San Francisco 49ers' special teams got together for a Gutbuster Dinner.
The entertainment for the 25 players and their wives and dates was a video of the special-teams season, the good parts and the funny.
Lynn Stiles, the special-teams coach, picked up the check.


Seoul Planning '89 Surplus Cut
LEAD: South Korea plans to cut its trade surplus with the United States by $2 billion in 1989 to help ease pressure from Washington to revalue the won, economic planning officials said last week.


Metro Matters; A Little Tin Box With Feerick As Its Pandora
LEAD:  Q. Whereabouts at home in the house did you keep this money that you had saved?
A.
In the safe.
Q.
But a little box in a big safe?
A.
In a big box in a big safe.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 15,1989:  MONDAY  Cent and South West Corp  Republic Gypsum Co  Southern Co  TUESDAY  Centerior Energy Corp  Honeywell Inc  ICM PPTY Invs Inc  Security Pac Corp  Smucker JM co  Southern Ind Gas &amp; Elec Co  TECO Energy Inc


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 'Kids of Summer'
LEAD: Looking beyond the cold winter days toward June are Good Housekeeping and Sesame Street Magazine's ''Parents Guide.'' Together, they are preparing a special section called ''Kids of Summer,'' a 48-page section scheduled to appear in both magazines in June.
The YMCA plans to distribute some 250,000 reprints of the issue to its 1,200 branches across the nation.


Review/Television; 'Big Bird in Japan'
LEAD: Looking for new programming directions, the Children's Television Workshop has fallen back once more on the good graces of Big Bird.
Several years ago there was the special called ''Big Bird in China,'' produced, directed and written by Jon Stone.
Tonight at 8 on Channel 21 and tomorrow at 7 P.M. on Channel 13 there is ''Big Bird in Japan,'' written and directed by Mr.


Six Traders Suspended
LEAD: The Chicago Board of Trade has fined and suspended six traders linked to a scheme in which a colleague of theirs had donned a wig and used fake identification to gain access to privileged information.


Indications Look Better for Bonds
LEAD: Credit market conditions could well stabilize or perhaps even improve a bit more during the next few weeks, buttressed by strong technical factors and interest rates that hover close to or above 9 percent across the maturity spectrum.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Goya Foods Inc. to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, with a budget in the $3 million to $5 million range.


Review/Music; The Classical, Back and (Next Time) Forth
LEAD: The Classical Quartet, which generally plays music from the Mozart-Haydn era suggested by its name, is branching out somewhat this season.
Saturday evening at St.
Michael's Church (Amsterdam Avenue and 99th Street), the group investigated Baroque territory already familiar to most period-instrument players - including, no doubt, this foursome, since all are active with other early-music ensembles.


Knicks Get Set For Road
LEAD: During a wait at an airport earlier this season, Rick Pitino got into a discussion over whether the Knicks might win 50 games this season, a number that appears within their reach.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Trotsky is no longer the evil spirit of Russian history.
He's simply a political leader who held rather unacceptable views in many ways.''  - Adam B. Ulam, professor of government at Harvard, on emerging new views of Leon Trotsky.  [ A3:4. ]


Chinese Prison Emphasizes Rehabilitation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Robert Lekachman Is Dead at 68; Teacher and Writer of Economics
LEAD: Robert Lekachman, a teacher of economics whose maverick views often set him apart from mainstream economists, died of cancer of the liver Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old.


New Yorkers Are Still Willing to Help the Blind; Worse in London
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steve Jones Wins Playoff With a Birdie
LEAD: Steve Jones, given a reprieve when Paul Azinger bogeyed the final hole, sank a 4-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole today to win the 30th annual Bob Hope-Chrysler Classic and remain the only winner on the 1989 PGA Tour.
This victory in a three-way playoff against Azinger and the Scot, Sandy Lyle, came a week after Jones won the MONY Tournament of Champions at La Costa Country Club in Carlsbad,


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  International Report





As the Big Day Approaches, the Band Prepares


Plessey Seeks to End G.E.C. Venture
LEAD: Plessey P.L.C., a British electronics group, said today that it had begun efforts to win control of a $3.2 billion telecommunications unit it owns jointly with the General Electric Company of Britain.


Economic Collapse and Noriega Rule Producing Hopelessness in Panama
LEAD: In a country whose bedrock was the unshakable conviction that tomorrow could only be better, hopelessness has grown until it now appears to define the national mood.


A Latin AIDS Meeting Opens Its Ears to What Was Once Unmentionable
LEAD: When experts gathered here recently for a widely publicized conference on AIDS in Latin America, they used words and notions about people's sex lives that must have startled the more conservative corners of the continent.


Deep Cut Is Reported In Soviet-Cuba Trade
LEAD: The Soviet Union reduced its trade with Cuba by 12 percent in the first quarter of 1988, according to documents of the Cuban National Bank made available here.


Bengals Try A Different Approach DTLrrMIAMI, Jan. 15 -
LEAD: Determined that the Bengals will neither wilt nor freeze up in Super Bowl XXIII, as their Bengal predecessors did seven years ago, Coach Sam Wyche put them through a 1-hour-45-minute practice in the 78-degree weather soon after they arrived today from Cincinnati.


CFM Sells 49.5% Stake
LEAD: CFM Associates, the limited partnership that publishes Corporate Finance magazine said last week that it had sold a 49.5 percent stake to Verlagsruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck G.m.b.H., one of West Germany's largest publishing companies.
Terms were not disclosed.
Holtzbrinck, based in Stuttgart, publishes Handelsblatt, a daily business newspaper, and Wertschaftswoche, a business weekly.


Nippon Phone Releasing Data
LEAD: Japan's dominant phone company, under pressure from the Government, said Friday that it would disclose market information that would help its new long-distance competitors plan their strategies.
The Nippon Telegraph and


Tax Watch; Asbestos Work: Deductible or Not?
LEAD: IN the next few years American businesses will face significant costs for removing asbestos from plants and office buildings, and a key question will be whether those costs can be treated like repairs and deducted for tax purposes immediately or whether they must be capitalized.


Research Hints at Link Between Patient's Attitude and Progress of AIDS
LEAD: Tentative evidence suggests that the mental attitudes of AIDS patients may affect the progress of their disease, scientists from five research institutions reported today.


Snowboarding for Beginners
LEAD: Lowell Hart, head of snowboarding instruction at Stowe, Vt., and Suzi Rueck, supervisor of snowboarding at Stratton, Vt., offer these suggestions for getting started.


Yonkers Blaze Kills 7 People Inside a House
LEAD: Seven people were killed and eight others were injured here early today when a fire swept through a boarding house on the bluffs overlooking the Hudson River.


At the Top: Economic Policy
LEAD:  ALAN GREENSPAN: Chairman, Federal Reserve Board  Could be the spoiler . . .
A solid Republican with ties to Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Baker going back to the Ford Administration when Mr.
Greenspan was the President's resident economist . . . 62 years old . . .
Born and reared in New York . . .
Graduated from New York University with highest honors .


A Nation Kicks a Habit
LEAD: The 1989 Surgeon General's report calls it ''phenomenal,'' and it surely is.
Nearly half of all living adults who ever smoked have quit.
In doing so they have kicked a habit responsible for more than one out of every six American deaths.
Surgeon General C. Everett Koop warns, however, that progress has to continue and accelerate or the health impact of smoking will remain into the 21st century.


Reporter's Notebook; An Angler in Paradise, All That and No More
LEAD: Fishing report, Friday, Jan. 13: The Vice President caught a 13-pound bonefish, using 8-pound line with spin-casting gear.


Micheline Keating, Novelist, 85
LEAD: Micheline Keating, a novelist and reporter, died Friday in a nursing home in Tucson, Ariz.
She was believed to be about 85 years old.


SUPER BOWL: Sports of The Times; Back to Miami 'Super' Theater
LEAD: IN the days before Super Bowl V in Miami, Duane Thomas, then a rookie running back who had not yet decided to distance himself from the news media, was sitting on the grass at Fort Lauderdale Stadium where the Dallas Cowboys were practicing.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-7  Yasir Arafat's wing of the P.L.O. has not planned or carried out any guerrilla acts in more than two months, the Israeli Army Chief of Staff has disclosed, drawing criticism from Prime Minister Shamir.
Page A1


Speech Teachers and Class in Basics Vanishing From Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


James Davidson, 48, Founder of Bus Service
LEAD: James A. Davidson, the founder and board chairman of the Hampton Jitney, a bus service between eastern Long Island and Manhattan, died of complications from AIDS yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old and had homes in Water Mill, L.I., and Cocoanut Grove, Fla.


Changes in Libya Embargo
LEAD: The Reagan Administration is likely to allow five American oil companies to resume doing business in Libya, U.S. officials said.
Page A7.


New Princeton/Newport Indictment Seen
LEAD: Additional charges will be brought against the top officers of a defunct New Jersey investment partnership who were indicted last summer on charges of engaging in a racketeering conspiracy, lawyers in the case said yesterday.


Dr. King Is Honored on His 60th Birthday


Reviews/Music; Aki Takahashi, Pianist
LEAD: Composers of the world seem to have found each other in the last generation, and their elaborate efforts to homogenize once-distant cultures, to find meeting grounds for once-irreconcilable music styles, are ending up in programs like Aki Takahashi's piano recital at the Asia Society late Saturday afternoon.


College Basketball; Pitt Overpowers Oklahoma
LEAD: Maybe Pitt should stick with top 10 opponents.
Just ask the Oklahoma coach, Billy Tubbs.


Turkish Economy at a Turning Point
LEAD: As 1988 drew to a close, Turkey's Prime Minister Turgut Ozal received an unusual, and unwelcome, package in the mail: Five men from the western city of Denizli had sent him the belts to their trousers.


Study Faults New York City's Public-School Health Project for Adolescents
LEAD: A four-year-old Health Department program to provide adolescents in New York City public schools with medical counseling and referrals to doctors is plagued with staff shortages and other problems and should be refocused into schools of greatest need, a private study has found.


Boston Co. Net Is Overstated
LEAD: The Boston Company's profits for the first three quarters of 1988 were overstated by $30 million, more than twice as high as preliminary estimates, officials with the investment firm said.
Shearson Lehman Hutton


Koch Disputed On a Benefit To Developer
LEAD: City Council members, civic leaders and lawyers who represent poor New Yorkers yesterday challenged the Koch administration's assertion that there had been public disclosure and debate over a change in city law that benefited the developer Harry Macklowe.


New Yorkers Are Still Willing to Help the Blind
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPUTER DEPICTS THOUGHT PROCESS
LEAD: Scientists at Johns Hopkins University, using electrodes connected to a monkey's brain, say they have produced a computer image of the brain as it thinks.


Reagan Says Ending Abortion Will Mean U.S. Is 'Civilized'
LEAD: President Reagan said in a television interview broadcast today that he does not believe the United States will be ''completely civilized'' until it stops abortion.


Grocery Clerk Is Killed After Row Over Money
LEAD: A Manhattan store clerk was shot and killed early yesterday, apparently after he argued with a customer over money, the police said.


Sports World Specials; Grateful on the Bench
LEAD: Sometimes David King catches himself sulking on the end of the Boston University bench.
Those are the times King reminds himself just how good he has it.
Those are the times King remembers that he's young, he's a member of a major college basketball team and he's receiving a free college education.


The Poor People's Campaign of 1989
LEAD: ''Many white Americans of good will have never connected bigotry with economic exploitation.
They have deplored prejudice but tolerated or ignored economic injustice.
But the Negro knows that these two evils have a malignant kinship.''


SUPER BOWL: Rice Overcomes Pain; Bengals Turn Tables; Their Receivers Are Paid to Hit
LEAD: ''IT'S amazing,'' said the hard-driving coach of the Bengals' receivers, Bruce Coslet, ''what a player will do for $5.''


Chief Named by Texaco For Canadian Oil Unit
LEAD: Philip J. Cram will be carrying the flag of Texaco Inc. in Canada after the oil company sells its 78 percent interest in Texaco Canada Inc.


Sports World Specials; Dream Management
LEAD: There have been fantasy camps where those who dream of playing major league baseball can rub elbows with real former major leaguers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Lowe Marschalk's Spot For Regina Vinegar
LEAD: Skinny women waltzing down a fashion-show runway clad in lettuce and potato salad may not be the average viewer's idea of a classy commercial, but sophistication was what Lowe Marschalk had in mind when it created its first-ever television spot for Regina Wine Vinegar.
Andrew Langer, the agency's creative director, said the model was its campaign for Grey Poupon mustard, like Regina, an RJR Nabisco brand.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Has an athlete ever played in both the World Series and the Super Bowl during his career?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; D.M.B.&amp;B. Purchase
LEAD: D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has acquired the Connecticut Consulting Group, a 10-year-old marketing planning and promotion services company in Wilton, Conn.
Terms were not disclosed.
D.M.B.&amp; B. said it planned to merge the firm into Ted Colangelo Associates, its Greenwich, Conn.-based subsidiary specializing in marketing and corporate communications, including sales promotion, package design and direct marketing.


Revere Copper Products
LEAD: Revere Copper Products Inc. has been purchased by an internal management group led by M. Brian O'Shaughnessy, the company's president, in a $61 million transaction.
The purchase includes the Rome plant, which employs 550 people, as well as Revere Copper Products' plant in New Bedford, Mass., where 180 people work, Mr.


Angst and Anger in Bonn; U.S. Disclosures on Libyan Chemical Plant Raise Hackles and Questions About NATO
LEAD: In the two weeks since West German companies were accused of helping to outfit a suspect chemical plant in Libya, West German officials have gone from a petulant defensiveness to the surprising admission that they knew all about it long before the Americans told them of their concerns.


Record Debt Downgrading
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said Friday that it had downgraded more United States corporate debt in 1988 than in any other year, in part because of the impact of huge leveraged buyouts and acquisitions.


Preparing for the Big Game


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None


Bush Enlists Economic Agnostics Who Share Belief in What Works
LEAD: President-elect George Bush's economic policy appointees are ideological agnostics who call themselves results-oriented, and they are.
But Mr.
Bush has yet to present them with a detailed map for reaching his goal of budget reduction and continued prosperity.


Reviews/Music; New Piano Music and Old
LEAD: Although Sarah Rothenberg's piano recital at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday night was a conscious effort to blend new music with old, attention and curiosity turned naturally to the former.
Bruce Adolphe's ''. . .
And Time Future Contained in Time Past . . .'' is a piece made whole by its scrupulous and intelligent economy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; A Season the Networks Would Rather Not Repeat
LEAD: FIVE months after Hollywood returned to work at the end of a paralyzing strike against producers by the Writers Guild of America, the three networks are assessing the costs and the consequences of the strike - particularly its impact on viewer habits and on revenue.


Review/Dance; Woetzel and Hlinka in a Balanchine Pas de Deux
LEAD: The New York City Ballet is offering a cascade of debuts this season.
On Saturday afternoon, Damian Woetzel, one of the company's most promising young male dancers, was seen for the first time in George Balanchine's ''Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux'' at the New York State Theater.


Rights Advocate Maintains Police Beat Him in a 'Sting' He Arranged
LEAD: A civil rights advocate, who arranged a sting operation to prove local police harass blacks, said today that an officer beat him and pushed his head through a window in a routine traffic stop.


Perestroika Enters Finland, a Bit Bumpily
LEAD: Perestroika has rippled through Finland, the Western nation with the longest and most extensive trading relationship with the Soviet Union, causing almost as much turmoil and uncertainty in board rooms and government offices as the restructuring has brought on the other side of the border.


Soviet Militiamen Are Posing As Afghans, Insurgents Say
LEAD: Guerrilla organizations fighting the Kabul Government say that Moscow has sent Soviet militiamen with Afghan identity cards into several Afghan provinces recently.


Engine Fire Forces Jet to Land
LEAD: An American Airlines jet bound for Dallas with 91 people aboard returned to Baltimore-Washington International Airport shortly after takeoff today when an engine caught fire.
An airline spokeswoman said a part on the left engine of the McDonnell-Douglas MD80, Flight 201, apparently came loose and a compressor stalled, prompting the pilot to shut the engine.


Chinese Prison Emphasizes Rehabilitation; Release Wei Jingsheng
LEAD: To the Editor:


ARAFAT'S FACTION IS SAID TO AVOID GUERRILLA ACTIONS
LEAD: The army Chief of Staff, Lieut.
Gen.
Dan Shomron, has told a parliamentary committee that Yasir Arafat's wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization has not planned or carried out any guerrilla acts in more than two months.


SUPER BOWL: Rice Overcomes Pain; Bengals Turn Tables
LEAD: THREE months later, the reminders are still being transmitted from Jerry Rice's left ankle.
Rice's season goes on, longer than any of his three previous years with the San Francisco 49ers.
His contribution has met the personal standards that his record-setting 1987 season established.


Connecticut's Chickens, Home to Roost
LEAD: Connecticut is looking for $882 million in state spending cuts and tax increases to close next year's prospective budget deficit.
That's close to 15 percent of its budget - a big gap for any government.
State officials like to blame the difficulty of predicting revenues, particularly in the wake of Federal tax reform.


Complicated Task of Writing Blurbs
LEAD: Paperback publishers rely heavily on freelancers to write the copy for the covers of paperback books. ''Some are aspiring writers, some moonlight while they work as editorial assistants in publishing houses, but some do it full time,'' said Natalee Rosenstein, the Berkley Publishing Group's executive copy chief, who herself started as a freelance copy writer.


Brazil Acts To Fight Inflation
LEAD: The Brazilian Government announced an indefinite freeze today on prices and wages and a devaluation of about 17 percent as part of a new anti-inflation plan.


15,000 Foes of Sandinistas March in Nicaragua
LEAD: A crowd of 15,000 chanting, cheering protesters marched through Managua today to dramatize their grievances against the Nicaraguan Government in the broadest collection of opposition groups since the Sandinista Front took power in 1979.


ON YOUR OWN: Fitness; An Everyday Exercise In Remaining Young
LEAD: THE distance down Highway 513 from Joe Lizzi's driveway to the crossroads at the United Methodist Church and back in this tiny community in rural Hunterdon County is 4.6 miles.
Lizzi, who is 60 years old, has measured it carefully.


In New York, Parents Lack Say in Schools
LEAD: When New York City's elementary and junior high schools were given greater autonomy 19 years ago, parents were supposed to gain direct control over their children's schooling through the local school boards that took over much of the central administration's responsibility.


Soviet Aide Ends Kabul Visit, Signaling Pullout By Feb. 15
LEAD: As a two-day visit to Kabul by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, ended today, there were clear indications that all Soviet troops would be out of the country by Feb. 15 despite continuing fighting between guerrillas and Afghan Government forces around the capital.


A Day Off Is Not the Dream, Disciple of King Says
LEAD: From a Manhattan pulpit where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. often preached his vision of a nation free of prejudice and violence, a disciple of the slain civil rights leader warned yesterday that the dream ''is at risk of being derailed'' by well-meaning but misguided people.


The Royal Shakespeare Thinks Busy And Better
LEAD: The Royal Shakespeare Company has announced plans for its biggest Shakespeare year ever, with a schedule that is to include productions of 14 of Shakespeare's plays and a new policy intended to attract more leading actors by offering shorter contracts.


Media General Sells a Unit
LEAD: Media General Inc. has completed the sale of its broadcast services division, which buys radio and television time for advertisers, to a group led by senior management of the unit, the managers said Thursday.


Sylvia Meagher, 67, Former Health Official
LEAD: Sylvia Meagher, a writer and retired senior liaison officer of the World Health Organization at the United Nations, died of complications from the flu Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Shifts Studied For Financial Regulators
LEAD: The Treasury Department is considering whether to abolish the Federal Home Loan Bank Board as part of a sweeping overhaul of financial services regulation in the Bush administration, a top banking regulator said last week.


The Talk Of the Connecticut Legislature; A Dry Spell in Hartford Amid Tokens of Plenty
LEAD: Officially, it's called ''The Travelator.'' Unofficially, it's ''The Ogle-eer,'' 250 feet of mechanized moving sidewalk named for a Connecticut state official, David B. Ogle, who envisioned legislators and lobbyists gliding smoothly through the newly expanded state-capitol complex and said, why not.


Critic's Notebook; The Casino as a Movie Setting and Metaphor
LEAD: Casinos are delivering payoffs in three recent buddy movies.
In ''Dirty Rotten Scoundrels,'' Michael Caine and Steve Martin compete for the fortune of a reputed soap heiress, Glenne Headly, at a Riviera roulette table.
In ''Things Change,'' Joe Mantegna, a Mafia underling, takes Don Ameche on an outing to Atlantic City, where the old fellow is allowed to make a seeming killing before the mob boss decides to really kill him.


Surprise Star Among the Bells
LEAD: At the time of the breakup of the Bell System, few would have picked Cincinnati Bell Inc. to emerge as a star performer.
But it has done just that.


At Least 110 Die in Bangladesh Train Collision


Big East; Thompson's Protest Intensifies Debate
LEAD: When Georgetown's coach, John Thompson, walked off the court Saturday night before a game with Boston College, he added another dimension to the increasingly complex debate over Proposal 42.


Lincoln Upset by Hayes
LEAD: Cardinal Hayes High School of the Bronx upset Lincoln of Brooklyn yesterday, 77-75, in the second game of the Martin Luther King Classic at St.
Francis College in Brooklyn.
Lincoln's defeat was its first of the season by a New York City school.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Key Goal Of Four A's: Friends
LEAD: JOHN E. O'TOOLE'S office at the American Association of Advertising Agencies in New York is a picture of calm.
Only two weeks on the job, and already the paintings are hung and the thick stack of welcoming letters are out of sight and almost answered.
The scene comforts, as might be expected from the copywriter who once wrote, ''To make sales, advertising has to make friends.


Denver Program Curbs Teen-Agers' Pregnancy
LEAD: Each week about a dozen teen-age girls, some with babies in their arms, come to La Mariposa Health Station here to pick up $7 each, a dollar a day for not becoming pregnant again.


Award to Architects
LEAD: Cesar Pelli &amp; Associates, a Connecticut architectural firm, is to receive the 1989 Architectural Firm Award from the American Institute of Architects in May at its National Convention in St.
Louis, the institute has announced.
The award is given annually to a firm that ''has consistently produced distinguished architecture for at least 10 years.


Martin Luther King Day
LEAD:  NEW YORK  Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Special delivery and Express Mail only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Sanitation: Regular collections.
No street cleanings.
Schools: Closed.


Prague Police Crush Rally for a 1960's Martyr
LEAD: Policemen used riot sticks, dogs and water cannon today to crush a rally commemorating the death 20 years ago of a student who set himself afire to protest the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia.


Major Hispanic Museum Lies Low and Likes It
LEAD: In a city teeming with vibrant cultural institutions, the Hispanic Society of America has chosen to go its own anachronistic way.
A magnificent cache of Spanish art and literature far from the busy museum-gallery scene of mid-Manhattan, it draws only 10,000 visitors a year, and its administration likes it that way.


Trade Arbitration Plan
LEAD: The European Community has given a cool response to a proposal made by a group of United States Congressmen to set up a bilateral panel to arbitrate trade disputes between the United States and the community.
A spokesman for the European Community's External Relations Commissioner, Frans Andriessen, said Friday that the community was more interested in strengthening the procedures of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva-based international trade body.


Ski Wear Goes Solar
LEAD: Solar energy is used to heat some houses, and now the same technology is being used to produce warmth in ski wear.


NatWest Halting Role In Treasury Securities
LEAD: A United States subsidiary of National Westminster Bank P.L.C. will end operations as a primary dealer of United States Treasury securities, the bank announced Friday, a little more than three months after the unit had gained approval to be a dealer from the Federal Reserve Board.


Cathay's Fate Is Tied to Hong Kong
LEAD: Decades ago this crossroads in the Orient made a fortune for a handful of shipowners.
Now Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd. is betting billions of dollars in new planes that the territory will do the same for an airline.


Man Sought in 7 Sex Attacks in Subways
LEAD: A slightly built young man who apparently has detailed knowledge of New York City's subway system and its cars may be responsible for at least seven sexual attacks since September, the Transit Police said yesterday.


Diet Coke's Ad Gives Super Bowl a New Look
LEAD: Introducing a new dimension to the cola wars, the Coca-Cola Company has been distributing 20 million 3-D glasses to retailers all over the country, including Walgreen, CVS and other chains in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


Helping to Sell a Book by Its Cover
LEAD: The cover conference at Berkley Books was under way for only a few minutes when someone raised the question: Should the cover on the paperback edition of the suspense novel ''Smoke and Mirrors'' actually depict a mirror?


King William Journal; Last Stand Nears for Tiny Indian Tribe's Identity
LEAD: For many tribal members, being a Pamunkey Indian these days is as much a state of mind as anything.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Dispute Over Building Ban  City Council members challenged Mayor Koch's account of public disclosure of a change in a law that benefited a developer.
Page B1.  7 Die in Yonkers Fire  In the city's worst fire in years, seven people were killed and eight injured when flames swept through a boarding house.


Work Station Market To Get Its First Clones
LEAD: A Colorado start-up company backed by a Japanese electronics giant will introduce on Monday a line of computers it says is fully compatible with a popular work station sold by Sun Microsystems Inc., the leader in the engineering work station business.


Sports World Specials; Can't Count on Figures
LEAD: The man who compiled these statistics doesn't put much faith in his own figures.
But for the record, attendance at college football games declined a bit last season, providing further evidence that the proliferation of televised games may be keeping some fans at home on fall Saturdays.


Truth About Auto Insurance
LEAD: Like their counterparts in California, New Jersey drivers are fed up with soaring auto insurance bills and won't let state officials rest until they've done something about it.
Even so, Governor Kean's latest proposal to placate angry drivers is a non-starter, at best puckish and at worst irresponsible.


Myth of Amazon Rubber Seeds Debunked
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Foote, Cone Produces 'Sunkist K.I.D.S.'
LEAD: Sunkist Growers Inc. will next month introduce ads in Sports Illustrated for Kids magazine heralding its new television series for children on ESPN, ''The Sunkist K.I.D.S.'' Left unstated in the advertisements, which are scheduled to appear throughout 1989 in the new Time Inc. publication, is that they are by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding.


Reagan Raising a Possibility Of Pardoning Patricia Hearst
LEAD: President Reagan raised the possibility today that before he leaves office Friday he would pardon Patricia Hearst Shaw, the newspaper heir, for her conviction in a 1974 bank robbery.


Shanghai Journal; At the Cutting Edge of China's New Journalism
LEAD: In a country where the boundaries of debate are real but ill-defined, a weekly newspaper here is renowned as perhaps the best surveyor of the changing frontiers of intellectual tolerance in China today.


Carol Levinson Is Bride Of H. Richmond Fisher
LEAD: Carol Levinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Lowenthal of Phoenix, was married there yesterday to H. Richmond Fisher, a son of Ann T. Fisher of Marblehead, Mass., and the late Capt.
Benjamin H. Fisher, U.S.N.R.
Judge Alice Wright of the Phoenix Municipal Court performed the ceremony at the Phoenix Country


At Least 70 Die as 2 Trains Collide in Bangladesh
LEAD: An express train carrying pilgrims to a Muslim festival crashed head-on into a mail train near here today, killing at least 110 people in Bangladesh's worst railroad accident, officials said.


Bridge
LEAD: Two players who have won five national titles between them, Warren Rosner and Ron Gerard of White Plains, captured the Superflighted Pairs title at the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., Saturday.


Morris Klein Married To Naomi S. Freeman
LEAD: Naomi Sue Freeman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Freeman of Millburn, N.J., and Morris Klein, the son of Mae Klein of Pittsburgh and the late Abraham Klein, were married yesterday at the Small Jewish Museum in Washington by Rabbi Max Ticktin.


BOMB PLANT FLAWS KNOWN TO DU PONT AND U.S. FOR YEARS
LEAD: Energy Department managers in South Carolina and the operator of the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant there were intimately aware of critical structural flaws and deficiencies in management and maintenance years before three reactors were shut down for safety.


For Roundabout, Changes at the Top
LEAD: The Roundabout Theater Company will announce today the appointment of Todd Haimes as its producing director, effective at the end of the 1989-90 season.
Mr.
Haimes, who is 32 years old, has been the company's managing director since 1983.


Review/Television; AIDS and Hemophilia
LEAD: Once again prime-time television entertainment is approaching the subject of AIDS through the case of a hemophiliac youth infected through a transfusion of tainted blood.
The vast majority of AIDS patients are homosexuals and drug addicts, but television apparently is not ready to explore these groups with any degree of compassion.


Inmates Find Ways to Lock Anger Inside
LEAD: For the last six weeks, 15 prison inmates have assembled daily in a classroom here to consider the harm they have caused others, including the strangers they have assaulted, robbed or raped and the family members they have abused, stigmatized or left abandoned.


New Yorkers Are Still Willing to Help the Blind; Discrimination at State
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Broker's Big Role In Chase Medical
LEAD: WHAT happens when more than 100 percent of the publicly owned shares of a company are held by customers of one brokerage house?


Plan to End Busing in Boston Runs Into Black Opposition
LEAD: All four black members of the Boston School Committee oppose a plan to end 15 years of court-ordered school busing, saying the plan will not work unless the city commits more money to it.


The New Trotsky: No Longer a Devil
LEAD: As they continue exposing Stalin's repressions and trying to correct the many distortions of official history, historians and journalists here have begun to sketch a clearer picture of a complex figure whose role in setting up Soviet power was blotted out for 60 years: Leon Trotsky.


Miami Diagrams Its Big Play
LEAD: SHORTLY after arriving in Miami this week, each of the 90,000 visitors expected for Super Bowl XXIII at Joe Robbie Stadium next Sunday will receive an original piece of artwork: the medium is crayon, the artists nearly 100,000 students in the Dade County elementary school system.


Opera Plan Falls Apart in France With Dismissal of Artistic Director
LEAD: One of the most ambitious postwar plans for opera on an international level has exploded with the ouster of Daniel Barenboim as artistic director of the new Bastille Opera of Paris.


TV Notes
LEAD:  'Phantom' Mini-Series For years, Arthur Kopit wanted to write a musical based on the Gaston Leroux novel ''The Phantom of the Opera.'' The playwright had even collaborated on an adaptation with Maury Yeston, a composer with whom he had created the Broadway musical ''Nine.''


Books of The Times; Shaping the Reality of AIDS Through Language
LEAD:  AIDS and Its Metaphors  By Susan Sontag  95 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95.


New Specialist Sees A Big Board Openness
LEAD: A subsidiary of the ABD Securities Corporation has become a specialist on the New York Stock Exchange - a rarity for a foreign-owned firm.


Sculptor and Patron Clash Over Piece
LEAD: A sculpture depicting a contemporary creche of a homeless family huddled on a steam grate is the centerpiece of a legal battle over whether the creator or the patron of a commissioned work of art owns the copyright for it, and thus sometimes lucrative licensing and reproduction rights.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Tennis  Leconte Is Upset: Hard-serving Jan Gunnarsson of Sweden upset sixth-seeded Henri Leconte of France, 6-4, 6-3, 6-2, Monday in the first round of the Australian Open at Melbourne.
Gunnarsson needed only 87 minutes to eliminate Leconte from the first Grand Slam event of the year.
Tobias Svantesson of Sweden took No.


Neediest-Cases Donors Say Gifts Are Late but Still Timely
LEAD: With the Christmas rush over, Alfred Chappy Morris of Manhattan sent his annual contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, saying, ''I know it is never too late to help those in need.'' He donated $250.


SENATORS EXAMINE BAKER ON TUESDAY
LEAD: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, meeting on Tuesday to consider the nomination of James A. Baker 3d as Secretary of State, is preparing an examination dominated by questions on changes under way in the Soviet Union, according to a committee briefing paper.


Sharpton and 5 Other People Arrested at a Sit-In in Hotel
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton and five other protesters were arrested last night after they staged a sit-in at the Helmsley Palace Hotel, a police spokesman said.


Tired of Cooling Their Heels, the Republicans Turn Up the Heat
LEAD: After 34 years out of power, a stint of minority status unbroken since cars had fins, Republicans in the House of Representatives have had it.
In the face of a muscular Democratic majority of 259-to-174, signs of a new Republican scrappiness abound.


A Winter Stoop Day


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market.
The regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, normally held on Mondays, will take place tomorrow.
The Treasury cash market is closed today for the observance of Martin Luther King Day.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Jan Bell Marketing Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a supplier of jewelry and other products to wholesale membership clubs and other retailers, named Lee A. Mills to the newly established post of executive vice president-corporate planning and general counsel.


U.S. May Ease Curbs on Oil Companies in Libya
LEAD: President Reagan is expected this week to lift some prohibitions on American oil companies doing business in Libya to prevent theirlosing their assets in the country, Administration officials said today.


Review/Theater; Macho Memories
LEAD: ''Guys like to fight - it's like petting but it's hard and very fast,'' observes John O'Keefe in ''Shimmer,'' a rivetingly kinetic solo performance piece in which he remembers his troubled adolescence in Iowa in the mid-1950's.


Poland's Party to Meet; Solidarity Will Be a Topic
LEAD: The Polish Communist Party begins a two-day conference on Monday that may lead to renewed contacts between the Government and the banned Solidarity trade union.


Taking On the Slopes (Sideways)
LEAD: TWO years ago, a skier riding sideways on a single, wide snub-nosed ski was a rare sight.
Most conventional skiers dismissed it as a fad.
Today, between 200,000 and 250,000 people are climbing onto snowboards and swiveling downhill, according to the North American Snowboard Association, the sport's governing body.


Caesars Ruling for Trump
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission has given the developer Donald J. Trump permission to buy more shares of Caesars World Inc. stock.


Stop the Todeskramer
LEAD: What did they know and when did they know it?
This question about an official ''cover-up'' of illegal acts, familiar to America's Watergate fans, is now being asked by a belatedly aroused free press in West Germany.


Outdoors: Pursuit of Cottontail Leads to Lessons of Childhood
LEAD: THE cottontail rabbit is the most sought-after small-game animal in this country.


Miss Swartz, Lawyer, Weds Dr. Peter G. Hill
LEAD: The wedding of Barbara Jill Swartz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Swartz of Teaneck, N.J., to Dr.
Peter Gary Hill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Hill of Rego Park, Queens, took place yesterday at the Tammy Brook Country Club in Cresskill, N.J.
Rabbi Bernard Cohen performed the ceremony.


The Biggest Wheel
LEAD: In Milltown, N.J., in 1940, Edward W. Bradley was chosen by his eighth-grade teacher to deliver Special Delivery letters around town for the local postmaster.
The only requirements were to get a bicycle and to report to the Post Office every morning at 6:30 sharp.
Mr.
Bradley recalled delivering hundreds of letters, receiving about 8 cents for each of them.


A Minority of None
LEAD: For most of the last eight years, said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, ''there has been no bipartisanship'' in any area of foreign policy from strategic planning to state dinners.
He said ''Democrats are almost never invited'' to the dinners, ''which was not the case in the past.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Earle Palmer Brown
LEAD: The Earle Palmer Brown Companies of Bethesda, Md., has agreed to acquire Ensslin &amp; Hall, an agency in Tampa, Fla., that has $20 million in billings and 27 employees.
No terms were disclosed.
The acquisition raises E.P.B.'s total billings past $300 million annually.
Ensslin &amp; Hall's major clients include GTE Mobilnet and The St.


Markets Open Today
LEAD: Banks and Government offices will be closed Monday to observe Martin Luther King Day.
The stock markets will be open, and there will be foreign exchange trading.


Crime Victims Fought Back
LEAD: Almost three-quarters of the victims of violent crimes who survived to tell about it say they made some effort to protect themselves, and most believe their resistance was worthwhile, a Federal survey shows.


Burke and Devils Blank Oilers
LEAD: With Sean Burke playing brilliantly in goal, the Devils handed the Edmonton Oilers a 1-0 defeat today at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Rangers Come Back On 5 Goals
LEAD: For the Rangers, silliness seemed the order of the day.


A Tough Sale for Knight-Ridder's TV Stations
LEAD: Just a decade ago, media companies especially wanted to own network-affiliated television stations.
The seemingly inevitable increases in advertiser spending, predictable cash flows and loyal audiences made owning a network affiliate a sure-fire investment.


Retail Group Loses Leader
LEAD: Edward S. Finkelstein, chairman and chief executive of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, abruptly resigned last week as chairman of the National Retail Merchants Association just before the group began its annual convention in New York.


French Leaders Act to Ease Damage of Insider Scandals
LEAD: As a storm of insider trading allegations, some of them touching French Finance Ministry officials, continued to grow in intensity, President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Michel Rocard moved last week to try to contain the damage to their Government.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Echo or Tocsin?
LEAD: When Joseph I. Lieberman beat Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in Connecticut's Senate elections, Republican reaction in Washington was generally sanguine.
Mr.
Weicker, a very liberal Republican who was sometimes bellicose in advocating his positions, had been a thorn in the side of the Reagan Administration.


International Research &amp; Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Research &amp; Development Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,479,080
5,578,858
Net inc
1,250,821
867,250
Share earns
.23
.16
Yr rev
23,685,225
19,145,006
Net inc
3,554,449
1,902,747
Share earns
.65
.35


Six in OPEC Have 70% of Oil
LEAD: Six members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries now have 70.5 percent of the world's proven oil reserves, the Middle East Economic Survey reported today.


Grain and Soybean Prices Tumble
LEAD: Grain and soybean prices plunged yesterday, despite Government crop reports detailing sharply lower harvests caused by the drought last summer and the Soviet Union's announcement that its grain harvest had come up short as well.


National Semiconductor To Cut Work Force 5%
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation said today that it would reduce its worldwide work force by approximately 2,000, or about 5 percent of the total of 39,000.
In connection with this action, National said it would record a one-time restructuring charge in the third quarter of its 1989 fiscal year.


First Citizens Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,566,000
5,709,000
Per share
.57
.58
Yr net inc
21,197,000
25,135,000
Per share
2.19
2.57


Cuomo May Juggle Auto Fees to Aid Budget
LEAD: To raise quick cash to pare the state's budget deficit, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is expected to propose that some motorists be required this year to register their automobiles for two years rather than one.


Carson of Jets Among Coaching Candidates for Browns
LEAD: Bud Carson, the Jets' defensive coordinator, emerged today as one of four finalists for the Cleveland Browns' head-coaching job.


G.O.P. ROLE GROWS IN NORTH CAROLINA
LEAD: Liston B. Ramsey, a New Deal Democrat from deep in the Appalachian Mountains, accumulated political power the old-fashioned way, but has lost it in the state's new two-party politics.


Omaha's Housing Chief Strives to Lead the Way to Better Lives
LEAD: When Jack F. Kemp was chosen to be the next Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, he promised a war against poverty, but many people say that war has already begun right here.


FASHION: Patterns; Risks and Hard Work
LEAD: Pacing the new optimistic mood in the fashion industry is the Limited, a trendy specialty retailer that has reported solid sales increases since November.
After a dismal period, from the end of 1987 through fall 1988, when sales were sluggish and earnings were down for three consecutive quarters, the company reported reassuring sales gains of 14 percent in November and 28 percent in December.


Langer Biomechanics Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Langer Biomechanics Group Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
3,593,000
2,817,000
Net inc
252,000
b90,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
9,690,000
8,958,000
Net inc
235,000
210,000
Share earns
.09
.08


Brazil Warns About Debt
LEAD: Finance Minister Mailson Ferreira da Nobrega said today that Brazil might again suspend interest payments on its foreign debt if its foreign reserves fell to a critical level.


Jordan Gets Honor
LEAD: For leading the Chicago Bulls to victories and averaging 39 points, Michael Jordan was named as N.B.A.
Player of the Week yesterday.(AP)


NBD Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
61,518,000
49,685,000
Per share
1.29
1.08
Yr net inc
227,156,000
162,229,000
Per share
4.85
3.47
NBD said its 1987 net was reduced by $32.4 million, or 69 cents per share, as the result of a special $54 million provision for possible credit losses on Latin American loans.


Sexual Response Is Studied in Rats
LEAD: SEXUAL climax in both male and female laboratory rats can be produced by stimulation of a particular area of the urethra, scientists at Northwestern University Medical School have discovered.


WORK IS FALTERING ON U.S. REPOSITORY FOR ATOMIC WASTE
LEAD: For the first time since the development of atomic weapons, Government bomb makers are trying to build a nuclear project under civilian safety rules, and they are faltering badly.


Jersey in Uproar Over Fees at Counties' Garbage Transfer Stations
LEAD: One year after New Jersey closed two regional landfills and forced six counties to ship their garbage out of state, disposal costs have doubled and tripled, and charges of price gouging, windfall profits and illegal monopolies are flying.


Designating the Driver
LEAD: It's not clear to what extent television molds social behavior.
But on the assumption that it does, the Harvard Alcohol Project and the television industry have been trying to combat drunken driving by promoting the designated driver concept.
Both partners deserve credit for the effort.


Funny Meant Money at the Movies in 1988
LEAD: Comedy was king in 1988, winning the top six places at the United States and Canadian box offices in a record-breaking year for Hollywood.
Since nobody wants to break up a winning hand, the movies scheduled for this year will be heavy on comedy as well.


Rice Is Questionable After Injuring Ankle
LEAD: Jerry Rice, generally regarded as the top receiver in the National Football League, suffered an injury to his right ankle in today's 49ers' practice and was listed as only 50-50 to be able to play in Super Bowl XXIII on Sunday.


SOVIETS' HARVEST WORST IN 3 YEARS
LEAD: The Soviet Union's grain harvest last year fell 40 million tons short of the target of 235 million tons, according to preliminary estimates, a Soviet offical said today.


Bank of Granite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Granite Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,343,000
1,184,000
Per share
.45
.39
Yr net inc
5,104,000
4,549,000
Per share
1.70
1.52


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IMC Fertilizer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
310,800,000
253,400,000
Net inc
37,000,000
b28,700,000
Share earns
1.40
1.01
6mo sales
579,400,000
479,800,000
Net inc
68,500,000
b55,800,000
Share earns
2.66
1.84


Spearhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spearhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,302,000
8,845,000
Net inc
372,000
501,000
Share earns
.08
.10
6mo sales
18,554,000
18,187,000
Net inc
688,000
1,469,000
Share earns
.14
.29


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,900,000
1,800,000
Per share
.48
.46
Yr net inc
8,500,000
8,100,000
Per share
2.12
2.01


A Tough Decision: Quitting Talent Bank Post
LEAD: Disillusioned as she was after two years in the New York City government, Nydia Padilla-Barham nonetheless found it difficult to quit her $32,000-a-year job as director of the Mayor's Talent Bank.


Personal Computers: New Fax Machines: Getting More for Less
LEAD: THE fax (short for facsimile) allows users to send and receive exact copies of documents anywhere in the world, or just across town, in minutes for much less than the cost of overnight mail.


Cuomo Delays Esplanade Plan For the Hudson
LEAD: Citing delays by New York City, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today suspended planning on an esplanade to run along the old West Side Highway, but said that planning on the replacement road would continue.


Some Burmese Student Protesters Disappear While in Army Custody
LEAD: Some student demonstrators have disappeared or died in custody since the Burmese Army suppressed demonstrations for democracy on Sept. 18, while the army has forced thousands of people to serve as porters and ''human minesweepers'' in battles against ethnic insurgents, diplomats and Burmese say.


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q.Why do flocks of birds fly up and wheel in the sky before landing on trees around sunset?
A.They may be leaving an avian ''cocktail party'' or arranging themselves into groups for the night, ornithologists suggest.


Creative Computer Applicaions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Creative Computer Applicaions Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
681,203
874,328
Net loss
72,210
102,937


Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Research Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,214,000
5,506,000
Net inc
169,700
215,800
Share earns
.11
.13


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Intensive Care (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,711,587
10,589,036
Net inc
2,482,480
1,481,781
Share earns
.26
.18
Shares outst
9,506,196
7,508,077
Share earnings results have been adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split paid in August 1987.


Secom General reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Secom General
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,817,072
1,811,158
Net inc
88,058
b178,786
b-Net loss


Bengals Hope Defense Will Stay Offensive
LEAD: They are more noted for shouting ''Woo!
Woo!'' and rotating their hips as part of the Ickey Shuffle, than for stopping passes.
On a team that leads the league in scoring and yardage, who notices if the secondary plays well?
Or poorly?
It takes an average of more than 28 points a game to beat the Bengals' offense, which has six of the eight Cincinnati players who are going to the Pro Bowl.


First Federal of Western Pennsylvania reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Western Pennsylvania
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
435,000
345,000
Per share
.33
.26
Yr net inc
1,799,000
1,212,000
Per share
1.36
-
The prior year per share earnings was not available because the company converted to stock form in mid- 1987.


Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,466,013
7,131,233
Net inc
958,045
b908,144
Share earns
.15
.16
Shares outst
6,457,893
5,707,198
b-After a tax credit of $326,500.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''He lived a hero's life.
He dreamed a hero's dreams.
And he left a hero's indelible mark on the mind and imagination of a great nation.''  - George Bush, on Martin Luther King Jr.  [ A1:3. ]


Commercial International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial International
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
18,826,031
18,382,629
Net inc
182,496
b58,479
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
32,790,686
34,097,650
Net loss
395,516
c67,624
b-Net loss  c-Included a gain of $148,000 from an accounting change.


Damon Agrees To Nomad Bid
LEAD: The Damon Corporation ended its seven-month struggle for independence today and agreed to be acquired by Nomad Partners L.P. in a deal valuing the chemical laboratory company at more than $250 million.
Under the agreement, Damon's shareholders will receive $26 a share in cash and 50 percent of the proceeds from the sale of Damon's 61 percent stake in Damon Biotech


New York Police Checking For Lieutenants' Test Fraud
LEAD: The New York City Police Department is investigating allegations of impropriety and cheating by a small number of officers during a recent examination for promotion to lieutenant, police spokesmen said yesterday.


Slamming The Door
LEAD: No doubt some sports fans will condemn John Thompson, Georgetown University's basketball coach, for walking out of a game to protest a new rule that slams the door on college opportunity for underprivileged athletes.


Gain in Apparel but Lag In Durables Sales Seen
LEAD: Predictions that 1989 will see an improvement in apparel sales but a slowdown in sales of big-ticket household durables opened the annual convention of the National Retail Merchants Association yesterday at the New York Hilton and Sheraton Center hotels in New York.


Sterling Capital Corp reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Capital Corp (AMEX)
As of Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
17,511,889
16,242,731
Per share
7.01
6.50
Assets represent net assets, and net assets and assets per share are after a dividend of 23 cents, to be paid Jan. 18 to shareholders of record Dec.


Science Watch: Tank-Destroying Robot
LEAD: Researchers at the Sandia National Laboratories have developed a robot that, under remote control, can spot and destroy enemy vehicles, including tanks.
But in doing so, it destroys itself.


Cellcom Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cellcom Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,771,552
11,442,599
Net loss
b5,935,892
1,254,414
Shares outst
29,872,708
25,870,000
b-Included a loss of $371,086 from discontinued operations.


In Heartbeat, Predictability Is Worse Than Chaos
LEAD: A perfectly regular heartbeat is more likely to presage sudden death than good health, scientists reported at a symposium here.


Analysts International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysts International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
21,559,000
17,052,000
Net inc
1,031,000
735,000
Share earns
.28
.20
6mo rev
41,733,000
33,175,000
Net inc
2,111,000
1,438,000
Share earns
.58
.40


CK Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CK Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
675,387
473,073
Per share
.54
.46
The company's quarterly earnings reflected its purchase of First State Savings and Loan Association of Gastonia, S.C. on Oct.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-19  The Soviet grain harvest fell short of its target last year by 40 million tons, making it the worst harvest in three years, according to preliminary estimates, a Soviet offical said.
Page A1


Weldotron reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weldotron (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,970,000
9,022,000
Net loss
336,000
135,000
9mo sales
29,820,000
27,161,000
Net loss
532,000
104,000


Computer Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Research Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,391,610
2,357,080
Net inc
99,870
103,607
Share earns
.03
.03


Chase Manhattan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Manhattan Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
275,000,000
154,000,000
Per share
2.93
1.66
Yr net inc
1,059,000,000
b895,000,000
Per share
11.55
-
b-Net loss  The latest fourth quarter and full year earnings included $217 million after taxes of cash collections of interest payments received on medium- and long-term cross-border extensions of credit to borrowers in


Family Violence: Protection Improves but Not Prevention
LEAD: Police and court protection for victims of family violence in the New York City metropolitan region has improved sharply in the last five years, social workers and law-enforcement officials say, but most counties still lack comprehensive and coordinated programs to prevent the abuse and help the victims.


Associated Natural Gas Corp reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Natural Gas Corp (OTC)
12mo Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
188,892,144
-
Net loss
66,043
-
The company went public on Sept. 29, 1988.


Grand Met Picks 2 to Head Burger King
LEAD: Choosing its own executives to head the Burger King Corporation, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. today named Barry J. Gibbons as chief executive and Ian A. Martin as chairman of the troubled restaurant chain, effective immediately.


Pennview Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennview Savings Assn (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
202,000
255,000
Per share
.41
.52
The company said its first quarter income decrease was primarily due to an accounting change which resulted in the deferral of $85,000 of loan fee income.


Quirk of Geography Turns Town to Homeless Capital
LEAD: First there was the village of Elmsford, circa 1910.
Then came the highways, three of them, criss-crossing its single square mile.
Then they built the motels, five of them, providing roadside rest for the weary traveler.


Nigeria Opens To Investment
LEAD: Wide areas of Nigeria's manufacturing industry are being opened to full foreign ownership, the nation's President, Maj.
Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, announced this weekend.
The country's Enterprises


Old Kent Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
21,662,000
18,539,000
Per share
.83
.71
Yr net inc
77,114,000
71,033,000
Per share
2.95
2.76
The prior year figures restated to reflect the acquisition of Unibancorp Inc.


At the Top: Foreign Policy
LEAD:  ROBERT M. GATES: Deputy National Security Adviser  A 45-year-old Kansan who has spent two decades at Central Intelligence Agency, where he is deputy director . . .
Georgetown University Ph.D. in Russian and Soviet history . . .
Served at National Security Council . . .
At C.I.A., did not have a direct hand in covert operations or clandestine intelligence-gathering .


Broader CBS Ad Campaign
LEAD: Languishing in third place among the television networks, CBS is about to send its advertising to a new frontier: consumer magazines.
Next month the network begins ''program specific'' advertising in New York magazine, Vanity Fair, Esquire, New York Woman and L.A.
Style, as well as in several advertising and broadcast trade journals.


Rangers Hit the Road Fueled by Big Rally
LEAD: The locker room felt electrically charged, although the sensation had nothing to do with the television wires and radio microphones that snaked across the floor.


British Sales Decline
LEAD: Britain's retail sales fell by a tenth of a percent in December from November, the Government reported today.
Retail sales had fallen six-tenths of a percent in November.
But retail sales were up 5.2 percent on a year-to-year basis in December, the Department of Trade and Industry said.


Mitsubishi Metal
LEAD: The Mitsubishi Metal Corporation said it would build a $250 million copper smelter in Texas City.
The plant will employ about 250 people and generate an estimated $5 million annual payroll, the company said.
The plant is expected to be in full operation in 1991 and will produce about 150,000 metric tons of copper a year.


Food Concerns Cut High Fats
LEAD: Phil Sokolof, a multimillionaire who has campaigned against the use of coconut and palm oil in processed foods, announced yesterday that five major food companies had said they would stop using the highly saturated fats.
Mr.
Sokolof said General


Shamrock to Acquire Sound Warehouse
LEAD: In a move to expand its foothold in the fast-growing music and video retail business, Shamrock Holdings Inc. said today that it had agreed to buy Dallas-based Sound Warehouse Inc. for $25.65 a share, or $132.5 million.


TRey Wilson, 40, Dies; A Stage and Film Actor
LEAD: Trey Wilson, a stage and film actor, died yesterday at New York Hospital after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage.
He was 40 years old and lived in New York.


Octel Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Octel Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,435,000
11,247,000
Net inc
2,852,000
b2,798,000
Share earns
.19
.15
6mo rev
38,396,000
19,146,000
Net inc
5,470,000
b2,520,000
Share earns
.37
.21


Merciless Texas Justice
LEAD: One reason Texas leads the nation in executions is the peculiar way Texas law makes it hard for juries to grant mercy.
The case of a convicted rape-murderer, Johnny Penry, argued before the Supreme Court last week, exposes the law's unfairness and forces the justices, who have upheld the law in principle, to confront its operation.


Fliers About Rapist Given Out in Subway
LEAD: Brightly colored fliers with guidelines on how to avoid becoming a victim of subway crime were distributed yesterday at subway stations where an armed man has sexually assaulted women at least seven times in the last five months.


Kraft Sets Layoffs
LEAD: Kraft Inc., the newly acquired subsidiary of the Philip Morris Companies, said it would eliminate about 250 of its 2,800 Chicago-area employees in the next two months.
Kraft is making the reductions as part of its plan to cut back after its $13 billion acquisition last month.


Nuclear Data reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Data (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,640,000
6,165,000
Net loss
b1,059,000
c1,309,000
9mo sales
21,778,000
21,957,000
Net loss
b2,162,000
c1,188,000
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $3,000 for the quarter and $760,000 for the 9 months.


Rice to Announce Goldsmith as Coach
LEAD: Fred Goldsmith, the new Rice football coach, said yesterday that he is facing the most challenging job in college football.
Goldsmith will be introduced today as Rice's head coach.
He replaces Jerry Berndt, who resigned Dec. 28 to accept the head coaching job at Temple.
The Owls finished last season 0-11 and have the nation's longest losing streak of 18 losses.


Coastal Bid For Texas Eastern
LEAD: The Coastal Corporation, a Houston-based energy company that owns the nation's third-largest natural gas pipeline, said today that it was seeking to acquire the Texas Eastern Corporation, a leading Northeastern supplier, in a cash tender offer worth $42 a share, or about $2.6 billion.


Bhutto Faces New Election Test in 2 Key Regions
LEAD: With a tumultuous national election only two months behind her, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is facing another round of voting on Jan. 28 that will test her party's strength in the country's most important province, Punjab.


Westin Hotels President Begins Expansion Plan
LEAD: In September, Lawrence B. Magnan, who had been at Westin Hotels and Resorts for 23 years and was a prime candidate for the president post, was ''disappointed'' when an outsider was hired instead.
But late last week, Mr.
Magnan, who is 44, was named president after the newcomer, Helmut Hoermann, resigned abruptly, citing personal reasons.


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Microwave (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
4,564,635
5,177,287
Net inc
57,735
291,186
Share earns
.04
.20
9mo sales
14,354,806
15,412,777
Net inc
19,190
695,574
Share earns
.01
.47


Solitec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,576,000
4,183,000
Net loss
1,973,000
b4,000
Shares outst
4,932,000
4,838,000
Yr rev
16,611,000
15,883,000
Net loss
3,620,000
b202,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
4,884,000
3,656,000


Koreas Agree to Hold High-Level Talks
LEAD: North Korea agreed today to a South Korean proposal for the highest-level political and military talks since the Korean War.


Buying Is Seen In UAL Shares
LEAD: Saul P. Steinberg has accumulated nearly a million shares, or close to 5 percent, of the UAL Corporation, an individual close to the Manhattan billionaire said yesterday.
UAL owns United Airlines, the biggest carrier in the country.


Latin Debt Crisis Seen as Threat To Continent's New Democracies
LEAD: A nonpartisan panel of 60 prominent private citizens in the Western Hemisphere warned today that the debt crisis gripping Latin America could lead to a political crisis and a return to authoritarian rule on the continent.


JAMAICA ELECTION SET FOR FEBRUARY
LEAD: Prime Minister Edward P. G. Seaga of Jamaica, who has been trailing in political polls, has announced that national elections will be held on Feb. 9, ending months of speculation in the Caribbean nation.


Here's to Haggis, but Only for Scots
LEAD: THE British Medical Journal, a weekly publication famous for its science but little known for whimsy, has broken new ground in both fields.


Damon Biotech reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damon Biotech (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
312,445
2,811,122
Net loss
2,098,057
334,458


Private Brands reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Private Brands (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
23,189,000
18,553,000
Net inc
554,000
804,000
Share earns
.02
.06


Yonkers Fire Toll at 8; Violations Found
LEAD: The death toll from the city's worst fire in 23 years rose to eight today, and the city's Fire Commissioner said the building where it occurred Sunday had been illegally converted into a rooming house and was in violation of the fire code.


Peripherals: Predicament Of Computer And Owner As Orphans
LEAD: MOST owners of personal computers use them for one job or a limited range of tasks and couldn't care less about how they operate otherwise.
Excerpts from a letter from one such user follow:


Cubans May Stay in Canada
LEAD: A Cuban who unwittingly deported himself and his family from the United States on a sightseeing trip nearly a month ago said today that the family may be forced to seek refugee status in Canada.


Zero Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zero Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,997,000
34,081,000
Net inc
3,471,000
2,906,000
Share earns
.28
.23
9mo sales
122,728,000
102,165,000
Net inc
11,400,000
9,278,000
Share earns
.91
.74


Hunt Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunt Manufacturing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 27
1988
1987
Sales
47,773,000
42,061,000
Net inc
4,565,000
3,482,000
Share earns
.43
.33
Yr sales
178,775,000
150,291,000
Net inc
16,167,000
12,378,000
Share earns
1.51
1.16


Standard Shares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Shares Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
189,176,000
165,655,000
Net inc
3,393,000
3,073,000
Share earns
1.29
1.17
9mo sales
582,831,000
487,383,000
Net inc
13,402,000
10,099,000
Share earns
5.10
3.85


Bangladesh Toll Rises to 135
LEAD: The official death toll from Bangladesh's worst train disaster rose to 135 today.
More than 1,000 people were injured when two crowded trains crashed head-on Sudnay at Pubail, 15 miles from Dhaka.


Review/Dance: Variety in Womanworks
LEAD: The third program of the current Womanworks dance festival at the Joyce Theater is a mixed bag.
Nonetheless, Beverly Blossom, Maedee Dupres and the entry billed as Annabelle Gamson/Dance Solos in one fell swoop offer the wild swings of humor and vision that single-troupe performances rarely provide.


Man Pushed Through Glass Alleges Police Racism
LEAD: A black civil rights advocate charged today that a police officer who pushed him through a store window in a weekend incident broadcast on national television used violence as a first resort and without justification.


134 Request Arbitration
LEAD: Some of the highest-priced names in baseball - led by Orel Hershiser, Dwight Gooden, Roger Clemens and Jose Canseco - were among the 134 players who filed letters for salary arbitration by the noon deadline yesterday.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Matter of Continuity
LEAD: Secretary of Defense Frank C. Carlucci, along with other Cabinet officers of the Reagan Administration, will leave office Friday, not on Feb. 1 as Mr.
Carlucci had previously said.
Deputy Secretary William Howard Taft 4th will become Acting Secretary until the new Secretary is sworn in.


George J. Aspland, 73, Ex-Judge in New York
LEAD: George J. Aspland, a Suffolk County prosecutor who became a State Supreme Court justice, died after a heart attack on Sunday at his retirement home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 73 years old and also had a home in Babylon, L.I.


First Union Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
70,453,000
67,512,000
Per share
.66
.61
Yr net inc
296,900,000
283,122,000
Per share
2.76
2.55
First Union said its loan loss provision for 1988 was $61 million, a decrease of $21 million for the 1987 amount.


Experimental Technology 'Maps' Joints for Surgical Precision
LEAD: EMPLOYING technology similar to that used for creating topographical maps of the earth's surface, a researcher has developed a new way of examining the internal functions of human joints such as the knee, shoulder and wrist.


Reagan Cites Regret on Regan
LEAD: President Reagan wanted his former chief of staff Donald T. Regan out of the White House for some time before Mr.
Regan was ousted, Mr.
Reagan said tonight in a nationally broadcast interview.


An Ex-Belgian Premier Is Believed Kidnapped
LEAD: A former Prime Minister believed to have been kidnapped, possibly by a terrorist group, was threatened before he disappeared, Prime Minister Wilfried Martens said today.


TV Festival Beginning
LEAD: The New York World Television Festival begins today at the Museum of Broadcasting with a drama inspired by the fiction of Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the Nobel laureate, and it ends next month with a 20th-anniversary salute to ''Monty Python's Flying Circus.'' Just what kind of a festival is this anyway?


Israel Sets Demands on Taba
LEAD: Israel's inner Cabinet agreed today to demand free access for Israelis to the Taba Red Sea resort and joint ownership of a hotel complex there in exchange for returning the disputed area to Egypt, Cabinet officials said.
Israeli, Egyptian and American negotiators will meet Thursday at the luxury hotel at the center of the seven-year border dispute.


FEWER BLACK MEN ON U.S. CAMPUSES
LEAD: In the last decade, the number of black men enrolled in higher education has declined, even though the overall minority presence in the college population has increased, says a study by the American Council on Higher Education.


Meese Is Reportedly Denounced In Report by Justice Department
LEAD: The Justice Department has written a stinging report concluding that Edwin Meese 3d engaged in ''conduct which should not be tolerated of any Government employee, especially not the Attorney General,'' according to The Washington Post.


King's Role in Selma Recalled as 3 Blacks Take Seats on Panel
LEAD: A few blocks from the bridge where a national voting rights law was born in violence 24 years ago, three black men took an oath of office today to end 112 years of white domination of the government of Dallas County.


Transition Watch; Bush's Plans For His Big Day
LEAD: On Inauguration Day, this Friday, George Bush plans to wake up before 6 A.M., watch the morning news programs until 6:30, ''play with grandkids, pray, go to the White House, go to Capitol Hill, get sworn in,'' reports Sheila Tate, the spokeswoman for the transition to his Presidency.


Key Tronic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Tronic Corp
Qtr to Dec 17
1988
1987
Sales
32,296,000
32,273,000
Net inc
659,000
700,000
Share earns
.08
.08
6mo sales
63,092,000
58,015,000
Net inc
410,000
1,386,000
Share earns
.05
.16


Transition Watch; . . And Now, in the Other League . . . Transition Watch
LEAD: The Democrats acknowledge that they're down, but not out.


Johnson Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Products (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,976,000
6,947,000
Net inc
b1,758,000
b79,000
Share earns
.44
.02
b-Included tax credits of $606,000 for the latest quarter and $15,000 for the year-earlier period.


Global Warming: Experts Ponder Bewildering Feedback Effects
LEAD: Scientists studying the greenhouse effect are struggling to understand a host of bewildering interactions among air, water and plants that could hasten the potentially disastrous global warming, postpone its effects or, they worry, produce unexpected, rapid change in the Earth's climate.


Sea to Sea, North and South, King Is Honored
LEAD: From Brooklyn, where Mayor Edward I. Koch recalled how he went to Mississippi in 1964 as a young lawyer defending civil rights workers, to Los Angeles, where golfers teed off in a tournament benefiting the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, Americans honored the memory of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.


Britain Agrees to Review the Case Of 4 Convicted of Bombings in '75
LEAD: The Court of Appeal will review the case of four accused guerrillas who were convicted in 1975 of the bombings of English bars, the British Government announced today.
Seven people were killed in the bombings.


NCR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,804,167,000
1,820,055,000
Net inc
149,565,000
161,385,000
Share earns
1.85
1.79
Shares outst
80,849,000
90,066,000
Yr rev
5,989,909,000
5,640,667,000
Net inc
439,266,000
419,330,000
Share earns
5.33
4.51
Shares outst
82,423,000
93,067,000


Olympians Join Meet
LEAD: The Olympic medalists Diane Dixon and Andrew Valmon, along with the former 800-meter world record-holder Rick Wohlhuter, have entered the Millrose Games Feb. 3 at Madison Square Garden, meet officials announced yesterday.


Spreadsheet Rivalry Heats Up
LEAD: Personal computer users, get ready for the spreadsheet wars.


Profits Up At Hanover And Chase
LEAD: More banking companies yesterday reported sharp improvements in earnings, in part a reflection of two years worth of overdue interest payments that were finally received from Brazil.


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,650,000
1,440,000
Per share
.44
.39
Yr net inc
6,250,000
5,240,000
Per share
1.67
1.46


One Language, at Least, They Agree On: Music


Jonesport Journal; On a Lobster Tie Line to the Nation
LEAD: While fishermen in hip boots drag crates of lobsters out of an icy bay in this eastern Maine town on the Atlantic, slickly produced advertisements are beamed by satellite to hundreds of cable television stations, promising that the lobsters will arrive, alive, anywhere in the country in 24 hours.


U.S. Issues Rise in Light European Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes rose marginally in very light trading in Europe yesterday.


Oneok Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oneok Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
128,800,000
111,100,000
Net inc
5,300,000
15,900,000
Share earns
.37
1.12
The year-ago share earnings restated to reflect a tax change.


Imperial Judges? No, Decent Prisons
LEAD: For two decades and more, state prison systems have been under siege.
Overcrowded and underfunded, they have bulged with inmates whose only schooling has been in further violence and crime.
The failure to provide humane and safe custody for inmates has, in turn, provoked the wrath of the Federal courts and, in some cases, actual judicial supervision.


Claims From Fires In Yellowstone Area Total $1.1 Million
LEAD: Damage claims totaling $1.1 million have been filed against the Federal Government as a result of the fires in Yellowstone National Park and surrounding forests last summer, United States Forest Service officials say.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
N.A.
9.15
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
8.21
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
8.31
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
9.10
N.A.
30-YR.


Thompson's Walk Raises Broader Issue
LEAD: IN the swirl of John Thompson's protest, and John Chaney's cries of N.C.A.A. racism, and the move spearheaded by Vince Dooley and the Southeastern Conference folks to push through Proposition 42, the essential function of the university, and the responsibility of the student himself, seem to have got lost.


Ex-Ulster Policeman Killed
LEAD: Two gunmen killed a former reserve policeman with Northern Ireland's Royal Ulster Constabulary, the police said today.
Harry Keyes, 25 years old, was shot Sunday evening as he was backing out of the driveway of a friend's house in Ballintra in western Ireland, they said.


Ford Plant Switch
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would switch production of its Sierra model from Britain to Belgium as part of its strategy to prepare for a single European market at the end of 1992.
The gradual production switch is likely to eliminate 500 jobs in Britain and create 2,000 jobs in Belgium, Ford said.


Cotto in Accord
LEAD: The Seattle Mariners reached agreement on a contract for the coming season with Henry Cotto, the outfielder, bringing their number of signed contracts to six.
Cotto, 28, hit .259 with 8 home runs, 33 runs batted in and 27 stolen bases in 133 games for Seattle. . . .
The California Angels signed Bill Schroeder, a catcher, and Tony Armas, an oufielder, for 1989.


Manufacturers Hanover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
224,000,000
23,000,000
Per share
4.28
.18
Yr net inc
966,000,000
b1,114,000,000
Per share
18.55
-
b-Net loss  The latest quarter's net included net of $146 million relating to past due interest payments received from Brazil.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
22,890,000
16,953,000
Per share
1.05
.81
Yr net inc
84,172,000
70,564,000
Per share
3.93
3.35


Fatal Shooting By Miami Police Sets Off a Melee
LEAD: A crowd in a predominantly black section of the city threw stones and bottles at police officers and journalists and set fire to cars Monday night after officers shot and killed a black man who was fleeing the police on a motorcycle.


Rockingham Stock Up 88.7% on Bid
LEAD: Shares of the Rockingham Bancorp of Exeter, N.H., soared 88.7 percent yesterday after it agreed to be acquired by the Eastern Bancorp of Burlington, Vt., for $17.75 a share, or $21.1 million.
Rockingham's gain of $6.875 a share, to $14.625, was by far the largest in over-the-counter trading.


Whittle to Test School TV Plan
LEAD: Whittle Communications said yesterday that it was preparing to test Channel One, a daily television news program to be shown in six schools across the country.


Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
32,758,000
30,308,000
Net loss
394,000
b107,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
93,098,000
81,015,000
Net loss
891,000
b1,536,000
Share earns
-
.29


CPAC Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPAC Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,600,000
2,700,000
Net inc
430,000
230,000
Share earns
.18
.11
Shares outst
2,333,615
2,072,415
9mo sales
19,900,000
9,400,000
Net inc
1,061,000
820,000
Share earns
.46
.40
Shares outst
2,308,004
2,061,148


Upon the Aral Sea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cable Company Drops CVN Bid
LEAD: Tele-Communications Inc., one of the nation's largest cable-television concerns, said it had withdrawn its offer to buy the CVN Companies for $14 a share in cash and a $4 note.
The offer, made in November, had been valued at about $313 million.
Tele-Communications, based in Denver, said it had withdrawn the offer because CVN's stock price on Friday, $18.50 a share, exceeded its bid.


Atlantic Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Group
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,152,407
7,885,679
Net inc
7,783
176,616
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
2,637,774
2,645,370
6mo sales
17,803,097
15,471,539
Net loss
45,656
b260,540
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
2,650,322
1,979,385


First Wachovia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
62,100,000
39,900,000
Per share
1.07
.73
Yr net inc
244,300,000
176,600,000
Per share
4.34
3.24
The net income for year-ago periods was reduced by $18.2 million, or 33 cents a share, in the quarter, because of a special after-tax loan loss provision, and $38.2 million, or 70 cents a share, in the year, because of the special loan loss provision, net of an $8.9 million equity security gain.


American Medical Internaional Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Internaional Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
646,757,000
741,530,000
Net inc
440,000
b39,204,000
Share earns
.01
.45
Shares outst
73,808,000
90,183,000
b-Included a $33,900,000 charge for the repurchase of debt, and a $50,700,000 gain from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes.


A Clash Erupts Between Scientific Subculture
LEAD: THIS fall, in what has become a case study in the sociology of science, William A. Goddard 3d, a chemist at the California Institute of Technology predicted that the new copper oxide superconductors would never work at room temperature.
With astonishing precision, he calculated that the highest possible threshold temperature was 54.7 degrees


NEW WIRE FAULTS FOUND ON 2 JETS
LEAD: Two more Boeing 757 jetliners have been found with crossed wires leading to cargo hold fire extinguishers, bringing to five the number of planes found with wiring problems since compulsory checks began on Friday, The Times of London reported today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Airlease Management Services Inc., San Mateo, Calif., the general partner of Airlease Ltd., said Douglas C. Kay had resigned as president to pursue other business interests.
He will be replaced by Gary P. Stern, an executive vice president of U.S.
Leasing International Inc., which founded the partnership.


Unisys to Display A New Computer
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said it would introduce this week the first model in a new line of computers.
The new desktop model will have the power of minicomputers and mainframe computers, the Blue Bell, Pa., company said.
It said it was able to shrink the size of its A-series machines through the use of a new processor called the Scamp.


Syncor International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syncor International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
27,400,000
25,500,000
Net inc
56,000
1,100,000
Share earns
-
.10
6mo sales
54,500,000
51,200,000
Net inc
151,000
2,100,000
Share earns
.02
.19


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day yesterday with an article about the marketing role of book covers reversed the identities of two men.
Ed Breslin, editor in chief of Berkley Publishing Group, was on the left; Roger Cooper, publisher, was at the center.


Castle Energy reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle Energy (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,591,039
4,869,519
Net inc
1,562,091
b2,501,106
Share earns
.50
.87
Shares outst
3,133,472
2,864,455
b-Included a gain of $1,672,319 from a bank debt settlement.


In Bonn, Echoes of Kaiser Wilhelm
LEAD: West German intelligence knew about the ''Libyan connection'' as early as 1987 and told Bonn so repeatedly.
Presumably, President Reagan and the Secretary of State, George P. Shultz, tried to be good allies when they discreetly informed the West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl; the point was not to compromise the Federal Republic but to allow Mr.


United Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Foods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
41,151,000
33,312,000
Net loss
902,000
1,471,000
9mo rev
112,934,000
83,081,000
Net loss
2,770,000
4,415,000
The latest periods' results included the operations of Mushroom King Inc.


Peoples Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,864,000
2,474,000
Per share
.41
.37
Yr net inc
10,295,000
9,277,000
Per share
1.57
1.40


Compuscan Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compuscan Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
703,000
2,434,000
Net loss
b618,000
344,000
6mo rev
1,816,000
4,701,000
Net loss
576,000
1,018,000
b-Included a loss of $9,000 from the reversal of a tax credit.


Brother James Vaughan, 81, Ex-Iona Dean
LEAD: Brother James H. Vaughan of the Christian Brothers order, a former dean of Iona College, died of a heart attack on Friday at Pascack Valley Hospital in Westwood, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in Oradell, N.J.


Thompson Says He Might Persist in Boycott
LEAD: John Thompson, the head basketball coach at Georgetown University, said yesterday that he might continue his boycott of National Collegiate Athletic Association-santioned games until ''something concrete'' is done to reverse a recently passed N.C.A.A. action that he feels negatively affects black athletes.


First Indiana Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,828,000
1,599,000
Per share
.81
.72
Yr net inc
5,314,000
5,023,000
Per share
2.37
2.28


Bank Chief to Leave South Africa, Joining Growing Flight of Liberals
LEAD: The chief executive of South Africa's largest commercial bank has decided to leave the country for a post in Europe, the bank announced today.


Marcos in Honolulu Hospital
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former President of the Philippines, was in guarded condition with pneumonia after entering St.
Francis Medical Center for the third time in little more than a month, a hospital spokeswoman said.
Mr.
Marcos, 71 years old, who is also suffering from bronchial asthma, returned to the hospital yesterday afternoon, said a nursing supervisor, Cindy Miller.


Optek Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optek Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 28
1988
1987
Sales
15,657,753
3,674,627
Net inc
b685,720
c426,500
Share earns
.22
.14
Yr sales
28,777,060
14,294,605
Net inc
b1,302,014
c1,225,889
Share earns
.42
.51
Shares outst
3,140,212
2,423,681


A Killing Silence in the Sudan
LEAD: Don't make waves, say State Department officials when asked about a horrifying famine that last year claimed as many as a quarter-million lives in the southern Sudan.
Making a fuss, they say, will only undercut an elected, moderate, useful regime in Khartoum.
Trust us, they add, to send the right stern signal to the Moslem-led Government in the North beset by a rebellion in the non-Moslem


National Micronetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Micronetics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 24
1988
1987
Sales
10,578,000
7,933,000
Net inc
b779,000
c224,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo sales
22,871,000
16,684,000
Net inc
b1,627,000
c68,000
Share earns
.17
-


Personnel Moves At Bozell, Jacobs
LEAD: Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt made several significant personnel moves yesterday, naming Gary Davis president and chief operating officer at Poppe Tyson, its $95 million business-to-business subsidiary, and appointing Josephine A. Cummings executive vice president and executive creative director of its


Alexander Hahn Postwar Investigator, 92
LEAD: Alexander Hahn, who headed a mission after World War II that sought to locate and return Hungarian property taken by the Nazis, died of arterial sclerosis on Dec. 29 at the Forest Hills Nursing Home in Queens.
He was 92 years old.


Gains Toward Cambodia Settlement Are Seen
LEAD: Diplomats and Thai officials say the necessary elements for a comprehensive settlement in Cambodia are rapidly coming together.


Bush Selections Signal Focus on Foreign Policy
LEAD: New Presidents have usually lodged their closest confidants in politically sensitive domestic jobs, notably that of Attorney General.


Science Watch: Group Sets Up Pension For 'Retired' Chimps
LEAD: A BIOMEDICAL foundation in San Antonio has established a pension plan for chimpanzees infected with the AIDS and hepatitis viruses so the animals can ''retire'' once their usefulness in research experiments is over.


'Smokeless' Tobacco Linked to Oral Lesions
LEAD: Nearly half of a group of professional baseball players who used snuff or chewing tobacco regularly had lesions in their mouths, researchers said today.


Hoechst Celanese
LEAD: The Hoechst Celanese Corporation, the American subsidiary of Hoechst A.G. of West Germany, said it would offer to acquire all the shares of Celanese Canada Inc. that it does not own in a deal valued at $210 million (Canadian), or about $175 million (United States).
Hoechst Celanese owns about 56.2 percent of Celanese Canada and is offering to buy each of the remaining shares for $35 (Canadian), or about $29 (United States).


Imre Cholnoky, Developer, 68
LEAD: Imre Cholnoky, founder and president of Sinjon Inc., a real-estate development corporation, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 68 years old and also had homes in Stratton Mountain, Vt., and Scottsdale, Ariz.


A Moment of Silence for Dr. King


Passport Travel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Passport Travel Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
9,306,000
8,292,000
Net inc
37,809
b1,421,001
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
39,613,000
28,969,000
Net inc
301,160
b1,274,597
Share earns
.25
-
b-Net loss


National City Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
66,534,000
17,990,000
Per share
1.10
.29
Yr net inc
233,202,000
129,323,000
Per share
3.84
2.11
The year-ago periods included loan loss provisions that reduced net income for the quarter by $35.7 million, or 59 cents per share, and by $76.1 million, or $1.25 per share, for the year.


4.9% G.M. Loans
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation, following the lead of the Ford Motor Company, said it would offer 4.9 percent financing on some compact pickup trucks.
G.M. said the 4.9 percent rate is available on two-year loans for 1988 and 1989 S/T-15 pickups.
Also available are rates ranging from 6.9 percent on three-year loans to 9.9 percent on five-year loans.


The Doctor's World: Many, Like Reagan, Find Bent Finger a Bother
LEAD: DUPUYTREN'S contracture, the deforming hand ailment for which President Reagan had surgery a little more than a week ago, is a common inherited condition that tends to be more nuisance than painful.


Advanced Micro Devices Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
248,055,000
262,545,000
Net loss
34,104,000
2,642,000
Yr sales
1,125,855,000
997,080,000
Net inc
19,316,000
b63,987,000
Share earns
.11
-


Congressmen Urge Bush to Delay Sales of California Water Rights
LEAD: A bipartisan group of Congressmen is urging President-elect George Bush to delay an Interior Department sale of water rights in California because the department had declined to analyze the environmental consequences.


Get Serious About Escalating Medical Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Europe Inquiry On Asian Tapes
LEAD: The European Community's Executive Commission said today that it had begun an inquiry into imports of audio cassette tapes from Asia that are said to be for sale in the 12-nation trade bloc at below market prices.


Lendl Rolls in First Round of the Australian Open
LEAD: Second-seeded Ivan Lendl, playing against an outclassed opponent, overpowered Alexander Mronz of West Germany, 6-0, 6-1, 6-3, today in the first round of the Australian Open championships.


New York City Can Do Better Than Spend on Political Campaigns
LEAD: To the Editor:


Northeast Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
5,100,000
b7,900,000
Per share
-
1.05
9mo net loss
14,996,000
b11,188,000
Per share
-
.86
b-Net income and included tax credits of $3,644,000 for the quarter and $8,395,000 for the 9 months.


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data Processing (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
409,478,000
376,697,000
Net inc
43,970,000
40,120,000
Share earns
.59
.52
6mo rev
805,615,000
738,002,000
Net inc
78,410,000
70,490,000
Share earns
1.04
.91


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Conservative Edge
LEAD: Conservatives may purport to hate government, but conservative political appointees in the Reagan Administration are being advised how to become permanent Federal employees as the Bush administration prepares to take office.


United Cable Television Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Cable Television Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
75,813,000
64,052,000
Net inc
469,000
b5,130,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
148,449,000
125,093,000
Net inc
4,011,000
b5,797,000
Share earns
.09
-


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 2
1988
1987
Revenue
103,077,000
83,730,000
Net loss
364,000
1,038,000
9mo rev
287,769,000
254,564,000
Net loss
911,000
432,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL  The Soviet Union's grain harvest fell 40 million tons short of the 235-million-ton target, a Soviet official said.
That would be the worst harvest in three years and a bit less than had been anticipated.  [ Page A1. ]  Grain and soybean prices plunged, despite the news from Moscow and U.S.


Burlington Northern Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,181,407,000
1,105,898,000
Net loss
b21,102,000
cd109,077,000
Share earns
-
1.46
Shares outst
74,760,000
74,260,000
Yr rev
4,699,517,000
4,249,542,000
Net inc
b155,750,000
d410,175,000
Share earns
2.04
5.48
Shares outst
74,854,000
74,244,000


Speaker's Ladders for Moscow
LEAD: It is official now - the representatives of 35 nations including the United States have agreed to gather in Moscow in 1991 to talk about the struggle for human rights around the world.


Transition Watch; Lee Atwater And His Orchestra
LEAD: A highlight of the inaugural festivities is a lineup of rhythm and blues stars Saturday night at Constitution Hall in a rocking concert that the new President and his family plan to attend.


Bear, Stearns Appointments
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company yesterday announced the formation of a new public finance group to focus on New York State and named Edward M. Bopp and Robert Steingut as co-heads.


JARUZELSKI WARY ABOUT SOLIDARITY
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish leader, said today that ''agreement of all the nation's constructive groups'' was indispensable for social and economic change.
But his words fell short of an expected proposal that the banned Solidarity union be made legal again.


Correction
LEAD: An article in SportsMonday this week about protests against a new N.C.A.A. rule misstated the effective date.
It is Aug. 1, 1990, not 1991.


Texcel International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texcel International
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
27,025,783
19,254,109
Net loss
2,388,391
949,833
The fiscal 1988 loss is after a gain of $435,691 on the sale of a subsidiary.


Century Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
47,357,000
39,484,000
Net loss
6,648,000
2,535,000
6mo rev
90,960,000
79,174,000
Net loss
8,846,000
4,762,000


Sterling A. Brown, 87, Poet and Educator, is Dead
LEAD: Sterling A. Brown, a poet and former professor of literature who helped to establish Afro-American literary criticism and who taught many of the nation's black scholars and writers, died of leukemia on Jan. 13 at the Heritage Health Care Center in Takoma Park, Md.
He was 87 years old and lived in Washington.


Jackson and the Garden Are Too Much for Spurs
LEAD: After yet another victory at home, the Knicks now take to the road, where few National Basketball Association teams win conistently.


Electrosound Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electrosound Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
10,366,000
9,677,000
Net loss
b5,154,000
c429,000
Share earns
-
.22
6mo rev
17,904,000
17,524,000
Net loss
b6,962,000
c518,000
Share earns
-
.26


Sandy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandy Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
8,236,000
6,536,000
Net loss
274,000
b877,000
Share earns
-
.41
b-Net income and after a $17,000 gain from an accounting change.


New York Banks on Winter Season
LEAD: The soul of thoroughbred racing has moved south and west for the season, taking up winter quarters amid the cool San Gabriel Mountains towering over Santa Anita in California and the royal palms swaying at Gulfstream Park in Florida.
But in New York the game goes on, and on and on, at Aqueduct Race Track, where the winter winds whip in from Jamaica


UST Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,864,376
6,751,015
Share earns
.61
.53
Yr net inc
28,324,916
24,407,815
Share earns
2.22
1.93


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about the Bear Stearns Companies described an aspect of its stock buyback incorrectly.
The buyback does not depend on shareholders' tendering a minimum number of shares.


Independent Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,068,000
1,703,000
Per share
.40
.34
Yr net inc
8,898,000
8,262,000
Per share
1.75
1.64


Afrikaner Paper Urges Talks With Mandela
LEAD: South Africa's major Afrikaans-language daily newspaper, Beeld, called on the Government today to hold talks with the outlawed African National Congress, the main exiled guerrilla group fighting to end white rule.


Excerpts From East-West Agreement on the Protection of Human Rights
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the final document of the Vienna meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Taking part in the conference were the Soviet Union, the United States, Canada and all European nations except Albania.
Condemning Terrorism


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,606,000
b2,273,000
Per share
.47
.37
Yr net inc
12,452,000
b11,124,000
Per share
2.42
2.02
b-After tax credits of $331,000 for the quarter and $531,000 for the year.


INSIDE
LEAD:  India's Russian Planes  India is leasing civilian airliners from the Soviet Union in a move away from its reliance on Western manufacturers.
Page D1.
Protecting the Protected  Most New York communities do not have the wherewithal to assure the safety of victims of domestic violence, experts say.


Get Serious About Escalating Medical Costs; Golden Years
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Up Steeply in Europe; Trading Light in New York
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply in Europe yesterday and held its gains in light holiday trading in New York.


The Pill: What's a Woman to Do?
LEAD: American women fear breast cancer, and with reason: one in ten can expect to get it someday, and it will kill 30 percent of those that do.
Now comes evidence that using birth control pills might increase the risk.
What's a woman to do?


Scientists Race to Explain How the New Superconductors Work
LEAD: IN the quest to find superconductors that work at higher and higher temperatures, scientists have been frustrated by the fact that they really don't know what in the name of physics is going on.
There was little reason to expect that the new materials, which are not metals but ceramics, would conduct electricity at all, much less that they would do so without losing any energy to resistance.


Reviews/Television: New England Tragedy
LEAD: With Judy Crichton as executive producer, ''The American Experience'' closes out its sturdy first season on public television tonight - on Channel 21 at 9 and Channel 13 at 10 -with still another first-rate documentary exploring the nation's past. ''Sins of Our Mothers'' was produced by David Hoffman and written and directed by Matthew Collins.


First Chicago Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
137,216,000
b96,448,000
Per share
2.07
-
Yr net inc
513,054,000
b570,660,000
Per share
8.20
-
b-Net loss and were due to additional reserve action related to troubled country debtors.


Hasidic Rabbi in Manhattan Is Missing After Sunday Walk
LEAD: A 66-year-old Hasidic rabbi, leader of a small Orthodox congregation he founded on the Upper East Side 11 years ago, has been missing since Sunday, the police said yesterday.
They asked for the public's help finding him.


Fries Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,311,000
7,689,000
Net loss
426,000
305,000
6mo rev
18,285,000
16,345,000
Net loss
808,000
168,000


Schulman, A Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schulman, A Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
160,886,000
143,614,000
Net inc
6,775,000
5,823,000
Share earns
.76
.65


India Turning To Soviets For Airliners
LEAD: India has signed a deal to lease civilian airliners from the Soviet Union to handle its increased domestic and international traffic and to offset a series of air mishaps that have depleted its fleet.


Oil Prices Highest Since '87; Optimism Rises on Controls
LEAD: Prices of oil futures surged yesterday to their highest levels since November 1987, bolstered by market speculation that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would be able to keep a cap on its output.


International Minerals &amp; Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Minerals &amp; Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
241,000,000
460,400,000
Net inc
b23,400,000
c56,100,000
Share earns
.83
1.95
6mo sales
458,600,000
885,100,000
Net inc
b52,200,000
c86,900,000
Share earns
1.86
2.92


A.T.&amp;T. Is Quiet On G.E.C. Reports
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which will hold its regularly scheduled board meeting tomorrow, declined to comment yesterday on widespread reports that it might join the Plessey Company in a hostile takeover bid for the General Electric Company P.L.C. of Britain.
The Financial Times reported that A.T.&amp;T.


Lee Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Revenue
27,212,000
26,790,000
Net loss
649,000
1,491,000
9mo rev
70,071,000
74,277,000
Net loss
2,154,000
5,216,000


Seton Hall Uses Defense to Thwart Villanova
LEAD: Villanova played its third consecutive Big East game on the road tonight, and looked like a team in need of a rest.
The only problem for the Wildcats was that their rest seemed to start before their game against Seton Hall ended.


Illinois Central Stake Is Acquired
LEAD: The Archer-Daniels-Midland Company said it had bought an 8 percent stake in the Illinois Central Transportation Company, a major rail hauler of grain between Chicago and the Gulf of Mexico.
Archer, a grain processor based in Decatur, Ill., said its stake was an investment, not a takeover move.


Pennsylvania Real Estate Investment Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennsylvania Real Estate Investment Trust (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Net inc
2,759,657
2,809,897
Share earns
.34
.34
Year-ago results included a gain of $78,035, or 1 cent a share, on the sale of interest in real estate.


McDonnell Order
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said China Eastern Airlines had agreed to buy five MD-11 jetliners in an order valued at more than $500 million.
The MD-11 is a long-range, wide-bodied jet that is slightly smaller than the jumbo Boeing 747.
Its main competitor is the Airbus A340, produced by the European consortium Airbus Industrie.


Transition Watch; Added Starter: Jesse Jackson
LEAD: The Bush transition headquarters received an unexpected phone call yesterday morning.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who had not spoken too kindly of Mr.
Bush in the Presidential campaign, said he was planning to come to the inauguration.
It was, Mr.
Jackson said, not a Republican event but an event for the republic.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  FIGURE SKATING  Zander Pulls Off Upset: Richard Zander, an American-born West German who almost quit last year because of a back injury, upset the Soviet favorite, Aleksandr Fadeev, to win the men's compulsories at the European championships yesterday in Birmingham, England.
Zander, who was born in Portland, Ore., and grew up in Los Angeles, gained top marks in both figures with a superb display of technical skating and swept into the lead on the first day of the tournament.


'Ecstasy' Drug Tied to Brain Damage
LEAD: The amphetamine derivative known as ''ecstasy'' may have long-term damaging effects on the brain, a Stanford University researcher says.


South Carolina National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,464,000
13,197,000
Per share
.62
.61
Yr net inc
54,515,999
52,918,000
Per share
2.51
2.44


Giving Miami the News in Both of Its Languages
LEAD: The Miami Herald became the oldest daily newspaper in town when The Miami News, a 92-year-old afternoon paper, died of circulation problems and neglect last month.
But the demise of The News, its only English-language competitor, promises to have little effect on The Herald, which long ago won the battle for readers and advertisers, at least those who spoke its tongue.


Reviews/Music: Shostakovich Premiere
LEAD: Mstislav Rostropovich had planned to conduct the National Symphony Orchestra in Haydn's Sixth and Shostakovich's Seventh symphonies on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall.
But early last week he announced that in place of the Haydn, he would offer the premiere of a previously unknown Shostakovich cantata in which the composer parodied


Reviews/Music: Paying Tribute to Dr. King
LEAD: Two anniversaries coincided on Sunday - Elie Siegmeister's 80th birthday and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s 60th.


Todd-AO Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Todd-AO Corp
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,779,000
6,022,000
Net inc
32,000
482,000
Share earns
.01
.24
Shares outst
3,883,052
2,046,235


Investments By Taiwan
LEAD: Businessmen from Taiwan more than doubled their investments overseas in 1988, to a record $219 million from $103 million in 1987, the Investment Commission said today.


Northern Telecom Selects a New Chief
LEAD: Paul G. Stern, former president of the Unisys Corporation, will join Northern Telecom Ltd. as vice chairman and chief executive on March 1, the company announced yesterday.


Books of The Times: Chess and the Future Overlay the Fate of a Nation
LEAD:  Hence  By Brad Leithauser  320 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.
In Brad Leithauser's ambitious new novel, the year is 1993 and Americans are suffering from ''millennial neuroses.'' Trends already in evidence in our own day have accelerated.
Changes in the weather heighten everyone's worst environmental fears, and the nation's desperate craving for some kind of order or faith is exploited by evangelists who preach apocalyptic doctrines of blood and sacrifice on television.


Texas Insurance Regulator Quits, Calling System Lax
LEAD: A high-ranking regulator of the Texas insurance industry says he will resign because the state continues to be ineffective in disciplining a growing number of troubled companies.


Chase Medical Trading Is Suspended by S.E.C.
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission suspended trading in the shares of Chase Medical Group Inc. yesterday amid a widening investigation into how customers of one brokerage firm came to control more than 100 percent of the public float in the stock.


Bank of New England Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New England Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
74,000,000
12,600,000
Per share
1.06
.17
Yr net inc
281,700,000
138,300,000
Per share
4.06
2.00
The year-ago periods included special provisions of $90 million for the quarter and $197 million for the year, both for loans to countries that were refinancing their debt.


S.I. Tech Plays Host to Soviets
LEAD: Students at Staten Island Technical High School, where Russian is the only - and, thus, required - foreign language, are being given an unusual chance to practice their language skills.
Their classmates for the next month will include visiting Soviet students.


Bridge
LEAD: Two major team titles were decided Sunday when the Tristate Regional Championships concluded in Port Chester, N.Y.
The Knockout Team Championship was captured by Neil and Juanita Chambers, Gene and Roslyn Weiss and Norb Kremer, all, Schenectady, N.Y., and Alan Sontag, Manhattan.
Victory in the Swiss Teams went to Phillip Martin, Manhattan, Debbie Zuckerberg, Flushing, Queens, Joel Friedberg, Scarsdale, N.Y., and Ethan Stein, Irvington, N


Transition Watch; All Is Not Quiet On the West Front Transition Watch
LEAD: On the West Front of the Capitol, framed against the dazzling prospect of the Mall and the Washington Monument, workers were installing the rostrum and the bulletproof shield that will surround it for the swearing-in of the 41st President.
The mood seemed frenetic. ''The very first thing we did this morning was make a checklist of what could be forgotten - who's bringing the Bush bibles, who's bringing the Quayle bibles,'' said Michael F.


In Chemical Maker's Town, Germans Silently Disbelieve
LEAD: Even in its hometown of Lahr, Imhausen-Chemie was hardly a household name before Jan. 1, when the company was publicly accused of having helped Libya build a poison-gas plant.


Burlington Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
476,180,000
606,060,000
Net inc
51,163,000
63,317,000
Share earns
.33
-
Yr rev
2,167,273,000
2,371,315,000
Net inc
72,079,000
231,200
Share earns
.46
-


Get Serious About Escalating Medical Costs; When Fees Are Capped
LEAD: To the Editor:


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
952,000
909,000
Per share
.59
.56
Yr net inc
3,592,000
3,622,000
Per share
2.22
2.24


Letter Indicates More Links Between Gas-Plant Builders
LEAD: Der Spiegel, the West German news magazine, published a letter today that established further links between Imhausen-Chemie, the company accused of involvement in construction of a suspect Libyan chemical plant, and I.B.I.
Engineering, the principal contractor for the plant.


Times Machinists Threaten Strike
LEAD: Nearly two years after its contract expired, a union representing 72 machinists at The New York Times said yesterday that it would strike the newspaper on Friday unless a new labor agreement was reached by then.


U.N. ACTS TO SPUR IRAN-IRAQ TALKS
LEAD: Five months after Iran and Iraq agreed to a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar is to send an envoy to the region next week to inject new life into stalled peace negotiations there.


International Dairy Queen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Dairy Queen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
51,981,714
43,409,065
Net inc
3,586,130
2,516,904
Share earns
.38
.26
Yr rev
243,229,272
210,604,292
Net inc
20,115,774
14,907,607
Share earns
2.09
1.54


Europe Reply On Meat
LEAD: The European Community will investigate Washington's recently expressed concerns that European meat sold in the United States is not adequately inspected, a senior trade official said today.


35 Nations Issue East-West Accord Assuring a Broad Range of Rights
LEAD: Thirty-five nations today made public a new East-West agreement that includes commitments for the protection of human rights, including freedom of association, religion, travel and emigration.


Mayfair Super Markets Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mayfair Super Markets Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
146,031,000
133,251,000
Net inc
2,084,000
3,008,000
Share earns
.27
.38


Troops in West Bank Kill Teen-Age Arab; A Gaza Youth Dies
LEAD: A Palestinian teen-ager was shot to death by Israeli soldiers in the occupied West Bank today, while another Arab youth died of gunshot wounds sustained in a demonstration in the Gaza Strip this week, Palestinians and the army said.


Belgian-Zairian Links Eroding
LEAD: Relations between Belgium and Zaire, its former colony, have fallen to a new low with Zaire's announcement last weekend that the African country was scrapping cooperation agreements and suspending payments on the part of its $7 billion debt owed in Belgium.


Scientific Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
731,967
868,939
Net inc
118,651
b892,714
b-Net loss  Latest-quarter share earnings are less than 1 cent a share.


Bank of New Hampshire Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New Hampshire Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,472,000
1,681,000
Per share
.74
.50
Yr net inc
8,308,000
6,962,000
Per share
2.47
2.07
The year-ago figures restated to reflect the acquisition of Suncook Bank in February 1988.


Cancer Fears Throw Spotlight on Estrogen
LEAD: THE more researchers study estrogen, the female sex hormone, the more they find themselves dancing around points and counterpoints.


On Ice, the Old Guard and the Avant-Garde
LEAD: In narrow knitted trousers or tights, in oversized ski sweaters that either celebrate or parody classic patterns and motifs, in wonderfully goofy hats for women and, for children, those gloves called Freezy Freakies - New York looks nice on ice.


TRC Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRC Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,060,081
7,849,752
Net inc
428,938
153,962
Share earns
.19
.07
6mo rev
19,280,513
15,825,546
Net inc
800,309
361,547
Share earns
.36
.17


The Unsinkable Kissinger Bobs Back
LEAD: Looming behind the Bush cabinet is the improbable but inescapable figure of Henry A. Kissinger.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Ball Corp., Muncie, Ind., said it was the low bidder on a one-year, $23.1 million contract to supply copper-plated zinc penny blanks to Government Mints in Philadelphia, Denver and San Francisco.


Cynicism and Mistrust Tied to Early Death
LEAD: Angry, cynical people are five times as likely to die under 50 as people who are calm and trusting, a psychiatrist has found.


Morton Thiokol Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morton Thiokol Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
631,935,000
584,779,000
Net inc
38,927,000
39,281,000
Share earns
.82
.82
6mo sales
1,233,409,000
1,088,702,000
Net inc
80,240,000
65,819,000
Share earns
1.68
1.38


Talking Business with Peters of the Michael Peters Group; Design Held Vital To Sales Abroad
LEAD: The Michael Peters Group P.L.C., a rapidly growing British design company, is beginning to make acquisitions in the United States.


Parker Drilling Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Drilling Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,681,000
25,827,000
Net loss
9,902,000
23,881,000
The results for the year-ago quarter were restated to show an increased loss of $5,270,000 to reflect an accounting change.


Barenboim Refuses To Accept Dismissal
LEAD: Daniel Barenboim, the Israeli conductor and pianist dismissed as musical and artistic director of the new opera house in Paris in a scandal of operatic dimensions, said today that his dismissal should come from President Francois Mitterrand.


At This School A Commitment To a City's Poor
LEAD: There aren't many Catholics at St.
Patrick Catholic Elementary School. ''More Baptists than anything else,'' said Sister Maeve McDermott, the principal.
All 500 children are black; 80 are Catholic.


Punishment for Plane Bomb Is Necessary
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Team Sports reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Team Sports
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
294,057
51,024
Net loss
67,481
131,032
9mo sales
1,301,955
511,033
Net loss
60,479
235,086


Rowan Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
54,847,000
46,783,000
Net inc
b10,460,000
c18,173,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr rev
216,685,000
143,129,000
Net loss
b31,601,000
69,290,000
b-Included a gain of $24.4 million from the physical loss of an offshore drilling unit.


U.N. Council Agrees to Cut Namibia Peace Force
LEAD: The Security Council agreed in principle today to cut the size and cost of the peacekeeping force it will send to Namibia this spring to oversee preparations for the territory's independence.
But diplomats cautioned that it was unclear whether the vote had really ended a three-week dispute between the five permanent members of the


New National Coach
LEAD: The United States Soccer Federation yesterday announced the appointment of a full-time coach for the national team.
He is Bob Gansler, a staff coach with the federation since 1975 and the head coach soccer coach at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee since 1984.
Gansler replaces Lothar Osiander, who had coached the United States national team on a part-time basis since 1986, including in the 1988 Olympics.


Hornets Win as Tripucka Scores 40
LEAD: Kelly Tripucka scored 40 points, including 9 in overtime today, as the Charlotte Hornets beat the Philadelphia 76ers, 127-122, to snap an 11-game road losing streak.


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melamine Chemicals (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,215,000
7,481,000
Net inc
1,522,000
1,542,000
Share earns
.28
.28
6mo sales
19,508,000
15,373,000
Net inc
3,121,000
3,015,000
Share earns
.57
.58
Shares outst
5,450,000
5,158,152


Careers; Improving Morale of Employees
LEAD: COMMUNICATING with employees is becoming important to top management, says Kathryn L. Troy, a senior research associate who wrote a report published this week by the Conference Board.


Market Place; Predicting Victor In the Super Bowl
LEAD: IT makes sense that changes in the discount rate should affect the stock market, and it is widely believed on Wall Street that they do.
It makes no sense that the result of the Super Bowl should be useful as a market forecaster, but it too is widely followed.


Clayton Homes Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clayton Homes Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
50,901,000
49,422,000
Net inc
3,054,000
2,904,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo rev
110,339,000
99,797,000
Net inc
6,808,000
6,128,000
Share earns
.42
.38


Job Concern Is Reacquired
LEAD: Barry Nathanson, president of Richards Consultants, has reacquired the management recruiting firm that he sold to British-based Blue Arrow P.L.C., the world's largest employment agency, in May 1987.


Hudson PCB Removal Stalled Again
LEAD: Removal of PCB's from the Hudson River, delayed for more than a decade, has been stalled once again by a state panel's rejection of a plan to bury soil dredged from the river on an upstate dairy farm.


Candor Is Seen as Best Weapon to Disarm Critics
LEAD: On the afternoon of the day that two United States Navy F-14's shot down a pair of Libyan fighters over the Mediterranean, Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr. called in his top aides to assess the situation, including the publicity surrounding the episode.


Homestake, Bond in Deal
LEAD: The Homestake Mining Company announced today that it would invest more than $117 million (Australian), or $99 million (United States), to join Alan Bond, the Australian businessman, in his dream of a ''super-pit'' gold mine.


'The Pulse' of the 49ers' Defense
LEAD: The permanently furrowed brow and the infrequent smiles provide signs that being the keeper of the standard is no simple job.
In Ronnie Lott's early years as a defensive back for the San Francisco 49ers, the more ambitious expectations of the organization were being put in place and the most important responsibilities belonged to others.


Paine Webber's London Curbs
LEAD: Paine Webber Inc. said today that it was pulling out of the Eurobond business and that 22 London traders would lose their jobs.


Scientists Pursuing Idea Of Tritium Accelerator
LEAD: More than half a century after a particle accelerator was used to discover tritium, scientists met in New Mexico today trying to prove that a much larger accelerator could affordably provide the gas in amounts needed for nuclear warheads.


An Ad Guy. Did a Book. Hard-Boiled
LEAD: HE was sitting in a corner of a Second Avenue seafood joint with a red no-smoking sign hanging behind the nape of his neck.
His name was Patterson - James Patterson.
He wrote ads.
Worked for a guy named Thompson.
He said he'd written a book.


Chess
LEAD: The Belgrade International Open Tournament, sponsored by the Grandmasters Association and Yugoslav Airlines, ended in a six-way tie for first place on Dec. 13.
Five Soviets, the grandmasters Mikhail Gurevich, Lev Psakhis, Evgeny Pigusov and Lev Polugayevsky and the international master Igor Naumkin, and the Yugoslav grandmaster Krunoslav


The Famous Join in Aiding the Neediest Cases
LEAD: What do John McEnroe, Peter Falk, E. L. Doctorow and Malcolm S. Forbes Jr. have in common?
Like many people whose names don't make headlines they are concerned about the alarming increase in the ranks of the poor of New York City and have sent contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Bryn Mawr Bank Corp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bryn Mawr Bank Corp
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,634,000
3,275,000
Per share
3.35
3.02


Diners Stabbed, Waiter Held
LEAD: A waiter angered by the small tip left by two customers was arrested after he allegedly attacked them with a knife, the police said today.
Guang Da Shen,19 years old, of Brooklyn, was charged with two-counts of assault after the incident Saturday night outside the Dragon House Restaurant.
Louis Pabian, 59, of Trumbull, was stabbed in the abdomen, and his son, Neil, 24, of Bridgeport, was cut in the hand, They had left a $2 or $3 tip on a bill of less than $50, the police said.


Saudis Block Idi Amin's Return
LEAD: Idi Amin, the deposed Ugandan dictator, is unwelcome at his home-in-exile in Saudi Arabia, Arab diplomats said today.


Shelton Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelton Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
665,000
184,000
Per share
.57
.16
6mo net inc
929,000
423,000
Per share
.79
.38


Central &amp; South West Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
569,000,000
568,000,000
Net inc
26,000,000
75,000,000
Share earns
.28
.79
Shares outst
94,400,000
94,800,000
Yr rev
2,512,000,000
2,443,000,000
Net inc
324,000,000
372,000,000
Share earns
3.43
3.92
Shares outst
98,600,000
94,800,000


Search for a Nugget
LEAD: The Denver Nuggets, third in the National Basketball Association's Midwest Divison, are considering a trade for an aggressive forward, Pete Babcock, president of the team, said yesterday.
He said repeated injuries had created the ''most unstable situation'' he has encountered during a 14-year career in the National Basketball Association, the last four years with the Nuggets.


Banctec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banctec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,646,000
24,676,000
Net inc
2,001,000
1,962,000
Share earns
.32
.32
9mo rev
75,802,000
70,209,000
Net inc
5,323,000
b4,198,000
Share earns
.85
.75
Shares outst
6,281,000
5,588,000


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abbott Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,306,000,000
1,234,000,000
Net inc
222,000,000
190,000,000
Share earns
.99
.84
Yr sales
4,937,000,000
4,388,000,000
Net inc
752,000,000
633,000,000
Share earns
3.33
2.78


Commerce Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
12,256,000
10,939,000
Per share
1.25
1.06
Yr net inc
49,033,000
40,073,000
Per share
4.92
3.89


Accounts
LEAD: * 3M Company's Do-It-Yourself business unit, St.
Paul, a maker of remodeling and auto products, to Martin/ Williams, Minneapolis, with a budget of $3 million.


Shigeharu Matsumoto, Japanese Internationalist, 89
LEAD: Shigeharu Matsumoto, a founder of the International House of Japan, died of a stroke last Tuesday in Tokyo, where he lived.
He was 89 years old.


Bush Says the Dream of Dr. King Will Be a Vision for His Tenure
LEAD: Signaling a greater responsiveness to black Americans than many blacks perceived in the Reagan Administration, George Bush said today that he would make it his mission as President to aggressively pursue Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream of equality.


FASHION: By Design; Looking Ahead: Post-Red
LEAD: Chartreuse may have been the shade of the season last spring, but red is certainly this winter's bell ringer.
Red hats, scarves, sweaters, suits, coats are seen scurrying about Manhattan.


Learonal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
38,644,000
40,512,000
Net inc
2,769,000
2,347,000
Share earns
.30
.25
9mo sales
119,005,000
117,717,000
Net inc
7,972,000
6,334,000
Share earns
.87
.68


Insurance Plan For Nissan Dealers
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company's American subsidiary said it would help to finance an insurance company to be owned and operated by its dealers, the first such arrangement in the auto industry.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries (NYSE)
12wks to Dec 17
1988
1987
Sales
178,972,000
167,366,000
Net inc
8,109,000
8,582,000
Share earns
.23
.24
Shares outst
34,889,330
35,362,902
24wk sales
349,418,000
334,286,000
Net inc
16,162,000
b18,412,000
Share earns
.46
.52
Shares outst
34,891,987
35,365,548


Managua Journal; As Sandinistas' Old Foe Exits, New Ones Line Up
LEAD: Having survived the contra insurgency and outlasted President Reagan, a powerful enemy, the Sandinista leaders of Nicaragua find themselves facing adversaries perhaps even more formidable.


Heico Bid Raised By Investor Group
LEAD: A Miami-based investment group has raised its offer to acquire the Heico Corporation to $23 a share, or $48.1 million, from its previous price of $21 a share.
In a letter to Heico's board dated Jan. 16, which was contained in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group's leader, Laurans A.


Smith Barney Will Re-enter Risk Arbitrage Deals Feb. 1
LEAD: Smith Barney Inc., the big securities firm owned by the Primerica Corporation, will announce today that it plans to re-enter the risk arbitrage business on Feb. 1, Frank Zarb, the company's chairman and chief executive, said yesterday.


Cross Recalls Some Other 49ers
LEAD: He comes from a time when the future of the coach of the San Francisco 49ers was not a subject of national attention, because there would be a new one soon enough.
Randy Cross does not have to be told about the days when the most loyal of the 49er faithful did not come close to filling Candlestick Park, when the Super


Exchange Seat Record
LEAD: A membership seat on the New York Mercantile Exchange has been sold for a record $267,500, the exchange said yesterday.
A seat on the 116-year-old exchange sold for $265,000 Monday, and two seats garnered $260,000 apiece on Friday.
The exchange's chairman, Lou Guttman, attributed the rising prices to the Mercantile Exchange's agreement in principle this month to join the Globex system - the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's planned after-hours electronic trading network.


Security Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
169,500,000
bc39,400,000
Per share
1.46
-
Yr net inc
638,900,000
c15,700,000
Per share
5.59
.01
b-Net loss  c-After additional provisions for developing country debt of $350 million for the quarter and $908 million for the year.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:  Lincoln's Inaugural Feast  The menu for Abraham Lincoln's inaugural luncheon in 1861 consisted of mock turtle soup, corned beef and cabbage, parsley potatoes, blackberry pie and coffee.
It was held at the Willard Hotel across from the White House.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: THE other day, Gloria Ross was late for an appointment at a company on the Avenue of the Americas.
She holds herself blameless for being tardy and in defense she offers this explanation:


Time-Life Book Club
LEAD: Time-Life Books (Europe) Inc. agreed on Monday to purchase Books for Children, Britain's largest hard-cover book club for children, from Independent Television Publications.
Terms were not disclosed.


Toronto-Dominion $150 Million Issue
LEAD: The New York branch of the Toronto-Dominion Bank offered $150 milllion of 10-year subordinated notes.


Books of The Times; American Suburbs and How and Why They Grew
LEAD:  Borderland  Origins of the American Suburb, 1820-1939  By John R. Stilgoe  Illustrated. 353 pages.
Yale University Press. $35.


Avery International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avery International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
416,600,000
387,000,000
Net inc
21,100,000
b7,000,000
Share earns
.48
-
Yr sales
1,582,000,000
1,465,500,000
Net inc
77,700,000
34,700,000
Share earns
1.77
.81


51 Killed in Sri Lanka As Train Smashes Bus
LEAD: At least 51 people, including 35 schoolgirls, were killed today when a train slammed into a crowded bus in southern Sri Lanka, police officers and hospital officials said.


Equimark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,669,000
4,224,000
Per share
1.08
.35
Shares outst
9,986,000
9,701,000
Yr net inc
25,280,000
14,316,000
Per share
2.21
1.22
Shares outst
9,960,000
9,170,000


Rockwell's Trial Is Delayed
LEAD: The start of the Rockwell International Corporation's trial on charges of overbilling the Air Force on a navigation-satellite contract was delayed today after the company and Federal prosecutors apparently made progress in negotiating an out-of-court settlement.


Israel Orders Harsher Tactics in Palestinian Revolt
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin announced tough new measures today against Palestinians accused of throwing stones in the occupied territories.


From Shepherds, A Pasta Legacy
LEAD: TO an American in Rome, seeking the city's past in monuments and museums is a perfectly logical pursuit.
Yet statues and portraits are silent.
To learn of the glory that was and is Rome, one most go to its neighborhoods.
Among other things, the fortunate visitor will find an ancient cuisine passed down through


Yugoslav Head Faults Strife Among Officials
LEAD: The Yugoslav head of state has declared that conflicts among the country's regional leaderships are preventing Yugoslavia from dealing with its grave problems.


Georgetown Is Pressing Its Case
LEAD: In the aftermath of a continuing protest by the school's basketball coach, Georgetown University officials have conducted an intense campaign throughout the National Collegiate Athletic Association to overturn a measure that could keep prospective student-athletes out of college.


Oren C. Herwitz, Lawyer, 81
LEAD: Oren C. Herwitz, a retired lawyer and a former New York City official, died of cancer Monday at his home on Treasure Island, Fla.
He was 81 years old.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,154,455,000
1,041,662,000
Net inc
84,362,000
77,425,000
Share earns
.41
.38
Yr rev
4,394,692,000
4,211,055,000
Net inc
528,586,000
520,451,000
Share earns
2.57
2.55


King World Productions Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* King World Productions Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
136,500,000
97,500,000
Net inc
28,400,000
22,800,000
Share earns
1.12
.78
Shares outst
25,300,000
29,200,000


Business Inventories Rose 0.4% in November
LEAD: Business inventories rose four-tenths of 1 percent in November and sales rose at the same pace, the Government said today in a report that analysts said bodes well for the nation's economy.


Hospital Neglected to Notify Family of a Man Who Died
LEAD: The body of an 81-year-old man who died in a Queens hospital nine days after he was in a car accident was sent to the morgue for burial in a common grave because his relatives were not called, City Council President Andrew J. Stein said yesterday.


Sen. Gordon Allott, 83, Pushed for Water Projects
LEAD: Former United States Senator Gordon Allott, who during 18 years in the Senate helped push through water projects instrumental to the economic development of Colorado and Arizona, died of cancer today.
He was 82 years old and lived most of his life in Englewood.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Flattered but . . .
LEAD: It was one of those Washington dilemmas: Daniel Schnur, a Bush campaign worker for 18 months until last November's victory, had received tickets to a Presidential inaugural ball, but his girlfriend was so involved in the inaugural activities that she could not go as his date.


Bengals' Blockers Are Moving Ahead
LEAD: They are the team within a team, one of the most honored units in the National Football League.


Conner Saves the Night for Nets
LEAD: The Nets were on their way to another debacle tonight.
They lost an 18-point lead in the second half.
Their offense collapsed in the fourth quarter.
They were struggling against the San Antonio Spurs (10-26), a team the Nets shouldn't lose to at home.


Jordan Surge Paces Bulls
LEAD: Michael Jordan, held to 11 points for three quarters, erupted for 11 fourth-period points and dished off 13 assists tonight to help lead the Chicago Bulls to a 103-96 triumph over the Indiana Pacers.


Morgan, J P &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan, J P &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
258,100,000
224,100,000
Per share
1.38
1.21
Yr net inc
1,002,000,000
83,300,000
Per share
5.38
.39
1987 included a $875 million second quarter provision for credit losses.


Rockwell International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwell International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,869,000,000
2,681,000,000
Net inc
160,000,000
b192,900,000
Share earns
.62
.71
b-Included a non-recurring favorable tax adjustment of $50.2 million, or 18 cents a share.


WASHINGTON TALK: The Presidency; Army of Cartoonists Begins Hunt for Fodder
LEAD: Jules Feiffer draws him as a prep schooler in short pants; Bill Mauldin sees him as a scolding headmaster; Gary Trudeau renders him like Tinkerbell, a tiny point of light, the rest invisible.


MNC Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNC Financial Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
49,262,000
43,541,000
Per share
1.67
1.51
Yr net inc
182,249,000
148,827,000
Per share
6.28
5.19


Guilty Pleas in Kickback Case
LEAD: Executives seeking lucrative contracts to repair city vehicles paid kickbacks to officials of the Environmental Protection Department and the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, officials said yesterday.
Guilty pleas were announced for four city officials and vendors from Samson Manufacturing and Durante Maintenance and Equipment at a news conference yesterday by Mayor Edward I.


Warning From Tokyo on Trade and Dollar
LEAD: A senior official of Japan's powerful Finance Ministry warned today that a widening trade surplus with the United States would not be improved by further declines in the dollar, suggesting that the Bush administration will have to take a markedly different approach to equalizing trade between the countries.


RECOMMENDED FEES AND FINE CHANGES
LEAD: Some increases from the budget proposed yesterday by Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
New Fees
Victims' Assistance Fee
$2
work-release inmate room and
$7 per day
board charge
Probation supervision fee
$10 per month
Late tuition charge to improve
$25
collection (CUNY)


Wells Fargo &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
136,000,000
111,200,000
Per share
2.45
1.95
Yr net inc
512,500,000
50,800,000
Per share
9.20
.52
Both year-ago periods' results included the effects of special additions to the allowance for loan losses and related tax benefits in connection with loans to developing countries.


18 Accused of Commodity Fraud
LEAD: Eighteen former employees of the First Commodity Corporation of Boston have been charged with defrauding more than 2,600 customers of more than $40 million.


MGM/UA Weighing Sale Of Its United Artists Studio
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company said today that it was considering a restructuring plan in which its United Artists film and television studio would be sold.


Let Mediation Board Do Its Job at Eastern Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York; In This Corner, Wearing Heels And a Tiara . . .
LEAD: People have been hitting each other and calling it sport for 3,500 years.
For what seemed clear and sufficent reason, boxing has been a male preserve.


Review/Theater; 3 Tales Play Against One Another In a Farce From Everett Quinton
LEAD: ''What in the gay hell?'' asks a startled Everett Quinton upon opening his apartment door during the early moments of the new Ridiculous Theatrical Company production, ''A Tale of Two Cities.'' In true Dickensian fashion, Mr.
Quinton, playing the role of an aspiring transvestite club performer, has just discovered that he is the recipient of an abandoned baby in a milk crate.


Apple Computer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,405,137,000
1,042,442,000
Net inc
140,452,000
121,368,000
Share earns
1.10
.92


MCI to Slash Service Prices
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that it was dropping the prices for its electronic mail service, beginning Feb. 1.


Makers of 'Jones' Sequel Offer Teasers and Tidbits
LEAD: Because they face a summer full of sequels to successful movies, Steven Spielberg and George Lucas have thrown off the mantle of secrecy behind which they hide their forthcoming films until the last possible moment.


Excerpts From Baker's Testimony Before Senate Committee
LEAD: Following are excerpts from testimony yesterday by James A. Baker 3d, the nominee for Secretary of State, at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
The testimony was recorded by The New York Times, through the facilities of C-Span, and by the Federal News Service.


Intel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
727,340,000
572,488,000
Net inc
85,801,000
95,537,000
Share earns
.46
.55
Yr rev
2,874,769,000
1,907,105,000
Net inc
452,922,000
248,055,000
Share earns
2.51
1.38


Czarist Bond Talks Going On
LEAD: The State Department has disclosed that United States and Soviet officials have started talks on the repayment of bonds issued by the czarist Government of Russia but repudiated after the Soviet revolution of 1917.


Luggage Holder in Pan Am Bombing Found
LEAD: The police investigating the explosion that destroyed a Pan Am Boeing 747 over Scotland last month said today that they had identified the luggage container in which the bomb was placed.


First Pennsylvania Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Pennsylvania Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
14,081,000
11,262,000
Per share
.33
.26
Yr net inc
58,166,000
b53,918,000
Per share
1.36
-
b-Net loss


Standard Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Products Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
131,408,000
126,185,000
Net inc
7,180,000
7,760,000
Share earns
.67
.70
6mo sales
245,303,000
228,950,000
Net inc
12,234,000
12,202,000
Share earns
1.15
1.10


Nunez Agrees to Terms
LEAD: The Mets reduced their salary-arbitration list to eight yesterday when they reached agreement on a 1989 contract with Edwin Nunez, a relief pitcher, who was purchased from the Seattle Mariners last July.
The terms were not disclosed, but Nunez was believed to have signed for one year for a slight raise over the $310,000 he earned last season.


Vacatons Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vacatons Spa Resorts (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,396,000
2,751,000
Net inc
391,000
634,000
Share earns
.01
.08


Mariners Sign Davis
LEAD: Alvin Davis agreed to a three-year, $4.45 million contract with the Seattle Mariners yesterday.
Shawon Dunston, Zane Smith, John Cerutti, Neil Allen and Al Nipper agreed to one-year contracts.
Davis, who made $922,500 in 1988, will get $1.25 million in 1989, $1.425 million in 1990 and $1.725 million in 1991.


2 Executives Leave Salomon
LEAD: Two senior executives have resigned from Salomon Brothers Inc., the securities firm has announced.


EDUCATION;
LEAD: Saul P. Steinberg, chairman and chief executive officer of Reliance Group Holdings, has pledged $25 million to the University of Pennsylvania, the largest single donation ever for the school, university officials announced yesterday.


Indiana National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Indiana National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
15,147,000
5,782,000
Per share
.87
.33
Yr net inc
55,826,000
27,052,000
Per share
3.21
1.58
The year-ago fourth quarter and year reflected the addition of $11 million and $34 million, respectively, of provisions for foreign loan losses.


International Paper Offer Is Approved
LEAD: The directors of Aussedat Rey S.A., one of France's largest paper companies, approved a $320 million acquisition offer from the International Paper Company.
International Paper, the world's largest paper maker, offered $107 a share for all of the French company's stock.
The bid was announced last week, but no price was disclosed.


Peoples Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,864,000
2,474,000
Per share
.41
.37
Yr net inc
10,295,000
9,277,000
Per share
1.52
1.40
Corrected from yesterday's editions.


Correction
LEAD: The Patents column in Business Day on Saturday misidentified the inventor of a device to help store breast milk for working mothers.
He is David Hauk.


Molinari Fights A Federal Post For Goodman
LEAD: In a move symptomatic of the deep divisions within the New York Republican Party, Representative Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island said yesterday that he was actively opposing the possible appointment of another leading city Republican, State Senator Roy M. Goodman of Manhattan, as Federal General Services administrator.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Washington is quiet now except for the background hum of knives being sharpened.''  - Robert Lichter, a political scientist.  [ A15:2. ]


Steinberg Jury Will Consider All Four Charges of Homicide
LEAD: The jury will be able to consider all the homicide charges against Joel B. Steinberg, including second-degree murder, first- and second-degree manslaughter and criminally negligent homicide, when it gets the case against him Monday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Economic Scene; Saving Energy: The Big Chill
LEAD: IMAGINE a technical fix that would conserve two billion barrels of oil, eliminate the need to build 14 Shoreham-sized power plants, slow the carbon dioxide buildup in the atmosphere - and still save consumers tens of billions of dollars.


RPM Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
100,053,805
91,277,638
Net inc
7,894,568
6,834,672
Share earns
.35
.30
6mo sales
197,293,254
178,432,114
Net inc
16,566,593
14,572,899
Share earns
.74
.65


Listing Is Won In Yellow Pages By Gay Groups
LEAD: Beginning with its 1989-90 editions, the Nynex Yellow Pages will be reorganized to include a previously unpublished listing: gay and lesbian services.


Dublin Journal; Fair Is City but Foul Is Air When Smog Creeps In
LEAD: The smog creeps menacingly through doors and windows here.
It attacks throats and lungs.
It sometimes invades Dublin to such a degree that night appears to fall by midday.


Devils' Power Play Is No Advantage
LEAD: Marc Fortier, Gaetan Duchesne and Jeff Jackson each scored short-handed goals tonight to help the Quebec Nordiques beat the Devils, 7-4.


Lennar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lennar Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
117,589,000
93,358,000
Net inc
8,779,000
6,593,000
Share earns
.88
.67
Yr rev
380,518,000
330,051,000
Net inc
27,620,000
23,014,000
Share earns
2.78
2.50


A NAMIBIAN GROUP OPPOSES U.N. CUTS
LEAD: The head of the South-West Africa People's Organization called on the United Nations today not to cut back on its plans for a Namibian peacekeeping force.


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer-Daniels-Midland Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
100,373,000
97,317,000
Share earns
.56
.54
6mo net inc
191,674,000
180,300,000
Share earns
1.08
.99


In U.S., Slim Expectations
LEAD: The American public strongly supports United States talks with Yasir Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization, but entertains little hope that either the P.L.O. or Israel will make the real concessions needed to achieve peace in the Middle East, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Air Treads Inc., Atlanta, a subsidiary of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. that services the aviation industry, appointed Albert K. DeRosa president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds Garland T. Duke, who is retiring.


Cuomo Education Budget Draws Wide Criticism
LEAD: Governor Mario M. Cuomo's proposed $11.3 billion budget for education, if adopted by the Legislature, would mean faculty layoffs, program cuts and dramatic increases in local property taxes across the state, education officials said today.


40 Banks Said to Back Deal for RJR Nabisco
LEAD: Commercial banks proved to be willing lenders for the $24.88 billion buyout of RJR Nabisco Inc. by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


Why Spelling Machines Sometimes Flunk
LEAD: The makers of electronic spelling checkers say their machines can find the proper spelling even if the user spells the word wrong. ''Type NABOR and in seconds the Spell-Checker locates NEIGHBOR,'' boasts the brochure for the Texas Instruments product.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,458,000
63,075,000
Net inc
2,230,000
1,279,000
Share earns
.41
.24
9mo sales
225,624,000
181,188,000
Net inc
5,879,000
3,379,000
Share earns
1.09
.63


Review/Theater; A Fictional Bert Lahr In Crisis
LEAD: A famous clown named Max Luck is in Florida rehearsing a role in an avant-garde tragicomedy (very much like ''Waiting for Godot''), and his insecurity in the play sends him into a swirl of memories about his early days in vaudeville.
For many years, he and his partner, Maxie (later his first wife), had been struggling troupers.


Icahn Raises Texaco Stake
LEAD: Carl C. Icahn said yesterday that he owned 40.47 million shares of Texaco Inc., or 16.6 percent.
The New York financier had previously reported a stake of 16.2 percent.


Arafat and Arab Mayor: Threat or a Distortion?
LEAD: On New Year's Day, Yasir Arafat was reported to have told a meeting of Palestinians in Saudi Arabia that any Palestinian who opposed the uprising in the West Bank and Gaza Strip ''exposes himself to the bullets of his own people.''


ITT Financial 10-Year Notes
LEAD: The ITT Financial Corporation priced a $100 million offering of 10-year notes through a syndicate led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Cooking Classes Come to the Family
LEAD: PEOPLE who make a living in the food business certainly have an obligation to teach their children how to cook.
Right?
Well, I tried.
Heaven knows I tried.
After both of my children, who are five years apart in age, had gone through the licking-the-bowl-and-the-eggbeater stage and had shown an interest in how to make the stuff that was clinging to both bowl and beater, I was happy to instruct.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Tallying the Hits ''My image is that I have no image except that of an everyday person,'' Debbie Gibson said the other day. ''When I first signed with Atlantic Records, the people I was working with said I had to have one.
They thought I should look older.
But I asked why.
I pointed out that guys in the business don't have to have an image, and that's one reason why they get taken more seriously.


A 45-Dish Banquet For 110 Hunters
LEAD: THE dinner began with woodcock breasts in brandy sauce and ended, 44 dishes later, with chocolate truffles. ''If anybody's still hungry after this, you can go get a pizza,'' said Mark Avondoglio, one of the hosts, to the 110 guests, many of them hunters and fishermen.


Reviews/Music; Premiere of Guitar Piece
LEAD: At a glance, the program Eliot Fisk played at his Alice Tully Hall guitar recital on Sunday evening seemed weighted toward the familiar, with a new work by Luciano Berio wedged in among pieces by Sor, Scarlatti, Bach, Paganini and Barrios.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  ATLANTA (NL) - Agreed to terms with Zane Smith, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CHICAGO (NL) - Agreed to terms with Shawon Dunston, shortstop, and Al Nipper, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Signed Claudell Washington, outfielder, to a three-year contract.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Agreed to terms with Neil Allen, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Northern Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
42,100,000
b35,200,000
Per share
2.59
-
Yr net inc
109,300,000
b65,100,000
Per share
6.61
-
b-Net loss and included losses from provisions for loan losses in less developed countries of $60 million for the quarter and $151 million for the year.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b747,000,000
621,000,000
Per share
2.19
1.82
Yr net inc
b1,858,000,000
c1,182,000,000
Per share
5.36
-
b-Included tax benefits of $160 million for the quarter and year.


Arab Countries Try To Help Lebanese Solve Political Crisis
LEAD: Arab governments have begun an initiative to help Lebanon solve a political crisis that has left the country without a president and split between rival Muslim and Christian interim administrations.


Making Over an Image With an Expert's Help
LEAD: IN the movie ''Working Girl,'' Melanie Griffith plays a character named Tess McGill, an ambitious Staten Island secretary who wears dangling earrings.
She encounters Katharine Parker (Sigourney Weaver), an impeccably groomed executive with an unfortunate tendency to quote Coco Chanel.
Like many professionals, Tess needs to upgrade her image.


Texas Eastern
LEAD: The shares of the Texas Eastern Corporation, which on Monday received a $2.6 billion takeover bid from the Coastal Corporation, rose yesterday as investors apparently believed that another bidder would emerge.
The oil and gas pipeline operator's stock rose $1.375, to $46.375, higher than the $42-a-share offer from Coastal.


How the Balloting Went
LEAD: The results of two ballots on Proposition 42, an amendment to the N.C.A.A. bylaw popularly known as Proposition 48.
Proposition 42 would tighten academic requirements for an athletic scholarship.
The first vote was Jan. 10, with the proposition being defeated by 159-151.
On a second vote, on Jan. 11, the proposition was passed, 163-154.


It's a Disgrace! Moscow's Warmest January in 100 Years
LEAD: Add winter to the list of current items in deficit in Moscow.
With chickens and soap disappearing from store shelves and service stations empty of gasoline, Muscovites are finding that even cold weather is hard to come by.


Birmingham Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birmingham Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
102,267,000
81,593,000
Net inc
10,323,000
5,064,000
Share earns
.84
.48
Shares outst
12,362,567
10,522,685
6mo sales
217,036,000
161,922,000
Net inc
22,323,000
10,309,000
Share earns
1.81
.96
Shares outst
12,356,796
10,736,343


Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
371,000
535,000
Share earns
.13
.19
Yr net inc
1,821,000
2,131,000
Share earns
.66
.77


Toys 'R' Us Head Honored; Some Retailers Don't Attend
LEAD: A number of major retailing executives did not attend a luncheon yesterday honoring Charles Y. Lazarus, chairman and founder of Toys ''R'' Us and Kids ''R'' Us, who was honored as ''boys' wear retailer of the year.''


Donors to the Neediest Cases Express Concern for the Aged
LEAD: ''There are so many different groups that need help, but the aged and infirm are surely among the most deserving,'' wrote a couple, asking to remain anonymous.
Natives of New York City, now living in Scarsdale, they sent $200 to help the elderly.


International Multifoods Names Chief Executive
LEAD: The International Multifoods Corporation, a Minneapolis-based company that has become a major food distributor, has named Anthony Luiso chairman and chief executive.


Triton Energy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Energy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
42,630,000
47,214,000
Net loss
13,167,000
b8,766,000
6mo rev
95,979,000
88,503,000
Net loss
18,222,000
b8,046,000
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $6,594,000 from the redemption of 13.5 percent notes due 1994.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillenbrand Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Revenue
248,289,000
199,528,000
Net inc
17,414,000
17,500,000
Share earns
.47
.47
Yr rev
884,288,000
724,602,000
Net inc
69,742,000
57,429,000
Share earns
1.86
1.51


Drought Alert Is Declared In Echo of '85
LEAD: New York City and Westchester County jointly declared a ''drought watch'' yesterday, and the Delaware River Basin Commission, from which New York City receives about half its water, went a step further by declaring a ''drought warning.''


'Darkness' Was in Our Vision
LEAD: The statue of Dr.
David Livingstone gazes out across the falls, a roaring curtain of water more than a mile wide that is truly one of the world's wonders.
He was, as a signboard explains, ''the first European to see the falls, which he named in honor of Queen Victoria.''


Review/Theater; Medieval Mystery Plays, As Performed to Music
LEAD: Handed down through centuries, the Medieval Mystery Plays are a native folk art in England, France and Germany.
There are so many cycles and so many directorial interpretations of Bible stories that one always looks for a fresh perspective.
This, unfortunately, is not forthcoming in ''Genesis: Music and Miracles from the Medieval Mystery Plays,'' an unimaginative storybook version of biblical highlights that opened last night at the Public


Farley Expects Shift by Pepperell
LEAD: The chairman of Farley Industries said he believed that West Point-Pepperell Inc.'s executives would change their hostile stance toward Farley's $48-a-share offer before a special shareholders meeting on Feb. 25.


Supreme Court Roundup; Ruling Upholds California Redistricting
LEAD: Ending a decade-long legal battle over Congressional redistricting in California, the Supreme Court ruled today that the district lines drawn after the 1980 Census did not amount to unconstitutionally partisan gerrymandering.


Nova Scotia Yield at 9.51%
LEAD: The Province of Nova Scotia priced $200 million worth of long-term bonds yesterday through a syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Carl M. Spero, Executive, 86
LEAD: Carl M. Spero, retired president of the Spero-Whitelaw Company, Manhattan insurance brokers, died of pneumonia on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Triad SystemsQtr to Dec 31 reports earnings for 1988
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triad SystemsQtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,110,000
29,569,000
Net inc
b3,229,000
1,346,000
Share earns
.40
.17
b-Included 20 cents a share from property sale and accounting of nonrecurruing costs.


McTear Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Houston McTear, a former record-holder in the 100-yard dash when world records were recognized in that event, pleaded guilty yesterday to one count of selling cocaine and will be sentenced in Santa Monica (Calif.) Superior Court Jan. 31.
McTear was arrested by the Santa Monica police last fall and charged with selling cocaine in a park.


Marriott in Venture With Soviet Airline
LEAD: The Soviet airline Aeroflot and the Marriott Corporation announced a venture to supply about 10,000 meals a day to Aeroflot passengers.
The catering operation would be the first in the Soviet Union to involve a Western concern, the companies said.


Columbia Fellows to Include Soviets
LEAD: Columbia University will establish a graduate fellowship program next fall in American and international studies with students from the United States, the Soviet Union and four other countries, school officials say.


Lavish Inauguration Nearly Ready
LEAD: In the Pentagon, a two-star general commands a legion of 8,500 military people for temporary duty as planners, parade marshals and chauffeurs.
On a street corner near the White House, Alfonso Benjamin Hayden Dixon holds sway over a set of commemorative buttons that he hawks to passing tourists.


WASHINGTON TALK: Briefing; Better to Receive?
LEAD: Senator Christopher J. Dodd has a suggestion for colleagues who say they oppose the 50 percent pay increase recommended by a Federal commission: Give it back.


Reagan's Final Rating Is Best Of Any President Since 40's
LEAD: As President Reagan prepares to leave office this week, two-thirds of the American people approve his performance over the last eight years, the highest rating given any President at the end of his term since World War II.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Citizen Watch Leaving Levine
LEAD: After six years, Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver has lost one of its showcase accounts, the Citizen Watch Company of America, to Young &amp; Rubicam and HDM.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chevrolet and Pontiac, two units of General Motors Corp., Detroit, said they would offer 4.9 percent financing on selected models.


Review/Opera; Jessye Norman in a 20th-Century Double Bill
LEAD: Both of the works on the double bill that had its Metropolitan Opera premiere on Monday evening, Bartok's ''Bluebeard's Castle'' and Schoenberg's ''Erwartung,'' were composed at a volatile time when the ideas of Freud and such Expressionist painters as Kandinsky were setting out a radical new agenda for 20th-century social and artistic thought.


Gerald G. Probst, 65, Chairman Of Sperry at Time of Big Merger
LEAD: Gerald G. Probst, former chairman of the Sperry Corporation and a longtime executive in the computer and military systems industries, died at his home in Salt Lake City last Sunday.
He was 65 years old.


Petoskey Journal; One Victim Fights a Rare Disorder
LEAD: Nancy Whitmore Sando's muscles began slowly turning to bone when she was 5 years old.
Now at 29, she is almost completely paralyzed, the victim of an extremely rare genetic disorder, Fibrodisplasia ossificans progressiva.


Damon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damon Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
53,687,743
44,678,672
Net loss
b434,403
c1,345,655
Share earns
-
.14
b-Included costs of $1,874,000 related to the company's defense against an unsolicited tender offer.


Teachers College Is Pondering New Challenges
LEAD: The centennial party is over at Teachers College at Columbia University, and, as it wakes to the realities of its second century, the school continues to reflect the strains of the profession for which it is named.


Girl, 11, Raped on Way to Brooklyn School
LEAD: An 11-year-old Brooklyn girl was raped while on her way to school yesterday morning, the police said.


Brazil Payments Aid Citicorp Net
LEAD: Bolstered by payments of past-due interest on loans to Brazil, Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, reported a strong gain in fourth-quarter earnings.


Intertan Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
202,182,000
172,331,000
Net inc
b18,171,000
8,298,000
Share earns
2.04
.93
6mo sales
335,029,000
281,636,000
Net inc
b21,510,000
10,775,000
Share earns
2.41
1.21


ITALIANS LECTURE IRANIAN ON RIGHTS
LEAD: Iran's Prime Minister met today with Italian leaders and with Pope John Paul II, receiving pledges of aid to rebuild the Iranian economy but also hearing calls for human rights improvements and for swift prisoner-of-war exchanges.


Mr. Meese's Disgrace
LEAD: The difference between escaping indictment and vindication has long eluded Edwin Meese.
He claimed vindication when one special prosecutor failed to indict him, thus clearing the way for his confirmation as Attorney General.
He claimed vindication again last summer when another special prosecutor declined to file criminal charges.


U.S. Note and Bond Prices Slip
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds dipped modestly in light trading yesterday, as market participants awaited this morning's release of the latest figures on the United States trade deficit.


Trade Parley Falls Through
LEAD: In a bid to defuse trade tensions, United States and European Community officials tried last week to set up a secret meeting in Bermuda, European diplomats and American officials said today.
But no meeting was held because of scheduling conflicts.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the Lotus Development Corporation misstated the circumstances under which Mitchell Kapor, its founder and chairman, left the company.
Mr.
Kapor said he left in July 1986 because he was unhappy with his work.
He did not start another company until late 1987.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about self-service baggage carts at Kennedy International Airport misstated the salaries of skycaps who also help carry passengers' luggage.
They earn $19,000 a year plus tips, not $14,000.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about foreign reaction to Emperor Hirohito's death misidentified a South Korean official who visited the Japanese Embassy in Seoul to sign a book of condolences.


William Redfield, 94, Ex-Grocery Executive
LEAD: William F. Redfield, a retired grocery executive and former president of the Hills Brothers Company, died Monday at his home in Montclair, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 94 years old.


Panel of Scientists Fears Global Race In Biological Arms
LEAD: Military use of biotechnology threatens to create a biological arms race that will disrupt recent efforts at international arms control, a panel of scientists said today.


Steel Output Capacity Rising
LEAD: The nation's ability to produce steel will increase this year after declining for seven years, the American Iron and Steel Institute said Monday.


Rights Panel Sees Decline in U.S. Enforcement
LEAD: A private commission today reported a ''dramatic decline'' in civil rights enforcement by the Federal Government under the Reagan Administration and urged that President-elect George Bush appoint a Cabinet-level group ''to deal with the causes and results of bigotry and prejudice.''


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
274,475,000
209,421,000
Net inc
11,088,000
7,375,000
Share earns
.73
.46
6mo sales
562,813,000
400,938,000
Net inc
20,750,000
14,257,000
Share earns
1.36
.88


Fetisov Leaves Team In Dispute With Coach
LEAD: Vyacheslav Fetisov, the star defenseman, and Igor Larionov, a center, have resigned from the Central Red Army team in a dispute with their coach, Viktor Tikhonov, who is also the coach of the Soviet national hockey team.
In an interview in Moskovsky Komsomolets yesterday, a Moscow youth daily, Fetisov cited a series of grievances against Tikhonov who, he said, made life with the club intolerable.


A Macklowe Cloud Over New York
LEAD: The saga of Harry Macklowe's midtown Manhattan hotel, a melodrama complete with dangerous dead-of-night intrigue, has turned into an indictment of New York City government.


NBD Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
61,518,000
49,685,000
Per share
1.29
1.08
Yr net inc
227,156,000
162,229,000
Per share
4.81
3.47
NBD said its 1987 net was reduced by $32.4 million, or 69 cents per share, as the result of a special $54 million provision for possible credit losses on Latin American loans.


Burke Gets All-Star Spot
LEAD: Sean Burke, the 21-year-old goaltender for the Devils, has been voted the starting spot on the Wales Conference team for the National Hockey League All-Star Game Feb. 7 in Edmonton, Alberta.
He is the first rookie to be named a starter since the fans began selecting the starting team four years ago.


Chamber Music Society Sets New-Season Plans
LEAD: Fred Sherry, the cellist who will become the artistic director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center in the fall, announced plans for his first season at the society's helm at a news conference yesterday.


A Salute to Pan Am Staff Following Crash; Christmas in Lockerbie
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Liszt Concerto Discovered
LEAD: A Chicago musicologist has quietly completed work on a discovery that will make a lot of noise: a hitherto unheard piano concerto by the piano's thundering master, Franz Liszt.


Homeless Defy Order to Vacate Refuge in Newark


2 Lawyers for Brawley Fight Disbarment Move
LEAD: Facing disciplinary proceedings for their roles in the Tawana Brawley case, C. Vernon Mason and Alton H. Maddox Jr., Miss Brawley's lawyers, are battling before two committees to avoid censure, suspension or disbarment.


About Education
LEAD: ''Schools are often ugly, shoddy, and dirty.
McDonald's Hamburgers Inc. spends millions of dollars redecorating their establishments to sell their products; yet, teachers are supposed to sell poetry, geography and the miracles of mathematics in environments that are often very unappealing, if not downright filthy.


An Honor for Payton
LEAD: Walter Payton, who rushed for more yards in his career than any other professional football player, was named the winner of the Dapper Dan Club's fifth annual Farewell to Sport Award yesterday.
The honor goes to a retiring athlete who exemplifies competitive excellence and service to the community.


Monsanto Is Nearer Sale of Unit to Germans
LEAD: An inter-agency Government task force has tentatively approved the Monsanto Company's plan to sell its semiconductor subsidiary to one of the largest chemical companies in West Germany, Reagan Administration officials said today.


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Association (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
152,700,000
b195,000,000
Share earns
1.91
2.42
Yr net inc
506,700,000
b376,000,000
Share earns
6.43
4.66
b-After a non-recurring credit of $135 million relating to the retroactive implementation in 1987 of a new accounting standard for both the quarter and year.


Rules on Tranquilizer Prescriptions Don't Harm Confidentiality
LEAD: To the Editor:


More Than 200 Arrested in Miami In 2d Night of Racial Disturbances
LEAD: The police used force to clear the streets last night as blacks burned automobiles and threw bottles in the Overtown section for the second night and violence spread to another black neighborhood.


In Senate Forum: All Hail, Baker!
LEAD: They had obviously gathered, these eminent Senators, not to bury James A. Baker 3d under a heap of hostile questions but to praise him, and the compliments flowed back and forth all day long.


Lloyd Bentsen Sr., 95, the Father Of Texas Senator, Killed in Crash
LEAD: Lloyd Bentsen Sr., the millionaire rancher whose son.
Lloyd Jr., was the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee in 1988, was killed early this morning in a traffic accident in Edinburg, Tex.
He was 95 years old.


Education Chief Blocks Move To Suspend a Board Member
LEAD: The state Commissioner of Education, Thomas Sobol, yesterday blocked a move by the city Board of Education for the immediate suspension of former City Councilman Robert Rodriguez from membership of Community School Board 4 pending the outcome of removal proceedings.


O'Connor Appeals to Subway Rapist to Surrender


Hunt Pressed for Belgian Ex-Prime Minister
LEAD: The Belgian authorities investigated presumed terrorist organizations today in their search for former Prime Minister Paul Vanden Boeynants, who disappeared from his home here Saturday night.


United Jersey Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Jersey Banks (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
28,546,000
25,867,000
Per share
.63
.56
Yr net inc
116,075,000
102,696,000
Per share
2.58
2.31


Five Children Killed As Gunman Attacks A California School
LEAD: A young drifter dressed in military fatigues opened fire with a semiautomatic rifle at children playing outside and others inside an elementary school today.
Five children between 6 and 9 years old, all of them refugees from Southeast Asia, were killed and more than 30 people were wounded, about half of them critically, before the gunman shot himself to death.


CUOMO PROPOSES CUTS IN SPENDING AND RISES IN FEES
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed a state budget today that would increase a wide array of fees and taxes, ranging from marriage license fees to taxes on tires, while cutting spending for many major state programs, including Medicaid and higher education.


Yanks Lose Washington To 3-Year Angels Deal
LEAD: In the midst of a feud between the owner and the star right fielder, the Yankees lost their center fielder yesterday when Claudell Washington signed as a free agent with the California Angels and nearly doubled his annual pay with a three-year contract for $2.625 million.


Polish Party Eases Stance on Solidarity
LEAD: Poland's Communist Party approved a complex plan early today that if accepted would lead to the legalization of the outlawed Solidarity labor union.
But it contained conditions that senior Solidarity advisers have said make it virtually impossible to accept.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Magazine And Retailer Join Forces
LEAD: THE nation's largest women's magazine, Family Circle, and the second-largest retail chain, K Mart, have joined with a popular taste maker in a multimillion-dollar program to enhance the retailer's image through advertising and editorial coverage.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  FIGURE SKATING  Soviet Pair Leading: Maryna Klimova and Sergei Ponomarenko emerged yesterday from the four-year shadow of Natalya Bestemyanova and Andrei Bukin to take the early lead in the ice dance competition at the European figure skating championships in Birmingham, England.
Klimova and Ponomarenko have never won a major event, having been runners-up in eight previous world, Olympic and European championship appearances.


Excerpts From Cuomo's Budget Message: Cuts in Aid and Other Programs ALBANY, Jan. 17 -
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget message to the Legislature:  SOCIAL JUSTICE  Substance Abuse And Alcoholism


Jim Bakker Pleads Not Guilty Of Misusing PTL's Millions
LEAD: Jim Bakker, the former leader of the PTL television ministry, pleaded not guilty today to Federal charges of diverting millions of dollars in donations from his followers and using the money to support his lavish style of life.


Dow Off by 10; Transport Average Climbs
LEAD: Despite a strong day for airline stocks that sent the Dow Jones transport average to a post-recovery high, the stock market closed lower yesterday on moderately higher volume.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 10 points, to 2,214.64, The transport index climbed 7.78, to 1,004.38, its highest level since Oct.


Park Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
42,980,000
41,338,000
Net inc
6,395,000
6,065,000
Share earns
.46
.44
Yr rev
160,357,000
149,427,000
Net inc
19,098,000
17,071,000
Share earns
1.38
1.24


Maxtor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxtor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Revenue
91,425,000
74,147,000
Net inc
767,000
5,151,000
Share earns
.04
.26
9mo rev
253,250,000
185,478,000
Net inc
3,822,000
8,065,000
Share earns
.19
.41


Probation Agency Faces a Double Burden
LEAD: The murder of Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant this month has once again cast a harsh light on the Probation Department, the New York City agency that was responsible for the activities and whereabouts of the 23-year-old man accused in her death.


Real Estate; Hovnanian's Big Project In Jersey
LEAD: OVER the last three decades K. Hovnanian Enterprises Inc., a development company based in Red Bank, N.J., has become a leading home builder by putting up no-frills housing.
The company's low prices have drawn buyers willing to camp out overnight for the chance to purchase.


German Inquiry Begun on Aid to Libyan Air Force
LEAD: The Munich prosecutor's office announced today that it had opened an investigation into a Bavarian company that has reportedly been helping Libya develop a capacity for midair refueling.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: SWEET red peppers make an excellent base for all kinds of delicious low-fat sauces.
I recently prepared a splendid but easy weeknight dinner using trimmed, boneless loin of pork and a quick red-pepper sauce.


Critic's Notebook; A Matisse Misfit Is Placed
LEAD: Thanks to the Art Institute of Chicago, and above all to its director, James N. Wood, one of the more disappointing aspects of the recent improvement in Soviet-American relations has been laid to rest. .
For the first time ever, Soviet authorities on 20th-century art sat down with their American equivalents and talked freely, easily, incisively and before an invited public for hour after hour.


Dollar Slips on Quiet Day; Dealers Await Trade Data
LEAD: The dollar slipped yesterday in quiet trading, reflecting dealers' reluctance to take risky positions before the release this morning of the latest figures on the United States trade deficit.


Tellier Named Coach Of Columbia Football
LEAD: Ray Tellier Jr., who was the head coach at Rochester for the last five seasons, was appointed yesterday as the new Columbia football coach.


Saudi Oil Production
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's oil output averaged 4.35 million barrels a day in the first two weeks of January, slightly below its newly assigned OPEC quota of 4.52 million barrels, Persian Gulf oil sources said today.


Tender Offer for Actmedia
LEAD: The Heritage Media Corporation, a Dallas-based broadcasting company, announced a cash tender offer yesterday for up to 6.4 million shares of Actmedia Inc. as a first step toward a friendly merger.


Irish vs. Virginia In Kickoff Classic
LEAD: Notre Dame, which wound up its undefeated 1988 season by beating West Virginia in the Fiesta Bowl, will begin the college football season against Virginia in the Kickoff Classic in Giants Stadium on Aug. 31.


Can a Champagne Redeem de Sade?
LEAD: A LINE of three Champagnes named for the Marquis de Sade was introduced in Paris yesterday by a descendant seeking to rehabilitate his ancestor's name.
Each wine is a brut - that is, dry.


Shultz Accuses East Bloc on Rights
LEAD: Secretary of State George P. Shultz asserted today that some countries in Eastern Europe, especially Czechoslovakia and Rumania, were abusing human rights even as they signed a major international agreement promising to respect such rights.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.25
9.10
1090
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.52
8.21
5.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.82
8.31
6.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.10
9.10
8.44
30-YR.


Let Mediation Board Do Its Job at Eastern Air; Impact on Florida
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gramm-Rudman, With Half a Heart
LEAD: A new administration is about to take power in Washington and, as it does, world financial markets join a chorus of domestic experts in warning us that we have to deal with our huge Federal budget deficits.


Strains Among the Children of Privilege
LEAD: EVEN now, almost three months after the accident, there are straggly bouquets of flowers at the base of the big coral tree at 11th Street and San Vicente Boulevard in Santa Monica.
The tree has become the unofficial tombstone of the four teen-agers who died when their speeding car plowed into it the night of Oct.


Cambodia Must Unite
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Bad Debts Grow


Black Tie and Brown Betty: The Fun Begins
LEAD: FIFTEEN security guards took their posts in the main hall of Union Station in Washington last night, awaiting this morning's commuters and Amtrak riders and keeping an eye on 5,400 pieces of china, 18,000 pieces of silverware and 6,300 pieces of glassware.
Their tour of duty, which began at about 11 P


Reviews/Music; Uchida in Piano Recital
LEAD: The pianist Mitsuko Uchida established her reputation as a superb Mozartean with a series of sonata and concerto recordings, and although she has expressed a desire to devote more time to other composers, she will be playing all the sonatas during Mostly Mozart's complete-works survey.


At the Top: Domestic Policy
LEAD:  ROGER B. PORTER: Assistant to the President for Economic and Domestic Policy


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Defaults Up On Debts Owed U.S.
LEAD: Delinquent debts that farmers, students, veterans and taxpayers owe the Federal Government have more than doubled in the Reagan years despite stepped-up efforts to curb it, the White House is expected to report later this week.


For TV, a Festival of Glowing Images
LEAD: George Bush's inauguration will be a festival of glowing television images aimed at bringing him the final step out of Ronald Reagan's shadow and burnishing away the remaining political scars from an election campaign dominated by harsh television commercials.


Islanders' Hard Work Pays Off
LEAD: For a change, the Islanders did what they were told and devoted 60 minutes of their evening to a game that requires a solid hour of their time but doesn't often get it.


Metro Datelines; Two Armed Robbers Killed by a Grocer
LEAD: Two holdup men were shot to death by a grocer during an attempted robbery of a store in the High Bridge section of the Bronx last night, the police said.


Walsh Keeps Future A Continuing Mystery
LEAD: Faced with an indication that he has planned to resign as coach of the San Francisco 49ers after Super Bowl XXIII Sunday, Bill Walsh repeated today that he would not make that decision until after the game.


Book Notes
LEAD:  New From Saul Bellow


TV Stations Subpoenaed
LEAD: Three network-affiliated television stations in the Roanoke, Va., area have been subpoenaed in a Justice Department inquiry into price-fixing of advertising rates, Government officials and station executives said today.


BAKER ASSERTS U.S. SHOULD NOT 'RUSH' IN AIDING MOSCOW
LEAD: Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker 3d said today that the United States has an interest in seeing Mikhail S. Gorbachev succeed in his attempts to bring changes to the Soviet system, but should avoid ''a headlong rush'' to provide Moscow with loans and credits.


Firstfed America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstfed America (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b3,079,000
2,567,000
Share earns
.82
.66
b-Included an $855,000 gain on the sale of Firstfed's Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. participating preferred stock.


Corrections
LEAD: Picture captions in Business Day yesterday with an article about the National Retail Merchants Association were reversed in some editions.


Metro Datelines; Bird and 10 Snakes Stolen From 2 Shops
LEAD: Ten snakes, two iguanas and a $1,400 cockatoo have been stolen from two pet shops in Nassau County, the police said yesterday.
It was not known if the two thefts were related.


Helen of Troy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
33,313,000
23,154,000
Net inc
3,436,000
2,199,000
Share earns
.97
.66
9mo sales
76,165,000
52,046,000
Net inc
7,170,000
4,369,000
Share earns
2.01
1.29


WINE TALK
LEAD: IN which we rummage through a couple of new wine newsletters and pass on a tragic tale from a wine-store O. Henry.


A Bengal Remembers Overtown
LEAD: Eddie Brown went back to his old neighborhoods on Monday but they looked closed, in more ways than one.


Federal Pay Increase Is Given Little Support
LEAD: Only one American in seven favors the proposed 50 percent pay increase for members of Congress, Federal judges and high officials of the executive branch, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


Soviet Pullout Is Said to Be Brisk As Afghan Deadline Gets Nearer
LEAD: Soviet troops have been leaving Afghanistan by the hundreds in daily airlifts from Kabul, the Afghan capital, Western diplomats said here today.


Trooper Kills Man in Struggle On Jersey Road
LEAD: A man riding in a car that was pulled over for speeding on the New Jersey Turnpike was killed today while struggling with a state trooper over a gun.


Aristech Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aristech Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
258,500,000
241,900,000
Net inc
34,900,000
21,400,000
Share earns
1.45
.84
Yr sales
1,065,200,000
918,800,000
Net inc
b188,200,000
69,700,000
Share earns
7.54
2.71


Paramount to Buy Option For Control of TV Stations
LEAD: Another movie company moved yesterday to enter television broadcasting, as Paramount Pictures agreed to acquire the right to buy control of TVX Broadcast Group, a troubled operator of independent stations, from Salomon Brothers Inc.


Insider-Trading Inquiry Reported in Paris
LEAD: The Commission on Operations of the Bourse, the French equivalent of the Securities and Exchange Commission, refused to comment today on reports that two prominent Lebanese businessmen were being investigated in connection with insider trading in the takeover of Triangle Industries by Pechiney S.A., the


Apple Profits Are Up 16%; Prices Cut
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. today reported a 16 percent gain in net income on a 35 percent growth in revenues for its first fiscal quarter, ended Dec. 30.
The company also announced selected price cuts for expensive products, effectively rolling back part of the unusual price rises it made in September.


Stage II Apparel reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stage II Apparel (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
33,269,000
28,776,000
Net inc
2,184,000
1,930,000
Share earns
.51
.50
Shares outst
4,284,000
3,884,000
6mo sales
57,722,000
45,760,000
Net inc
3,192,000
2,723,000
Share earns
.75
.76
Shares outst
4,284,000
3,593,000


Vienna Spring, Prague Winter
LEAD: Only an hour after pledging in Vienna to ''respect the right of their citizens to contribute to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedom,'' Czechoslovakia used dogs, clubs and water cannon to deny that right.


Bridge
LEAD: If you watch a declarer win the first trick and then see him start to think, you can safely assume he is not an expert.
Even if the play to the first trick seems obvious, it pays to plan before touching a card.
Sometimes a little cogitation will result in a different play at the first trick.


Pitt Rallies to Beat Boston College, 73-64
LEAD: Bobby Martin scored 17 points and Jason Matthews added 16 to lead Pitt to a 73-64 Big East victory over Boston College tonight.


L. Reyner Samet, Lawyer, 83
LEAD: L. Reyner Samet, a New York divorce lawyer for 50 years whose clients included Colleen Dewhurst, Lee Remick, Barbara Walters and Roy Scheider, died of heart failure Monday in Marina del Rey, Calif., while on vacation.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Crude Oil and Gasoline Rise; West Texas Contract Climbs
LEAD: Crude oil and gasoline futures prices posted strong rises again yesterday, building on recent bullish momentum.
Prices tailed off late in the day, however, amid profit taking.


Dancing At the Bottom
LEAD: I once went to an Inaugural Ball.


Accord in Death of Girl Who Made Peace Trip
LEAD: The mother of Samantha Smith, a Maine schoolgirl who visited the Soviet Union on a peace mission at the invitation of the Soviet head of state, has settled a $50 million lawsuit she filed after the girl and her father died in a plane crash, a lawyer said today.


Hugh D. McCandless, 81, Ex-Rector of Church
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Hugh Douglas McCandless, rector emeritus of the Episcopal Church of the Epiphany at York Avenue and 74th Street in Manhattan, died of cancer Sunday at his home in Hamden, Conn.
He was 81 years old.


Koch Rebuffed in Bid for Inquiry Data
LEAD: The New York State Commission on Government Integrity yesterday refused to provide Mayor Edward I. Koch with confidential information gathered during its investigation of the Mayor's Talent Bank.


Putting Data at Your Fingertips
LEAD: Stephen A. Rondel stood amid a small crowd with a strange contraption in his hand, speaking slowly into a microphone. ''I would like . . . to go . . . to the . . . airport,'' he said in a monotone voice.
Then, he added, ''Translate.''


Molex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
143,959,000
122,921,000
Net inc
8,364,000
14,270,000
Share earns
.33
.56
6mo rev
282,317,000
235,088,000
Net inc
24,068,000
27,025,000
Share earns
.95
1.07


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 13
Jan. 6
Jan. 15
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
234.8
228.8
233.4
Distillate stocks
124.3
126.9
131.7
Crude imports, daily
5.2
4.4
5.6
Product imports, daily
3.2
2.5
2.7
Crude stocks
324.5
329.0
343.1
Crude production, daily
7.9
7.9
8.2
Refinery utilization (%)
85.7
85.3
83.3


How to Obtain State Budget
LEAD: Copies of the 1990 New York State Budget, which run about 700 pages, are bing sold to the public for the first time.
The cost to the state is $20 per copy, but they will be sold for $10 each, and 3,000 copies are available.
Legislators, libraries and journalists will still receive free copies.
To obtain a copy, send $10 to Paul Fisk, Budget Services Unit, Room 117, State Capitol, Albany, N.Y., 12224.


Garrison Makes Comeback And Moves to Third Round
LEAD: Sixth-seeded Zina Garrison came back in the final set to beat Sandra Wasserman of Belgium, 7-6, 4-6, 6-4, today and advance to the third round of the Australian Open tennis championships.


Confusion Renewed Over Pill and Risks
LEAD: CONCERNED and confused, sometimes angry or, by now, numb to bad news about breast cancer: that is how gynecologists are describing patients' reactions to three recently released studies linking prolonged exposure to the estrogen in oral contraceptives with increased risk of breast cancer.


Australian Dollar Offering by Unisys
LEAD: The Unisys Financial Corporation priced a $75 million (Australian) note offering.


Mayors Hopeful on Homeless
LEAD: The nation's mayors expressed guarded optimism today that the problems of homelessness and hunger in the cities had finally stabilized.


Justice Dept. Assails Meese
LEAD: The Justice Department's ethics office said yesterday that if Edwin Meese 3d were still Attorney General he should be subjected to Presidential discipline.


Budget Plan Burdens New York City, Its Officials Say
LEAD: New York City officials, citing the new burdens they would shoulder for education and medical care, said today that Governor Mario M. Cuomo had underestimated how onerous his proposed budget would be to the city.
They vowed to lobby for major changes in the budget.


Lessons
LEAD: Most societies have some sort of rite of passage from childhood to adulthood.
The aborigine in Australia send adolescents into the wilderness on a ''walkabout.'' German noblemen prove their maturity by acquiring dueling scars.


Kissinger Relays Bush's Ideas On Relations to Gorbachev
LEAD: Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger met Mikhail S. Gorbachev today and relayed some ideas about Soviet-American relations from President-elect George Bush, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.


IRAQ SAID TO STUDY BIOLOGICAL ARMS
LEAD: Iraq is developing biological weapons, including arms that can spread typhoid, cholera and anthrax, Government officials said tonight.


A Salute to Pan Am Staff Following Crash
LEAD: To the Editor:


Zitel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zitel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,643,000
5,588,000
Net inc
b875,000
b282,000
Share earns
.17
.06
b-Included tax credits of $48,000 and $110,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


The New Voodoo, Made Fairer
LEAD: Commendably, President-elect Bush wants to stretch the dismally short investment horizons of American business.
Not at all commendably, he thinks that cutting the tax on capital gains is a sensible way to do that.
He urged that new form of voodoo economics during the campaign, and it is now said to be high on a list of contemplated fixes.


Intel's Net Down in Quarter
LEAD: The Intel Corporation, a leading maker of computer chips, reported today that its fourth-quarter earnings had dropped 10.2 percent from a year ago.
The company cited a decline in demand for its 80386 microprocessor, reflecting inventory buildup by personal computer manufacturers.


EATING WELL
LEAD: AFTER a dinner at your favorite restaurant in which nearly every dish is served with a sauce enriched with cream, butter or both, you may find it difficult to believe that the chef has heard of the dangers of cholesterol.


Paul Sheatsley, 72; Pioneer and Leader In Opinion Research
LEAD: Paul Baker Sheatsley, a retired research director who was a well-known authority in public opinion polling, died of emphysema Sunday at Little Company of Mary Hospital in Chicago.
He was 72 years old and lived in Chicago.


Rules on Tranquilizer Prescriptions Don't Harm Confidentiality; Bottleneck in Refills
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Now, No Changes in Prescribing Methods
LEAD: DOCTORS at most family-planning groups and student health clinics surveyed said they did not plan to change guidelines for prescribing contraceptive pills in the wake of three new studies linking the pills with increased risks of breast cancer.


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
54,513,000
49,668,000
Per share
.85
.79
Yr net inc
206,285,000
157,933,000
Per share
3.25
2.52
The prior year net was reduced by 43 cents by two unusual events in the second quarter, a $15 million special provision for Latin American debt and a $27.6 million lawsuit settlement.


Review/Television; Diary of a Rain Forest and Its People
LEAD: Phil Agland lived with the Baka in their tiny villge deep in a rain forest in southeastern Cameroon while making ''Baka: People of the Forest,'' and it shows.
His close-in view of the day-to-day lives of the seminomadic Pygmy tribe awakens thoughts of our common humanity.
The appealing National Geographic documentary can be seen at 9 P.M.


New Jersey Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Jersey Steel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
36,997,000
24,245,000
Net inc
5,940,000
3,348,000
Share earns
1.04
.57
Yr sales
139,347,000
94,573,000
Net inc
23,304,000
10,041,000
Share earns
4.08
1.84


Serious Ethics Breaches by Meese Are Found in Justice Dept. Study
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that Edwin Meese 3d violated government ethics codes so seriously when he was Attorney General that if he were still in office he should be subjected to Presidential discipline.


Awaiting the Corrugation of a New President


Review/Dance; Isadora Duncan's Legacy
LEAD: One of the most amazing theatrical illusions is spontaneity.
Isadora Duncan, the great pioneer of modern dance, must have known how to create it, for she so enthralled audiences that many assumed her choreography was improvised.
But the dances by Duncan preserved by her disciples after her death in 1927 are as precise in form as they are eloquent in content.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about bank earnings misstated the closing price of the stock of the Chase Manhattan Corporation.
It closed at $30.875, up 62.5 cents.


Bush's Domestic Policy Team Is All Set, but Not the Agenda
LEAD: George Bush ascends to the Oval Office this Friday having made a broad set of domestic policy promises: to clean up the environment, fight drug abuse, improve education and make day care more affordable for the poor.


The Big Cleanup Push Will Take Leadership
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Executive Director Is Chosen at Bellevue
LEAD: The executive director of the City Hospital Center at Elmhurst was named the executive director of the Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation announced yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-9  The Secretary of State-designate, James Baker 3d, said that the United States has an interest in seeing Mikhail Gorbachev succeed, but should avoid ''a headlong rush'' to provide loans and credits.
Page A1


L.F. Rothschild Withdraws As a Key Treasury Dealer
LEAD: L.F.
Rothschild &amp; Company said yesterday that it had withdrawn as a primary dealer in United States Treasury securities.
It cited difficult business conditions and questionable short-term prospects.


Capital Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
33,172,000
25,511,000
Net inc
1,816,000
1,420,000
Share earns
.19
.15
6mo rev
37,058,000
21,562,000
Net inc
2,636,000
2,835,000
Share earns
.28
.30


Check of Ski Lifts Is Ordered After Cracks Appear in Chairs
LEAD: State officials have ordered nine ski resorts to inspect ski lifts immediately after cracks were found in a chairlift.


Raise for Galarraga
LEAD: Andres Galarraga tripled his salary yesterday and Bobby Bonilla, Joe Hesketh, Wes Gardner and Kevin Mitchell doubled their paychecks.
Galarraga and the Montreal Expos agreed to a one-year contract for $865,000, an increase from the $240,000 he made in 1988.
Bonilla and the Pittsburgh Pirates agreed to a one-year contract for $730,000, a $485,000 raise.


Bush to Meet U.N. Chief
LEAD: President-elect George Bush has invited Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to a small dinner party at the White House next Tuesday evening, officials said today.


US Trust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Trust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,651,000
7,937,000
Per share
.56
.78
Yr net inc
30,621,000
34,354,000
Per share
3.00
3.24
Per share earnings are fully diluted.
The company said latest quarter and year results reflected the impact of the company's share repurchase program, partly offset by the sale of 450,000 shares of stock to the company's newly formed employee stock ownership plan.


Sovran Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
68,098,000
59,973,000
Per share
1.15
1.01
Yr net inc
243,062,000
217,437,000
Per share
4.09
3.67


Steel Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steel Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
29,774,000
19,704,000
Net inc
1,574,000
1,152,000
Share earns
.20
.16


Talking Deals; How Zeckendorf Filled a Tower
LEAD: WHERE crowds once roared at the previous Madison Square Garden, between 49th and 50th Streets and Eighth and Ninth Avenues, workers are putting the finishing touches on an office tower and residential complex that pushes the midtown cluster of high-rises and white-collar workers into a neighborhood best known for pornography and cheap bars.


Lotus to Offer PC Software
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation said yesterday that it would introduce a new kind of utility software designed to help personal computer users organize and retrieve information stored in computer files, including spreadsheets, word processing documents and data base files.


Bengals' Krumrie Carries the Load
LEAD: Most football players train by lifting weights. Tim Krumrie lifts an anvil.


Bridge
LEAD: Every beginner is taught to select a four-four major suit fit rather than play in no-trump.
There are rare exceptions, and it is possible to have hands with a five-four fit on which no-trump is preferable.
But eschew a five-five major suit fit?
Never.


American Home Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,300,912,000
1,213,358,000
Net inc
238,641,000
215,203,000
Share earns
1.63
1.47
Yr sales
5,500,533,000
5,028,272,000
Net inc
932,184,000
845,081,000
Share earns
6.38
5.73


State-O-Maine Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State-O-Maine Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
31,289,488
26,142,162
Net inc
2,651,979
2,367,014
Share earns
.81
.96
Shares outst
3,257,747
2,466,495
9mo sales
58,772,676
45,189,428
Net inc
4,574,063
3,712,241
Share earns
1.60
1.56
Shares outst
2,855,953
2,374,955


Gasoline Demand and Oil Price Rise
LEAD: The price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil climbed to $19.26 a barrel yesterday, its highest level since November 1987.
The 31-cent increase in the spot contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange was spurred in large part by sharply higher gasoline prices.


King Says He Signed 2 Contracts with Tyson
LEAD: While making a deposition in Mike Tyson's suit to void the contract of his manager, Bill Cayton, Don King was glum in the morning, loquacious in the afternoon and thunderingly irate at the close of the proceedings.


At Library, a Room for the Homeless
LEAD: WHEN the new public library in Haverhill, Mass., opens in 1992, it will include a room designed specifically for homeless people.
The 60,000-square-foot library is part of a civic center, shown above, being designed by Mark Mitchell Associates of Hanover, N.H.
Haverhill is in the northeastern part of the state.


Lebanon Foes to Aid Arab League Mediators
LEAD: Leaders of rival Christian and Muslim Cabinets have agreed to cooperate with the Arab League in an effort to prevent the formal partition of Lebanon, officials reported today.


Jaruzelski Said He'd Quit If Party Rejected His Gesture to Solidarity
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski and other Polish leaders threatened to resign to force the adoption of a resolution opening the way for legalization of the Solidarity trade union, a Government press agency report said late Wednesday.


RABIN AT CENTER OF ISRAELI STORM
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin walked out of a stormy debate in Parliament today after opposition members heckled him about increased bloodshed in the occupied territories and demanded that he resign.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: EVERYONE in the Miller household admits that living the past eight months under one roof has taken some adjusting.


Dominion Bankshares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Bankshares Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
21,066,000
19,685,000
Per share
.54
.51
Yr net inc
83,048,000
77,852,000
Per share
2.14
2.02


PRISONS' DIRECTOR IS SLAIN IN OREGON
LEAD: The director of Oregon's prison system was found stabbed to death today on the grounds outside the headquarters of the Department of Corrections here.


The Fast-Food Market's New Lure
LEAD: Fast-food marketing experts, always trying to shrink the time and distance between a man and his meal, are rapidly discovering a new competitive wrinkle.


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zurn Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
118,056,000
94,594,000
Net inc
5,865,000
4,538,000
Share earns
.48
.37
9mo sales
341,283,000
304,226,000
Net inc
16,558,000
13,827,000
Share earns
1.36
1.13


Vanzetti Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanzetti Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
624,509
1,518,074
Net loss
605,743
b102,656
Share earns
-
.04
Yr sales
4,944,382
3,472,983
Net loss
467,679
1,710,556
b-Net income


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
American Home Products
$ 238,600,000
+
10.9
Ameritech
309,700,000
-
3.9
AMR Corp.
116,700,000
*
-
Arco Chemical Co.
134,000,000
+
116.1
Cincinnati Bell Inc.
17,300,000
-
2.8
Gencorp Inc.
13,000,000
-
94.9
I.B.M.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you come down here and think this is Disneyland, that's not real.''  - Ronnie Lott, of the San Francisco 49ers,talking about racialdisturbances in Miami,site of the Super Bowl.  [ A18:3. ]


First Peoples Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Peoples Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,020,000
c3,142,000
Share earns
1.30
.92
Shares outst
3,068,000
3,365,000
Yr net inc
b17,003,000
c10,824,000
Share earns
5.24
3.32
Shares outst
3,207,000
3,090,000


Huntington Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
22,848,000
5,634,000
Per share
.61
.15
Yr net inc
87,552,000
47,827,000
Per share
2.33
1.26


Gendex Corp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,913,000
4,395,000
Net inc
495,000
461,000
Share earns
.17
.16
9mo sales
13,950,000
11,949,000
Net inc
1,274,000
875,000
Share earns
.43
.34


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
256,511,000
185,876,000
Net inc
8,947,000
4,583,000
Share earns
.49
.26
9mo sales
644,011,000
460,838,000
Net inc
19,107,000
6,750,000
Share earns
1.05
.39


Eagle Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Financial Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,020,000
383,000
Share earns
.38
.14


Banc One Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
87,548,000
68,536,000
Per share
.67
.53
Yr net inc
340,188,000
231,496,000
Per share
2.61
1.82


Becker Cruises Into Third Round
LEAD: Boris Becker, playing his first outdoor match in four months, breezed past Kelly Evernden of New Zealand, 7-5, 6-1, 6-3, today to advance to the third round of the Australian Open.


Federal Judge Acting to Settle Lilco Suit Case
LEAD: The Federal judge presiding over the racketeering suit against the Long Island Lighting Company has intensified pressure on the representatives of the utility, its customers and Suffolk County to fashion a settlement that could lead to the closing of the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Gorbachev Promises Big Cut in Military Spending
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev told a visiting Western delegation today that the Soviet Union will reduce its military budget by 14.2 percent and cut production of weapons and military hardware by 19.5 percent.


Phoenix Technologies Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Technologies Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,626,000
8,775,000
Net inc
2,865,000
b1,438,000
Share earns
.26
.17
Shares outst
11,103,000
8,388,000
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $67,000 which resulted from a tax benefit of net operating loss carryforwards.


Life's Basic Problems Are Still Top Concern In the Nursing Homes
LEAD: A new study indicates that residents of nursing homes are much more concerned about the daily problems of institutional living than with the loftier issues of death and dying that ethicists thought would be uppermost in their minds.


Domain Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domain Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,045,000
13,191,000
Net inc
1,845,000
b179,000
Share earns
.24
-
Shares outst
7,717,000
7,201,000
6mo sales
46,243,000
25,105,000
Net inc
3,675,000
4,000
Share earns
.47
.09
Shares outst
7,748,000
7,172,000


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,151,000
3,126,000
Per share
.49
.30
Yr net inc
17,671,000
11,362,000
Per share
1.68
1.09


Network Equipment Technoloies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Equipment Technoloies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1987
Revenue
35,537,000
24,794,000
Net inc
4,177,000
b3,983,000
Share earns
.30
.29
Shares outst
13,855,000
13,774,000
9mo rev
97,953,000
62,657,000
Net inc
11,327,000
b11,185,000
Share earns
.82
.81
Shares outst
13,849,000
13,764,000


Pharmakinetics Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pharmakinetics Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,487,686
2,713,720
Net inc
669,128
b265,294
Share earns
.07
.03
6mo rev
11,743,972
4,991,617
Net inc
1,227,222
b566,513
Share earns
.13
.06


Club Med Inc reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Club Med Inc (NYSE)
Year to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
412,423,000
370,443,000
Net inc
8,770,000
17,351,000
Share earns
.62
1.23


Apple Offers New Computer
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. introduced the Macintosh SE/30 today, a new computer that packs much of the power of the top-of-the-line Macintosh IIX into the smaller housing of the original Macintosh.


Woman Gets Top News Job At Knight-Ridder
LEAD: Jennie Buckner, a senior editor of The San Jose Mercury News, is to leap into the corporate hierarchy of Knight-Ridder Inc. on July 1 when she assumes responsibility for the news and editorial content of the Knight-Ridder chain's 12 largest newspapers and its Washington bureau.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the New York State budget misstated the total spending proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for the coming fiscal year.
It is $46.6 billion, not $46.4 billion.


United Jersey Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Jersey Banks (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
28,546,000
25,867,000
Per share
.63
.56
Yr net inc
116,075,000
102,696,000
Per share
2.58
2.31


Problems on Shuttle Resolved
LEAD: Engineers have resolved the tile and engine problems of the last space shuttle flight, and the launching of the next shuttle has been set for Feb. 23, the Kennedy Space Center director said today.
Forrest S. McCartney said damage to tiles on the shuttle Atlantis on its secret mission last month was caused by insulation that hit the shuttle in liftoff.


In London, a Showcase for Italian Design
LEAD: The richly colored metaphysical paintings of Giorgio de Chirico fill an entire gallery in the new exhibition ''Italian Art in the 20th Century,'' which opened Saturday at the Royal Academy of Art here.


Holiday Glow Won't Go Away
LEAD: Christmas decorations still glow each night in downtown Delano because the Chamber of Commerce does not have the money to store them and pay for insurance.
The lights have been plugged into city light poles since mid-November, so they turn on automatically every evening. ''It's very embarrassing to me,'' the chamber manager, Dorothy Knight, said Monday.


Bank South Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank South Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
12,680,000
6,427,000
Per share
.37
.19
Yr net inc
43,431,000
29,395,000
Per share
1.28
.88


Reagan in Retrospect, on 'Frontline'
LEAD: ''Frontline'' bids farewell to the Reagan era tonight with a 90-minute exploration of ''The Real Life of Ronald Reagan.'' The title hints at a theme of Garry Wills's narration -that Mr.
Reagan's own view of his career and the world often owed more to memories of the movies he played in or watched than to reality.


Is That in Ohio?
LEAD: One of the many perils of testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is pronunciation.
More than one official has made himself look silly in years past by stumbling over the names of people and places in remote lands like Iran or Laos or Liechtenstein.


U.S. Again Reports Libyan Role in Terrorism
LEAD: The United States asserted today that Libya continues to support terrorism around the world and is using foreign surrogates to strike Western targets.


Syracuse Mourns Students Killed on Flight 103


When Chest Pains Have Nothing to Do With a Heart Attack
LEAD: Severe, crushing pain in the chest is often a warning of an imminent heart attack, but in tens of thousands of people this frightening symptom has nothing to do with heart disease, scientists have concluded on the basis of new studies.


Berlin Wall Aids Peace, East Bloc Powers Assert
LEAD: The Soviet Union and East Germany today rejected Western calls for the destruction of the Berlin wall, saying it must stay in place for the time being.


Republic New York Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
50,000,000
22,100,000
Per share
1.49
.57
Yr net inc
169,700,000
17,200,000
Per share
5.01
.11
The results for 1987 included losses of $83.8 million on lesser developed country (LDC) debt, a special loan loss provision for LDC's of $110 million and an extraordinary loss, net of tax benefit, on the early extinguishment of long-term debt of $15.9 million.


Review/Cabaret; Hildegarde, Still Kinetic
LEAD: ''The Incomparable Hildegarde,'' as this singer from Milwaukee has been billed for many years, is now, at the age of 83, not only beyond comparison but is seemingly unquenchable.
In the new cabaret room Rainbow and Stars, on the 65th floor of 30 Rockefeller Plaza, she is singing, playing piano, bouncing around the tiny stage and expending enough energy to exhaust someone half her age.


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
610,000
103,000
Per share
.36
.06
6mo net inc
1,212,000
699,000
Per share
.72
.41


Bio-Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Logic Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,320,998
2,340,433
Net inc
50,343
242,203
Share earns
.02
.09
9mo rev
6,929,971
6,123,835
Net inc
433,463
537,514
Share earns
.16
.19


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bonnie Doon Inc., Stamford, Conn., a maker of women's and children's hosiery, named Martin B. Kramer president and chief executive.


First Tennessee National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,900,000
2,177,000
Per share
.88
.14
Yr net inc
52,343,000
33,913,000
Per share
3.34
2.20
The year-ago periods included charges of $7,888,000 for the quarter and $15,509,000 for the year on loan loss provisions for lesser developed countries loans, and gains of $401,000, or 2 cents a share, and $4,959,000, or 32 cents a share, for the same periods, respectively, for partial settlement of pension plan liabilities.


Intermec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
33,385,000
23,243,000
Net inc
2,482,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.37
.21
9mo rev
85,714,000
61,818,000
Net inc
4,906,000
3,209,000
Share earns
.74
.51


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Section yesterday about breast cancer misstated the affiliation of Dr.
Selig Strax.
He is medical director of the Guttman Breast Diagnostic Institute.


Yields Rise For Week
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds all rose for the week ended yesterday.


Ryan's Family Steak House reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan's Family Steak House (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
48,047,000
40,465,000
Net inc
4,636,000
4,431,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Yr rev
193,024,000
155,252,000
Net inc
19,262,000
16,830,000
Share earns
.37
.32


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
54,418,000
32,405,000
Net inc
7,897,000
5,604,000
Share earns
.55
.39
6mo sales
98,434,000
61,982,000
Net inc
13,608,000
10,295,000
Share earns
.94
.73


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.06
9.26
6.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.26
8.24
5.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.29
8.35
6.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.03
9.10
8.91
30-YR.


George Bush: In Search of A Mission
LEAD: Candidate Bush turned out to be a surprise. President Bush may be a bigger one.


Meridian Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
21,710,000
17,656,000
Per share
.55
.45
Yr net inc
86,053,000
79,435,000
Per share
2.21
2.05


Pacific Western Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Western Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,035,000
1,234,000
Per share
.18
.11
Yr net inc
b7,368,000
29,000
Per share
.63
-
b-After a gain of $1.2 million from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


TCF Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCF Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b4,461,000
c70,697,000
Share earns
.62
-
Yr net inc
b21,483,000
c7,810,000
Share earns
2.99
-
b-Included tax credits of $2,338,000 and $9,009,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


International Business Mahines Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
20,002,000,000
18,302,000,000
Net inc
2,347,000,000
2,087,000,000
Share earns
3.97
3.47
Shares outst
590,800,000
599,600,000
Yr rev
59,681,000,000
55,256,000,000
Net inc
5,806,000,000
5,258,000,000
Share earns
9.80
8.72
Shares outst
592,400,000
603,000,000


Q&amp;A
LEAD: Q. Most of the time my toilet flushes fine, but occasionally the water swirls around and won't flush completely.
In fact, sometimes the water keeps rising until it almost reaches the rim of the bowl.
The ballcock inside the tank is adjusted properly and the flapper valve is working fine.
There is no leakage.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Rally
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds staged a rally in active trading yesterday, bolstered by the dollar, which rose despite a trade report that showed the merchandise trade deficit widening substantially in November.


32 Are Killed and 41 Injured In Chinese Bus-Train Crash
LEAD: At least 32 people were killed and 41 injured when a passenger train hit a crowded bus in northeastern China, the New China News Agency reported today.


ARCO Offering
LEAD: ARCO said it expected to receive up to $1.38 billion in proceeds from its 40-million-share initial public offering of the Lyondell Petrochemical Company, which was priced today at $30 a share.
As part of the offering proposal, Lyondell paid ARCO a $500 million dividend on Tuesday.
The stock will be offered for sale beginning Thursday through the offering's underwriters, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Salomon Brothers Inc.


Valley National Phoenix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Phoenix Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
18,720,000
b27,161,000
Per share
.95
-
Yr net inc
67,316,000
b44,359,000
Per share
3.41
-
b-Net loss  The net is after credit losses of $103.9 million in 1988 and $154.9 million in 1987.


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller Building Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,732,382
8,793,021
Net inc
420,802
331,213
Share earns
.10
.08
6mo sales
22,617,399
18,361,771
Net inc
1,050,952
b1,020,176
Share earns
.26
.25


Sterling Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,343,000
16,291,000
Net inc
797,100
b440,200
Share earns
.20
.12
9mo sales
66,591,000
46,613,000
Net inc
2,298,300
b806,800
Share earns
.59
.22


Reed Loses Temper As Nets Lose Game
LEAD: So often, Willis Reed suffers silently on the Nets' bench, keeping his composure while watching another chance for victory slip away.


Kimberly-Clark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimberly-Clark Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,400,000,000
1,300,000,000
Net inc
94,700,000
82,200,000
Share earns
1.18
.99
Yr sales
5,400,000,000
4,900,000,000
Net inc
378,600,000
325,200,000
Share earns
4.71
3.73


Sunair Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunair Electronics
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,490,055
1,416,829
Net inc
156,626
225,911
Share earns
.04
.06


Security Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,011,000
5,399,000
Per share
.91
.72
Yr net inc
24,469,000
19,299,000
Per share
3.21
2.54


Circulation Power Play By Magazine
LEAD: IN New York, they say, money is power.
In Washington, they add, power is power, a tautology that perhaps explains why poorly paid Senate aides are nevertheless feared.


Capital Mayor Is Subpoenaed In Federal Grand Jury Inquiry
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. has been subpoenaed to testify before a Federal grand jury investigating the Mayor's conduct and a city contract with the Virgin Islands, an assistant to the Mayor indicated tonight.


ATWATER ELECTED CHAIRMAN OF G.O.P.
LEAD: Lee Atwater, who enhanced his street-fighter reputation as Vice President George Bush's campaign manager, today was elected chairman of the Republican National Committee and immediately sounded the battle cry for the party's next big challenge: Congressional redistricting.


No. 1 Duke Is Upset By Carolina
LEAD: Scott Williams sparked the inside game, scoring 22 points to lead the 13th-ranked North Carolina to a stunning 91-71 upset of top-ranked Duke in an Atlantic Coast Conference game tonight.


Officials Fear Shift of Taxes From Albany
LEAD: One day after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo made public his $46.6 billion state spending plan, many state lawmakers and local government officials said that if the plan were enacted, New Yorkers would be spared increases in their state taxes only to see them show up on their local tax bills.


Supertex Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Supertex Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,141,000
4,796,000
Net inc
801,000
829,000
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
12,177,000
12,097,000
9mo sales
16,060,000
13,006,000
Net inc
2,408,000
1,751,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Shares outst
12,166,000
12,084,000


The Palestinian Menace Has Been Exaggerated; Raising the Issues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Julian L. Greifer, Sociologist,87
LEAD: Julian L. Greifer, a former social worker who was a professor emeritus of sociology at Temple University, died of internal bleeding Saturday at Arlington Hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 87 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


The Palestinian Menace Has Been Exaggerated
LEAD: To the Editor:


Toronto Race Relations Shaken by Shootings
LEAD: Toronto's claim to one of the best records on race relations of any major North American city has been shaken in the last week by scenes of anger and recrimination between the city's blacks and its overwhelmingly white police force.


At the Top: Congressional Movers
LEAD:  SAM NUNN: Chairman, Senate Armed Services Committee  A 50-year-old native of the small south Georgia town of Perry who has spent 16 years in the Senate building an imposing reputation on national security issues . . .
Often mentioned as a Presidential candidate . . .
Graduate of Georgia Tech, with law degree from Emory University .


After Shooting, Horror but Few Answers
LEAD: They fled the killing fields of Cambodia to bring up their children in the peaceful, fertile fields of the San Joaquin Valley of California.
But today the thousands of Southeast Asian refugees who have settled here could only wonder in horror why a young American would walk into a schoolyard and open fire with an assault rifle.


Advanced Marketing Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Marketing Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
75,221,000
48,822,000
Net inc
3,300,000
2,353,000
Share earns
.57
.47
Shares outst
5,823,000
4,993,000
9mo sales
129,260,000
85,874,000
Net inc
4,523,000
3,006,000
Share earns
.83
.65
Shares outst
5,427,000
4,603,000


Russell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
151,428,000
132,647,000
Net inc
17,468,000
14,764,000
Share earns
.44
.37
Yr sales
531,136,000
479,880,000
Net inc
53,765,000
46,334,000
Share earns
1.36
1.17


Researchers Make Clotting Protein
LEAD: A clotting protein made through genetic engineering appears promising for people with the bleeding disease hemophilia and would be more certainly free of contaminating viruses than current treatments, researchers say.


Collagen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collagen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,733,000
6,784,000
Net inc
b867,000
c688,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
8,247,000
7,429,000
6mo rev
19,858,000
12,845,000
Net inc
b1,457,000
c1,083,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
7,976,000
7,381,000


Jefferson Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,368,000
3,781,000
Per share
.72
.61
Yr net inc
14,832,000
13,438,000
Per share
2.44
2.18


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about risks and benefits of the female sex hormone estrogen misidentified the group of women in which the incidence of breast cancer is increasing most rapidly.
It is those over age 50.


S.E.C.-Drexel Negotiations Are Said to Be at Impasse
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. are at an impasse over how to settle the charges of securities law violations against the firm, a person directly involved in the case said yesterday.


Compromise on Leadership Reached by Retailers Group
LEAD: After a four-day convention marked by opposition between large retail members and small ones, the directors of the National Retail Merchants Association moved to smooth things over yesterday by appointing a small-store merchant as its new chairman and a big-store chief executive as first vice chairman.


On the Agenda, Parting and Partying
LEAD: Outside 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, workers were completing the stands for the inaugural parade on Friday.
Inside the White House, a Marine Band played ''Auld Lang Syne'' in the East Room as Nancy Reagan cried and Ronald Reagan blinked back tears.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Mutual Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b11,033,000
7,203,000
Per share
.73
.48
Yr net inc
b38,573,000
c40,014,000
Per share
2.56
2.67
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,299,000 for the quarter and year.


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Microwave (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,817,000
10,290,000
Net inc
3,056,000
1,917,000
Share earns
.25
.16
9mo sales
45,589,000
27,720,000
Net inc
8,151,000
4,396,000
Share earns
.67
.42


James W. Cooper, 84, Retired Bar Official
LEAD: James Wayne Cooper, a retired lawyer and former president of the Connecticut Bar Association, died of cardiac arrest Monday at his home in Woodbridge, Conn.
He was 84 years old.


Exchange Sets 4:30 A.M. Start
LEAD: The Philadelphia Stock Exchange will begin extended morning trading in currency options on Friday in a move that could set the stage for almost round-the-clock trading on the exchange.


St Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St Paul Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,435,000
6,378,000
Per share
.54
.54
Yr net inc
22,041,000
20,215,000
Per share
1.85
1.70


Gencorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gencorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
531,000,000
451,000,000
Net inc
b13,000,000
c254,000,000
Share earns
.38
8.01
Yr sales
1,891,000,000
1,619,000,000
Net inc
b70,000,000
c475,000,000
Share earns
2.19
9.87


Hibernia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
12,148,000
10,238,000
Per share
.57
.51
Yr net inc
53,010,000
46,516,000
Per share
2.60
2.34


Drew Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drew Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
26,481,000
22,797,000
Net inc
208,000
b687,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Included a tax credit of $234,000.
The company said the latest quarter included operations acquired from Novo Corp.


Apple Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bank for Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,965,000
b8,072,000
Per share
1.52
1.76
Yr net inc
24,261,000
b27,567,000
Per share
5.29
6.01
b-After extraordinary credits of $3,351,000 for the quarter and $8,366,000 for the year.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Cop Shot (Citizens Outraged at Police Being Shot) is receiving $500,000 in bus shelter ad space provided by Gannett Transit to advertise its award program.


Knicks Hit Roadblock On West Coast Trip
LEAD: The Knicks, with a horrendous shooting performance from 2-point, 3-point and free-throw range, opened their 7-game, 11-day West Coast road trip with a 133-119 loss to the Golden State Warriors here at the Oakland Coliseum tonight.


Provident Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,873,000
892,000
Per share
.75
.11
Yr net inc
16,200,000
b10,528,000
Per share
2.08
1.35
b-After a gain from an accounting change of $2,024,000.


Review/Music; The Voices In Honor Of Dr. King
LEAD: Symphony Saintpaulia and its associated choirs, the Voices Saintpaulia, made their Carnegie Hall debuts Monday night in a tribute to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Saintpaulia is the African violet, and violet is one of the colors that leapt to mind as the rainbow richness of the choir's sound unfolded.


U.S. to End Protection Of 6 Kuwaiti Tankers
LEAD: In a sign of the continuing reduction of tensions in the Persian Gulf, the United States has decided to phase out its naval protection of 6 out of 11 Kuwaiti tankers that have flown the American flag since mid-1987, State Department officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Coastal Corporation's offer to buy the Texas Eastern Gas Corporation misstated terms of a deal between two other natural-gas companies.
The Transco Energy Corporation has agreed to acquire the Texas Gas Transmission Company from the CSX Corporation.


Frederick's of Hollywood Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frederick's of Hollywood Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Sales
17,417,000
14,283,000
Net inc
150,000
114,000
Share earns
.09
.07


TSR Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSR Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,388,000
5,895,000
Net inc
49,000
180,000
Share earns
.02
.08
6mo rev
10,701,000
11,908,000
Net inc
165,000
348,000
Share earns
.08
.15
Revenue for the both year-ago periods have been restated.


Elmore Jackson, 78, Quaker Mideast Envoy
LEAD: Elmore Jackson, a Quaker official who attempted a secret diplomatic mission aimed at achieving a political settlement between Egypt and Israel in 1955, died of Parkinson's disease Tuesday in Newtown, Pa., where he lived.
He was 78 years old.


American Hoist &amp; Derrick Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Hoist &amp; Derrick Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
77,541,000
-
Net inc
b3,760,000
-
Share earns
.49
-
Yr sales
258,216,000
203,039,000
Net inc
b6,557,000
c15,118,000
Share earns
.66
2.01


NEW FLAWS FOUND ON MISSILE SHIELD
LEAD: A panel of the National Research Council said yesterday that proposed energy sources to power weapons for the Pentagon's space-based system to defend against missiles were ''unacceptably large,'' making them impracticable to launch into orbit.


Selfix Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selfix Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
7,510,161
4,828,799
Net inc
557,094
427,124
Share earns
.20
.19
6mo sales
15,601,915
9,941,989
Net inc
1,418,776
965,521
Share earns
.56
.42


Killing of a Child: How the System Failed
LEAD: A little more than two years ago, welfare investigators portrayed the home of Abigail Cortez as a ''warm and nurturing environment.'' On Dec. 14, 1988, her 5-year-old daughter, Jessica, was dead of a broken neck, and Mrs.
Cortez and her companion, Adrian Lopez, were charged with murder.


U.S. Agency Sets Wetland Protection Policy
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency, in a step with potentially far-reaching conservation consequences, today announced a new policy of preventing any net loss of the nation's remaining wetlands.


First City Bancorp of Texas Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp of Texas Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
25,211,000
-
Per share
1.05
-
Yr net inc
66,059,000
-
Per share
2.73
-
First City said prior year figures are not comparable since the company was completely reorganized on April 18, 1988.


St. John's Holds On to Edge Rutgers
LEAD: St.
John's ran up leads of 10 points against Rutgers twice during tonight's second game of a doubleheader at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and held on to win by 62-61 before a crowd of 6,691.


Many Species Are Still Threatened Despite Law, U.S. Agency Reports
LEAD: The Federal program that is supposed to protect threatened plants and animals is fraught with problems, the General Accounting Office reported today, and a third of the 500 species listed as in peril continue to fade toward extinction.


U.S. Says It Has Tape of Arafat Threat
LEAD: Despite denials that Yasir Arafat had made any threats, the State Department said today that it had a tape recording by the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman made on New Year's Day that amounted to a threat to moderate Arabs and strayed from Mr.
Arafat's commitment to renounce terrorism.


Calendar: Antiques On View
LEAD:  Nine Days of Antiques, Seventh Avenue Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; 212-665-5250.


First Commercial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,800,000
b3,900,000
Per share
.85
.87
Yr net inc
13,300,000
b11,500,000
Per share
2.96
2.56
b-Included non-recurring income of $1.1 million, or 23 cents a share, resulting from the settlement of the company's litigation against its fidelity bonding company.


Trump Gets Initial Approval to Acquire Eastern's Shuttle
LEAD: The Department of Transportation, after reviewing the financial and managerial fitness of Donald J. Trump to run an airline, gave its initial approval today for the New York real estate developer to buy the air shuttle operations of Eastern Airlines.


Pacific Gas Has Big Loss
LEAD: The Pacific Gas and Electric Company reported today that it lost $487.1 million in the fourth quarter.


Roberts and 49ers Become Stronger
LEAD: It would not be fair to say that Larry Roberts was being pushed around a season ago.
He was in his second season as a defensive end with the San Francisco 49ers, primarily responsible for an outside rush in passing situations, when injuries suddenly necessitated a new role and created extenuating circumstances.


Nissan Establishes U.S. Finance Unit
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company of Japan said it had established a financial subsidiary in New York that would complement those in London and Tokyo.
The unit will give the auto maker 24-hour access to global financial markets.


Gretzky Places Third In Balloting by Fans
LEAD: It was no surprise that Wayne Gretzky made the Campbell Conference team for the National Hockey League All-Star Game when results of fan balloting were announced yesterday.
The surprise was that he finished third in the voting.
From the record 1,151,321 votes cast by the fans, who selected the starting team for the fourth consecutive year, Gretzky's Los Angeles teammate, Luc Robitaille, a left wing, finished first over all with 279,202 votes.


Judge Extends Order That U.S. Protect Dolphins
LEAD: A Federal district judge has extended his order for American tuna fishing boats to carry Government observers to see that efforts are made to prevent the killing of dolphins that become caught in the boats' nets.


Hershiser Complains
LEAD: He may be a sentimental hero to Dodger fans, but the way Orel Hershiser sees it, to the Dodger management he is just another business asset that may be getting too expensive to keep.
The pitcher, who was named as the most valuable player in both the National League playoffs and the World Series, told a Los Angeles radio station that although he wanted to remain with the Dodgers he had become so disenchanted with negotiations for a new contract that he was beginning to think of becoming a free agent after next season and moving to a new team.


Cuomo Plan Angers Board Members
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's new budget plan is out, and Charles Massie of Syracuse has a problem with it.


Students Are Recalled With Sobs and Silences
LEAD: In the arena where Syracuse University has celebrated its greatest victories with deafening roars, there were muffled sobs and eerie silences today as more than 10,000 people gathered to share an excruciating loss.
Four weeks after 35 Syracuse students were killed aboard Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, today's grief was new and raw, as the families of the dead students exchanged snapshots of the children they had lost.


Metro Matters; Now Hear This! Or Is the Honking Too Loud?
LEAD: ''Come Blow Your Horn'' is the name of a Neil Simon comedy, but in New York City it might as well be an invitation.


The Palestinian Menace Has Been Exaggerated; Limitless Demands
LEAD: To the Editor:


Personal Health
LEAD: Perhaps you remember as a child having a mouthful of food that you absolutely hated and couldn't begin to swallow.
Or perhaps you had a throat so sore and swollen that even water had trouble getting through.
Now, try to imagine having a more serious variation of the problem, perhaps all the time, every day, every time you try to eat or drink.


Church's Chicken To Be Auctioned
LEAD: Church's Fried Chicken Inc. said its board had decided to put the company up for auction to maximize its shareholders' value.
The San Antonio-based company said its advisers would be soliciting proposals from interested bidders in the next 30 days.
Each interested party will be required to sign a standstill agreement not to rebid for the company within a year if its offer is unsuccessful, a


Treasury Official Says Bush Is Unfazed by Dollar's Gains
LEAD: A senior Treasury official indicated today that the Reagan Administration and President-elect George Bush are unconcerned about the rise of the dollar in recent weeks, including a new spurt today.


Illinois Town Suffers With Stockton
LEAD: More than 70 parents accompanied their children to the Hubbard Woods Elementary School in this Chicago suburb today, where reading and arithmetic lessons gave way to discussions about random violence against children.


National Convenience Stores Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
271,937,000
200,218,000
Net loss
2,054,000
b1,249,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo sales
547,265,000
425,565,000
Net loss
717,000
b9,088,000
Share earns
-
.40


National Lampoon Board Expanded
LEAD: Matty Simmons, the chairman of National Lampoon Inc., has agreed to expand the company's board to seven seats from four and to add as directors the actor Tim Matheson, who played Otter in ''Animal House''; David Grodnik, a motion picture and television producer, and an Omaha investor, Alan S. Parsow.


F.D.A. Backs Warner Drug
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said yesterday that it had approved the Warner-Lambert Company's anti-cholesterol drug, Lopid, for use in reducing the risk of coronary heart disease.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Baker Says Central America Is Most Pressing Issue


First Maryland Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Maryland Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,245,000
11,752,000
Per share
.63
.68
Yr net inc
52,370,000
45,340,000
Per share
2.93
2.65
The results for the latest quarter included one-time expenses of about $5.3 million associated with the offer by Allied Irish Banks Plc.


Cost of Reagan Reign Far Exceeds Benefits; Breaking the Jinx
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times; The Many Faces of a Colorful Intelligence Agent
LEAD:  Edward Lansdale  The Unquiet American  By Cecil B. Currey  Illustrated. 430 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.


Reservation's Taxes May End Detours for Cheap Gas
LEAD: Each day hundreds of people stop briefly just inside the reservation here near the shore of Lake Erie.
Most are truck drivers or cigarette smokers looking for bargains.


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,616,000
7,339,000
Net inc
616,000
387,000
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
3,696,100
2,694,500
9mo sales
26,183,000
19,348,000
Net inc
1,510,000
1,027,000
Share earns
.50
.43
Shares outst
3,044,400
2,382,500


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b144,000,000
d95,500,000
Per share
3.10
-
Yr net inc
c129,400,000
d604,000,000
Per share
2.63
-
b-After a $27 million extraordinary credit.


Two Receive Awards For Bush Campaign
LEAD: Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable, a Milwaukee ad agency, shared the top prize with Roger Ailes, President-elect George Bush's political media consultant, at the American Association of Political Consultants' Pollie Awards dinner in Washington last night.


Kohl Attacked in Parliament on Libya Chemical Issue
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl came under sharp personal attack in Parliament today for his handling of the Libyan chemicals affair, while a senior aide to Mr.
Kohl called the spread of chemical weapons to irresponsible governments a ''nightmare'' that must be stopped.


Manning on Mend
LEAD: Danny Manning, the Los Angeles Clippers rookie forward, was released from Centinela Hospital in Inglewood, Calif., yesterday, four days after undergoing reconstructive surgery on his right knee.
Manning will undergo a rehabilitation program at the Kerlan-Jobe Orthopedic Clinic for the next 9 to 12 months, the Clippers' general manager, Elgin Baylor, said.


Dow Gains 24.11; Rising Dollar Helps
LEAD: Stock prices rose sharply yesterday as the Dow Jones industrial average reached another post-crash high.


For Kitchens and Baths With Flair
LEAD: FOR a show at the Art et Industrie gallery in SoHo, James Hong reinvented two objects that architects and decorators buy from catalogues: the cooktop and the bathroom sink.


Cuban Rights: Even Today, Not So Libre
LEAD: In late October, a small group of Cubans working to improve human rights set out to lay a wreath at a monument to Jose Marti, the Cuban poet and independence hero, in a small park in the colonial section of Havana.


Ebb and Flow of Time and Tastes Reshape Kennedy's Grand Vision
LEAD: In 1961, in what is now a legendary trip in the annals of urban planning as well as American politics, John F. Kennedy rode down Pennsylvania Avenue in his inaugural parade and was so appalled at the tawdry state of the boulevard connecting the Capitol to the White House that he set in motion plans to revive it.


United Vermont Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Vermont Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
924,000
b60,000
Per share
.98
-
Yr net inc
3,427,000
2,198,000
Per share
3.68
2.44
b-Net loss  The prior quarter and year included a one-time charge of $779,000 to the bank's loan loss reserve and a write- down of securities of $325,000.


Modine Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1988
1987
Sales
106,245,000
98,562,000
Net inc
5,387,000
6,020,000
Share earns
.36
.40
9mo sales
313,518,000
292,130,000
Net inc
19,921,000
19,894,000
Share earns
1.32
1.33


First Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Eastern Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,388,000
6,532,000
Per share
.76
.68
Yr net inc
26,551,000
22,616,000
Per share
2.73
2.37
The year-ago quarter and full year results are restated to reflect the company's merger with Peoples First National Bank and Trust Co.


Homework Reminders Given By Phone
LEAD: A PROFESSOR of education at Vanderbilt University has come up with a way for schools to increase communication between busy parents and teachers through the use of telephone-answering machines.


An Angolan Proposal
LEAD: The President of Angola, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, has called for a cease-fire in his Government's long war with the Unita rebel movement.


George R. Tweed, 86; Eluded Foe on Guam
LEAD: George R. Tweed, a World War II Navy radioman who eluded Japanese forces on the Pacific island of Guam for 31 months, died Monday in an automobile accident in Northern California.
He was 86 years old.


Whitman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,035,400,000
906,500,000
Net inc
b59,100,000
c128,600,000
Share earns
.57
1.16
Shares outst
103,600,000
110,800,000
Yr sales
3,582,500,000
3,059,800,000
Net inc
b233,500,000
c251,700,000
Share earns
2.19
2.23
Shares outst
106,700,000
112,700,000


First Virginia Banks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Virginia Banks Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
15,757,000
13,769,000
Per share
.75
.67
Yr net inc
60,940,000
56,293,000
Per share
2.90
2.75


Integrated Device Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Device Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
43,470,000
32,055,000
Net inc
2,888,000
3,260,000
Share earns
.11
.13
9mo sales
133,151,000
83,813,000
Net inc
13,713,000
7,283,000
Share earns
.54
.29


Tandy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,402,661,000
1,302,893,000
Net inc
135,050,000
130,780,000
Share earns
1.50
1.46
6mo sales
2,339,614,000
2,141,119,000
Net inc
199,959,000
195,035,000
Share earns
2.23
2.17


International Research &amp; Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Research &amp; Development Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,479,080
5,578,858
Net inc
1,250,821
867,250
Share earns
.23
.16
Yr rev
22,685,225
19,145,006
Net inc
3,554,449
1,902,747
Share earns
.65
.35


Corrections
LEAD: A list in Sports Pages yesterday, showing schools' and conferences' votes in two ballots on Proposition 42 at the N.C.A.A. convention, misstated or omitted some votes.
The University of New Mexico voted no on the first ballot and yes on the second; it did not vote yes twice.
The Southwestern Athletic Conference voted no, not yes, on both ballots.


Estonia Votes to Make Its Language Official
LEAD: The legislature of Estonia approved a law today giving Estonian precedence over Russian as the official language of the republic.


Corestates Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corestates Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
47,160,000
42,585,000
Per share
1.20
1.03
Yr net inc
179,479,000
162,296,000
Per share
4.50
3.91


Cincinnati Bell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Bell Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
195,163,000
175,665,000
Net inc
17,312,000
17,837,000
Share earns
.52
.56
Shares outst
31,296,000
31,997,000
Yr rev
738,434,000
635,035,000
Net inc
84,335,000
64,353,000
Share earns
2.63
2.01
Shares outst
31,351,000
32,025,000


Jones Goes for 3d Straight
LEAD: Steve Jones, who says he is not nervous about it, can become the first man in 11 years to win three consecutive tournaments on the PGA Tour.
All he has to do is beat 143 other tour pros in the Phoenix Open, which begins Thursday and ends Sunday at the Tournament Players Club of Scottsdale.
No one has been able to put together three consecutive tour victories since Gary Player won the Masters, the Tournament of Champions and the Houston


Excerpts From Interview With Reagan, Looking Back on His Presidency
LEAD: Following are excerpts of an interview with President Reagan in the White House today by print journalists:  The Hostage Situation


TAIWAN IS SEEKING NEW TIES ABROAD
LEAD: Despite strenuous objections from Beijing, Taiwan will begin a diplomatic offensive aimed at broadening relations with other countries, Taiwan's Foreign Minister said today.


Review/Ballet; A Debut With 'Jewels'
LEAD: Thanks to some polished dancing by the New York City Ballet, George Balanchine's ''Jewels'' glowed on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater when a new cast took over many of the principal roles in the three-act spectacle.


Continental Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
113,500,000
b235,800,000
Per share
1.94
-
Yr net inc
315,800,000
b609,500,000
Per share
5.19
-
b-Net loss  The net income for 1988 included approximately $55 million in net after- tax gains from corporate restructuring, including $11 million from funds released from reserves after Continental's decision to leavemass-market retail banking and certain foreign operations.


Polaroid-Kodak Trial Is Delayed
LEAD: The trial that will determine whether the Eastman Kodak Company will have to pay the Polaroid Corporation as much as $1 billion for violating Polaroid's instant-photography patents was postponed Tuesday until at least April 17.
The trial had been scheduled to begin Tuesday in Boston, but all parties agreed to a postponement after a meeting with United States District Judge A.


Cherokee Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherokee Group (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1988
1987
Sales
27,871,000
33,178,000
Net loss
1,566,000
b2,276,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
12,987,604
12,953,083
6mo sales
71,054,000
68,912,000
Net inc
891,000
5,234,000
Share earns
.07
.40
Shares outst
12,986,041
12,118,218


Not Quite a Maze, Perhaps, but Amazing Nonetheless
LEAD: IT doesn't matter that neither design is a bona fide medieval maze or an authentic Renaissance parterre.
But hidden among the bricks and concrete of Manhattan, two carefully composed boxwood gardens aspire to emulate these historical forms.
Despite limited space, the city folk who created them enjoy an elegant year-round pattern of green.


Ernie Blake, Ski Resort Owner, 75
LEAD: Ernie Blake, founder of the Taos Ski Valley resort, died of pneumonia Saturday.
He was 75 years old.


Bancorp Hawaii Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
16,564,000
13,769,000
Per share
1.15
.97
Yr net inc
b74,902,000
53,134,000
Per share
5.25
3.76
b-After a gain of $12,705,000 from the sale of the bank's Waikiki building.


Say Again, Please
LEAD: The Pentagon is known for being hooked on acronyms, abbreviations and jargon, but the members of the press who cover the Department of Defense are not immune to the affliction.
At a recent briefing on the new military budget, a reporter sought this information:


Review/Theater; In Pirandello, a Game Too Convincing for Enrico
LEAD: As a philosophical comedy, Pirandello's ''Enrico IV'' (at the Roundabout Theater Company) deals with the limits of logic and the possibilities of artifice.
In keeping with other Pirandello plays, it encapsulates a truth within an illusion.


Carlucci Urges Growth in Military Spending
LEAD: Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci made a final appeal to Congress today for resuming the growth in military spending that was halted late in the Reagan Administration.
He said that the Soviet Union still was a threat and that national security could be impaired if military budgets were cut or frozen.


Bounties and Vans: Jersey Copes With Labor Shortage
LEAD: For Keith J. Esmark, general manager of the Holiday Inn here, dealing with the lowest unemployment rate in the metropolitan region means doing everything from paying bounties for new workers to bringing in employees from as far away as Staten Island and Easton, Pa.
At times, short of staff, he has even had to cook breakfast for guests.


Excerpts From Baker's Testimony to Senate Foreign Relations Committee
LEAD: Following are excerpts from testimony today by Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker 3d at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, as recorded by the Federal News Service:  Latin American Policy  RICHARD G. LUGAR.
How do you intend to take charge in the Latin American situation, or how are you going to manage, really, in the next two or three weeks, in which a good bit may happen?


Chrysler Unit Set for Aircraft
LEAD: The Chrysler Technologies Corporation, the smallest of the three operating units of the Chrysler Corporation, said today that it had established a subsidiary for the modification of military aircraft that would combine complementary units of its two other subsidiaries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  The Federal Reserve said it would allow banking companies to raise money for corporations in the bond market.
The decision breaks down part of the wall that has separated banking and the securities business since 1933 - the Glass-Steagall Act. [ Page A1. ] The nation's trade deficit widened substantially in November, to $12.5 billion, as exports declined and imports surged to the second-highest level on record, the Commerce Department reported.


Esquire Campaign
LEAD: Esquire magazine has a new trade campaign that begins Monday and is about as far removed from advertising as it can get.
The magazine is running three editorial pages, without any ad copy or sales chatter at all, in Adweek.
It will continue the campaign through February.
W.
Randall Jones, Esquire's publisher, called it ''a subtle sell.


IPM Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPM Inc
(
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,627,989
2,753,036
Net loss
1,222,985
92,090


Unisys Introduces Micro A Computer
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation yesterday introduced its new Micro A computer, a machine the company says provides the power of a mainframe computer in a desktop machine.
The Micro A uses advanced semiconductor and packaging technology, called Scamp for Single Chip A-series Mainframe Processor.
The Scamp is a two-by-two-inch device that packs mainframe power in a single chip,


India Lets Israeli Consulate Expand Diplomatic Activities
LEAD: India said today that it had agreed to allow the Israeli Consulate in Bombay to expand its activities and represent the interests of a small group of Jewish families in the southern state of Kerala, where Jews have been living for more than a thousand years.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  BOSTON (AL) - Signed Wes Gardner, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
DETROIT (AL) - Agreed to terms with Chris Brown, third baseman, on a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Signed Tim Stoddard, pitcher, to a minor league contract.
Invited Stoddard, Dan Firova and Tom Magrann, catchers, to their training camp.


New Names in Rock's Pantheon
LEAD: Phil Spector, one of rock's most celebrated recluses, made a rare public appearance that sparked the fourth annual induction ceremonies of the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame last night.


U.S. Bishops Say Vietnam Eases Religious Curbs
LEAD: The Government of Vietnam has significantly reduced, though not eliminated, repressive policies toward religion, a delegation of American Roman Catholic Bishops said this week.


Consolidated Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,251,783
21,543,029
Net inc
1,133,297
940,816
Share earns
.30
.26


As the Congress Will Make Clear, It Isn't Only the President Who Governs
LEAD: For all the early sniping about George Bush's lack of a mandate, Congressional leaders are not spoiling for a fight with the new President.
Indeed, Washington has become a peaceable kingdom in recent weeks, with earnest pledges of bipartisan cooperation from every corner.


Caution Urged Over AIDS Partners
LEAD: The health authorities should use caution in notifying the sexual partners of people infected with the AIDS virus, officials from 20 countries have concluded.


Moscow Journal; Prying Where It Counts: Into the Soviet Census
LEAD: In a high-rise apartment complex in the Proletarsky district of Moscow, a census-taker handed a 75-year-old woman a card listing sources of income.
After an awkward moment, the woman admitted she could not read it.


Japan's Trade Surplus Hit a Record Last Month
LEAD: Amid growing concern over its trade gap with the United States and Europe, Japanese officials reported today that the country's trade surplus had widened in December to $9.65 billion, a record monthly imbalance.


Life at the Top: Even the Weather Is Different
LEAD: ''YOU'RE the top!
You're the Colosseum,'' the song lyric goes.
But the Colosseum stands only 160 feet tall, and the forgotten-but-not-gone New York Coliseum is a mere 102.
With apartment buildings climbing 50, 60 and even 70 stories, the top is closer to the clouds than the Romans or Cole Porter ever dreamed.


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCB Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,104,000
4,005,000
Per share
.97
.76
Yr net inc
19,727,000
b18,650,000
Per share
3.94
3.72
b-After a gain of $1.6 million from an accounting change.


Merchants National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,173,000
9,912,000
Per share
.77
.68
Yr net inc
44,051,000
14,571,000
Per share
3.05
1.00


Alberto Culver Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto Culver Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
162,466,000
133,536,000
Net inc
5,501,000
4,540,000
Share earns
.42
.32
Shares outst
13,054,673
14,067,088
The company said the year-ago net excluded a one-time gain from the sale of investments of $2.3 million, or 16 cents a share.


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Florida Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,277,000
13,344,000
Per share
.84
.84
Yr net inc
48,889,000
48,337,000
Per share
3.08
3.02


Southtrust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
17,947,000
16,057,000
Per share
.71
.63
Yr net inc
67,588,000
60,491,000
Per share
2.67
2.39


Top-Ranked Duke Upset by North Carolina, 91-71


Anna Sokolow Choreographs Lessons in Sorrow
LEAD: Anna Sokolow has steadfastly moved to her own drummer.
A leading American modern-dance choreographer, she has had a long and influential career teaching young dancers and actors how to make every moment count emotionally.
And her dances have addressed the alienation of modern life with memorable intensity.


Developer Drops Plan For Philadelphia Mall
LEAD: A developer is abandoning his $120 million Penn's Landing mall and office project along the Delaware River about three months before its scheduled groundbreaking, calling it ''an expensive mistake.''


Bruce Chatwin, 48, Travel Writer And Author of 'Songlines,' Dies
LEAD: Bruce Chatwin, a British author whose first book, ''In Patagonia,'' published only a decade ago, established him as one of his generation's ranking travel writers and an elegant literary craftsman and storyteller, died Tuesday in a hospital in Nice, France.
He was 48 years old and had been in failing health for more than five years.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GBC Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,146,000
1,453,000
Per share
.40
.35
Shares outst
5,337,000
4,142,000
Yr net inc
7,139,000
3,411,000
Per share
1.60
.82
The latest quarter included $243,000 writedown of data processing equipment.


Bessemer Securities Acts to Get Aggressive
LEAD: The Bessemer Securities Corporation, a staid Wall Street investment firm owned by the Phipps family, said yesterday that it planned to get more aggressive and hired a new president and chief executive, Ward W. Woods Jr., as a first step.


Kings Road Chief Out
LEAD: Kings Road Entertainment Inc., a small film maker that has been unprofitable since going public in 1986, said Tuesday that its chairman and chief executive, Stephen J. Friedman, had been dismissed.
The company said a management restructuring was planned.
Kings Road has made about 20 films, including ''Slapshot,'' ''All of Me,'' and ''Enemy Mine.


Hoyas Top Providence
LEAD: Georgetown, playing its second consecutive game without Coach John Thompson, beat Providence, 80-77, tonight.
Charles Smith scored 35 points, including a go-ahead basket with 5 seconds left.


UST Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
156,183,000
153,712,000
Net inc
39,355,000
33,602,000
Share earns
.34
.29
Yr sales
618,517,000
576,092,000
Net inc
162,150,000
130,871,000
Share earns
1.41
1.13


Miami Mayor Apologizes to Police For Actions at Scene of Disorder
LEAD: Mayor Xavier Suarez said today that he regretted his handling of an incident that helped touch off race-related violence that continued this evening for a third night, and he issued a public apology to the police.


In Capital, Patriotic Napery
LEAD: AT dinners last night in Washington celebrating George Bush's inauguration, the guests may not have noticed the tablecloths, but officials at Waverly Fabrics in New York surely did: the company produced the fabric.


Panasonic to Return $16 Million to Consumers
LEAD: In a major price-fixing settlement, the Panasonic Company has agreed to return as much as $16 million to consumers to end charges by New York State that it threatened retailers with a loss of supply unless Panasonic products were sold at prices dictated by the company.


Molson and Carling To Merge Operations
LEAD: Brewers of two of Canada's most popular beers, Molson and Carling O'Keefe, are merging their North American operations to reach for a bigger share of the United States beer market.


Teco Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
249,500,000
237,900,000
Net inc
b15,600,000
17,400,000
Share earns
.28
.30
Yr rev
1,034,000,000
970,400,000
Net inc
b114,300,000
110,700,000
Share earns
2.02
1.95


Pyramid Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pyramid Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Revenue
24,478,000
17,528,000
Net inc
2,412,000
1,820,000
Share earns
.28
.22


Review/Dance; Bravura With Subtlety, by the Moiseyev Troupe
LEAD: ''Enjoy the show,'' the ushers tell you at Radio City Music Hall, where the Moiseyev Dance Company has just opened a two-week run.
You will.


Yanks to Stay With Own Center Fielders
LEAD: Despite the loss of Claudell Washington to the California Angels, despite the feud between George Steinbrenner and Dave Winfield and despite a lot of things in a time of tumult, the Yankees insisted yesterday that they were planning no wild forays into the trading market and would instead find a center fielder within their own ranks.


Albany Confronts Its Budget Pain
LEAD: Governor Cuomo's proposed bad-news budget reflects a welcome willingness to acknowledge the size of the state's deficit - but an unwelcome tolerance of short-term solutions and a dubious desire to shift the burden to local governments.


JUSTICES UPHOLD DISPUTED SYSTEM OF U.S. SENTENCING
LEAD: The Supreme Court, ending a year of turmoil in the lower Federal courts, today upheld the new Federal system for sentencing convicted criminals.


Promotion at Lintas
LEAD: In an effort to coordinate its European operations, Lintas: Worldwide has appointed Ingo Zuberbier chairman of Lintas: Europe and head of its newly formed European Executive Group.
Mr.
Zuberbier, who will continue as chairman of Lintas: Germany, will be responsible for the agency's 57 media and marketing operations in 16 countries.


A Garden Tied In Knots
LEAD: FOR centuries, gardeners have taken pleasure in creating patterned landscapes.
Among the earliest, believed to have come from pagan rituals and Greek mythology, are mazes or labyrinths: networks of paths through which it is difficult to find a way.


Chemical Weapons Talks Facing Tough Hurdles
LEAD: Although a powerful international spotlight has been trained on them, negotiations here to ban the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons face formidable hurdles before delegates can complete a draft treaty, diplomats and specialists say.


Neediest Gain From Art Sale And Lottery
LEAD: The New York Graphic Society of Greenwich, Conn., donated $1,000 from its second ''Help the Homeless'' art sale to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Conservative Limelight
LEAD: Parallel to the inauguration of George Bush, the organization Students for America is holding its fifth annual convention here today through Sunday.


Metro Tel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Tel Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,643,125
1,705,089
Net inc
118,020
78,853
Share earns
.06
.04
6mo sales
2,927,515
3,418,398
Net inc
115,284
154,054
Share earns
.05
.07


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-16


Combustion Engineering Pact
LEAD: Combustion Engineering Inc. and Paris-based Alsthom S.A. announced plans today to combine their steam-boiler businesses in a joint venture that would have combined revenues of about $2 billion.
Combustion Engineering and Alsthom would own roughly equal shares in the joint venture, which is subject to approval by each company's directors and regulatory agencies in the United States, France, Canada and the European Community.


The Soviets Still Leave Reagan Uneasy
LEAD: Reflecting on his tenure, President Reagan said today there had been ''no change'' in his skepticism about the Soviet Union although he felt that remarkable progress had been made in relations between Washington and Moscow.


Rangers Are Glad to Win Big One Against the Blackhawks
LEAD: Tony Granato had just put the puck past Ed Belfour of the Blackhawks to secure a 6-4 triumph for the Rangers and complete the third hat trick of his wondrous rookie season.
Suddenly, a lone hat floated out of the stands and over the end boards.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
9,463,000
9,124,000
Per share
.87
.84
Yr net inc
b35,225,000
33,897,000
Per share
3.24
3.12
b-After a gain of $1,282,000 from an accounting change.


Yonkers Regains Many Fiscal Powers
LEAD: The State Emergency Financial Control Board yesterday restored much of Yonkers's spending authority, convinced that many restrictions imposed during a crisis over a court-ordered housing desegregation plan were no longer required.


For Western Customers, Chinese Tame Hot Colors
LEAD: FOR East to meet West, sometimes only a change of palette is necessary.


2 V.M.I. Cadets Seized in Big Holdup
LEAD: Two cadets at Virginia Military Institute and a father of one of the cadets were arrested yesterday by Federal agents and charged in the armed robbery of $4.5 million from an armored car in Clifton, N.J., last month.


A Top Officer Is Named At American Savings
LEAD: The Robert M. Bass Group has hired Robert T. Barnum from the First Nationwide Bank to be the chief financial officer for its American Savings Bank of Stockton, Calif.


Fidelity Savings Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Savings Association (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
332,000
252,000
Share earns
.34
-
Shares outst
977,500
-
The company said there is no per share information presented for year- ago period, as the association converted from mutual to stock ownership in July 1988, and had no shares of common stock issued and outstanding prior to that date.


Genetics Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
14,372,000
4,424,000
Net loss
2,887,000
4,113,000
Yr rev
29,684,000
19,600,000
Net loss
11,240,000
10,444,000


Mayors Voice Hope for the Cities With Bush Assuming Presidency
LEAD: The nation's mayors said today that they were looking with hope to President-elect George Bush after an eight-year fiscal drought under the Reagan Administration.


Ties Are In, Tees Are Out
LEAD: The Rules Committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association has voted down a proposal to establish a tie-breaker for football.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,607,000
6,574,000
Per share
1.34
.87
Yr net inc
34,635,000
32,363,000
Per share
4.39
4.30
The prior year net included a gain from an accounting change of $2,212,000 which resulted from the adoption of FASB No.


AMR Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,368,038,000
1,882,055,000
Net inc
116,704,000
b805,000
Share earns
1.93
-
Yr rev
8,824,335,000
7,197,974,000
Net inc
476,813,000
198,407,000
Share earns
7.92
3.28


Video Display Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Display Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,317,060
6,003,551
Net inc
672,475
569,879
Share earns
.16
.14
9mo sales
30,556,338
19,933,539
Net inc
1,931,189
1,248,319
Share earns
.47
.30


Central Bancshares of the South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Bancshares of the South (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,592,000
7,010,000
Per share
.49
.33
Yr net inc
41,048,000
31,302,000
Per share
1.91
1.47
The results for 1987 and 1988 are restated to reflect a change in accounting for loan fees and origination costs in accordance with FAS No.


Vertex Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vertex Communications
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
4,600,000
3,615,000
Net inc
315,000
191,000
Share earns
.10
.06


E. B. Simmons Sr., 86, Dentist for 50 Years
LEAD: Dr.
Everett B. Simmons Sr., a dentist for 50 years, died of cardiopulmonary arrest Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan and had practiced in East Orange, N.J.


Go Back to Light Rail for Forest Timber
LEAD: To the Editor:


Software Deals Climbed in '88
LEAD: The dollar value of acquisitions in the computer software and services industry rose by 70 percent in 1988, a survey released on Tuesday has found.


Temtex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temtex Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
12,806,000
11,694,000
Net inc
189,000
b692,000
Share earns
.08
.28
b-Included a tax benefit of $221,000.


Cross Says He Is Going to Retire
LEAD: Randy Cross, the offensive lineman who has been with the San Francisco 49ers longer than Coach Bill Walsh, announced his retirement today. ''I can think of no better way to end a career,'' Cross said. ''It's the way you dream of ending your career.''


Washington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,200,000
b20,100,000
Per share
.45
-
Yr net inc
13,100,000
b25,600,000
Per share
1.86
-
b-Net loss


Two Trials Sought In Death of Jessica
LEAD: The lawyer for Abigail Cortez asked yesterday for separate trials for Mrs.
Cortez and Adrian Lopez, both of whom are charged in the death of 5-year-old Jessica Cortez.


Fleet/Norstar Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet/Norstar Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
87,643,000
7,591,000
Per share
.79
.05
Yr net inc
335,829,000
200,126,000
Per share
3.07
1.85
The results for both 1988 and 1987 included Indian Head Banks Inc., Nashua, N.H., which was acquired by Fleet/Norstar on Dec.


Greentree Software reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greentree Software (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
263,366
65,333
Net inc
78,236
b43,564
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
6,170,521
6,069,673
6mo sales
577,839
198,288
Net inc
260,256
b25,070
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
6,168,021
5,943,908


RLC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RLC Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
76,029,000
64,126,000
Net inc
b5,258,000
b14,355,000
Share earns
.28
.78
b-Included net from operations to be spun off of $430,000, or 2 cents a share, and $968,000, or 6 cents a share, for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively; the year-ago period also included a tax credit of $9,125,000.


How Khomeini Made Gorbachev See Red
LEAD: The Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, flushed when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini told him Communism was an outdated relic, an Iranian cleric said today.


Laclede Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Steel Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
79,105,000
70,010,000
Net inc
3,304,000
b4,841,000
Share earns
.82
1.19
Yr sales
306,805,000
268,128,000
Net inc
16,614,000
b7,906,000
Share earns
4.10
1.95


Stoneridge Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stoneridge Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
38,722,000
22,639,000
Net loss
252,000
461,000
Revenue represented operating revenue.


Court Settles Insider Case
LEAD: Two foreign nationals who were employed by the Upjohn Company today settled Federal civil charges that they had illegally traded Upjohn stock options while in possession of inside information that the Canadian Government had approved the company's anti-baldness medicine, Rogaine, for marketing in the fall of 1986.


Sherwood Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwood Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,313,888
14,531,370
Net loss
4,484,514
3,531,494
6mo rev
5,235,382
33,213,860
Net loss
6,880,976
b1,472,792
b-Net income and included a $1,580,491 after-tax gain on the early extinguishment of debt.


Ex-Navy Man Denies Trying to Sell Secrets
LEAD: A former Navy technician pleaded not guilty today to charges that he had tried to sell secrets involving anti-submarine warfare to the Soviet Union.


Crown Crafts reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Crafts (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
23,014,000
18,940,000
Net inc
1,586,000
b1,253,000
Share earns
.47
.38
Shares outst
3,396,701
3,305,440
9mo sales
66,448,000
53,299,000
Net inc
4,655,000
b4,082,000
Share earns
1.38
1.20
Shares outst
3,376,922
3,413,722


Amid Uneasiness, Super Bowl Visitors Stream In
LEAD: The visitors at the airport arrived bearing golf clubs, tennis racquets and caps with Bengals and 49ers logos.
They had reservations at hotels, but only limited reservations about coming to the Super Bowl at a time of civil disturbances.


I.B.M. Posts 12.4% Gain In Fourth-Quarter Profit
LEAD: Laying the foundation for a year that analysts think will be financially strong, the International Business Machines Corporation reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income rose 12.4 percent from a year earlier.


Housewares Show: Out With Clutter
LEAD: If the new offerings here at the 89th National Housewares Show are an indication of public sentiment, Americans are yearning for products to organize their homes and home offices.


Jorge Cruickshank Garcia, Politician, 73
LEAD: Jorge Cruickshank Garcia, a Congressman who was co-founder and leader for two decades of the Popular Socialist Party, died of a brain tumor Tuesday.
He was 73 years old.
With Vicente Lombardo Toledano, Mr.
Cruickshank helped found the party in 1948 and had been its secretary general since 1968.


Geodyne Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodyne Resources Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,426,525
3,843,586
Net inc
1,671,071
1,165,813
Share earns
.10
.07
Shares outst
16,387,756
15,020,279
9mo rev
13,921,549
8,378,464
Net inc
5,802,685
1,974,617
Share earns
.34
.11
Shares outst
16,387,756
15,631,591


Latin Issues Pressing Bush, Baker Says
LEAD: James A. Baker 3d, the Secretary of State-designate, said today that several Latin American issues, including the March elections in El Salvador, troubled relations with Nicaragua and the difficult state of dealings with Panama, would require the Bush Administration's immediate attention.


Angola Strife Rages Around Phantom City
LEAD: Onlookers in this besieged highland city craned their necks today as a Soviet cargo jet climbed in a steep spiral, spewing burning white flares from its underbelly.


American Franchise Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Franchise Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,804,000
1,825,000
Net inc
99,000
245,000
Share earns
.01
.04
Shares outst
7,707,000
5,494,000
9mo rev
6,962,000
5,006,000
Net inc
431,000
377,000
Share earns
.06
.06


Home Improvement
LEAD: WHEN a furnace unexpectedly stops working or fails to start, there are several safe, simple procedures you can try before calling for professional service.
Naturally, do not hesitate to call for service if you feel uncertain about how to proceed or if you suspect danger.


Pilgrim's Pride Stock Soars
LEAD: The share price of the Pilgrim's Pride Corporation soared $1.50 today, to close at $7.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Neighborhood Grants to Combat Drugs
LEAD: To help make citizens the first line of defense in New York City's fight against drugs, a nonprofit organization will award grants to neighborhood groups with solid anti-drug programs.


FEDERAL RESERVE ACTS TO LET BANKS INTO BOND TRADING
LEAD: Breaching a wall that has separated banking and the securities business for more than 50 years, the Federal Reserve Board said yesterday that it would allow banking companies to raise money for corporations in the bond market.


Loss of Subsidy May Ground A Little-Used Georgia Flight
LEAD: A dozen times a week, Flight 3323's engines crank into a throbbing whine and lift an 18-passenger turboprop out of one of the nation's busiest airports into one of air travel's loneliest routes.


Old Stone Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Stone Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
9,250,000
5,788,000
Share earns
1.03
.53
Shares outst
8,348,897
6,977,712
Yr net inc
36,350,000
b7,735,000
Share earns
3.99
-
b-Net loss and after a $16,177,000 loss from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Grocer Is Charged In Killing of Robbers
LEAD: The owner of a small grocery store in the Bronx was charged yesterday with a misdemeanor weapons violation after he fired at three armed men who were trying to hold up his store, killing two of them, the police said.


BHA Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHA Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,718,000
9,301,000
Net inc
763,000
455,000
Share earns
.23
.14


Lawyer Says 'Dying' Marcos Is Unfit for Trial
LEAD: A lawyer for Ferdinand E. Marcos said yesterday that the former Philippine President's health had deteriorated so severely that he could not be arraigned on criminal charges and might be physically incapable of withstanding a trial.


Lights! Action! Inauguration Is Under Way
LEAD: President-elect George Bush opened a five-day celebration of his inauguration tonight, saying he wants Americans to do more for one another than they have done before and dramatizing the idea with a fireworks display of several thousand points of light across the sky.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  FIGURE SKATING  Fadeyev in Lead: Aleksandr Fadeyev, the former world champion from the Soviet Union, took the lead yesterday after the original program of the men's competition at the European championships in Birmingham, England.
With a routine that included some interesting arm-shaking and body-wiggling choreography with a difficult triple axel-double toe-loop combination, Fadeyev moved ahead of the figure leader, Richard Zander.


Water Meters Gain Urgency During Drought
LEAD: With New York City and the metropolitan region facing the prospect of its third drought in a decade, progress on the city's plan to install water meters in every home - and to charge customers based on their consumption - has taken on new importance.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Orangina USA, a soft-drink maker whose parent is Austin Nichols &amp; Co., a subsidiary of Pernod-Ricard S.A., Paris, to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, with a budget of more than $2 million.


New Van Brunt Officer
LEAD: Van Brunt &amp; Company has named 54-year-old Robert G. Minicus president and creative director, in the first change in the agency's leadership ranks in 30 years.
Mr.
Minicus was previously senior vice president and creative director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Compton, where the accounts he worked on included Tylenol, U.S.


Dollar Up In Spite of Trade Data
LEAD: The dollar surged yesterday, ignoring the negative economic news in the widening trade deficit and another round of central bank intervention.


It's Israel's Move
LEAD: For all his double-talk, Yasir Arafat has done enough in recent weeks - including apparently halting terror operations - to put the burden of the next move on Israel.
That's clearly the private sentiment among many people in Congress and incoming Bush administration officials.


Market Place; More Visibility On O-T-C Orders
LEAD: IF the purpose of a marketplace is to bring together buyers and sellers, the over-the-counter market in stocks has long had a weakness: It is completely possible for a prospective buyer and a prospective seller to be willing to trade at the same price, and for neither to be able to make the trade.


Chameleon on Plaid
LEAD: Tergiversators, equivocationists and circumlocutionaries were filled with a warm (if ambivalent) glow this week as a world-class double-talker, nominated for Secretary of State, made monkeys out of the members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.


Thompson's Protest Over Freshman Rule Is Drawing Some Criticism
LEAD: While opponents of Proposition 42 argue that it closes a window of opportunity for disadvantaged student athletes, supporters maintain that it merely closes a loophole that allowed unscrupulous coaches to continue the flow of academically unprepared athletes from high school to college.


Apartment Project To Be Scaled Down
LEAD: The developers planning Brighton by the Sea, a Brooklyn apartment project on the site of the Brighton Beach Baths, have withdrawn an application they submitted last year to the City Planning Commission, officials said yesterday.
A spokesman for the developers said they planned to seek permission for a scaled-down version of the project.


Record for World Steel
LEAD: World output of crude steel rose to an all-time high of 780 million metric tons last year as demand boomed in leading non-Communist industrialized countries and developing nations opened new plants.
The International Iron and Steel Institute said today that the figure was up 6 percent from 1987's level.


Linear Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
15,731,000
12,303,000
Net inc
2,117,000
b2,367,000
Share earns
.13
.14
6mo sales
30,587,000
23,368,000
Net inc
4,317,000
b4,502,000
Share earns
.26
.27


Ohio Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
533,039,000
417,935,000
Net inc
96,354,000
72,848,000
Share earns
.59
.40
Yr rev
2,142,572,000
1,779,556,000
Net inc
346,533,000
412,920,000
Share earns
2.06
2.40


A 'Chilling Effect' On New Products
LEAD: Slotting allowances - the practice among retailers of forcing vendors to pay for shelf space - is having a ''chilling effect'' on product introductions, a recent issue of Gorman's New Product News reported.


First National Cincinnati Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Cincinnati Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
14,032,000
8,006,000
Per share
.97
.55
Yr net inc
58,496,000
49,783,000
Per share
4.05
3.45


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Sports Pages yesterday about the appointment of a football coach at Columbia University omitted the name of one candidate.
He was Doug Jackson, who had been an assistant coach there.


A Greek Prosecutor Is Shot; Radicals Take Responsibility
LEAD: Terrorists tonight shot and seriously wounded a prosecutor in what the Government described as an attempt to terrorize the judiciary.
It was the second such attack in 10 days.


Technology Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Marketing
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,585,455
2,433,191
Net inc
269,330
73,055
Share earns
.09
.02
9mo rev
8,737,392
6,711,494
Net inc
894,675
b402,367
Share earns
.30
-
b-Net loss


HWC Distribution Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HWC Distribution Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,151,000
26,944,000
Net inc
2,830,000
1,325,000
Share earns
.52
.25
9mo sales
99,384,000
70,819,000
Net inc
6,961,000
2,976,000
Share earns
1.29
.60


Georgetown Journal; Coach's Private Battle On Night of Big Game
LEAD: John Thompson is more than a basketball coach at Georgetown University.
He is a symbol.


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jacobs Engineering Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
165,345,000
206,420,000
Net inc
2,055,000
1,653,000
Share earns
.40
.34


Citytrust Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citytrust Bancorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,423,000
5,862,000
Per share
1.54
1.42
Yr net inc
23,638,000
21,502,000
Per share
5.66
5.20


Cost of Reagan Reign Far Exceeds Benefits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Exchange Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exchange Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,471,000
c2,907,000
Per share
.32
.20
Yr net inc
b21,835,000
c15,867,000
Per share
1.30
1.04
b-Included a loss of $2,043,000 from an accounting change.


A.T.&amp;T.-Dialcom
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and Dialcom Inc. said that they had established the first commercial link between two domestic electronic mail services employing a new international standard designed to simplify computer-to-computer communications.
The new standard, known as X.400, is a set of guidelines specifying the format, delivery and receipt of electronic messages recommended by an international standards body.


TV Notes
LEAD:  With Mary Martin


Applied Magnetics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Magnetics Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
83,294,000
60,601,000
Net inc
4,928,000
4,783,000
Share earns
.32
.31


Wang Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wang Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
760,700,000
784,700,000
Net inc
1,000,000
34,100,000
Share earns
.01
.21
6mo rev
1,483,800,000
1,477,700,000
Net inc
14,100,000
56,600,000
Share earns
.09
.34


IF NOT QUITE A MAZE, CERTAINLY AMAZING


Review/Operetta; 'H.M.S. Pinafore' Sails In
LEAD: The English Savoyard tradition is undergoing a sea change, with London companies being reorganized, and hallowed, not to say creaky, performance styles being rethought.
Yet judging from the cheerful but rather becalmed production of ''H.M.S.
Pinafore'' by the New Sadler's Wells Opera, which opened Tuesday night at the City


Weapon Used by Deranged Man Is Easy to Buy
LEAD: The Soviet-designed military assault rifle that a deranged man used to kill five schoolchildren in California and wound 30 others can be purchased as easily as an ordinary rifle or shotgun, Federal officials said yesterday.


Bribes and Babies
LEAD: ''Boys don't like it too much when you have to take your baby on dates.'' It sounds like a line from a TV situation comedy.
In fact it comes from real life, from a Denver 17-year-old named Rita Lafoya, and the situation she describes is nothing to laugh at.
Miss Lafoya is the mother of a 20-month-old boy, which is hard, she says, ''because most of my freedom is gone.


Reynolds Metals Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,483,700,000
1,155,900,000
Net inc
139,900,000
b80,000,000
Share earns
2.61
1.50
Yr rev
5,618,600,000
4,316,600,000
Net inc
482,000,000
b219,500,000
Share earns
9.01
4.33


Australian Trade Gain
LEAD: Australia's broadest measure of trade improved in December, when the current account deficit fell to $941 million (Australian), or $809 million (United States), from $1.54 billion (Australian) in November, the Government said today.
The current account measures trade in goods and services and is the nation's broadest measure of trade.


Dataflex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,543,723
5,925,586
Net inc
414,099
b150,131
Share earns
.18
-
9mo rev
32,572,417
15,503,703
Net inc
1,056,122
138,487
Share earns
.47
.07
b


John Loder, 90, British Actor
LEAD: John Loder, an actor whose tenure of more than 30 years in British and American movies was credited largely to his good looks and his imposing physique, has died in England.
He was 90 years old and had homes in London and Buenos Aires.


Wave of Growth Planned at South Street Seaport
LEAD: The South Street Seaport would take a big step northward, with the transformation of two gritty old waterfront blocks into a fancy new stretch of shops, offices and apartments, under an agreement announced yesterday between New York City and two private developers.


Stone &amp; Webster Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
81,645,000
81,178,000
Net inc
11,411,000
9,332,000
Share earns
1.50
1.21
Yr rev
324,127,000
317,027,000
Net inc
b41,179,000
48,992,000
Share earns
5.41
6.56


Knicks Covet Mullin
LEAD: Chris Mullin in a Knick uniform has always been a family dream.
It may be a Knick dream, too.
Ever since Mullin left St.
John's University, where he was the 1985 college player of the year and then the Warriors' top draft choice, several attempts - some of them real - have been made to make him a Knick.


Power Behind the Pen: The Book Agent's Rise
LEAD: At a Simon &amp; Schuster party at Tavern on the Green recently, Laurence J. Kirshbaum, the president of Warner Books, surveyed the crowd of several hundred publishers, editors, authors and literary agents. ''You can tell who the agents are,'' he said. ''They're the ones with all the money.''


Rockwell to Plead Guilty to Overbilling Air Force
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation today agreed to plead guilty to charges of overbilling the Air Force on a navigation-satellite contract.


Business as Usual
LEAD: Despite disturbances in Miami, fans, players and the N.F.L. are trying to keep Super Bowl preparations as normal as possible.
Page A18.


Parker Hannifin Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
612,620,000
549,850,000
Net inc
25,227,000
24,417,000
Share earns
.52
.50
6mo sales
1,208,274,000
1,062,696,000
Net inc
48,525,000
46,657,000
Share earns
1.00
.96


BRIEFS
LEAD: Amanda Acquisition Corp., Burlington, Mass., a subsidiary of High Voltage Engineering Corp., said it had extended its $35-a-share offer for Universal Foods Corp. to Feb. 1 from Jan. 17.


AIDS Treatment Is Found Effective in Monkeys
LEAD: An experimental substance that is thought to prevent the AIDS virus from infecting cells has dramatically suppressed AIDS-like viral infections in monkeys.


Boston Questions 11 Firefighters On Claim to Be Part of a Minority
LEAD: City officials have questioned the assertions of 11 firefighters that they are members of minority groups and thus are qualified for preferential treatment in hiring and promotions, according to a city report released Tuesday night.


When Amateurs Are Professionals
LEAD: It's no secret that many athletes who play big-time college sports are essentially mercenaries hired to win championships and fill stadiums.
From time to time the N.C.A.A. makes a fuss about minimum academic standards.
But this is hypocritical nibbling around a larger truth: athletes rarely get a solid education because that's not why they're there.


Irving Boroff, 80, Ex-Head of Special School
LEAD: Irving M. Boroff, a retired New York school principal who devised innovative programs to deal with disruptive and other problem pupils, died of a heart attack Tuesday at Coney Island Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


A Day to Celebrate
LEAD: About 289,000 Federal employees have three reasons to celebrate this week: the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, President-elect Bush's inauguration and, because of the first two, a three-day work week.


Reviews/Television; When a Teen-Ager Takes a Stand
LEAD: This afternoon's ''Taking a Stand'' should be considered required viewing for Ronald Reagan.
Last week, the President wondered aloud if some civil-rights activists haven't been exaggerating the degree of racial prejudice in this country.
The recent turmoil in Yonkers alone should have been enough to give him pause.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Suspended 5 'Down Here On Business'
LEAD: rrFrom a dock on Biscayne Bay, the United States Customs speedboats roar off to chase the cocaine smugglers.
On Miami Avenue, a store sign, apparently in descending order of importance, blares: ''Lotto, Checks Cashed, Guns and Ammo, Hardware.'' Along Interstate 95 through downtown, blue flares and blue lights atop police cars block ramps near the Overtown area, seething from the fatal shooting Monday night of a speeding motorcyclist by a policeman.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the MCI Communications Corporation misstated some of the company's price reductions.
The cost of sending electronic messages and domestic facsimile documents has been reduced as much as 75 percent.
Under one plan, the cost of sending an electronic message will be 25 cents for each of the first 40 messages of no more than 7,500 characters.


Westinghouse Electric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,648,200,000
3,293,000,000
Net inc
b248,700,000
c273,000,000
Share earns
1.71
1.87
Yr rev
12,499,500,000
11,332,000,000
Net inc
b822,800,000
c900,500,000
Share earns
5.66
6.23


American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital Manageent &amp; Research Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,200,000
4,600,000
Share earns
.22
.19
Yr net inc
23,300,000
29,800,000
Share earns
.96
1.23


Fido, Captured in Paint
LEAD: WHAT do Lady Emma Hamilton, Emily the pug and Otto and his mother have in common?
All are cats or dogs that have had their portraits painted by Mimi Vang Olsen.


Review/Pop; A Keyboardist Steps Out Into The Foreground
LEAD: Rod Williams, the keyboardist who performed with his group at the Knitting Factory on Monday night, is one of the many musicians in New York who toil in the background, but shouldn't.
With other people - he is the regular keyboardist for the singer Cassandra Wilson - he is an empathetic accompanist, stabbing away at chords when needed, adding lush solos on cue.


U.S. Trade Gap Widens Sharply As Imports Soar
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit widened substantially in November, to $12.5 billion, as exports fell and imports surged to their second-highest level, the Commerce Department reported today.


Gardens Born of the Imagination
LEAD: FLOWERS do not grow and grass is markedly absent at ''Theatergarden Bestiarium,'' a show at the Institute for Contemporary Art in Long Island City, Queens.


Bush Names Choice for Information Agency
LEAD: President-elect George Bush today announced his intention to nominate a New York pharmaceutical executive, Bruce S. Gelb, as director of the United States Information Agency, which oversees the Voice of America and international cultural programs.


Review/Photography; An Evans Show, 50 Years Later
LEAD: Fifty years after the publication of his ''American Photographs'' and 14 years after his death, Walker Evans (1903-1975) remains a beacon for contemporary photographers.
Unlike the other modernist masters who photographed in the 1930's - Alfred Stieglitz, Paul Strand and Ansel Adams among them - Evans seems relevant to our post-industrial, post-modern age.


Kidder, Peabody Reorganization Expected
LEAD: Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company will shortly announce a major reorganization that includes the appointment of a new chief executive, Wall Street analysts and executives said yesterday.


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,504,400,000
2,449,100,000
Net inc
309,700,000
322,200,000
Share earns
1.15
1.16
Yr rev
9,903,300,000
9,547,000,000
Net inc
1,237,400,000
1,188,100,000
Share earns
4.55
4.24


Papers Unsealed in RJR Nabisco Suit
LEAD: The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, one of the bondholders of RJR Nabisco that sued the company after its management began a leveraged buyout offer, concluded in confidential studies conducted in 1985 that all of the corporations in which it held bonds were open to such bids.


Industry Operated at a 9-Year High in December
LEAD: Industry in the United States operated at its highest rate in nine years last month, the Government reported today, but analysts said the modest growth should allay fears that inflation is rising.


The Events on Inuaguration Day
LEAD: All times are Eastern.  11:30 A.M.
Swearing-in ceremony begins.  1:30 P.M.
Inaugural parade.  8 P.M.
Inaugural balls.
Television Coverage  ABC: 10:30 A.M. to 1 P.M., 2 to 3 P.M., on '20/20' at 10 P.M. and on 'Nightline' at 11:30 P.M.
CBS: 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 2 to 4 P.M.


Lund Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lund Enterprises Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,885,991
2,127,001
Net inc
458,838
350,001
Share earns
.10
.07
6mo sales
5,619,515
3,993,777
Net inc
849,245
673,724
Share earns
.18
.15


Harry Shad, 85, Dies; Oil Refining Executive
LEAD: Harry G. Shad, a former executive vice president of the Atlantic Refining Company, died of Alzheimer's disease Thursday in the Beneva Nursing Pavilion in Sarasota, Fla., where he lived.
He was 85 years old.


Arco Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arco Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
745,000,000
507,000,000
Net inc
134,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
1.39
.62
Yr rev
2,700,000,000
1,952,000,000
Net inc
494,000,000
257,000,000
Share earns
5.00
2.58


Reserve Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reserve Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,123,584
2,089,524
Net inc
b112,503
b363,030
Share earns
.06
.18
b-Included a $447,543 gain from extinguishment of debt for the latest quarter, and a tax credit of $84,700 for the year-ago period.


South African Leader Has 'Mild Stroke'
LEAD: President P. W. Botha, South Africa's leader for the last 10 years, suffered a ''mild stroke'' early today, a presidential spokesman said.


Emulex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Revenue
37,687,000
30,416,000
Net inc
3,816,000
2,358,000
Share earns
.33
.19
Shares outst
11,728,000
12,241,000
6mo rev
73,848,000
59,191,000
Net inc
7,305,000
3,970,000
Share earns
.63
.32
Shares outst
11,636,000
12,433,000


General Employment Enterrises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Employment Enterrises Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,033,663
3,493,288
Net inc
204,185
b71,396
Share earns
.14
-
b-Net loss


Smith, A O Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith, A O Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
262,316,000
236,197,000
Net inc
6,423,000
2,023,000
Share earns
.69
.13
Yr sales
1,015,427,000
970,424,000
Net inc
18,989,000
b18,444,000
Share earns
1.86
1.74


2 Accused in Scheme To Sell F-14 Parts
LEAD: Two Long Island businessmen were arrested at a Suffolk County airport yesterday on charges of selling parts for the F-14 Tomcat fighter jet to an undercover Federal agent posing as an arms dealer for Iran, Federal officials said.


Southmark's 2 Top Officers Step Down
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation said today that its two top officers and major shareholders, Gene E. Phillips and William S. Friedman, had resigned from the ailing real estate and financial services company and several affiliates.


Jostens Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
176,201,000
131,084,000
Net inc
9,637,000
b48,180,000
Share earns
.26
1.35
6mo sales
272,432,000
223,101,000
Net inc
11,634,000
b51,910,000
Share earns
.32
1.45


Comerica Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
28,482,000
24,327,000
Per share
1.72
1.43
Yr net inc
112,031,000
71,432,000
Per share
6.78
4.13


US Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
34,939,000
19,071,000
Share earns
.85
.46
Yr net inc
123,913,000
108,472,000
Share earns
3.02
2.65
Prior year included a gain from an accounting change of $8,834,000, or 22 cents a share.


Fort Wayne National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Wayne National Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,018,000
3,678,000
Per share
.64
.58
Yr net inc
15,003,000
13,863,000
Per share
2.38
2.20


Tandem Computers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
392,285,000
282,282,000
Net inc
31,295,000
23,693,000
Share earns
.32
.24


Building Dreams With Toy Blocks
LEAD: NORMAN BROSTERMAN does not consider himself a toy collector. ''These things are much more than toys,'' he said, referring to the 265 sets of children's architectural building blocks that crowd the closets of his Upper West Side apartment. ''They represent the whole history of architecture.
You have to wonder which architects played with which ones when they were kids.


Shift by Rockport
LEAD: The Rockport Company, which is based in Marlboro, Mass., and is a subsidiary of Reebok International Ltd., has temporarily returned to Chiat/Day after a yearlong relationship with Messner, Vetere, Berger, Carey &amp; Schmetterer.
Creative differences led to the divorce.
Chiat/ Day handled Rockport's advertising for about a year, until January 1988.


Close to Home
LEAD: NOW that the Holland Hotel is finally closed there aren't so many of them around Times Square: the big-bellied girls in their makeshift maternity clothes.
But they're elsewhere in the city, as many as there ever were, so young sometimes I wonder whatever drove them to sex.
Surely not lust; it must have been a rite of passage.


EDUCATION PLEDGE RENEWED BY BUSH
LEAD: President-elect George Bush, seeking to put a distinctive stamp on his Presidency, reinforced his campaign pledge today to make education a top priority of his Administration.


And Now a Few Words From President's Critics
LEAD: ''We made a difference,'' President Reagan said in his farewell address last week, describing a nation ''more prosperous, more secure and happier than it was eight years ago.'' They are words that the President has repeated, with slight variation but with consistent enthusiasm, in a final round of interviews that have focused on the


Texas Eastern, Coastal to Meet
LEAD: The Coastal Corporation, which has bid $2.6 billion for the Texas Eastern Corporation, said that a meeting between officials of the two companies has been arranged for this weekend.
Coastal said it owns about 4 percent of Texas Eastern's outstanding common stock on a fully diluted basis.


Passing the Blame
LEAD: If at first you don't succeed, blame the assistant coaches.
That seems to be the operative philosophy of the Los Angeles Raiders' first-year head coach, Mike Shanahan, and the team's owner, Al Davis.
When the Raiders finished the season with a 7-9 record and failed to make the playoffs, Shanahan, a former Denver assistant who took over the Raiders last season, dismissed the team's defensive coordinator, Charlie Sumner, and another assistant, Willie Brown.


The Palestinian Menace Has Been Exaggerated; Peace and Ploys
LEAD: To the Editor:


James Marshutz, Advertising Executive, 66
LEAD: James Marshutz, an advertising executive and television producer, died of cancer Jan. 12 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old.


Heading Off 'Junk Fax' At the Wire
LEAD: Don't fax me, I'll fax you: Under a bill proposed in the Connecticut General Assembly, that would be the official message here to businesses, direct marketers and others who send unsolicited advertisements - ''junk fax'' - over the telephone wires.


San Jose Boycott
LEAD: Ten members of San Jose State's team who demanded the dismissal of Coach Bill Berry were replaced by eight walk-ons for the game last night at Fullerton State.
Four replacements, who joined the four remaining members of the team, are football players, including the tailback Johnny Johnson.
Only one walk-on, 6-foot-9-inch Craig McPherson, a transfer from Santa Clara, has college experience.


For Children
LEAD:  Shows, Nature, Museums  ''NO PROBLEM,'' #10 new vignettes by the Paper Bag Players, who romp and dance their way through ''The Great Mummy Robbery'' and ''The Paper Bag Rag'' as well as other numbers, to the music of Donald Ashwander and the direction of Judith Martin, who also wrote the material, 2 P.M.


Digital Equipment Net Falls 15%; Sun and Microsoft Gain
LEAD: Even though it posted an earnings decline of 15 percent, the Digital Equipment Corporation fared well on Wall Street yesterday because those second-quarter results were 25 to 30 cents a share better than analysts had expected.


Sounds Around Town; DUELING DECIBELS
LEAD: Blind Idiot God, B.A.L.L., Reverb Mofos and Rude Buddha at CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street (982-4052).
Rough, brute-force rock -pounding drums, distorted guitars, disheveled vocals - takes the stage tomorrow at CBGB.
Blind Idiot God, at 11:30 P.M., plays bruising instrumentals that embrace dub reggae, hard-rock and Stravinsky; B.A.L.L., at 12:30 A.M., plays grinding, lumbering, sometimes off-handedly funny songs; the Reverb Mofos, at about 1:30 A.M., bash away like a latter-day Steppenwolf.


The Fullback Is a Throwback
LEAD: From September to January he's a flattop kind of guy.
Tom Rathman could not explain why his hair, which grows out when the football season ends, becomes a flattop again each year when it's time to return to work. ''It's just something I do,'' he said.
Rathman is 6 feet 1 inch and 232 pounds, and his appearance reflects a role that is functional and basic.


Buyout Curbs Draw Concern
LEAD: Congress should move cautiously on proposals to restrict leveraged buyouts for fear of stifling economic growth, the House Ways and Means Committee chairman said today.


Show and a Concert of William and Mary
LEAD: The exhibition ''The Age of William III and Mary II; Power; Politics and Patronage, 1688-1702'' continues through Jan. 28 at the Grolier Club, 47 East 60th Street.
For the first time on display outside the archives of the House of Lords, is the Declaration of Rights, which effectively established parliamentary rule in Britain and is considered the most important document in English history after Magna Carta.


McCaw, Boston Globe Owner Set Changes
LEAD: McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest cellular telephone operator, and Affiliated Publications Inc., owner of The Boston Globe and specialty magazines, yesterday announced plans for separate but related financial transactions that change the structures of both companies.


Lawyer for striking air traffic controllers won back 60 jobs but suffered personal loss
LEAD: More than 11,000 air traffic controllers lost their jobs in their ill-fated strike of 1981.
Jack Solerwitz, the lawyer who represented many of them, arguably lost even more.


6-Year-Old Boy Who Had Knife Is on Suspension
LEAD: A first grader was suspended Wednesday for carrying a knife into the same Bronx elementary school where a 5-year-old student was found with a loaded pistol last week.


Writers Reading
LEAD: As part of the fourth season of the New York Voices readers series of public readings by writers who live in or write about New York, Meg Wolitzer, whoe most recent novel is ''This Is Your Life,'' is to read from her works this afternoon at 12:15 at 1 Chase Manhattan Plaza.
Thulani Daivs, a poet and staff writer for The Village voice who wrote the libretto for the opera ''X, the Life and times of malcolm X'' and Mark Richard, a writer and photographer, are to read next Friday at the smae time and place.


To Flop Or Not To Flop?
LEAD: WHEN the world pauses for the Super Bowl on Sunday, there may be no giddy spectacle of players writhing on the ground, trying to remember which knee to clutch, the way the Seattle Seahawks did three weeks ago, trying to evoke a free timeout.


A Strained Welfare Unit, Another Child Dead
LEAD: In the latest example of New York City's inability to track troubled families, a Bronx woman whose 10-month-old boy suffocated last week was supposed to be contacted by city caseworkers once a month but had not been visited since last April.


Everett Quinton's Life After Ludlam
LEAD: Everett Quinton is sitting in the front row of the Charles Ludlam Theater thinking about the last two years.


Pentagon, Not Social Security, Made the Deficit; Growing Old's Reward
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Acts to Aid the Oil Industry On Leases and Use of Arctic Land
LEAD: The Interior Department, in the last hours of the Reagan Administration, took two actions tonight to benefit the oil industry.


Time Inc. Lifts Buyback Lid
LEAD: Time Inc. said yesterday that it had raised to 20 million the number of shares it was authorized to buy back under its share-repurchase plan.
Previously, it had authorization to buy 10 million shares.


Our Towns; Pulling America To the Twistless, Droopless Blind
LEAD: Homeowners don't know it, but they're about to have a new consumer need developed.
The typical suburbanite thought he was doing great a few years ago when he got rid of the heavy venetian blinds with the fat slats and bought those skinny wonders, thin-slatted aluminum mini-blinds.
Forget it.
America does not stand still.


G.E. Unit Executive Named As Kidder, Peabody Chief
LEAD: The General Electric Capital Corporation, a financial subsidiary of the General Electric Company, announced yesterday that Michael A. Carpenter, an executive vice president, had been named president and chief executive of its Kidder, Peabody Group.


Murray Chris-Craft Will End Business
LEAD: Murray Chris-Craft Inc. will close next Friday, ending a 50-year presence as a manufacturer of pleasure boats.
Chris-Craft's debt-ridden parent company, Murray Industries of Bradenton, Fla., made the announcement Wednesday to the 70 workers at the Holland Township plant, which employed about 600 workers as recently as 1983.


Title Bid Is 3d For Jones in '89
LEAD: Steve Jones's attempt to win a third consecutive PGA Tour event got off to a fair start today in the first round of the Phoenix Open as he shot three-under-par 68.


Restaurants
LEAD: One-shtick restaurants, like one-shtick comedians, can be amusing for a while, but their routines soon wear thin.
That was my impression after repeated visits to Trattoria dell'Arte, a restaurant designed by Milton Glaser with an anatomical theme that is about as subtle as Pee-wee Herman.


For Better or for Worse, The Bushes Trade Tales
LEAD: In a conjugal dustup in a television interview, President-elect George Bush and his wife, Barbara, have exchanged gibes about her weight and his dancing.


Exit the Music Man
LEAD: Already the spotlight is turning away.
In a few more hours, President Reagan will snap off a parting salute and be gone.
Come noon, it will be George Bush's day, city and Government.
But there will be time to think about all that.
For the moment, Ronald Reagan is still President and he remains, to the end, both amazing and comfortable; it's a fit time to contemplate why.


Mexico's President Gets Tough
LEAD: The Rambo-style assault by Mexican troops last week against the home of Joaquin Hernandez Galicia, boss of the powerful oil workers' union, can be seen as evidence that Mexico remains, behind its democratic facade, a virtual presidential dicatorship.
Legal niceties lost out in the raid and in Mr.
Hernandez's swift imprisonment on charges of amassing a private arsenal.


Zimbabwe Reads of Officials' Secrets
LEAD: One of the scarcest commodities in Zimbabwe these days is a spunky newspaper that has been attracting national attention with tales of wrongdoing in high places.


Dali's Health Declines; Condition Called Critical
LEAD: The condition of Salvador Dali worsened today after he developed pneumonia and an inflamed lung, the Spanish radio reported the artist's doctor as saying.


Nine Hostages Sadden Reagan
LEAD: President Reagan, whose obsession to gain the release of American hostages in Lebanon prompted the failed arms-for-hostages initiative with Iran, is saddened that he will leave office with nine Americans still captive.


Life's Nightmare Continues For a Howard Beach Victim
LEAD: Timothy Grimes's life had been deeply troubled even before he was a victim of violence two years ago in Howard Beach, Queens.
Since then his problems have worsened.


Two Found Dead in Brooklyn
LEAD: The bodies of a Brooklyn father and his 16-year-old daughter were found in the bedroom of their home yesterday, the police said.
The police said they believe the father shot the girl and then turned the gun on himself.
The clothed bodies of James Reid, 41, and his daughter Dionne were found in bed at 597 East 95th Street in the Brownsville section, the police said.


Sounds Around Town; Specialty Singing
LEAD: Stephanie Nakasian and Hod O'Brien, Chez Beauvais, 852 10th Avenue, at 56th Street (581-6340).
Hod O'Brien started out in the 1950's as a be-bop pianist influenced by Bud Powell.
He has since developed a very different style, one closer to the rumbling, swaggering lines of Dave McKenna.
In recent years, he has been teamed with Miss Nakasian, a singer who spent two years in Jon Hendricks's vocal group singing the ''trumpet'' parts Mr.


Retail Prices Up 0.3% for Month
LEAD: Prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent in December, contained by a sharp drop for gasoline.
For 1988 prices rose 4.4 percent, the same as in 1987.


Owner of Canadian Air Will Acquire Wardair
LEAD: In a move that will reduce competition in domestic air travel in Canada to only two significant carriers, the PWA Corporation announced today that it planned to acquire all outstanding shares in Wardair Inc. of Toronto.


Economic Scene; The Daunting Job Confronting Bush
LEAD: AFTER an initial burst of anxiety immediately after his election, the financial markets have greeted the ascendancy of George Bush to the White House with a joy bordering on euphoria.
What explains it?
Mr.
Bush's camp says the markets are cheering because they like the policies they see ahead.
And many outsiders say they like the choices Mr.


Reviews/Art; Kinetic Sculpture Using Toys, Fire and Water
LEAD: Dennis Oppenheim's two SoHo exhibitions, one at the John Gibson Gallery, the other at the newly opened Willoughby Sharp Gallery, mark something of a comeback for an artist who has kept a low profile in New York for the last five years.
Mr.
Oppenheim emerged in the late 1960's as a combination earth artist and body artist who came to specialize in indoor and outdoor installation works.


Koop Foresees 50 Different Laws If Abortion Ruling Is Overturned
LEAD: Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, who opposes abortion, said today that if the Supreme Court returned control of abortion to the states, ''we'll have 50 problems instead of one.''


Wilander Is Upset In Australia
LEAD: Ramesh Krishnan of India defeated Mats Wilander, 6-3, 6-2, 7-6, in the second round of the Australian Open today, leaving the top-ranked player in the world contemplating a complete break from the sport.


TV Weekend; The Woman Who Loved Melba Toast
LEAD: A couple of long shows are on tap this weekend.
Tonight at 9 on Channel 13, ''Great Performances'' begins the four-part ''Melba,'' a weekly mini-series that tells more than you probably care to know about the legendary soprano from Australia.
And Sunday at 9 P.M., NBC is offering the first half of a four-hour television movie adapted from the David Morrell thriller ''Brotherhood of the Rose.


Capital's Day of Waiting and Nostalgia
LEAD: President-elect George Bush, suggesting he would take a cautious approach in the first weeks of his administration, said today that he would not rush to reach an arms control agreement with the Soviet Union.


F.B.I. SAID TO STUDY CHICAGO CHEATING IN FUTURES TRADES
LEAD: Officials of Chicago's commodities exchanges acknowledged today that Federal investigators were looking into trading activities to determine whether investors had been defrauded.


Link of Smoking and Heart Disease Reported
LEAD: Heart disease patients who smoke are three times more likely to have chest pains and restricted blood flow to their hearts than those who do not, researchers say in a new study.


Borman's to Fight Stockholders' Suit
LEAD: Borman's Inc. said it would contest a lawsuit by shareholders who say they sold their stock at artificially low prices at a time company officials were holding secret acquisition talks with the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company.


Hirohito's Body Moved in Preparation for Funeral


Reviews/Music; Christopher Young Plays Varied Works
LEAD: Christopher Young, the organist who won the American Guild of Organist's National Young Artist Competition last year, offered a stylistically varied recital program on Wednesday evening at Park Avenue Christian Church.
In works ranging from a 17th-century Bruhns Praeludium through a recent William Albright piece, Mr.


From George Washington to George Bush, Speeches and Parades, Dances and Tradition
LEAD: Of the 50 formal inaugural ceremonies that have installed American Presidents from George Washington to Ronald Reagan, only a handful remain memorable.


Review/Theater; Evoking Bohemian Memories
LEAD: In her quest for novel ''site specific'' locations for environmental theater, Anne Hamburger has taken intrepid audiences into abandoned storefronts, converted warehouses and city streets, from which we watched a play enacted on and around the facade of a high-rise apartment building.
The latest excursion of Ms.


Review/Dance; A Cavalier and a Hoofer
LEAD: Almost every balletgoer knows that George Balanchine loved to choreograph for women.
But it should not be forgotten that he also created interesting parts for men.
In one of the two works by Balanchine that the New York City Ballet offered Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, the male dancer was a noble cavalier; in the other, the male star was a hoofer.


Fed Selling Ends Rally In Dollar
LEAD: A bruising round of central bank intervention and an increase in interest rates in Europe stopped the dollar rally yesterday, but some traders said they still expected the dollar to move higher.


Penny Stock Fraud Case
LEAD: Three Federal enforcement agencies announced a 36-count indictment on Wednesday, charging 10 individuals with criminal conspiracy and securities fraud in the trading of Protecto Industries.
Protecto is a so-called penny stock - one that is thinly traded and for which little information is available.


Top-Ranking Executive Quits Posts at Invitron
LEAD: The Invitron Company, a biotechnology company involved in cell culture manufacture, has announced the resignation of its president and chief executive, Charles V. Benton.


Uninspired Goaltending Is Key Factor in Devil Loss
LEAD: The Devils' goaltending was so poor tonight that Coach Jim Schoenfeld covered his eyes in their 5-4 loss to the Quebec Nordiques.


For the Record
LEAD:  Diversity in Hiring  From remarks Jan. 6 by Prof.
Alan Freeman of the State University of New York at Buffalo at the convention of the American Association of Law Schools in New Orleans.
Professor Freeman spoke on behalf of 300 colleagues who had signed a petition calling for the appointment of an independent commission to promote ''diversity in hiring'' in law schools.


Optimistic Mood Greets 41st President
LEAD: Americans begin the Bush administration in a buoyant mood, optimistic about the country and the new President and especially satisfied with their own lives, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


Pennsylvania Light Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: The Pennsylvania Power and Light Company is offering $125 million in 10 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2019 at a price of 99.35, to yield 10.7 percent, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Los Angeles Station Sold
LEAD: The Evergreen Media Corporation, an Irving, Tex., radio station operator, said today that it had paid $55 million for the Los Angeles classical music station KFAC.
Louise Haifetz paid $33.5 million in 1986 for the FM station, along with its AM sister station, which was sold separately last summer for $8.7 million.


Trout &amp; Ries Moving
LEAD: A year after announcing that it was leaving the agency business, Trout &amp; Ries is leaving New York City as well.
Jack Trout and Al Ries are packing up some of their remaining employees and establishing their marketing-strategy consulting operation in Greenwich, Conn.
With their books and articles, the partners had established themselves as doyens of positioning when they lost the United Jersey Banks account in late 1987, an event that hastened their move out of advertising.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 454 money market mutual funds increased by $2.2 billion, to $284.59 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 137 institutional funds increased by $998.2 million, to $73.93 billion.
The assets of the 226 general-purpose funds were down by $2.9 million, to $90.17 billion.


European Units Acquired by UPS
LEAD: United Parcel Service announced the acquisition of seven transport companies, which it said would strengthen its operations in Europe and the Pacific.
The acquisitions, whose terms were not disclosed, will also facilitate the company's expansion into the Middle East and Africa, it said.


Dr. Michael B. Shimkin, 76, Dies; Helped Link Smoking and Cancer
LEAD: Dr.
Michael B. Shimkin, a researcher who helped establish the link between smoking and lung cancer, died of a stroke Monday at the Medical Center of the University of California at San Diego.
He was 76 years old and lived in LaJolla.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about Advanced Micro Devices Inc. misstated its earnings in the fourth quarter of 1987.
The company earned $262.5 million.


Housing Construction Hit 6-Year Low in 1988
LEAD: Housing construction fell by 2.2 percent in December, ending a year in which residential building activity dropped to its lowest level in six years, the Government reported today.


Dr. Hubert Beck, 81, A Retired Professor
LEAD: Dr.
Hubert Park Beck, a psychologist and retired professor of educational psychology, died of cardiac arrest Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Killer Depicted as Loner Full of Hate
LEAD: The 24-year-old man who opened fire on children in a schoolyard here Tuesday was a troubled loner full of hate who could not keep a job and had alcohol and drug problems, according to the portrait that is emerging from investigators and family members.


Steinberg Lawyers Say Nussbaum Killed Lisa
LEAD: Defense lawyers said yesterday that it was a jealous and deceitful Hedda Nussbaum who murdered Lisa Steinberg, not Joel B. Steinberg, who is accused of beating the 6-year-old child to death.


Hitachi Sued By Motorola
LEAD: Motorola Inc. filed a lawsuit Wednesday charging that Hitachi Ltd. had infringed on several of its patents and was engaging in unfair competition in the sale of microprocessors.
In the lawsuit filed in United


Diner's Journal; Gage &amp; Tollner
LEAD: Gage &amp; Tollner, the 110-year-old landmark Brooklyn restaurant operated by the Dewey family since 1919, was sold late last year to a partnership headed by Peter Aschkenasy, a Manhattan restaurateur who has vowed to keep its 19th-century character, including its faded tin ceiling, burnished wood walls and period chandeliers.


Corrections
LEAD: The Lessons column on the Education page on Dec. 7, about Education Secretary Lauro F. Cavazos, described Richard M. Nixon's 1968 campaign remarks about the Vietnam War incorrectly.
Mr.
Nixon pledged to end the war if elected President.


The Inaugural Sewer
LEAD: George Bush's lavish Inaugural festivities carry a lavish price tag.
By the time the five-day extravaganza ends, a record $30 million will have been spent - about eight times the tab for Jimmy Carter's 1977 Inauguration.


Concern on Botha's Health Sends Platinum Up Sharply
LEAD: Platinum futures prices surged yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange in a rally reflecting concerns about the health of South Africa's President, P. W. Botha.


Behind the Image, Woods Has Serious Side
LEAD: The first time Sam Wyche met Ickey Woods, the Bengals' coach couldn't help noticing the rookie was wearing a ponytail.


At the Top: The Senior Aide Corps
LEAD:  JOHN H. SUNUNU: White House Chief of Staff  A 49-year-old engineer retiring as Governor of New Hampshire . . .
Credited with helping Mr.
Bush to victory in the New Hampshire primary . . . became increasingly a key player in the campaign, taking on the role of chief critic of the Democratic nominee, Michael S.


Edgar P. Mannix, 75, a Thoracic Surgeon
LEAD: Dr.
Edgar P. Mannix Jr., a thoracic surgeon and former director of surgery at the St.
Francis Hospital Heart Center in Roslyn, L.I., died Jan. 9 at his home in Escondido, Calif.
He was 75 years old.


Getty Trust And Chinese
LEAD: China and the Getty Conservation Institute today announced a joint effort to preserve two of China's largest and most significant cultural sites, where statues and paintings dating from the fourth century are decaying from harsh weather, pollution and damage by earthquakes.


Hoyt S. Haddock, 81, a Maritime Unionist
LEAD: Hoyt S. Haddock, a retired maritime union official who was a former president of the United Seamen's Service, died Tuesday at his home in Towson, Md., after a long illness.
He was 81 years old.


Residents Assail Plan for A-Waste Dump
LEAD: The anger was audible here Wednesday night as 500 people filled a high school auditorium to hear state officials explain why an 86-square-mile parcel in Washington County is being considered for a low-level radioactive waste dump.


Chrysler and G.M. Expand Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation and the General Motors Corporation expanded low-interest incentives by offering financing as low as 4.9 percent on some of their small cars and light trucks.
The Ford Motor Company started the latest wave of low-interest incentives last week by offering 4.9 percent interest on some of its small cars.


Brooklyn Man Held In Rape of Girl, 11
LEAD: A maintenance worker at a Brooklyn day-care center was arrested Wednesday and charged with the rape of an 11-year-old girl, the police said.


Times and Machinists Reach Tentative Pact
LEAD: The New York Times and the union representing its 72 machinists reached a tentative agreement yesterday on a six-year extension of a labor contract that expired nearly two years ago.
The accord averted a strike that had been set for 12:01 A.M. today.


John D. Hickerson, 91; Foreign Service Officer
LEAD: John D. Hickerson, a former Ambassador and chairman of the group that established NATO, died of cancer Wednesday in Maryland at Bethesda Retirement and Nursing Center.
He was 91 years old and lived in Washington.


Gooden and Darling File for Big Pay Increases
LEAD: The high price of success was spelled out yesterday when more than 100 baseball players and their teams exchanged salary arbitration numbers and Dwight Gooden joined Orel Hershiser, Roger Clemens and Kirby Puckett in asking for salaries of more than $2 million.


Barron and Mitchell
LEAD: The duo of Kenny Barron on piano and Red Mitchell on bass will perform tonight and tomorrow at Bradley's, 70 University Place (228-6440).
Music begins at 9:30 P.M.; there is a $5 cover and an $8 minimum.


At the Movies
LEAD:  Partners in a Venture


Arabs Blacklist Hotel Chain Owner
LEAD: Arab officials organizing the economic boycott of Israel blacklisted the British-based owners of the Hilton International hotel chain.
An official at the Damascus-based Arab Bureau for the Boycott of Israel said the Ladbroke Group, which owns Hilton, was blacklisted on Saturday.
He said that under boycott rules all subsidiaries of a blacklisted group or company were included in the ban.


D'Amato Urges Defense Lawyer For U.S. Attorney
LEAD: Senator Alphonse M. D'Amato will ask the Justice Department to name Otto G. Obermaier, a top defense lawyer in New York, to be the next United States Attorney in Manhattan, a spokeswoman for the Senator confirmed last night.


Vasconcelos and Band
LEAD: Nana Vasconcelos and his Brazilian-funk band Bush Dancers are to perform tonight at midnight at B#2, 157 Hudson Street (966-5881).
Tickets are $15; doors open at 10 P.M..


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


Shamrock Lifts Bid for Polaroid
LEAD: Shamrock Holdings Inc. said today that it would raise its offer for the Polaroid Corporation by $3, to $45 a share, and begin a proxy fight for control of the company's board.
The revised offer is worth $3.1 billion.


Dismissed Coach Sues
LEAD: Gary Moss, who was dismissed as the Sam Houston State coach after the National Collegiate Athletic Association issued sanctions against him, has filed a lawsuit against school officials and others, including Dick Schultz, the N.C.A.A. executive director.
In the suit filed Wednesday in Huntsville, Tex., Moss said his constitutional rights were violated because a hearing on his dismissal was not held.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:  Friday  WOOLF'S WOMEN


Plan to Bid For G.E.C. Is Shelved
LEAD: A consortium formed to make a multibillion-dollar takeover bid for the General Electric Company, Britain's largest manufacturing enterprise, said today that it was shelving its attempt.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: *
An anti-crack radio campaign, featuring the 1950's hit song ''Yakety Yak,'' with new lyrics recorded by the original group, the Coasters, has been produced by Mark &amp; Jeff's Jingle Company, San Francisco, and financed by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/ San Francisco, for the Partnership for a Drug Free America.


Micro D Takes Ingram Offer
LEAD: Micro D Inc., a distributor of microcomputer hardware, software and books, said today that it had agreed in principle to be acquired by Ingram Industries for $14.75 a share in cash.
Ingram, a privately held company based in Nashville, already owns about 59 percent of Micro D, of Santa Ana, Calif.


Reviews/Film; Writer's Block, by Law
LEAD: ''Memoirs of Prison'' was shown as part of the 1984 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 10, 1984.
The film, in Portuguese with English subtitles, opens today at the Public, 425 Lafayette Street.


Selection of Baker Wins Endorsement Of Senate Committee
LEAD: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted unanimously today to recommend confirmation by the full Senate of James A. Baker 3d as the Bush Administration's Secretary of State.


Hispanic Partnership Formed to Buy TV Stations
LEAD: Hoping to take advantage of tax incentives available to television station owners who sell to minority buyers, Herman Badillo, Geraldo Rivera and three other Hispanic partners yesterday announced the formation of a partnership to acquire and manage stations in various markets around the country.


Drug Watch Hot Line
LEAD: There is a new hot line here that has nothing to do with impending confrontations with the Soviet Union.
If you are calling 1-800-333-6988 it relates to the Washington metropolitan area's drug wars.


Islanders Keep Kings And Gretzky in Check
LEAD: Another frightening opponent, another Islander victory.
The modest two-game string of success is enough, said Pat LaFontaine, to make the Islanders believe they can make a habit of winning once again.


Birthdays and Engagements Inspire Gifts to the Neediest
LEAD: After lengthy discussions about what to buy each other for their first wedding anniversary, Leslie J. Lane and Alan H. Vorchheimer of Manhattan decided to celebrate the occasion with a gift to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Clippers Dismiss Shue And Name Don Casey
LEAD: The Los Angeles Clippers dismissed Coach Gene Shue yesterday and named Don Casey, an assistant who was a former coach at Temple, as interim coach.
Shue has the most victories of any active National Basketball Association coach, with 784.
The Clippers lost their 11th consecutive game Wednesday night, to the Los Angeles Lakers.(


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: Markets


Irving Resnick, Gambling Figure, 72
LEAD: Irving (Ash) Resnick, a gambling figure credited with bringing high rollers to the Las Vegas Strip, died Wednesday after a long bout with cancer.
He was 72 years old.


Reviews/Music; Blues and Country Sounds From Cowboy Junkies
LEAD: In great blues and country performances, there's usually a moment where the music drops to a hush and the singer quietly confesses stark, primal terrors.
Cowboy Junkies, a Canadian band that sold out the Bottom Line on Tuesday, want to extend that moment through its entire repertory.


Nuclear Industry Faulted
LEAD: A study of the American nuclear power industry found it had one of the worst performance records in the industrialized world, and management weaknesses are probably at fault, a group of nuclear engineering experts said this week.
The best nuclear plants in the United States are as good as any in the world, they said.


Annette Krebs, 72; Led a Literacy Project
LEAD: Annette Krebs, a former director of the adult literacy project of the Massachusetts Council for Public Schools, died of Alzheimer's disease Tuesday at her home in Newton, Mass.
She was 72 years old.


Soviets Buy Pushkin Love Letters
LEAD: Thirteen letters written by Aleksandr Pushkin were handed over to a Soviet official at a ceremony in a Geneva hotel Wednesday night.
The letters once belonged to a member of the Czar's family and later to Sergei Diaghilev.


Reviews/Art; An Antic Hymn to a Never-Elegant New York
LEAD: As George McNeil gets older, his work gets younger.
The new paintings by this nearly 81-year-old artist step out of his disco series, but they are even more topsy-turvy, even more antic.
They are a hymn to New York City, composed by someone for whom Manhattan has the packed, labyrinthine concentration of medieval


Steinbrenner Pardoned by Reagan For '72 Election Law Violations
LEAD: President Reagan has pardoned George M. Steinbrenner 3d, owner of the New York Yankees, for convictions connected with illegal contributions to the 1972 campaign of Richard M. Nixon, a White House official disclosed today.


On Bush's Team, Key Word in Assistant to the President Will Be 'Assistant'
LEAD: President-elect Bush has installed a White House staff of seasoned, but relatively unknown senior aides.
Its mission is to stay that way.
While the aides will have the same lofty-sounding ranks as their predecessors, they have been told in no uncertain terms that the important word in a title like assistant to the President, is assistant, not


Excerpts From Warsaw Plan To Discuss Legalizing Unions
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Communist Party resolution calling for talks leading to legalization of new trade unions, as translated by the official P.A.P. press agency:


Charging Riot Policemen Beat Protesters in Prague Square
LEAD: Policemen swinging riot sticks stormed into a crowd of more than 2,000 demonstrators in Prague's central square today, pinning many to the ground and beating them severely.


For Bush, 40,000 Points of Maglites
LEAD: If President Bush follows his plan to use the phrase ''thousand points of light'' in his address to those attending the inaugural balls Friday night, 40,000 points will shine.


New Chief Executive For Fuqua Industries
LEAD: J.B.
Fuqua, the man who built Fuqua Industries, has stepped down as chief executive, and the post has been given to Lawrence P. Klamon, Fuqua's president and chief operating officer, the company announced yesterday.


Books of The Times; The Ecstasies and Agonies Of the Neurotic Life
LEAD:  Intimacy  By Susan Chace  161 pages. Random House. $14.95.


White House Ordered To Save Message Files
LEAD: A Federal district judge issued a restraining order tonight that bars the Government from destroying computer files containing interoffice messages sent by Reagan Administration officials on the White House computer.


Giuliani Says Efforts on Drug Abuse Are Wanting
LEAD: In a speech that could serve as a mayoral campaign theme, United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani declared yesterday that the Federal, state and local governments have not done enough to combat drug abuse and addiction.
But he conceded that the problem could not be solved, only reduced.


Tom Russell Band
LEAD: Tom Russell is to lead his country band tomorrow at 11 P.M. at Delta 88, 332 Eighth Avenue, at 26th Street (924-3499).
There is a $5 cover and a $5 minimum.


PRETORIA INSTALLS ACTING PRESIDENT
LEAD: A senior member of the South African Cabinet was sworn in as Acting President today, 34 hours after President P. W. Botha suffered a mild stroke.


Tyson Sweetens Holly Farms Bid
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation received a sweetened bid of $63.50 a share in cash from Tyson Foods Inc., the Springdale, Ark., chicken producer that made the original offer for Holly Farms in October.
Holly Farms, based in Memphis, said its board was considering the latest bid by Tyson.
Tyson's previous bid for Holly Farms was $60 a share in cash.


U.S.S.R. Says It Will Withdraw More Nuclear Arms From Europe
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union announced today that Soviet troops leaving Eastern Europe under a previously announced reduction would take their battlefield nuclear weapons with them.


Homeless Have Moved From Hotels for Years
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pop (as in Populism) Go the Festivities
LEAD: With the Beach Boys at the Lincoln Memorial, a mariachi band at the Kennedy Center, rhythm-and-blues at the Washington Convention Center and country music everywhere, the entertainment for the inaugural festivities adds up to the capital's most populist cultural event since the heyday of Jimmy Carter.


Bush Offering a Special Mix: Ivy League and Pork Rinds
LEAD: If Ronald Reagan represents the apotheosis of cowboy values, symbolizing the enduring American myths of self-help, self-sufficiency and self-confidence, George Bush embodies the patrician ideal of responsibility begotten by privilege: an equally American tradition reaching back through the many Presidents more at home in mansions than log cabins, from Washington of Mount Vernon to Jefferson of Monticello to Roosevelt of Hyde Park.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.94
9.07
6.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.24
8.26
5.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.27
8.29
6.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.04
9.03
8.82
30-YR.


A Victory for U.S.F.L.
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the National Football League must pay the defunct United States Football League $5.5 million in attorneys' fees.
The man who served as the U.S.F.L.'s commissioner said the ruling ''further validates our antitrust charges.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Radio-Print Campaign For the Sisters of Mercy Radio-Print Campaign For the Sisters of Mercy
LEAD: ''You won't find her program for success inside a computer,'' one print ad says.
Another says, ''Her promotion to vice president meant picking up a sponge and a mop.'' These are among the four print ads and a 60-second radio spot promoting the Sisters of Mercy, a Roman Catholic order that has received a grant for the project from the Catholic Communications


On Eve, Everything's Coming Up Relatives
LEAD: Like hundreds of his brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews and cousins, George Bush Jr. was scrambling through the traffic-choked streets of Washington today, rushing from event to event to event.


Prices of Notes and Bonds Mixed
LEAD: Treasury note and bond prices closed narrowly mixed yesterday as the fixed-income securities markets were again dominated by the gyrations in the dollar.
Dealers said that moves by several European countries to raise domestic interest rates were ignored by the bond market, as were several economic reports that would usually be considered positive for the market.


Windborne Dollars
LEAD: As might have been expected, when a bumbling bank robber dropped the $2,900 he had just stolen from Redlands Federal Savings on Tuesday, passersby quickly gathered to grab what was blowing in the wind.
What they caught they returned to the bank.
All but $20 was turned in, said Sgt.
Dan Castellini.


Palestinian Is Killed In Protests in Gaza; Many Are Wounded
LEAD: A Palestinian in the occupied Gaza Strip was killed by soldiers today and dozens of others were wounded during widespread violent protests against the army's harsh new measures to quell the Palestinian uprising.


U.S. to Let Oil Companies Operate Again in Libya
LEAD: President Reagan announced today that he was modifying trade restrictions against Libya to allow American oil companies to resume operations there and avoid a Libyan takeover of their assets.


Limited Supply Of 3D Glasses
LEAD: As this Sunday's Super Bowl approaches, millions of Americans are scrambling to find tinted cardboard glasses they can use to watch a three-dimensional commercial and halftime show sponsored by the Coca-Cola Company.


Neo-Classicism Sweeps Armory Show
LEAD: WINGED horses, gilded eagles and an impressive gathering of Roman goddesses reign in Neo-Classical splendor among the urns, columns and obelisks spread throughout the Winter Antiques Show, opening today in previews and tomorrow to the public for a nine-day run at the Seventh Regiment Armory.


BUSH AIDE INSISTS ON NO TAX RISES, EVEN IN DISGUISE
LEAD: Richard G. Darman, the chief architect of President-elect George Bush's budget policies, told Congress today that the new administration opposed all measures the public might perceive as tax increases and would not disguise tax proposals in euphemistic terms.


George, Do It Yourself
LEAD: Every time a politician runs for President the real message is the same: Just put me into that Oval Office and I will show you that I can get things done and that I can make changes.
Count on me.


Frose Keeps the Ranger Goal And His Mouth Shut Tight
LEAD: Bob Froese does not complain or despair.
He plays only occasionally, but keeps his mouth closed.
The Rangers, from management to minor leaguers, admire his unfailing stoicism.
What they appreciate even more, though, is that when he does play, he gives them no reason to complain.


Jokers and Leaders Keep Teams Together
LEAD: They have talked enough about the blitz to make them blue and plenty more about who will shuffle last and who will slip first, who has the edge and who has the heart in Super Bowl XXIII.
They have played the game 100 times in practices and several times more in their sleep.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I have just a slight sense that Bush may turn out to be more of a tribune of the people than he chose to suggest in the campaign.
We may find noblesse oblige replacing greed as the White House style.''  - Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.  [ A11:3. ]


N.C.A.A. Presidents Urge Delay on Proposition 42
LEAD: The presidents of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and of the organization's Presidents' Commission said today that they would recommend postponing the enactment of Proposition 42, the controversial proposal to tighten scholarship eligibility requirements for prospective freshman athletes.


Kenny Burrell
LEAD: The guitarist Kenny Burrell leads his Jazz Guitar Band tonight through Sunday at Carlos 1,432 Avenue of the Americas, at Ninth Street (982-3260).
Sets begin at 9 and 11 P.M., plus a 12:30 A.M. set tonight and tomorrow; there is a $10 cover with a $7 minimum at tables and $10 admission at the bar.


San Francisco Journal; Chilling Answer to Life After Death
LEAD: Everyone knows that you can't take it with you.
But if members of the American Cryonics Society Inc. have their way, they are going to come back and get it.


For a Third Party
LEAD: To the Editor:


Northeast Utilities
LEAD: Lawyers for shareholders and creditors of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire Tuesday dismissed a $2 billion offer for the company by Northeast Utilities as too low.
Howard Berman, a lawyer representing Public Service's 100,000 shareholders, said they would urge the company's board to reject Northeast Utilities' plan ''as totally unsatisfactory.


Top Official of Israeli Labor Party Quits
LEAD: Uzi Baram resigned as Secretary General of the Labor Party today, formalizing a split in the party's ranks that may create new leaders for Labor in the months ahead.


With 8 Hands and 25 Strings, a Quartet Makes Music
LEAD: The classic guitar, with its gentle voice and its ability to play contrapuntal music, is usually regarded as a solitary instrument - the province of the soloist.
But throughout the instrument's modern history, guitarists have teamed up as duets, trios and even, if more rarely, quartets, in order to take on music that makes demands greater than two hands and six strings can negotiate.


Tokyo Journal; A Fear of Cancer Means No Telling
LEAD: The biggest conspiracy of silence in recent Japanese medical history started sometime in late 1987, in a secret meeting at the University of Tokyo.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Steinbrenner Wins Pardon


Auctions
LEAD:  A Suite With a Past


African Bishops Urge Peace
LEAD: Roman Catholic bishops from nine southern African nations appealed today to governments and guerrillas in the region to make peace.
The letter, written after three years of research and approved by Pope John Paul II when he visited Zimbabwe in September, was published her by the Inter-Regional Meeting of Bishops of Southern Africa.


Washington's Mayor Is Questioned by Grand Jury
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. went before a Federal grand jury today, asserting as he entered the closed hearing that he had done no wrong and was not the target of the jury's investigation into allegations of drug dealing and misuse of government funds.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  BALTIMORE (AL) - Agreed to terms with Mark Thurmond, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Agreed to terms with Brook Jacoby, third baseman, on a two-year contract.
LOS ANGELES (NL) - Agreed to terms with Ray Searage, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
MONTREAL (NL) - Agreed to terms with Pascual Perez, pitcher, on a one-year contract and with Kevin Gross, pitcher, on a two-year contract.


Open Positions on Short Sales Increase 2.4% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange yesterday reported that short interest on the Big Board rose 2.4 percent in the four-week period ended last Friday.


Who's Who at 1600
LEAD: The seasoned but little-known people who will staff the White House know that the important word in a title like assistant to the President is assistant, not President.
The last of five articles on the players in George Bush's Washington.
Page A10.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary article and headline yesterday about a former executive vice president of the Atlantic Refining Company misidentified him.
He was Harry G. Schad, not Shad.


The All-Purpose Inaugural Address
LEAD: Presidents' inaugural addresses from George Washington onward have dwelled on similar themes.
Turn them upside-down, shake them out, and one can excerpt and assemble the parts into a single all-purpose speech, like the following. (The authors are footnoted below.)


Transplanting Genes Is Approved To Study Cancer Cells in Humans
LEAD: The Federal Government yesterday approved the first federally sanctioned attempt to transplant foreign genes into humans.


3 Banks Post Rise In Profits
LEAD: Several more banks reported record quarterly earnings yesterday as they benefited from interest payments from Brazil that had been overdue since the beginning of 1987.
Even excluding that unusual item, however, banks continued to show progress in controlling expenses and in generating additional fee income.


Review/Music; Four Conducting Contestants Show Their Stuff
LEAD: Four nervous but assured conductors, all Americans under 35 years of age, took their turns on the podium at Alice Tully Hall on Wednesday night.
Each led the American Symphony Orchestra in bits of Beethoven's ''Egmont'' overture as well as Tchaikovsky's ''Pathetique'' and Mozart's ''Jupiter'' symphonies; each accompanied an aria by Leonard Bernstein and rehearsed a difficult stretch of Aaron Copland's Orchestral Variations.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pepsi to Show Ad in Russian
LEAD: ''Noise!
Noise!
You call that music?'' a father trying to read a newspaper says to his son, who is bopping to music blasting in the living room.
The dialogue is in Russian, with English subtitles.
A can of Pepsi is on top of a shortwave radio.


Guilty Plea by Rockwell
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation pleaded guilty today to two significant counts in an indictment that charged one of the nation's 10 largest military contractors with conspiring to defraud the Air Force.


Consumer Prices Increase 0.3%; Year's Rise Matches 4.4% of '87
LEAD: Retail prices rose a modest three-tenths of 1 percent in December, the Labor Department reported yesterday.


Joys of the Bank That Stays Together
LEAD: YOU hear it immediately: the crystalline blend of the instruments, the effortless elegance of the musicians, the subtle shadings of the beat that are acknowledged on the bandstand by a sideways glance and a smile.
It's the sound of musical empathy, the sound of a band that plays together regularly -one that's more than willing to produce extraordinary music on any bandstand at any time.


Review/Dance; More of Womanworks
LEAD: The emphasis was on long, continuous strands of motion on Wednesday at the Joyce Theater, where the Womanworks festival presented Risa Jaroslow and Dancers and the Monica Levy Performance Group.
There was also some fine dancing by the two companies.
But there the similarities ended.


Bogus Police Sought In Thruway Incident
LEAD: The state police said yesterday that they were looking for two men who posed as police officers to pull a driver off the New England Thruway on New Year's Day and for the ''good Samaritan'' who may have saved her from harm.


Power for a Friend
LEAD: President Reagan's power is dwindling fast, but he can still do a few favors for friends.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: A.L.
Laboratories, Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a maker of generic pharmaceuticals and animal health micronutrients, named John T. Janssen to the newly created post of chief financial officer of its subsidiary Barre-National Inc., Baltimore.


Inflation Slows in New York Area
LEAD: Consumer prices in the metropolitan New York area rose one-tenth of 1 percent in December, finishing the year with an inflation rate that was markedly lower than that in 1987, the Labor Department's regional Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


Phone Service To Be Tested
LEAD: An affiliate of the American Express Company yesterday announced a new service that it said would expand the ability to handle thousands of telephone calls placed simultaneously by people who are ordering merchandise or participating in live broadcast surveys.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-6  In Poland, leaders published the text of the Communist Party resolution calling for talks leading to legalization of new trade unions, including Solidarity, which was banned more than six years ago.
Page A1


King Accuses Cayton
LEAD: Don King castigated Bill Cayton for a second day yesterday as he gave his deposition in the suit that Mike Tyson has brought against Cayton, his manager, to void their contract, which runs until February 1992.
During six hours of questioning by Thomas Puccio, Cayton's attorney, King accused Cayton of ''double-dipping'' on foreign sales for Tyson's championship fights against Larry Holmes, Tony Tubbs and Michael Spinks.


'Romance' Closes
LEAD: ''Romance Romance,'' a musical with book, lyrics and direction by Barry Harman and music by Keith Herrmann, closed Sunday after the matinee at the Helen Hayes Theater.
The production ran for 297 regular performances and 10 previews.


Gene Combination Tied to Higher Risk of Multiple Sclerosis
LEAD: Scientists said yesterday that they had found that two genes, when inherited together, heightened the risk of developing multiple sclerosis, a severe and mysterious disease of the central nervous system.


Review/Cabaret; Of Young Adulthood
LEAD: The finest songs of Richard Maltby Jr. and David Shire, the collaborative team best known for the 1977 cabaret revue ''Starting Here, Starting Now'' and the 1983 Broadway show ''Baby,'' communicate something rarely found in theater music nowadays: a rich sweeping sense of lives being lived and people changing over time.


A.T.P. Announces 1990 Schedule
LEAD: The Association of Tennis Professionals unveiled its inaugural tour yesterday, a 77-event schedule for 1990 that includes new tournaments in China and the Soviet Union while omitting several major American events that had been fixtures of the tour operated by the Men's Tennis Council.


Bristol, Pfizer Raise Profits
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Company yesterday reported a 12.3 percent earnings gain in the fourth quarter of 1988, while a rival health care company, Pfizer Inc., reported an increase of just 3.7 percent.


Irish Player Dies
LEAD: Bob Satterfield, a Notre Dame player, collapsed at a nightclub and died yesterday, a few hours after returning with his teammates from a White House visit, school officials said.
A preliminary autopsy indicated that Satterfield, 22 years old, suffered a seizure followed by cardiac arrest, said the Notre Dame sports-information director, John Heisler.


Pentagon, Not Social Security, Made the Deficit; Middle-Income Targets
LEAD: To the Editor:


At the Show Without a Ticket
LEAD: Not everyone is celebrating in Washington today.
Hundreds of frustrated out-of-towners are spending their first hours in town in the cavernous Convention Center, standing in long lines and sitting in abject resignation in the Error Resolution Area.


Review/Cabaret; 'Ad Hock,' Sellouts In Song
LEAD: The world of advertising, as scores of novels and movies have insisted over the years, is populated with sensitive artists prostituting their creative talents in order to live well.
For those who make it big in the business, the cliche has it, success and self-flagellation often go hand in hand.


Pension Fund Acts
LEAD: The Merchant Navy Officers Pension Fund said it planned to sell from time to time its 6.9 percent stake in First Union Real Estate Equity and Mortgage Investments, a real estate investment trust in Cleveland.
The Merchant Navy fund, which provides pensions for retired officers of the British Merchant Navy, controls 1.24 million First Union shares.


Attorney for Miami Officer Calls Shooting Self-Defense
LEAD: The lawyer representing William Lozano, the city police officer whose fatal shooting of a black motorcyclist on Monday set off three days of racial violence here, said today that the officer acted in self-defense when the 500-pound vehicle came roaring toward him.


COMMODITY HUBS
LEAD:  Figures are for 1988.  CHICAGO BOARD OF TRADE


Rebel Camp on Thai Border Captured by Burmese Troops
LEAD: Burmese Government troops backed by mortars captured a major rebel camp near the Thai-Burmese frontier, sending 600 civilians of the Karen ethnic group fleeing to Thailand, Thai officials said today.


Ohio State Upsets Cold Iowa by 102-91
LEAD: Jay Burson scored 26 points and No. 16 Ohio State ran away from No. 7 Iowa tonight, defeating the Hawkeyes, 102-91, in a Big Ten Conference game.


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Expectations for the Bush Years
LEAD:  The Mood is Generally Optimistic


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Big B Inc., Birmingham, Ala., a drugstore chain, said it would acquire Reed Drug Co., a unit of Peoples Drug Stores Inc., Alexandria, Va., for about $50 million.


Skiing Risks Include Mismanaged Slopes
LEAD: To the Editor:


McDonnell Shares Up on Order Report
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation's stock climbed today after it was reported that the aircraft company was close to obtaining an order of up to $7.4 billion from the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines Inc.
McDonnell Douglas closed $1.50 higher today, at $82.50 a share on the Big Board.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  SKIING  Walliser Wins Again: Maria Walliser of Switzerland won her second World Cup race of the season, defeating Carole Merle of France yesterday in a women's downhill in Tignes, France.
Walliser was timed in 1 minute 19.16 seconds.
Merle, who moved to second place in the overall standing, was clocked in 1:19.57.


Fairchild Rejects Offer by Carlyle
LEAD: Fairchild Industries, the military electronics contractor, rejected an unsolicited $264 million takeover bid by the Carlyle Group, an investment partnership in Washington.
A statement issued by the company read in part, ''The proposed conditional cash purchase of $15.50 a share of common stock was financially inadequate and not in the best interests of Fairchild and all its stockholders.


Reviews/Film; Substitute Soldiering
LEAD: ''Field of Honor'' was shown as part of the 1988 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 18.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Carnegie Screening Room, Seventh Avenue at 57th Street.


Report Looks to Hudson for New York City's Water
LEAD: To meet its expanding needs, the New York City water-supply system will likely have to begin to take up to 300 million gallons of water a day from the Hudson River, a state report says.
The report also says that Long Island will probably need to be connected to the city's system soon to prevent depletion of its ground-water acquifers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising
LEAD: A Campaign For Research On Animals


Koch Clarifies Comment on S.R.O. Law
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch said yesterday that he had not meant to suggest last week that city officials and City Council members had publicly discussed a change in a city law that benefited the developer Harry Macklowe.


2 Convicted in Bank Fraud
LEAD: Two former high-ranking officers of the defunct Golden Pacific Bank were convicted Wednesday of Federal conspiracy and fraud charges in the secret diversion of $15 million in depositors' money.


Aldo DeDominicis, Broadcaster, 85
LEAD: Aldo DeDominicis, who founded the first television station in New England, died Tuesday at Hartford Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Cheshire, Mr.
DeDominicis and a partner, Patrick Goode, financed and built what is now WTNH-TV in New Haven in 1948.
Earlier in the 40's, Mr.
DeDominicis was a co-founder of WNHC-AM in New Haven and bought stations in New Britain that he renamed WRCH-AM and FM.


Croatian Official Chosen to Be Yugoslav Premier
LEAD: Ante Markovic, a member of the collective presidency of Croatia who is regarded as a supporter of economic change, was chosen as Yugoslavia's Prime Minister today.


U.S. Files More Charges On Princeton/Newport
LEAD: Government prosecutors brought additional charges yesterday against the top officers of a disbanded New Jersey investment partnership and one other person who had been indicted last summer on charges of engaging in a racketeering conspiracy.


G.O.P. Shows Fun Side, Mostly in Formal Wear
LEAD: Republicans in tuxedos and long dresses are roaming everywhere about Washington this week.
So much so that at a ''Cabaret Night'' for the conservative wing of the party, Oliver L. North, no longer a marine, outshone other partygoers by wearing his medals on his dinner jacket.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Sharyn Williamson has been promoted to executive vice president/planning and operations at Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore.


Warsaw Issues A Call for Talks On New Unions
LEAD: Poland's leaders today published the long-awaited text of the Communist Party resolution calling for talks leading to legalization of new unions, including Solidarity, which was banned more than six years ago.


Pentagon, Not Social Security, Made the Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reagan's Housing Chief Says Never Mind to His Critics
LEAD: On Friday, Samuel R. Pierce Jr. ends his tenure as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and as the only person to have served in President Reagan's Cabinet for the full eight years.


Japan to Be No. 1 Giver of Foreign Aid
LEAD: The Japanese Government today made public a budget for 1989 that will, for the first time, make it the world's largest donor and lender of foreign aid.


Balkan Parley in Albania
LEAD: For the first time since World War II, Albania is the host of a meeting of Deputy Foreign Ministers from the six Balkan countries, Bulgaria, Romania, Yugoslavia, Turkey, Greece and Albania.
The three-day conference in Albania is seen a strong indication that the country is emerging from a long self-imposed isolation.


Administration Lauds Own Homeless Efforts
LEAD: A White House report made available today lauded Federal efforts to combat homelessness, but concluded that state, local and private groups bear most of the responsibility for addressing the problem.


S.&amp;P. Lifts Ratings On Phillips Debt
LEAD: The ratings on $4.9 billion in debt from the Phillips Petroleum Company and a subsidiary have been raised, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday.


Ohio Doctor Offers to Quit
LEAD: A gynecologist who faces charges from the State Medical Board that he performed unnecessary surgery on women has offered to surrender his certificate to practice medicine, his lawyer, Earl Moore, said Tuesday.
Dr.
James C. Burt asserted that the genital surgery would enhance sexual responsiveness.


Disclosure Step By Comptroller
LEAD: The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates national banks, said on Wednesday that it would start disclosing more to the public about its enforcement actions against banks.


Limited Practice Session for Rice
LEAD: Jerry Rice, the San Francisco 49ers' dangerous pass receiver, did limited work today in a 90-minute practice session at the University of Miami field.
Coach Bill Walsh said he expected Rice to take part in practice Friday and continued to give him a 75 percent chance to play against the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday in Super Bowl XXI


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
American Capital Management and Research, Houston, a provider of financial services, to EBW Advertising, with a $2 million budget.


Nabisco to Shed South Africa Units
LEAD: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York investment firm that recently won control of RJR Nabisco Inc. with a record $24.88 billion bid, said yesterday that it would sell Nabisco's South African operations.


Pentagon, Not Social Security, Made the Deficit; Double Tax Jeopardy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spoleto U.S.A. Announces '89 Season
LEAD: New productions of operas by Mozart and Bellini and a world premiere by Laurie Anderson are to be part of the 13th Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., May 26 to June 11.


Anglicizing Yiddish Theater
LEAD: Is Lillian Lux, the Brooklyn-born star of Yiddish stage, bringing to her native heath new wine in old bottles or old wine in new bottles?
The question, which arises in connection with her presentation of a musical, ''Oy, Is This a Rebbitzin!,'' by the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, may not have an answer.


Atlanta Transit Authority Sets $143.6 Million Offering
LEAD: The Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority is offering $143.6 million in sales tax revenue bonds, with a maximum yield of about 7.437 percent for an issue due in 2010, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about next season's plans at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center misidentified the composer of a work it has commissioned.
The work, a String Sextet that is to have its premiere, is by Charles Wuorinen, not Milton Babbitt.


On Stage
LEAD:  No Dandy, Mandy


'90 Downturn Held Possible
LEAD: Despite expectations of better business activity for this year, financial executives at many American corporations foresee the possibility of an economic downturn in 1990, a survey released on Wednesday said.
The National Association of


Knicks Stall Again on the Road
LEAD: The Knicks were in trouble early tonight with Patrick Ewing in foul trouble and on the bench in the first quarter.
The Knick center tried to bring his team back, scoring 34 of his 38 points in the final three quarters, but it was not enough.


Dow Inches Up 0.36 to Finish at 2,239.11
LEAD: The stock market continued its peak-and-valley pattern yesterday, managing to eke out another post-crash high on the Dow Jones industrial average.


U.S. Revokes Privileges on Thai Goods
LEAD: On the last full day of the Reagan Administration, the United States today revoked special trading privileges for $165 million worth of products from Thailand in retaliation against that country's refusal to grant copyright protection for American pharmaceuticals and software.


Marcos's Health Takes Bad Turn, Court Told
LEAD: Ferdinand E. Marcos's health took a turn for the worse yesterday, his doctors said, while a court in New York was holding a hearing on whether the former Philippine President is too ill to stand trial.


Review/Art; 'Museum-cum-Semnar': The Janis Gallery at 40
LEAD: Long before he opened a gallery, Sidney Janis bought works, by Picasso and Leger and Brancusi, and he purchased a painting from Mondrian in 1930 for $70, which even at the time seemed an awfully good deal.
Mr.
Janis was a shrewd businessman, having made a fortune selling shirts (this, following a stint dancing the hesitation waltz and the one-step on the Gus Sun Time vaudeville circuit).


Dining Out Guide: Tropical Settings
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.
Caribe  Diner's Journal (March 14, 1986), 117 Perry Street (255-9191) - A jungle of palms thrives at Caribe, an informal Greenwich Village restaurant with flamingo-pink walls and wicker furniture.


Group Urges Doctors to Fight Malnutrition in AIDS Patients
LEAD: Aggressive efforts to improve nutrition, including intravenous feeding and other medical intervention when necessary, could greatly improve the quality of life and possibly extend the lives of AIDS patients, a study group said today.


Study Ties Race and New York City Pay Disparities
LEAD: Although the number of black and Hispanic workers in New York City government has increased, whites continue to hold a disproportionate share of the highest-paying jobs, a study by the Community Service Society has found.


Confessed Rapist Fails to Surrender
LEAD: A man who said he was the rapist who has attacked seven women in the subway called the police yesterday and arranged to surrender, but then failed to show up, Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward said.


Carlos Carrillo, Psychiatrist, 64
LEAD: Dr.
Carlos Carrillo, a psychiatrist and physician, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Death-Plot Fugitive Seeking to Return
LEAD: A fugitive convicted in 1968 of plotting to murder two civil rights leaders, Roy Wilkins and Whitney M. Young Jr., has made overtures to return to New York, the Queens District Attorney's office said yesterday.


Review/Music; The Influences on a Trio
LEAD: Despite the enormous differences in their sensibilities, the young pianist Geri Allen and the veteran bassist Charlie Haden, the two main soloists in a trio that performed at the Knitting Factory on Friday night, made extraordinary music for a packed house.


4 Visit Nelson Mandela At Guarded Bungalow
LEAD: Four jailed black nationalist colleagues of Nelson Mandela visited him at the prison farm bungalow where he is confined two days before Christmas, a lawyer for one of the prisoners has said.


Reviewers Urged to Doubt A Book on the Binghams
LEAD: A letter signed with the names of four members of the Bingham publishing family of Louisville, Ky., has been sent to book reviewers with documents to try to support what it calls misstatements in ''Passion and Prejudice'' by Sallie Bingham.
The book is to be published by Alfred A. Knopf on Feb. 3.


'Sex Club' Found at Mental Unit
LEAD: Children at a New York State psychiatric center near Buffalo operated a ''sex club'' in which younger patients were intimidated into performing sex acts, an investigation by a state watchdog agency has found.
Several staff members at the center also engaged in sex with children, the agency said.


Texaco Plans a Sale To Exxon
LEAD: Imperial Oil Ltd., the Exxon Corporation's Canadian subsidiary, agreed today to pay Texaco Inc. $3.24 billion for its 78 percent interest in Texaco Canada Inc., Canada's fourth-largest oil and gas enterprise.


Glenmore Distilleries Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenmore Distilleries Co (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
96,485,000
33,720,000
Net inc
1,848,000
368,000
Share earns
.74
.15
6mo sales
149,620,000
61,421,000
Net inc
2,314,000
b245,000
Share earns
.93
-


Gorbachev Asks Stable Relations
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev congratulated President Bush and expressed hope for stable relations.


THE 41st PRESIDENT: The Parade; In Person, Cacophony of Bands Is Pure Harmony
LEAD: America loves a parade, and for ceremonial grandeur and patriotic pride, nothing touches the inaugural parade.
This afternoon, from the Capitol to the White House reviewing stand, ranks upon ranks marched up Pennsylvania Avenue, and whatever the country saw on television could not come close to the experience heard and seen and felt live.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Fall in Light Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell yesterday, with the losses most pronounced among the longer maturities.


Shelby Williams Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelby Williams Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,474,000
42,317,000
Net inc
1,404,000
2,949,000
Share earns
.14
.29
Yr sales
154,744,000
159,649,000
Net inc
6,559,000
9,576,000
Share earns
.65
.93


Forest Hills Is Left Out
LEAD: A day after the Association of Tennis Professionals announced a 1990 tour schedule that does not include a slot for the Tournament of Champions, a fixture at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills since 1978, tournament officials vowed yesterday to do their best to salvage the tournament as a nonsanctioned event next year.


DOWN COMFORTERS
LEAD: Chilly nights and winter white sales mean the time is right to shop for a down comforter.
The cost of a queen-size comforter can range from $89 to $900, depending on the quality of the down, the ratio of down to feathers, the quality of the fabric shell and the intricacy of the stitching.
Here are the main indicators of quality; all should be listed on the literature provided with the comforter, or available on request.


Jones Fails to Keep Up With the Leaders
LEAD: Steve Jones will not win a third consecutive PGA Tour event because he failed today to make the 36-hole cut at the Phoenix Open.
The 30-year-old resident of Phoenix, who won the MONY Tournament of Champions Jan. 8 and the Bob Hope-Chrysler Classic last Sunday, shot eight-over-par 79 over the windy Tournament Players


First Federal Savings Bank-Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank-Tennessee
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b238,024
251,250
Per share
.47
-
6mo net inc
b577,321
498,494
Per share
1.13
-
b-Included gains of $69,861 for the quarter and $165,331 for the 6 months from the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Bridge; Youthful schooling in the classics leads to an elite post interpreting tournament play.
LEAD: the British establishment used to make the comfortable assumption that anyone who could master classical languages in youth could do anything else later in life.
One of the few contemporary examples of this thesis is a 30-year-old Londoner named Barry Rigal, who studied Latin, Greek and classical Hebrew at Oxford and is now an accountant by day and a bridge player the rest of the time.


Vitalink Communications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitalink Communications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,176,000
9,439,000
Net inc
b4,612,000
c2,241,000
Share earns
.40
.24
Shares outst
11,627,000
9,087,000
b-After a gain of $1,386,000 on the sale of discontinued operations and a $1,018,000 tax credit.


Society for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
9,641,000
b8,024,000
Per share
.89
.75
Yr net inc
33,260,000
b31,269,000
Per share
3.08
2.91
b-After tax credits of $387,000 for the quarter and $1,395,000 for the year.


THE 41st PRESIDENT: The Contributors; Pins and Pampering for Big Money
LEAD: Some of the most pampered guests at the inaugural festivities today were easy to spot: they proudly sported either red and silver badges with the word ''Eagle'' in big letters, or red and white ones that said ''T 100.''


Holly Farms Rejects Sweetened Tyson Bid
LEAD: After two days of intense negotiation, the Holly Farms Corporation said today that its board had rejected Tyson Foods Inc.'s sweetened takeover offer of $63.50 a share in cash.


Cameron Iron Works Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cameron Iron Works Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
153,897,000
132,239,000
Net inc
5,327,000
b1,525,000
Share earns
.13
-
6mo sales
297,165,000
239,379,000
Net inc
9,595,000
1,266,000
Share earns
.23
-


French Aide Resigns Post To Fight Scandal Rumors
LEAD: A top assistant to Pierre Beregovoy, the French Finance Minister, resigned today, saying he was stepping down to defend himself against what he called rumors implicating him in an insider-trading scandal.


Great Northern Nekoosa Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Northern Nekoosa Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
950,000,000
782,600,000
Net inc
86,000,000
56,700,000
Share earns
1.56
1.04
Yr sales
3,588,000,000
2,589,000,000
Net inc
342,000,000
200,600,000
Share earns
6.21
3.68


Despite Law, New York City Candidates Get Large Donations
LEAD: Despite attempts of New York City and a state investigative panel to restrict large political contributions, the city's three top officials have received major donations, many of them from people doing business with the city, according to the latest reports filed with the city's Board of Elections.


Teach Lawfulness
LEAD: To the Editor:


BankAmerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b265,000,000
60,000,000
Per share
1.36
.27
Shares outst
183,185,000
162,530,000
Yr net inc
b726,000,000
c955,000,000
Per share
3.79
-
b-Included tax credits of $71 million for the quarter and $179 million for the year.


C F &amp; I Steel Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C F &amp; I Steel Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
59,984,000
76,370,000
Net loss
6,012,000
b1,278,000
Share earns
-
.19
Yr sales
303,423,000
252,500,000
Net inc
2,392,000
c9,880,000
Share earns
.36
-


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,043,571,000
1,830,920,000
Net loss
461,644,000
b148,897,000
Share earns
-
.32
Yr rev
7,645,748,000
7,185,701,000
Net inc
62,127,000
688,517,000
Share earns
-
1.53


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
23,675,000
20,027,000
Net inc
487,000
379,000
Share earns
.10
.08
6mo sales
47,363,000
42,408,000
Net inc
1,492,000
1,219,000
Share earns
.30
.25


Nicaragua, to Improve Relations, Lifts Visa Freeze on U.S. Envoys
LEAD: The Government took steps today to encourage good relations with the Bush Administration by announcing that it was lifting a freeze on new visas for American diplomats.


Multibank Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
8,376,000
1,186,000
Per share
.90
.12
Yr net inc
26,892,000
16,151,000
Per share
2.90
1.73
The year-ago periods' results included a non-recurring $6 million charge for the settlement of a lawsuit with a former major shareholder.


Colonial Bancgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Bancgroup (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,961,000
b3,006,000
Per share
.30
-
Yr net inc
7,907,000
2,140,000
Per share
1.22
.35
b-Net loss


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Bonded Fibers
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
9,346,000
8,188,000
Net loss
95,000
b30,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo sales
16,512,000
15,055,000
Net loss
357,000
156,000
b-Net income


Products Research &amp; Chemial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Products Research &amp; Chemial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
27,237,000
22,351,000
Net inc
1,952,000
1,787,000
Share earns
.26
.21
Shares outst
7,519,389
8,411,000


Ask Computer Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ask Computer Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
45,504,000
32,346,000
Net inc
3,181,000
2,252,000
Share earns
.24
.17
6mo rev
84,820,000
58,955,000
Net inc
5,558,000
4,134,000
Share earns
.41
.32


Lee Enterprises Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Enterprises Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
70,124,000
65,533,000
Net inc
11,063,000
10,500,000
Share earns
.44
.42


Anxiety Rises as New York Limits Tranquilizer Prescriptions
LEAD: The New York State Department of Health has increased the anxiety and possibly the expenses for some people who use tranquilizers.


Fidelity Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
332,000
252,000
Per share
.34
-
The year-ago per share earnings are unavailable because the company converted to stock ownership in July 1988.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
640,555,000
585,920,000
Net inc
61,124,000
55,352,000
Share earns
1.11
1.01
The company said the latest quarter included a gain of $4.8 million, or 9 cents a share, from the resale of a 50 percent interest in a cogeneration project.


About New York Heaven on Earth Can Be Yours For Only $300,000
LEAD: Most compelling was the following: ''10 A.M.
Maharishi Heaven on Earth Development Corporation holds news conference about building 'Cities of Immortals' throughout North America, providing 'beautiful, spacious communities free from noise, pollution and crime.' ''


Russell Johnson, 67, Panasonic Executive
LEAD: Russell W. Johnson, a former vice president and general manager of the communications division of the Panasonic Company, died Wednesday at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 67 years old and lived in Bernardsville, N.J.


Initial Repairs Are Completed At Arms Plant
LEAD: Workers at the Rocky Flats Plant near Denver, where plutonium is formed into triggers for nuclear warheads, took the first steps today to reopen a plutonium-processing building shut down since October for emergency repairs.


Legg Mason Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
56,176,000
55,402,000
Net inc
2,747,000
b236,000
Share earns
.32
.03
9mo rev
160,199,000
163,985,000
Net inc
5,054,000
b5,686,000
Share earns
.59
.66


Alcan Aluminium Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,254,000,000
1,894,000,000
Net inc
255,000,000
136,000,000
Share earns
1.64
.81
Yr rev
8,626,000,000
6,878,000,000
Net inc
931,000,000
433,000,000
Share earns
5.77
2.52
Shares outst
153,300,000
157,900,000


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salick Health Care (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
11,139,000
8,188,000
Net inc
1,003,000
975,000
Share earns
.18
.18
Shares outst
5,609,000
5,475,000


INSIDE
LEAD:  Managua's Gesture to Bush


Johnson Controls Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Controls Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
860,400,000
732,800,000
Net inc
30,800,000
29,700,000
Share earns
.84
.81


Diversico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversico (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,123,600
8,447,071
Net inc
325,630
271,018
Share earns
.15
.12
9mo rev
29,564,495
25,859,557
Net inc
943,669
746,301
Share earns
.43
.36


Mellon Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
48,000,000
b234,000,000
Per share
1.05
-
Yr net loss
65,000,000
844,000,000
b-Net loss  Mellon attributed the improved 1988 results to a lower provision for credit losses, which dropped to $321 million in 1988, from $1.06 billion in 1987.


Top Secret Papers Found in Nerve-Gas Case
LEAD: Top secret documents involving national security were found on the office desk of a Korean-American businessman who was indicted today on charges of trying to export nerve gas, a Federal prosecutor said in court.


New Herbicides Called No Threat to Humans
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company won patent approval this week for a family of powerful herbicides, or weed killers, that the company said pose no threat to humans and animals.


Wavetek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wavetek Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,356,000
20,947,000
Net inc
165,000
b703,000
Share earns
.02
.08
b-After an extraordinary credit of $106,000.
The company said the latest quarter's results reflected its restructuring and reorganization.


Arix Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arix Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,219,000
11,552,000
Net inc
1,569,000
763,000
Share earns
.21
.13
Shares outst
7,584,000
5,863,000
6mo sales
42,397,000
19,662,000
Net inc
2,611,000
985,000
Share earns
.39
.17
Shares outst
6,638,000
5,864,000


Theory and Practice In Writing of Diaries
LEAD: ''I have a theory that women are better diarists than men,'' said Dr.
Lola L. Szladits, curator of the Berg Collection of English and American Literature at the New York Public Library, and someone who normally avoids making such touchy comparisons between her famous authors.


Imex Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imex Medical Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,558,671
1,207,345
Net inc
89,621
66,646
Share earns
.02
.01
6mo rev
2,738,519
2,283,616
Net inc
108,512
98,372
Share earns
.02
.02


Miami Opens Slaying Inquiry, Seeking Calm for Super Bowl
LEAD: A panel formed to investigate the slaying that touched off racial violence this week met for the first time today as civic and community leaders sought to maintain calm for Super Bowl weekend.


Rule Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rule Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,014,000
8,059,000
Net inc
92,000
215,000
Share earns
.04
.09


Eastland Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastland Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,938,000
b
Per share
.51
-
Yr net inc
7,114,000
3,874,000
b-A break-even resulted.
The per share earnings were not available; the company became publicly held in July 1988.


Warsaw Sees the Light
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, who sent troops to smash Solidarity seven years ago, today knocks hard-line Communist heads together in a bid to restore the independent union's legal status.
Strikes and repeated failures to reform the economy from above have compelled this historic change.
General Jaruzelski's offer, which he says is open to negotiation, deserves a positive and constructive reply from


Alden Electronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alden Electronics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,491,088
6,087,297
Net inc
120,975
207,777
Share earns
.06
.10
9mo rev
14,360,626
18,012,361
Net inc
495,108
817,546
Share earns
.23
.38


Review/Ice Show; Adding the Frosting to Romance
LEAD: The Ice Capades has returned to Madison Square Garden in a new edition, , a show that is brilliant in color, fast on the ice and imaginative in decor.
It is not, to be sure, Harold Pinter, and rather than judge it for its significant silences and inner meaning, neither of which were in attendance, it lends itself very nicely to a gee-whiz rating.


Primerica Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
291,500,000
234,900,000
Net inc
67,500,000
b4,500,000
Share earns
1.50
.11
Yr rev
1,003,700,000
912,300,000
Net inc
161,800,000
b23,700,000
Share earns
3.61
.48


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,548,000
b718,000
Per share
.65
-
Yr net inc
40,401,000
18,563,000
Per share
2.50
1.17
b-Net loss  The company said latest year net was affected by a new accounting rule requiring banks to defer part of fee income earned on loans until later accounting periods.


Great Bay Bankshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Great Bay Bankshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,163,000
634,000
Per share
.36
-
6mo net inc
2,077,000
1,228,000
Per share
.63
-
The year-ago periods' per share earnings not applicable; the bank converted to public form of ownership on Dec.


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Changing the Guard; Day of Mixed Emotions for the Old and the New
LEAD: Midway through the inaugural speech today, Marlin Fitzwater looked to his lapel, took off the red pin worn by Reagan staff members and exchanged it for one of the green pins that identify the aides to George Bush.


As Tarzan Knew, Jungle Nice
LEAD: Here is another story about an armed lunatic gunning down small children.
It reminds us of how perilous life can be in a heavily armed nation where insanity is commonplace.
Death by armed maniac is always an American possibility.
If you are a worrier you take precautions.


Eldec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Sales
24,931,000
21,361,000
Net inc
b6,689,000
c520,000
Share earns
1.24
.10
9mo sales
71,551,000
68,477,000
Net inc
b9,210,000
c3,206,000
Share earns
1.72
.60


Whirlpool Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whirlpool Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,024,200,000
983,300,000
Net loss
b12,000,000
cd40,400,000
Share earns
-
.59
Yr rev
4,421,400,000
4,208,600,000
Net inc
b94,100,000
d191,900,000
Share earns
1.36
2.68


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
115,610,000
32,570,000
Share earns
1.32
.37
Yr net inc
442,700,000
b255,700,000
Share earns
5.09
3.00
b-Included $90 million additional provision to increase reserves against losses in developing countries experiencing payment problems.


A Method to Filter High-Sulfur Coal Gas
LEAD: The Noxso Corporation, a small company in Library, Pa., has developed a new method for filtering the exhaust from electric power plants that burn high-sulfur coal.


Carter-Wallace Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter-Wallace Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
125,295,000
112,934,000
Net inc
11,127,000
9,013,000
Share earns
.73
.59
Shares outst
15,177,000
15,153,000
9mo sales
386,053,000
355,722,000
Net inc
36,019,000
29,991,000
Share earns
2.37
1.98
Shares outst
15,175,000
15,148,000


Changes Ordered at Children's Center
LEAD: State mental-health officials have ordered a series of management changes at a children's psychiatric center where a state inquiry uncovered a patients' ''sex club'' and four instances of sex between staff members and young patients.


Caterpillar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,660,000,000
2,270,000,000
Net inc
163,000,000
170,000,000
Share earns
1.61
1.67
Yr rev
10,435,000,000
8,294,000,000
Net inc
616,000,000
350,000,000
Share earns
6.07
3.51


The Checkered Past of Commodity Markets
LEAD: The Government's investigation into trading at two leading commodity exchanges follows a number of celebrated cases:  Marc Rich: During 1980 and 1981, Mr.
Rich, one of the world's most successful commodity traders, conducted sham transactions in oil contracts to evade Federal regulations limiting the amount of profits permitted in selling crude oil during the energy crisis.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Willamette Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
445,682,000
379,507,000
Net inc
39,431,000
38,664,000
Share earns
1.55
1.53
Yr sales
1,716,021,000
1,431,624,000
Net inc
161,087,000
121,339,000
Share earns
6.34
4.78


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EAB
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
46,274,000
b132,166,000
Yr net inc
97,298,000
b101,643,000
b-Net loss  The latest fourth quarter included $14.5 million of interest relating to the settlement of certain tax issues.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,035,000
8,953,000
Per share
.49
.44
Yr net inc
38,677,000
34,906,000
Per share
1.88
1.69


Loctite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
112,773,000
103,208,000
Net inc
12,295,000
9,613,000
Share earns
.69
.53
6mo sales
219,210,000
197,190,000
Net inc
24,230,000
18,448,000
Share earns
1.35
1.02


Corrections
LEAD: A schedule in Sports Pages yesterday listing United States sites for the Association of Tennis Professionals tour in 1990 included one tournament erroneously and misstated its starting date.
The United States Open in New York, which begins Aug. 27, 1990, is not part of the tour.


Crestmont Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestmont Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,597,000
2,327,000
Share earns
.47
.68
9mo net inc
4,542,000
7,316,000
Share earns
1.32
2.13


Ameritrust Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
26,100,000
12,300,000
Per share
.69
.29
Yr net inc
103,500,000
b10,100,000
Per share
2.62
-
b-Net loss  The latest year included an after- tax gain of $14.1 million from an unusual item.


For Those Who Are Down, Raise Minimum Wage
LEAD: To the Editor:


FNW Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FNW Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,993,000
2,831,000
Per share
.43
.41
Yr net inc
12,276,000
b10,909,000
Per share
1.79
1.57
b-After a tax credit of $80,000.


Colorado National Bankhares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado National Bankhares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,052,000
b164,000
Per share
.18
-
Yr net inc
10,646,000
502,000
Per share
.98
.05
b-Net loss  The company said loan loss provision for latest periods totaled $6,698,000 for the quarter and $24,411,000 for the year, compared with $10.8 million and $37,509,000 for the year-ago quarter and year, respectively.


Comdisco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdisco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
374,000,000
327,000,000
Net inc
23,000,000
b56,000,000
Share earns
.55
-
b-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $80 million.


Chiefs Make Choice?
LEAD: A Cleveland television station reported yesterday that Marty Schottenheimer, former coach of the Cleveland Browns, would be named head coach of the Kansas City Chiefs on Tuesday.


Microsoft Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsoft Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
209,882,000
155,896,000
Net inc
47,485,000
35,329,000
Share earns
.85
.63
6mo rev
386,275,000
258,532,000
Net inc
84,067,000
56,588,000
Share earns
1.50
1.02


Child-Protection System Falls Victim to a Paper Maneuver
LEAD: Only last month, in the wake of the death of 5-year-old Jessica Cortez, Mayor Edward I. Koch said there were limits to what New York City could do to prevent neglect and abuse of children.


Walesa Is Ready to Negotiate But Union Puts Off Approval
LEAD: Solidarity leaders today put off a formal response to a Government offer to restore the union's legal status, but Lech Walesa said he was ready to begin full-scale discusssions with the authorities.


For Those Who Are Down, Raise Minimum Wage; Poor Get Poorer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rare Wares Dazzle at Antiques Show
LEAD: A series of elegant back-to-back parties opened the 1989 Winter Antiques Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan yesterday.
Seventy-four dealers presented their prize wares - rare and often eccentric museum-quality pieces that dazzled even the most sophisticated collectors.


Review/Music
LEAD: For some time now, it has been apparent that Susan Dunn's is a potentially major talent.
The large-voiced soprano, filling in on short notice Thursday evening as soloist with the New York Philharmonic for Julia Varady (who dropped out owing to illness), gave fresh evidence of her promise and progress.


Southern New England Comunications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern New England Comunications Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
423,400,000
395,400,000
Net inc
39,800,000
36,200,000
Share earns
1.28
1.17
Yr rev
1,582,600,000
1,487,100,000
Net inc
155,400,000
139,700,000
Share earns
4.99
4.54


Systems &amp; Computer Techology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systems &amp; Computer Techology Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,543,000
9,663,000
Net inc
b2,175,000
c586,000
Share earns
.18
-
b-Included a gain of $1,858,000 from the settlement of litigation.


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Speech Writer; A Stirring Breeze Sparks Feelings, Then Words for a President's Vision
LEAD: Peggy Noonan was sitting on a couch in a West Wing office at the White House two weeks ago, her black fake crocodile notebook in her lap.
She was tired and drained.
She had just finished working on Ronald Reagan's farewell speech, and now she was beginning to scribble notes for George Bush's Inaugural


Great Western Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
59,700,000
13,700,000
Share earns
.47
.11
Yr net inc
248,000,000
212,000,000
Share earns
1.95
1.66


Bank of New York Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New York Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
54,738,000
45,874,000
Per share
1.17
1.34
Yr net inc
213,033,000
103,432,000
Per share
5.61
2.97
On Nov. 29, the company acquired 86 percent of Irving Bank Corp.


Clippers' New Coach Puts Team on Notice
LEAD: Don Casey says he is somewhat uncomfortable about taking over as coach of the Los Angeles Clippers because the man he replaces, Gene Shue, is his friend.
But he wasted no time in putting his young, injury-prone and lackluster team on notice.


Delchamps Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delchamps Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
224,981,000
210,626,000
Net loss
81,000
b1,046,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
446,815,000
423,265,000
Net inc
2,693,000
4,120,000
Share earns
.38
.63
Shares outst
7,050,000
6,553,000


Florida National Banks of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida National Banks of Florida (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,490,000
b8,445,000
Per share
.21
.32
Yr net inc
34,908,000
b32,543,000
Per share
1.31
1.22
b-Included a gain of $9.1 million from a one-time pension annuitization for the quarter and year.


Names of Donors to Neediest Are Not Passed On to Others
LEAD: ''Please don't give or sell my name and address to any other organization or mailing list.
Please no telephone solicitations.
Please don't send me solicitations for donations,'' read a typed circular sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Woodhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Woodhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
17,022,000
15,531,000
Net inc
753,000
593,000
Share earns
.24
.19


IP Timberlands Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IP Timberlands Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,000,000
71,000,000
Net inc
21,000,000
44,000,000
Share earns
.55
.76
Yr rev
206,000,000
204,000,000
Net inc
113,000,000
119,000,000
Share earns
2.56
2.52


Girl Killed in Drug Shooting
LEAD: A 12-year-old Brooklyn girl was shot and killed last night and a 14-year-old boy was seriously injured by machine-gun fire that erupted during a drug transaction in their neighborhood, the police said.
The girl, Kashaine Green, of 2225 Ditmars Avenue, was hit in the neck by bullets fired about 7:20 P.M.


Nominations Sought For Inventor of the Year
LEAD: Attention, inventors: Now is the time to submit nominations for the Inventor of the Year Award, sponsored by Intellectual Property Owners Inc., a Washington trade association representing inventors.


Champion International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,314,372,000
1,157,488,000
Net inc
119,892,000
82,140,000
Share earns
1.26
.86
Shares outst
95,207,000
94,914,000
Yr sales
5,128,513,000
4,614,723,000
Net inc
456,445,000
382,012,000
Share earns
4.80
4.03
Shares outst
95,137,000
94,752,000


Scotty's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scotty's Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
140,930,000
133,557,000
Net inc
2,470,000
2,636,000
Share earns
.17
.18
6mo sales
268,957,000
257,207,000
Net loss
2,003,000
b11,176,000
Share earns
-
.76


Cedar Fair L P reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cedar Fair L P (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
103,157,000
102,815,000
Net inc
22,593,000
b1,452,000
Share earns
1.06
.09
b-Included an extraordinary charge of $13.9 million from loan prepayment penalty.


NCNB Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
64,297,000
14,724,000
Per share
.69
.17
Yr net inc
252,471,000
166,852,000
Per share
2.90
2.03
The latest quarter net included an earnings contribution from NCNB Texas National Bank of $3.7 million, or 4 cents a share, reflecting NCNB's 20 percent ownership for six weeks beginning Nov.


Ralston Purina Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ralston Purina Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,681,100,000
1,511,400,000
Net inc
b202,700,000
b132,400,000
Share earns
2.99
1.91
b-Included gains from discontinued operations of $1.1 million and $10.2 million for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively, and the latest quarter also included a gain of $70.2 million from the disposal of discontinued operations.


American Electric Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,232,000,000
1,150,000,000
Net inc
160,315,000
89,319,000
Share earns
.83
.46
Yr rev
4,841,000,000
4,788,000,000
Net inc
626,843,000
502,460,000
Share earns
3.24
2.60


South India Election Will Test Political Strength of Gandhi
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi faces an election Saturday in the southern state of Tamil Nadu that is viewed nationwide as a test of his popularity and his effectiveness as a leader.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,895,000
1,585,000
Per share
.54
.29
Yr net inc
b10,421,000
8,120,000
Per share
1.95
1.47
b-After a gain from a change in accounting of $669,000.


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,828,000
2,587,000
Per share
.57
.39
Yr net inc
12,287,000
10,140,000
Per share
1.84
1.53


National Savings Bank of Alany reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Savings Bank of Alany
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
882,304
800,593
Per share
.75
.69


Dover Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
501,298,000
434,840,000
Net inc
37,320,000
31,417,000
Share earns
.57
.47
Yr sales
1,953,754,000
1,588,223,000
Net inc
145,772,000
111,701,000
Share earns
2.22
1.65
Shares outst
65,726,000
67,552,000


Forest Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,022,000
20,408,000
Net inc
5,604,000
4,101,000
Share earns
.31
.23
9mo rev
72,703,000
61,431,000
Net inc
15,495,000
11,929,000
Share earns
.87
.69


Quantum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1989
1988
Sales
51,591,000
56,689,000
Net inc
3,312,000
4,666,000
Share earns
.36
.51
9mo sales
130,289,000
146,356,000
Net inc
5,966,000
5,184,000
Share earns
.61
.56


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 12.


Seattle Mayor Will Not Run
LEAD: Mayor Charles Royer announced Thursday that he will not seek a fourth term because he ''needs new challenges and new growth'' but said he had no specific plans for the future.
Mr.
Royer, 49 years old, a former journalist who was elected Mayor in 1977, won re-election in 1981 and a third term in 1985.


Haley's No Longer Just a Lineman
LEAD: The depth chart now says that Charles Haley plays left outside linebacker.
The force that his 6-foot-5-inch 230-pound body regularly creates in opposition backfields suggests something more powerful than the San Francisco 49ers have produced at the position throughout the 1980's.


Unifi Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifi Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Sales
96,484,521
72,457,989
Net inc
5,344,880
5,831,724
Share earns
.60
.55
6mo sales
176,058,925
141,487,347
Net inc
11,688,576
12,202,758
Share earns
1.11
1.15


Lord Harding, Field Marshal, 92
LEAD: Lord Harding, a commander of Britain's forces in North Africa during World War II, died today at his home in Nether Compton in southwestern England after a long illness, his family said.
He was 92 years old.


Kennametal Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
111,401,000
101,831,000
Net inc
5,763,000
5,735,000
Share earns
.56
.56
Shares outst
10,342,000
10,256,000
6mo sales
223,080,000
195,906,000
Net inc
11,765,000
10,680,000
Share earns
1.14
1.04


Dynatronics Laser reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatronics Laser
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,753,000
1,021,841
Net inc
b172,458
c115,480
Share earns
.02
.02
6mo sales
3,260,828
1,975,087
Net inc
b349,498
c216,545
Share earns
.05
.03
b-Included tax credits of $14,933 and $29,866 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


First Commercial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,043,571
620,378
Per share
.24
.16
Yr net inc
3,371,408
1,549,417
Per share
.82
.53


University Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Savings (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
838,000
1,549,000
Per share
.28
.53


Seagate Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
340,325,000
332,473,000
Net inc
7,637,000
22,833,000
Share earns
.15
.46
6mo sales
643,545,000
558,536,000
Net loss
45,170,000
b37,630,000
Share earns
-
.76


First Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mutual Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
500,039
323,928
Per share
.41
.28
Yr net inc
1,284,189
1,376,819
Per share
1.06
1.18
The company said the decline in earnings for the latest year resulted from a one-time $475,000 settlement with the Federal National Mortgage Association and a $70,000 reduction in income as a result of implementing new accounting standards for loan fee income.


Margaret Leonard, 77, Reporter and Author
LEAD: Margaret Long Leonard, a journalist and novelist, died Thursday at the Tallahassee (Fla.) Community Hospital after a heart attack.
She was 77 years old and lived at the Capital Health Care Center in Tallahassee.


Security Is Strong On Columbia Campus
LEAD: To the Editor:


F.B.I. INTENSIFYING COMMODITY INQUIRY ON CHICAGO TRADES
LEAD: Capitalizing on fears in the commodity markets after subpoenas were served on 50 to 100 floor traders, Federal investigators are pressing those implicated in possible fraud to name others, lawyers and other sources said today.


Eastern Gas &amp; Fuel Assocites reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Gas &amp; Fuel Assocites (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
174,805,000
175,490,000
Net inc
16,802,000
14,295,000
Share earns
.72
.61
Yr rev
671,929,000
677,159,000
Net inc
50,673,000
47,568,000
Share earns
2.18
2.05


Southington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southington Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
801,000
624,000
Per share
.44
.34
Yr net inc
2,680,000
2,590,000
Per share
1.47
1.42


String Soloist Ensemble
LEAD: The violinist Gidon Kremer and an ensemble of string soloists will play a concert of chamber music at Carnegie Hall at 8 o'clock tonight.
The program includes the American premiere of Sofia Guaidulina's ''Rejoice'' for violin and cello, Schubert's Five Minuets and Six Trios, Alfred Schnittke's String Trio, and a group of Johann Strauss waltzes, arranged by Alexander Weinmann.


Outboard Marine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outboard Marine Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
307,723,000
259,680,000
Net inc
992,000
b7,932,000
Share earns
.05
.41
b-Included a $5,841,000 gain from an accounting change.


BayBanks Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BayBanks Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
23,368,000
18,565,000
Per share
1.47
1.18
Yr net inc
88,534,000
b74,222,000
Per share
5.57
4.90
b-After a gain of $4,820,000 from an accounting change and included a gain of $1,526,000 on the sale of property.


Bengals' 'Anchor' Keeps His Balance
LEAD: In a formal style that sounded as if it had been learned in Public Speaking 101, Reggie Williams declared: ''I am being used as the anchor of the Bengals' defense.
Our coaching staff has to depend on Reggie Williams so that his job is done at right outside linebacker.'' Indeed.
Then again, how else should a 34-year-old graduate of Dartmouth, who also is a member of the Cincinnati City


Texas Eastern Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Eastern Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
985,600,000
924,100,000
Net inc
b40,300,000
c31,400,000
Share earns
.75
.59
Yr rev
3,481,300,000
3,614,800,000
Net inc
b151,900,000
c96,100,000
Share earns
2.85
1.80


Your Money
LEAD: Some analysts think precious metals belong in everyone's portfolio, as a hedge against inflation, World War III or a particularly bad Super Bowl wager.


Olga Averino, Soprano, 93
LEAD: Olga Averino, a former lyric soprano and a voice teacher for more than 50 years, died in her sleep Tuesday at her home in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 93 years old.


Bandag Inc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
490,644,000
423,029,000
Net inc
69,755,000
62,553,000
Share earns
4.68
3.90
Shares outst
14,914,942
16,040,400


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allen Group Inc., Melville, L.I., an automotive parts manufacturer, announced it had agreed in principle to sell its National Rubber Co. division, based in Toronto, for $38 million.


Georgia Gulf Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
283,587,000
201,856,000
Net inc
54,422,000
b25,182,000
Share earns
3.90
1.74
Yr sales
1,060,612,000
707,435,000
Net inc
193,604,000
b81,851,000
Share earns
13.51
5.61


Burma Refuses to Say When It Will Hold Elections
LEAD: A high-ranking Burmese military official refused today to give any indication when promised multi-party elections might be held.
He said that the current state of law and order in the country was not satisfactory and that such fundamental change had to come slowly.


Cybertek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybertek Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,753,000
5,604,000
Net loss
181,000
b283,000
Share earns
-
.08
9mo rev
15,026,000
16,623,000
Net loss
243,000
b180,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income


First Interstate Corp of Wisconsin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Corp of Wisconsin (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,487,000
2,445,000
Per share
.42
.28
Yr net inc
13,160,000
b11,892,000
Per share
1.55
1.38
b-After a tax credit of $458,000.


She'll Stay Put, She Says, Park or No
LEAD: The dogs were kicking up a fuss and the cats scampered into hiding.
The chickens and the ducks were beside themselves, running in circles around the plastic-covered shacks.
Whipping along was an incredible wind off Long Island Sound, sending the plastic wrappings flapping up and the hen-wire gate flying from its hinges.


Ex-Klan Head a Contender In Race for Louisiana House
LEAD: It is campaign season in this stronghold of conservatism just outside New Orleans, where voters will choose candidates in a special primary election Saturday to fill a vacancy in the Louisiana House of Representatives.


Affiliated Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,040,000
1,537,000
Per share
.27
.40
Yr net inc
4,750,000
5,223,000
Per share
1.21
1.35


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,863,668,000
1,836,746,000
Net inc
303,412,000
300,098,000
Share earns
.24
.17


Dow Off by 3.75, but Rises for Week
LEAD: Stocks fell moderately yesterday, reflecting similar declines in the dollar and bond prices.


THE 41st PRESIDENT; Transformation of Bush: His Own Man
LEAD: ''I --'' the new President blurted out, a beat ahead of the moment he was supposed to begin repeating the Presidential oath after Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
George Bush smiled nervously and began again.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 3-5, 28  The Sandinistas tried to improve ties with the new Bush Administration by announcing that they were lifting a freeze on new visas for American diplomats.
No American response was forthcoming.
Page 5  Parts of a Soviet hero's memoirs that criticize Stalin's World War II leadership and blame him for the deaths of Soviet citizens were made public for the first time.


Hilton Hotels Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
254,400,000
221,200,000
Net inc
35,200,000
b58,400,000
Share earns
.73
1.18
Yr rev
953,600,000
843,800,000
Net inc
130,900,000
b139,900,000
Share earns
2.72
2.80


Crude and Oil Products Fall While Cocoa Prices Surge
LEAD: Prices of crude oil and refined petroleum products fell sharply yesterday, and analysts blamed the decline on profit taking after the rally earlier in the week, as well as technical factors.


Vista Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
191,211,000
178,824,000
Net inc
b31,189,000
b31,295,000
Share earns
2.06
1.73
b-Included gains of $368,000 and $5,817,000 from changes in stock option plan for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


Vote Today in San Antonio Is About a Lot More Than a Stadium
LEAD: The question on the ballot Saturday is a simple one: Do voters want to increase the local sales tax by half a penny to build a 65,000-seat stadium?


Bowater Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
367,340,000
349,198,000
Net inc
45,516,000
29,565,000
Share earns
1.22
.77
Yr sales
1,410,411,000
1,231,002,000
Net inc
164,317,000
81,140,000
Share earns
4.37
2.12


Businessland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Businessland Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
301,339,000
258,297,000
Net inc
9,468,000
5,322,000
Share earns
.32
.19
6mo sales
572,893,000
461,936,000
Net inc
16,990,000
8,812,000
Share earns
.58
.33


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 21, 1989
LEAD:  The Chicago Inquiry


First of America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
26,715,000
23,149,000
Per share
1.78
1.62
Yr net inc
88,823,000
78,262,000
Per share
5.98
5.62


4 Down, 104 to Go
LEAD: Kirk McCaskill and Jose Guzman, pitchers, and Geno Petralli and Steve Lake, catchers, settled their arbitration cases yesterday.
McCaskill, 8-6 last season with a 4.31 earned-run average, settled with the California Angels at $400,000, a raise of $138,000.
Guzman, 11-13 with a 3.70 e.r.a., settled with the Texas Rangers at $425,000, a raise of $255,000.


Seacoast Banking (Florida) Corp (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Banking (Florida) Corp (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,160,000
1,024,000
Per share
.33
.29
Yr net inc
4,497,000
4,026,000
Per share
1.28
1.15


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Fashion; Following a Tough Act With Impeccable Taste
LEAD: Nancy Reagan is a tough fashion act to follow, but Barbara Bush has already shown that she has star quality.
The clothes she wears as she takes center stage for the inaugural festivities demonstrate that she has excellent taste and an understanding of what is both appropriate and flattering to a woman of her age and size.


Beatrice Lillie, Comedienne And Lovable Eccentric, 94
LEAD: Beatrice Lillie, who during a half-century theatrical career was often called ''the funniest woman in the world,'' died yesterday at her home in Henley-on-Thames, England.
She was 94 years old.


Sun Microsystems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Microsystems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Revenue
448,281,000
235,094,000
Net inc
29,509,000
13,959,000
Share earns
.36
.19
6mo rev
836,750,000
426,803,000
Net inc
50,072,000
26,891,000
Share earns
.63
.37


THE 41st PRESIDENT; NO REVERSAL, BUT CHANGES
LEAD: President Bush swore his oath with the same 35 words that George Washington uttered two centuries ago, resting his left hand on the same Bible that George Washington used, and he spoke of the orderly transfer of power that the inaugural ceremony so compellingly symbolizes.


Bank of Boston Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Boston Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
82,700,000
b41,400,000
Per share
1.18
-
Yr net inc
322,300,000
19,700,000
Per share
4.66
.10
b-Net loss and included a $200 million charge resulting from provisions for credit losses related to less developed countries.


49er Endured Different Sort Of Pain
LEAD: John Frank said no, he hadn't seen or heard from his father in quite a while, but he'd rather not be specific as to how long.
Not now, not during the Super Bowl, when he was living this dream come true.


Brajdas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brajdas Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
15,239,177
12,054,042
Net inc
265,969
489,986
Share earns
.09
.17
9mo sales
48,404,669
34,558,633
Net inc
1,953,295
1,485,884
Share earns
.66
.51


II-VI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* II-VI Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,226,000
2,850,000
Net inc
396,000
291,000
Share earns
.15
.11
6mo sales
6,411,000
5,423,000
Net inc
795,000
500,000
Share earns
.30
.21


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle-Picher Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
202,944,537
181,917,716
Net loss
496,446,759
b11,704,357
Share earns
-
1.09
Yr sales
770,109,728
677,233,788
Net loss
465,762,111
b39,987,525
Share earns
-
3.70


Weyerhaeuser Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyerhaeuser Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Sales
2,560,000,000
2,351,471,000
Net inc
154,871,000
129,400,000
Share earns
.73
.61
Yr sales
10,000,000,000
8,822,666,000
Net inc
564,445,000
446,623,000
Share earns
2.68
2.12
Shares outst
207,785,000
202,544,000


Courier Dispatch Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Dispatch Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,257,000
10,347,000
Net inc
172,000
27,000
Share earns
.07
.01
6mo rev
22,512,000
20,626,000
Net inc
283,000
107,000
Share earns
.11
.04


Rozelle Sees Miami Violence As No Threat to Super Bowl
LEAD: The outbreaks of racial violence here this week have been closely monitored by the National Football League but have never threatened the playing of Super Bowl XXIII or warranted a plan for extra security at the game, Commissioner Pete Rozelle said today.


Computer Associates Internaional reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Associates Internaional (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
309,403,000
195,075,000
Net inc
62,705,000
42,783,000
Share earns
.79
.54
9mo rev
718,814,000
502,668,000
Net inc
108,521,000
67,980,000
Share earns
1.37
.87


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan South Carolina (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,156,000
1,407,000
Share earns
.25
.30
6mo net inc
2,308,000
2,635,000
Share earns
.49
.56


Petrolane Partners L P reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petrolane Partners L P (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
195,389,000
172,242,000
Net inc
20,873,000
22,352,000
Share earns
.90
.95
Yr rev
642,467,000
703,151,000
Net inc
52,670,000
45,904,000
Share earns
2.27
1.95


NESB Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NESB Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
403,000
b2,781,000
Per share
-
.35
Yr net inc
7,780,000
10,258,000
Per share
1.01
1.28
b-Net income  The latest fourth quarter included a $6.7 million addition to the loan-loss reserve.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Weekender Guide column of Weekend yesterday gave an incorrect time for a concert this evening by Lukas Foss.
The performance, at the Paula Cooper Gallery, is at 6, not 8.


Vietnamese Report Progress In Their Talks With Chinese
LEAD: Vietnam reported progress today in relations with Beijing and said the Vietnamese leader, Nguyen Van Linh, would go to India next week in the search for peace in Cambodia.


Crestar Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
22,300,000
b12,000,000
Per share
.76
.40
Yr net inc
86,700,000
56,700,000
Per share
2.96
1.92
b-Included a special loan loss provision of $10.5 million, which reduced net equal to 30 cents a share.


Commonwealth Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,349,468,000
1,229,987,000
Net inc
74,848,000
182,657,000
Share earns
.24
.74
Yr rev
5,613,338,000
5,673,782,000
Net inc
737,521,000
1,089,579,000
Share earns
3.01
4.75


Marion Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Laboratories Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
219,989,000
180,553,000
Net inc
53,824,000
36,027,000
Share earns
.35
.23
6mo sales
426,170,000
351,545,000
Net inc
101,909,000
70,913,000
Share earns
.66
.45


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.94
9.07
6.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.24
8.24
5.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.26
8.27
6.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.07
9.04
8.26
30-YR.


United Technologies Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,271,500,000
4,839,400,000
Net inc
150,600,000
172,500,000
Share earns
1.16
1.32
Yr rev
18,517,900,000
17,436,200,000
Net inc
659,100,000
591,700,000
Share earns
5.05
4.52


THE 41st PRESIDENT; Reagan Packs Up a Presidency and Its Memories
LEAD: Ronald Reagan was wistful. Nancy Reagan was worried.


Raytheon Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,209,000,000
2,137,000,000
Net inc
127,300,000
117,900,000
Share earns
1.92
1.69
Shares outst
66,300,000
70,000,000
Yr sales
8,192,000,000
7,659,000,000
Net inc
489,600,000
445,100,000
Share earns
7.35
6.12
Shares outst
66,600,000
72,800,000


Review/Pop; A Mixture of Two Esthetics
LEAD: On a formal level, the composer Michael Gordon's music, which he performed at the opening of the Kitchen's music series on Wednesday night, had moments of real promise.
On a social level, it did as well, but both aspects of his music had the sort of stillborn quality that indicated a composer with ideas, but not the technique to develop them.


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Missouri Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
8,951,000
8,506,000
Per share
.67
.64
Yr net inc
34,470,000
32,345,000
Per share
2.59
2.43


McGill Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGill Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,212,000
21,336,000
Net inc
1,821,000
387,000
Share earns
1.26
.27
6mo sales
50,599,000
43,633,000
Net inc
3,327,000
743,000
Share earns
2.30
.52


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,037,065,000
920,598,000
Net inc
57,539,000
c59,469,000
Share earns
1.63
1.67
Yr sales
4,068,015,000
3,453,184,000
Net inc
b262,078,000
c144,976,000
Share earns
7.39
4.14


Guerrillas Attack Police Center in Salvador
LEAD: Guerrillas attacked the Treasury Police headquarters today with mortars launched from the backs of pickup trucks, killing 2 people and wounding up to 10 others, the authorities said.


Frankford Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frankford Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,698,000
1,572,000
Per share
.59
.54
Yr net inc
5,929,000
5,815,000
Per share
2.05
2.00


Parents of Boy Genius Will Share Custody
LEAD: A custody battle over 12-year-old Adragon De Mello, who graduated from college at the age of 11, has been settled, with his parents agreeing to joint custody.


Aluminum Co of America (ALCOA) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co of America (ALCOA) (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,646,600,000
2,058,400,000
Net inc
b218,700,000
132,800,000
Share earns
2.47
1.50
Yr rev
9,795,300,000
7,767,000,000
Net inc
b861,400,000
c200,100,000
Share earns
9.74
2.25


First Northern Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Northern Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
660,000
562,000
Share earns
.54
.47
Yr net inc
2,448,000
2,485,000
Share earns
2.00
2.04


President Bush's Breeze of Decency
LEAD: The scene at the Capitol yesterday contrasted strikingly with January 1961, the last time a vastly popular Republican President left office after eight years.
John Kennedy fired public imagination then with his urgent summons to a New Frontier.
Yesterday George Bush spoke, in measured tones, about a new breeze and the age of the offered hand.


Rift in Pakistan Demonstrates Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Genetic Finding May Aid in Treating Disfiguring Disease
LEAD: New genetic findings will help doctors diagnose ''elephant man's disease'' before symptoms appear and aid scientists in finding the gene that causes the disease, which afflicts at least 100,000 Americans, experts say.


Offer to Buy Braves
LEAD: Chuck Tanner, dismissed last season as manager of the Atlanta Braves, said he has offered to buy the team and would make himself manager.
Tanner said a group of investors, including himself, offered Ted Turner, the team's owner, $80 million for the franchise, but the offer was turned down.


GV Medical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GV Medical Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,369,000
371,241
Net loss
864,000
1,049,954
Yr rev
3,701,000
1,412,184
Net loss
3,591,000
3,643,748


Navratilova Gains in 53 Minutes
LEAD: Martina Navratilova cruised into the fourth round of the Australian Open today with a 6-2, 6-2 victory over Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia.


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
28,295,000
17,424,000
Per share
1.02
.65
Yr net inc
152,468,000
23,452,000
Per share
5.71
.85
The latest year included a $12 million gain from tax benefits relating to the 1987 loan-loss provisions and a third-quarter after-tax gain of $29.2 million from the sale of Landmark Financial Services Inc.


Meredith Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
195,853,000
174,160,000
Net inc
10,387,000
14,681,000
Share earns
.54
.77
6mo rev
386,358,000
318,209,000
Net inc
21,046,000
b36,614,000
Share earns
1.10
1.92


THE 41st PRESIDENT: The Singer; Rumbling Bass A Longtime Favorite With the Bush Clan
LEAD: The soldier who sang ''God Bless America'' and ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' a cappella in a rumbling bass at the inauguration ceremony today is a favorite performer of the new President and was selected for the honor by Barbara Bush.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,432,000,000
1,327,600,000
Net inc
102,300,000
96,500,000
Share earns
.94
.85
Shares outst
109,600,000
114,600,000
Yr sales
5,616,700,000
5,182,600,000
Net inc
467,600,000
377,100,000
Share earns
4.26
3.19
Shares outst
109,800,000
118,200,000


Emhart Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emhart Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
723,000,000
665,000,000
Net inc
33,000,000
26,000,000
Share earns
.52
.42
Yr rev
2,762,000,000
2,454,000,000
Net inc
126,000,000
106,000,000
Share earns
2.02
.70


Genlyte Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
125,098,000
113,611,000
Net inc
2,705,000
4,113,000
Share earns
.21
.31
Yr sales
492,853,000
442,719,000
Net inc
11,525,000
14,953,000
Share earns
.88
1.14


Kappa Networks reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kappa Networks (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
10,691,591
10,707,362
Net loss
1,051,909
895,103


Commercial National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial National (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
10,696,000
b514,000
Per share
-
.12
Yr net loss
8,340,000
21,521,000
b-Net income


Starting Over, the Ex-Peruvian Way
LEAD: In a crowded airport lounge in full view of tearful emigrants bidding farewell to friends and relatives, the message written in black letters on a white marble wall looked singularly out of place.


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constellation Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,070,000
4,898,000
Per share
.98
.80
Yr net inc
21,398,000
17,209,000
Per share
3.45
2.82


Glaring Through the Hypocrisy
LEAD:  Wittgenstein's Nephew  A Friendship  By Thomas Bernhard  Translated by David McLintock. 100 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


Insituform East Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insituform East Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,129,317
5,255,574
Net inc
958,641
532,432
Share earns
.21
.11
6mo sales
11,414,546
9,788,394
Net inc
b1,533,445
1,121,962
Share earns
.33
.24


Checkrobot Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkrobot Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
379,400
12,100
Net loss
969,600
1,129,800
6mo rev
565,800
12,100
Net loss
1,858,600
2,022,000


Versa Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Versa Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,442,000
11,030,000
Net inc
1,503,000
1,402,000
Share earns
.31
.29
9mo sales
35,220,000
34,671,000
Net inc
4,685,000
4,244,000
Share earns
.96
.88


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day last Saturday about Advanced Micro Devices Inc. misstated the company's revenues for the fourth quarter of 1987.


Office Set on Fire
LEAD: The office of Don King Productions on East 69th Street was set on fire Thursday night, prompting the boxing promoter to respond in his own fiery style: ''Whatever the message was, it hasn't been received by me.
If they want to tell me something, tell me in English.


Health Care Property Investrs Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Care Property Investrs Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,709,000
10,444,000
Net inc
3,343,000
3,782,000
Share earns
.41
.46
Yr rev
53,219,000
39,559,000
Net inc
13,656,000
14,208,000
Share earns
1.67
1.74


P.L.O. Again Denies Arafat Remark Was a Threat
LEAD: Yasir Arafat and other senior officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization today disputed American charges that Mr.
Arafat had threatened Arabs who tried to halt the Palestinian uprising in the West Bank.


Gerber Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
240,420,000
227,089,000
Net inc
19,109,000
c9,702,000
Share earns
.96
.49
9mo sales
757,623,000
683,654,000
Net inc
b59,522,000
c24,499,000
Share earns
3.01
1.24


Butler National Corp Qtr to Oct 31 reports earnings for 1988
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler National Corp Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,775,952
1,161,993
Net loss
b121,988
c215,239
Share earns
-
.06
6mo sales
2,843,380
2,025,937
Net loss
b163,071
c430,210
Share earns
-
.12
b-After losses from discontinued operations $134,097 and $234,852 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Insuring Less-Expensive Treasures
LEAD: There is an increasingly popular way to insure treasured items like jewelry, cameras and great-grandmother's crystal that are usually valued at about $500 to $5,000 each.
It is called blanket insurance, and it is for entire categories of possessions.


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,523,000
1,179,000
Per share
.40
.30
Yr net inc
5,032,000
3,409,000
Per share
1.30
.86


THE 41st PRESIDENT; A Disappointed Dukakis Wishes Bush Well
LEAD: While George Herbert Walker Bush was sworn in as President today, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, who lost to him in November, watched on television, eating a tuna sandwich and sharing his disappointment with his staff.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


London Broker Layoffs
LEAD: Two London stockbrokers announced today that they were curtailing trading activities and eliminating 43 jobs in the latest cutbacks since the 1987 stock market crash.
Warburg Securities, the stockbroking arm of the big London merchant bank Warburgs, said it was withdrawing from some Eurobond market-making, or wholesale dealing, activities and cutting 15 jobs.


Quake Rescue Shows Need for Esperanto
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Going Home; Reagans' Leave-Takings Are Swift, but Not Without Some Sweet Sorrows
LEAD: Aboard the plane on which he traveled around the world as President, Beijing to Bali and Mexico to Moscow, Ronald Reagan flew to California today to begin retired life as a private citizen.


Tears, Handcuffs for Boy, 10, Facing Judge in Crack Sale
LEAD: The 14-year-old boy drove the BMX bike, a Suffolk County police officer testified today.
The 10-year-old sold crack from the back of the bike.


Summit National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit National Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
212,000
94,000
Per share
.30
.20
Yr net inc
664,000
227,000
Per share
.95
.60
Shares outst
696,000
458,000


LSI Logic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
119,407,000
78,258,000
Net inc
b5,291,000
c5,780,000
Share earns
.13
.14
Yr rev
378,908,000
262,131,000
Net inc
b24,702,000
c11,340,000
Share earns
.60
.28


Air Canada-Boeing
LEAD: Air Canada said it plans to buy seven 747-400 passenger and cargo aircraft from the Boeing Company.
The first three aircraft, including associated spare parts and equipment, are valued at about $600 million (Canadian), or about $506 million (United States).
They will be delivered to Air Canada between December 1990 and May 1991, the airline said.


Soviets Print Excerpts Of Attack by Zhukov On Stalin's War Role
LEAD: Pravda today published previously secret sections of the memoirs of Marshal Georgi K. Zhukov that sharply criticize Stalin's war leadership and blame him for the annihilation of thousands of Soviet citizens.


Advo-System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advo-System (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
152,972,000
148,983,000
Net loss
1,599,000
b2,836,000
Share earns
-
.17
b-Net income  The company said the latest first quarter loss is after a $117,000 tax benefit and one-time unusual charges relating to a change in senior management and the early termination of computer equipment leases.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
15,046,000
14,462,000
Per share
.46
.44
Yr net inc
58,235,000
56,206,000
Per share
1.77
1.71


Shad to Leave As Envoy
LEAD: John S. R. Shad, the United States Ambassador to the Netherlands, will leave his post next month, the American Embassy said today.
His departure comes amid speculation that he might be named chairman of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


Texas Pacific Land reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Pacific Land (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
626,704
447,580
Share earns
.17
.12
Yr net inc
2,560,893
2,722,762
Share earns
.70
.73


Society Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
25,880,000
22,578,000
Per share
1.09
.96
Yr net inc
100,051,000
90,935,000
Per share
4.19
3.75


New York City Closes 3 Stores for Selling Used Goods as New


Merc, Board of Trade Said to Begin Inquiries
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange said today that it had begun an inquiry into trading activities on its floor.


PDA Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PDA Engineering (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,373,000
6,328,000
Net inc
446,000
377,000
Share earns
.11
.09
6mo rev
12,191,000
11,255,000
Net inc
700,000
556,000
Share earns
.17
.14


Rollins Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Environmental Services (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
42,569,000
50,725,000
Net inc
2,729,000
8,975,000
Share earns
.05
.15
Share earnings reflected a 5-for-4 stock split in September 1988.


Texas Eastern In Court Move
LEAD: The Texas Eastern Corporation, the target of a $2.6 billion hostile takeover bid by the Coastal Corporation was granted a motion by a Federal appeals court today that allows Texas Eastern to pursue legal action in other courts.
Earlier this week, Federal


Suffield Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffield Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b507,000
cd2,854,000
Share earns
.08
-
Yr net loss
b257,000
c397,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $171,000 and $268,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and a gain of $195,000 from the sale of discontinued operations for both periods.


Firstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstar Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
18,800,000
b23,600,000
Per share
.83
-
Yr net inc
132,300,000
b47,300,000
Per share
5.92
-
b-Net loss  The latest year included gain of $57.2 million, or $2.68 a share, from the sale of Firstar's headquarters, real estate and income tax benefits resulting from 1987 loan loss provisions.


Bearings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bearings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
153,301,000
132,280,000
Net inc
4,341,000
b1,585,000
Share earns
.87
.30
6mo sales
296,771,000
257,209,000
Net inc
8,043,000
b6,538,000
Share earns
1.59
1.20


Marcos Hearing Adjourned
LEAD: A hearing into whether Ferdinand E. Marcos is too ill to be arraigned in New York on racketeering charges was adjourned yesterday until next month.
More medical testimony on Mr.
Marcos's health is expected to be heard Feb. 9 by Judge John F. Keenan in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The former Philippine leader, who was indicted last October, is in a hospital in Honolulu, where, his lawyers say, he is being treated for pneumonia, asthmatic bronchitis and a heart ailment.


Aspen Ribbons Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Ribbons Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,493,157
4,353,187
Net inc
296,096
274,367
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
3,838,158
3,485,776
6mo rev
8,828,549
8,454,281
Net inc
590,867
508,872
Share earns
.16
.15
Shares outst
3,723,984
3,485,506


A Curator Is Leaving The Getty
LEAD: In a staff change that may signal a shift in its attitude toward the collecting of paintings, the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., has announced the resignation of its paintings curator, Myron Laskin, and his replacement by George Goldner.


Schwab, Charles Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schwab, Charles Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
102,200,000
124,100,000
Net inc
b600,000
c14,000,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
392,200,000
464,800,000
Net inc
7,400,000
24,400,000
Share earns
.27
.87


Julia E. Collier, 37, Executive at Christie's
LEAD: Julia E. Collier, head of the collectibles department of Christie, Manson and Woods International Inc., the auction house, died Thursday after being struck by a truck.
She was 37 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Midlantic Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
59,452,000
37,630,000
Per share
1.53
.97
Yr net inc
222,865,000
161,478,000
Per share
5.73
4.23
The year-ago periods' earnings included provisions for possible losses on loans to less developed countries of $25 million for the quarter and $55 million for the year.


More Ado About Abortion
LEAD: The Missouri abortion case the Supreme Court has accepted for review doesn't warrant the commotion it has evoked on all sides.
As abortion cases go, it's no legal landmark.
But Missouri, at the Justice Department's urging, has asked the Court to use the case as a vehicle for overturning the 1973 Roe v.


Jockey Donations
LEAD: About 20 members of the Jockeys' Guild riding at Aqueduct will donate their fees on losing mounts today to the Disabled Jockeys Fund of the Guild.
Eddie Maple, Eastern director of the guild, who coordinated the effort, estimates that about $3,500 will be generated from about 70 rides.


Wardair Delays Aircraft Orders
LEAD: Wardair Inc., a Canadian passenger airline that agreed this week to a buyout by a rival domestic carrier, said it was putting on hold a $600 million (Canadian) order for 14 aircraft until the two companies determined a future business strategy.


JEWS IN U.S. FIGHT A VISA FOR ARAFAT
LEAD: The major umbrella organization of American Jews says it will urge the Bush Administration to deny a visa to Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to enter the United States to speak before an Arab-American convention in April.


Irwin Union Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Union Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,439,954
1,302,119
Per share
2.28
2.10
Yr net inc
4,117,793
2,247,047
Per share
6.55
3.62


D&amp;N Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D&amp;N Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,644,000
1,780,000
Per share
.72
.49
Yr net inc
13,332,000
6,371,000
Per share
3.65
1.75
The results reflected the acquisition of First Federal Savings and Loan of Livingston County in the first quarter of 1988.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the 1989 season of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., misattributed the opera ''La Straniera.'' It is by Bellini, not Rossini.


Wedding Information Network Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wedding Information Network Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
693,228
425,024
Net inc
78,093
b81,891
Share earns
.02
-
6mo rev
1,164,753
1,076,487
Net loss
12,023
c74,655
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net loss


50th Goal for Lemieux
LEAD: Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins became only the second player in National Hockey League history to score 50 goals in less than 50 games in the first period of tonight's 7-3 loss to the Winnipeg Jets.
Pat Elynuik, a rookie, had two goals and three assists for the Jets.


Inmates Set Fires at Prison South of Capital
LEAD: Inmates set fires in a prison south of Washington tonight, and the authorities said an unknown number of inmates were free within the complex.


Coping: With Furnishing a Home Office
LEAD: Telecommuting - working at home for a client or employer who may be miles away - has become a fact of life for more than 14 million people, according to the American Home Business Association, a professional organization.
The work offers convenience and flexible hours, but to do the job right, home-office equipment must be chosen with care.


Kimball International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
149,541,000
132,159,000
Net inc
8,661,000
9,428,000
Share earns
.41
.44
6mo sales
285,417,000
269,151,000
Net inc
15,795,000
19,799,000
Share earns
.75
.93


Chicago's Financial District Gets a Bad Case of the Blues
LEAD: An uneasy gloom settled over Chicago's financial district today as brokers and traders tried to fathom the possible impact of a Federal investigation of their industry.


Texaco Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Canada (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
678,000,000
726,000,000
Net inc
91,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
.75
.74
Yr rev
2,660,000,000
2,800,000,000
Net inc
333,000,000
320,000,000
Share earns
2.75
2.65


Florida High Court Refuses To Put Off Bundy Execution
LEAD: The State Supreme Court refused today to postpone the execution of the killer of a 12-year-old girl, rejecting defense lawyers' plea to let lower courts decide whether he was sane when he was tried.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Otto George Obermaier; Defender Who Would Be Prosecutor
LEAD: Early in his career, Otto G. Obermaier prosecuted Mafia dons, drug kingpins and nefarious Wall Street schemers.
Later, he defended people accused of insider-trading, tax evasion and other white-collar crimes.
In the lawyer's parlance, he has walked both sides of the street.


Nuclear Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Metals (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,774,000
9,756,000
Net inc
392,000
73,000
Share earns
.15
.03


No Coal Mining Plans For National Parks
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Foreign Reaction; Toasts to Bush, Farewells to Reagan: World Leaders Send Their Regards
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, congratulated President Bush on his inauguration yesterday and expressed hope for stable United States-Soviet relations during Mr.
Bush's term in office, the official press agency Tass said.


Elco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elco Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
37,640,000
33,623,000
Net inc
1,605,000
1,752,000
Share earns
.34
.37
6mo sales
73,121,000
65,782,000
Net inc
3,310,000
3,406,000
Share earns
.69
.72


First Hawaiian Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Hawaiian Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
11,591,000
9,426,000
Per share
.87
.71
Yr net inc
43,339,000
35,495,000
Per share
3.23
2.65


Preserving Organs for Transplant
LEAD: A surgeon and a biochemist at the University of Wisconsin Medical School in Madison won patent approval this week for a chemical solution that preserves human organs several times longer than present compounds, improving the chances of successful transplants.


Andrew Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andrew Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
64,901,000
54,471,000
Net inc
2,468,000
2,678,000
Share earns
.25
.27


Thompson Returns as N.C.A.A. Acts to Delay Rule
LEAD: John Thompson, basketball coach at Georgetown University, today ended his two-game coaching boycott, announcing that he would return Saturday for the Hoyas' home game against Connecticut.


Shawmut National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
66,100,000
b43,700,000
Per share
.88
.60
Yr net inc
242,500,000
158,900,000
Per share
3.28
2.20
b-Included a charge of $8.6 million for merger expenses.


Buckeye Partners L P reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buckeye Partners L P (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
41,800,000
39,000,000
Net inc
10,400,000
11,900,000
Share earns
.86
.98
Yr sales
157,000,000
152,400,000
Net inc
34,800,000
33,600,000
Share earns
2.87
2.77


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have more will than wallet; but will is what we need.'' - President Bush.  [ 1:6. ]


Norwest Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
55,900,000
46,700,000
Per share
1.19
1.00
Yr net inc
221,200,000
b46,400,000
Per share
4.52
-
b-Net loss and was after a special provision of $204 million for international credit exposure.


Israelis Close All Schools in West Bank and Gaza
LEAD: The Israeli Government closed all schools in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip indefinitely again today, saying gatherings of students had contributed to the recent rise in violent demonstrations.


Johnson Worldwide Assocites Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Worldwide Assocites Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
47,910,000
49,000,000
Net inc
1,108,000
777,000
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
7,937,000
6,830,000


Manufacturers National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
26,311,000
b23,912,000
Per share
1.74
-
Yr net inc
96,255,000
6,631,000
Per share
6.40
.45
b-Net loss  The year-ago periods included loan loss provisions of $49 million for the quarter and $76.4 million for the year, both for Third World loans.


Clorox Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clorox Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
289,217,000
243,444,000
Net inc
24,367,000
21,631,000
Share earns
.44
.40
6mo sales
639,961,000
545,921,000
Net inc
66,883,000
60,994,000
Share earns
1.21
1.11


Chamber Symphony
LEAD: Kevin McMillan, a baritone, is to be the soloist with the New York Chamber Symphony in Bach's Cantata No. 82 (''Ich habe genug'') and arias from Handel's ''Rinaldo,'' at 8 o'clock tonight at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The program, which will be conducted by Leopold Hager as part of the orchestra's Baroque series, also includes two concertos from Vivaldi's ''Estro Armonico'' and works by Telemann and Corelli.


Smithfield Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smithfield Cos
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,553,722
7,987,893
Net inc
564,503
393,666
Share earns
.34
.37
Shares outst
1,679,500
1,054,500
9mo sales
25,109,804
17,235,809
Net inc
1,118,246
715,073
Share earns
.82
.68
Shares outst
1,368,136
1,054,500


Sealright Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealright Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
38,727,000
36,051,000
Net inc
1,596,000
1,525,000
Share earns
.22
.21
Yr sales
173,598,000
157,948,000
Net inc
11,942,000
11,155,000
Share earns
1.62
1.52


Review/Television; A New Show on Books and Authors
LEAD: Public television's latest book show has its premiere Sunday, on Channel 13 at 5:30 P.M..
The host of the weekly half-hour series, Lewis Lapham, the editor of Harper's Magazine, is clearly trying for something more substantial than book chat this time out, even if his opener does not quite make it.


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 54.


Altos Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altos Computer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,400,000
46,700,000
Net loss
1,800,000
c6,300,000
Share earns
-
.51
6mo sales
72,500,000
87,400,000
Net inc
b2,200,000
8,500,000
Share earns
.19
.66


Pfizer Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,368,200,000
1,275,200,000
Net inc
b141,600,000
136,600,000
Share earns
.84
.82
Yr sales
5,385,400,000
4,919,800,000
Net inc
791,300,000
690,200,000
Share earns
4.70
4.08


Trade Deficit: Economists Gloomy
LEAD: After a long and agonizing battle that finally put the trade deficit on a downward course last year, the United States already confronts the prospect of seeing that progress slip away, many economists fear.


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of California
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,686,429
5,544,819
Per share
.95
.79
Yr net inc
24,542,460
20,385,357
Per share
3.48
2.92


THE 41st PRESIDENT: Headgear; Cap Revives Court Custom
LEAD: When he appeared at the West Front of the Capitol today to administer the oath of office to George Bush, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist revived a sartorial tradition of the Supreme Court by wearing a simple black woolen skullcap.


Nuclear Support Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Support Services
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,873,638
15,568,031
Net inc
651,234
b690,640
Share earns
.30
.35
b-After a gain of $600,000 from an accounting change.


QMS Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* QMS Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
48,772,000
36,333,000
Net inc
b1,321,000
215,000
Share earns
.12
02
Shares outst
2,189,867
1,955,866
b-After a tax credit of $558,000.


Fortune Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fortune Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
908,000
3,160,000
Share earns
.23
.63
The company said the earnings decline was due to $1.6 million realized security losses.


AFGHAN CAMPAIGN SAID TO INTENSIFY
LEAD: The Soviet Union is using a new, heavier bomb against guerrilla forces for the first time in the Afghan war, State Department officials say.


Italy's Economy Grows
LEAD: Italy's economic expansion, driven by booming consumer demand and strong industrial investment, is continuing to gather pace, according to official data issued today.
The National Statistics Institute said Italy's gross domestic product, the measure of economic performance excluding foreign trade, grew 3.9 percent year-to-year in the third quarter of 1988, up from 3.3 percent growth in the second quarter.


THE 41st PRESIDENT; Transcript of Bush's Inaugural Address: 'Nation Stands Ready to Push On'
LEAD: Following is a transcript President Bush's Inaugural Address yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times.
Because of slips in Mr.
Bush's delivery, two sentences - indicated by italics - are taken from his prepared text.


Software Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Services of America
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,075,361
1,197,800
Net inc
94,608
111,234
Share earns
.04
.05
6mo rev
3,786,227
4,031,928
Net inc
88,958
105,426
Share earns
.04
.05


Despite a Sore Ankle, Rice Runs in Practice
LEAD: Four days after his sprained right ankle raised questions of his effectiveness for the game Sunday, Jerry Rice took part in the San Francisco 49ers' final practice this afternoon.


Stryker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stryker Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
47,688,000
37,168,000
Net inc
3,900,000
2,975,000
Share earns
.25
.19
Yr sales
178,636,000
148,095,000
Net inc
15,860,000
12,725,000
Share earns
1.02
.82


Bell Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,783,000
1,498,000
Per share
.71
.60
6mo net inc
2,622,000
2,989,000
Per share
1.05
1.20


THE 41st PRESIDENT; BUSH TAKES OFFICE ASKING BIPARTISAN HELP IN FIGHTING SOCIAL ILLS DESPITE THE DEFICIT
LEAD: George Herbert Walker Bush of Texas, promising new efforts to heal social wounds and to end two decades of divisiveness between the White House and Congress, was inaugurated today as the 41st President of the United States.


Scecorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scecorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,540,000,000
1,410,000,000
Net inc
107,000,000
171,000,000
Share earns
.49
.78
Yr rev
6,250,000,000
5,600,000,000
Net inc
762,000,000
739,000,000
Share earns
3.49
3.39


Review/Music; The Bass Clan Does Its Individual Things
LEAD: The Bass family came into the Greenwich House on Saturday night and settled in without a moment's hesitation.
Martha Bass, the gospel singer and matriarch of the clan, brought her daughter, Fontella Bass, and her son, David Peaston, in for a rocking, friendly show that moved easily from rhythm-and-blues to prim gospel numbers to black pop.


Adjustable Rate Rises to 8.58%
LEAD: The average interest rate on one-year, adjustable-rate mortgages rose to the highest level in more than two and a half years this week, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation said today.


Miss Delgado Married To Dr. Kaare Nygaard
LEAD: Adrienne Delgado of Harrison, N.Y., a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
F.
Alan Delgado of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Kaare Kristian Nygaard of Scarsdale, N.Y., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Johannes Nygaard of Lillehammer, Norway.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the ceremony at Christ's Episcopal Church in


4:30 A.M. Bell In Philadelphia
LEAD: Based on the premise that money never sleeps, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange began pre-dawn trading today in foreign currency options and futures.


Glenfed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
642,636,000
576,541,000
Net inc
35,160,000
b48,189,000
Share earns
1.19
1.65
6mo rev
1,245,349,000
1,133,128,000
Net inc
66,606,000
b92,301,000
Share earns
2.27
3.15


Muller Scores With 35 Seconds Left in Overtime
LEAD: The way things have been going for the Devils lately, with only a victory in five games, a tie against one of the league's elite teams would have sufficed.
But the Devils had victory on their minds when they went into overtime against the Capitals here tonight.


Dollar Slides On Central Banks' Sales
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply yesterday after another round of concerted dollar-selling by the Federal Reserve and other central banks.
It then slipped a bit more after President Bush's inaugural address.


Environmental Tectonics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Tectonics Corp
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,153,000
3,742,000
Net inc
261,000
90,000
Share earns
.09
.03
9mo sales
14,884,000
10,361,000
Net inc
185,000
251,000
Share earns
.07
.09


BancTexas Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
6,928,000
12,570,000
Yr net loss
29,543,000
54,351,000
The loss for 1987 is after an extraordinary gain of $22 million from the financial restructuring that occurred in July 1987.


Frank B. Smithe, 96, Amateur Ornithologist
LEAD: Frank B. Smithe, an amateur ornithologist credited with setting color standards for the science, died Sunday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I. after becoming ill recently.
He was 96 years old and lived in Douglaston, Queens.


Intermark Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermark Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
169,779,000
136,336,000
Net inc
7,184,000
b864,000
Share earns
.87
-
9mo rev
545,909,000
451,871,000
Net inc
7,398,000
bc6,220,000
b-Net loss


THE 41st PRESIDENT: The Parties; Brilliant in Blue, First Lady Is Indeed Belle of Ball
LEAD: The First Lady, dressed in what has already become known as ''Barbara Blue,'' swept through a gilded railroad station tonight for her first inaugural ball.


Keeping Children Safe In Others' Homes
LEAD: Every morning, thousands of New Yorkers leave their children with a neighbor.
Only a few do so sure that the city holds the care-giver to minimum standards of suitability and safety.
Why don't more parents recognize the need?


Stenmark to Retire
LEAD: Ingemar Stenmark of Sweden, the top-winning skier in World Cup history, will end his career April 8 with an international exhibition race against competitors of the last 15 years, according to reports in Stockholm yesterday.


Anchor Savings Bank - Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anchor Savings Bank - Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b900,000
c3,400,000
6mo net inc
b4,800,000
c10,000,000
Per share
-
.16
b-After tax credits of $2 million for the quarter and $4.6 million for the 6 months.


Suspect Shoots Two Officers And Escapes
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were shot and wounded yesterday morning - one of them critically - as a murder suspect with a history of violence against police officers burst through the door of a Brooklyn apartment and, the police said, opened fire.


Cityfed Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cityfed Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
10,678,000
b435,000
Yr net loss
10,277,000
b13,170,000
Per share
-
.24
b-Net income and the year was after a gain of $2,470,000 from termination of a pension plan.


Wilmington Trust Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
16,220,000
13,670,000
Per share
.93
.78
Yr net inc
51,847,000
43,363,000
Per share
2.98
2.46


First United Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First United Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,700,000
1,600,000
Per share
.83
.77
Yr net inc
6,900,000
6,800,000
Per share
3.21
3.19


Bessie Stolzenberg, Teacher, 95
LEAD: Bessie Stolzenberg, a social studies teacher in Manhattan for almost 40 years and an early advocate of women's suffrage, died of heart failure Thursday at her home in Rego Park, Queens.
She was 95 years old.


Rowe Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowe Furniture (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
22,644,000
22,133,000
Net inc
1,062,000
b29,000
Share earns
.61
-
Yr sales
87,197,000
90,503,000
Net inc
2,277,000
2,215,000
Share earns
1.30
1.15


Horizon Bank (Washington) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank (Washington)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
997,081
923,180
Per share
.38
.35
9mo net inc
2,928,496
2,810,210
Per share
1.11
1.06


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,035,000
c6,928,000
Per share
.40
.55
Yr net inc
b2,305,000
d27,027,000
Per share
.18
2.13
b-After a tax credit of $493,000.
c-After a gain of $1,990,000 for early retirement of debt.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Celtics 117, 76ers 109: Dennis Johnson hit three long jump shots down the stretch and Boston withstood Philadelphia's fourth-quarter comeback last night at Boston Garden. (AP)  Lakers 115, Mavericks 99: Magic Johnson scored 30 points to lead Los Angeles to its 17th victory at home this season without a loss..(AP)


Pennwalt Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennwalt Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
263,515,000
215,021,000
Net inc
b144,297,000
c16,972,000
Share earns
12.45
1.34
Yr sales
1,023,640,000
846,256,000
Net inc
b178,655,000
c52,438,000
Share earns
14.34
4.02


First Financial Savings (Ohio) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Savings (Ohio)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
482,000
468,000
Per share
.73
.71
9mo net inc
1,499,000
1,336,000
Per share
2.27
2.02


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
22,544,000
12,022,000
Per share
.90
.89
Yr net inc
58,017,000
40,132,000
Per share
3.51
3.01


Cullen-Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
703,000
400,000
Per share
.08
.05
Yr net inc
2,403,000
1,983,000
Per share
.28
.24


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday misstated Fairchild Industries' response to a takeover offer from the Carlyle Group.
Fairchild rejected Carlyle's offer; it did not say it would become a private company.


Luxtec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Luxtec Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,510,674
936,040
Net inc
b40,129
c617,328
Yr sales
5,683,960
3,912,516
Net inc
b253,697
c585,293
Share earns
.01
-
b-After tax credits of $1,022 for the quarter and $86,000 for the year.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
252,989
c155,527
Per share
.04
.03
Shares outst
2,998,981
2,306,819
Yr net inc
b803,523
c572,169
Per share
.15
.14
Shares outst
2,681,729
1,519,002


For Goodyear Chief, the Heat Is On
LEAD: Tom H. Barrett believes he faces perhaps the toughest challenge of any chief executive in the history of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company: retain the dominant position of the company at a time when its rivals are bigger and more competitive than ever.


Motorola Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motorola Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,193,000,000
1,855,000,000
Net inc
124,000,000
102,000,000
Share earns
.95
.75
Yr sales
8,250,000,000
6,727,000,000
Net inc
445,000,000
308,000,000
Share earns
3.43
2.39


Police Capture Suspect Freed By Forged Papers
LEAD: A murder suspect who walked out of Rikers Island last month because of falsified records was returned to custody yesterday after investigators tracked him to the Brooklyn home of a former sister-in-law.


Gabor Sues Delta Over Dogs
LEAD: Zsa Zsa Gabor has filed a lawsuit against Delta Air Lines, saying she ''was not treated in a first-class manner'' by the airline's ''servants and employees'' when she was escorted off a flight Jan. 6 for refusing to cage her two dogs.
The lawsuit, filed Wednesday in Palm Beach County, Fla., where Ms.


Review/Television; Dolphins, Australia And Family Problems
LEAD: The new series ''Dolphin Cove,'' filmed entirely in Australia, is CBS's latest effort to establish an early-evening beachhead in the Saturday ratings.
This one - created by Michael Bendix, Allen Marcil and Peter Benchley - could tickle the notoriously fickle fancies of younger viewers.


Cambridge Players
LEAD: The Cambridge Chamber Players - D'Anna Fortunato, mezzo-soprano; Carmit Zori, violinist; Richard Sher, cellist; John Gibbons, harpsichordist, and Robert Stallman, flutist - are to play a program of Baroque music at the Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian Church, Lafayette Avenue and Oxford Street South, Brooklyn, at 3:30 P.M.


Bliss &amp; Laughlin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bliss &amp; Laughlin
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,264,000
22,579,000
Net inc
458,000
357,000
Share earns
.25
.19


Moore Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore Financial Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,259,000
5,075,000
Per share
.93
.66
Yr net inc
25,464,000
16,906,000
Per share
3.27
2.25
The company said latest periods' nets are after provisions for credit losses of $2.6 million for the quarter and $10.9 million for the year.


Western Micro Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Micro Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,038,000
19,320,000
Net inc
882,000
160,000
Share earns
.30
.06
9mo sales
75,771,000
50,976,000
Net inc
2,451,000
255,000
Share earns
.84
.09


First Amfed Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Amfed Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
731,000
713,000
Per share
.45
.45
The latest quarter's net included a pre-tax gain of $268,000 on the sale of FHLMC preferred stock and was reduced by about $181,000 because of an accounting change.


Iomega Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iomega Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,475,000
29,158,000
Net inc
970,000
2,421,000
Share earns
.06
.15
Yr sales
111,501,000
89,417,000
Net inc
8,567,000
b36,688,000
Share earns
.50
-


Bankers Trust New York Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust New York Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
185,500,000
284,500,000
Per share
2.29
3.70
Yr net inc
647,700,000
1,200,000
Per share
8.09
.02
The company recorded in 1987 a special provision for credit losses of $636 million after tax.


USAir Cites Talks With Eastern Air
LEAD: USAir Group Inc. said it had been engaged in talks with Eastern Air Lines Inc. to buy some of Eastern's gates and routes at Philadelphia International Airport, but it said no agreement had been reached.
Eastern disclosed last month in court testimony that it was seeking to sell its operations at Philadelphia for about $87 million.


Altera Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,658,000
6,528,000
Net inc
2,210,000
774,000
Share earns
.11
.05
Yr sales
37,857,000
20,652,000
Net inc
7,067,000
2,029,000
Share earns
.38
.12


THE 41st PRESIDENT: The New York Region; Even When Partying, Some Are Working
LEAD: The New Yorkers who have descended upon Washington for the inauguration ''like to party hearty,'' says Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, and when New Yorkers party they, well, they work.


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
64,590,000
56,906,000
Net inc
2,271,000
1,887,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Yr sales
264,625,000
196,899,000
Net inc
b11,892,000
5,007,000
Share earns
1.05
.50


Programming &amp; Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Programming &amp; Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,046,171
5,533,185
Net inc
567,871
429,879
Share earns
.32
.24
9mo rev
19,084,634
13,451,170
Net inc
1,975,513
1,544,027
Share earns
1.10
.86


Sakharov Nominated for Soviet Congress
LEAD: Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and human rights campaigner, was nominated today for a seat in the new national Congress of Deputies, but not before he had been spurned by leaders of the scientific establishment.


Silicon Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Graphics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
65,925,000
35,465,000
Net inc
2,638,000
2,731,000
Share earns
.16
.21
Shares outst
17,019,000
13,268,000
6mo rev
110,213,000
64,345,000
Net inc
3,620,000
b5,687,000
Share earns
.21
.43
Shares outst
17,036,000
13,375,000


Man Convicted of Menacing South Jamaica Homeowner
LEAD: A man said to be a Queens drug dealer was convicted yesterday of menacing a South Jamaica man whose home had been firebombed after he had complained to the police about neighborhood drug dealers.


Piedmont Jet Loses Engine in Chicago
LEAD: The right engine of a Piedmont Airlines Boeing 737 fell off in a takeoff from Chicago's O'Hare Airport today, scattering debris on the runway that delayed flights for hours at the nation's busiest airport.
The plane landed safely on its second engine and no one was injured.


Digital Equipment Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,179,500,000
2,782,200,000
Net inc
279,579,000
329,532,000
Share earns
2.20
2.48
Shares outst
127,111,940
133,067,000
6mo rev
6,121,305,000
5,312,025,000
Net inc
502,953,000
599,474,000
Share earns
3.90
4.50
Shares outst
129,036,762
133,156,190


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Fork Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,500,000
2,800,000
Per share
.60
.55
Shares outst
9,235,256
5,227,056
Yr net inc
14,700,000
10,300,000
Per share
2.13
1.97
Shares outst
6,890,861
5,245,879


Water Metering Penalizes New York Landlords
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Jan. 7 about a plan to study the health of workers in the semiconductor industry misstated the date of an earlier study, at the Digital Equipment Corporation.
It was completed in 1986.


Bristol-Myers Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,479,546,000
1,360,649,000
Net inc
195,572,000
174,071,000
Share earns
.68
.61
Yr sales
5,972,511,000
5,401,159,000
Net inc
829,022,000
709,644,000
Share earns
2.88
2.47
Shares outst
287,859,000
287,123,000


Courier Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,902,000
20,385,000
Net inc
2,686,000
363,000
Share earns
1.46
.20
The latest quarter included an after-tax gain of about $2.5 million, or $1.35 a share, from the sale of Courier's 50 percent interest in Nadco Directory Management Corp.


Amerifirst Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerifirst Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,481,000
c11,207,000
Per share
.13
.99
b-After a loss of $742,000 from discontinued operations.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $335,000 and a gain of $7,901,000 from an accounting change.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Connecticut (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,505,000
1,245,000
Per share
.69
.57
Yr net inc
5,521,000
5,006,000
Per share
2.55
2.31


Road May Get Longer For Knicks
LEAD: After a practice at the Arco Arena today, the Knicks headed for Seattle, the third stop of their seven-game, 11-day West Coast swing.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,501,000
1,484,000
Per share
.46
.45
Yr net inc
5,618,000
5,173,000
Per share
1.71
1.71
Shares outst
3,282,214
3,030,059


Let the Yen, Pounds and Marks Pour In
LEAD: In the recent election campaign, a number of responsible voices claimed that foreign investment in the United States was both big and bad.
An understanding of the facts, however, indicates quite the opposite.
Foreign investment is modest and, by and large, good.
Indeed, in the world where commerce is becoming increasingly globalized, the citizenship of the owner of funds is an emotional red herring.


Prosecution Calls Steinberg A Brutal Killer
LEAD: The prosecution portrayed Joel B. Steinberg yesterday as the brutal, ''repulsive'' killer of Lisa Steinberg and as a scheming, evasive defendant who tried to conceal her murder with lies and deceit.
Failing that, prosecutors said, he blamed Hedda Nussbaum for the death.


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
182,820,000
134,627,000
Net inc
2,177,000
c1,537,000
Share earns
.39
.28
9mo sales
502,195,000
374,735,000
Net inc
b10,239,000
c3,948,000
Share earns
1.83
.73


Louis Hausman, 82, Executive at Networks
LEAD: Louis Hausman, a broadcasting executive, died of pneumonia Wednesday at George Washington Hospital in Washington.
He was 82 years old and lived in Washington.


Thomas Neff Married To Sarah B. Hallingby
LEAD: At St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn., Sarah Brown Hallingby, a daughter of Frances H. Brown of West Chester, Pa., and the late Dr.
Ernest Mack Brown, was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Neff, a son of Elizabeth A. Neff of Easton, Pa., and the late J. Wallace Neff.
The Rev.


Frederick M. Stern, 84, Gruntal Chairman
LEAD: Frederick M. Stern, a Wall Street broker for more than 60 years and the chairman emeritus of Gruntal &amp; Company, died of complications after a stroke on Thursday at Montefiore Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Robert M. Weitman, 83, Former Producer
LEAD: Robert M. Weitman, a former film, stage and television producer, died Friday at his home in Beverly Hills.
He was 83 years old.


A ''Catch-22'' On Health Care in the Home
LEAD: Americans now spend more than $1 out of every $10 on health care.
How we put this money to the most cost-effective use is one of the most important questions facing individuals and political leaders today.


Rightists Blamed in Killing of 12 in Colombia
LEAD: The slayings this week of 12 members of a judicial commission that had apparently uncovered evidence on previous massacres has focused outrage on violent right-wing paramilitary groups and prompted a two-day protest strike by the nation's judges and court workers.


Sweet Talk, Tough Tactics
LEAD: My day always becomes wonderful/when I see your/pretty face smiling so sweetly. . . .
Such free-verse sentiment, printed against a background of pastel artwork, is a kind of signature for Blue Mountain Arts, a greeting-card company founded here in 1971.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amelia R. Hamill To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Axel Litchfield of Pound Ridge, N.Y., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Litchfield's daughter, Amelia Richardson Hamill, to Timothy Balch Hopkins, a son of Elizabeth Balch Hopkins of Westport, Conn., and the late Dwight Douglas Hopkins of Buffalo.
The future bride is also the daughter of the late James Lyon Hamill of Downingtown,


Positive Expectations
LEAD: ''Failing in Teaching'' by Karon Cooney is one of the saddest statements I've ever read about education, although my first reaction to it was why such a negative, unforgiving article would be printed at all.


Benefits Around Town
LEAD:  A Night at the Ballet


A Love of Children
LEAD: In ''Failing in Teaching'' the author makes the point that teachers have a great opportunity to develop children's hopes for themselves.
They also have the opportunity to make an impact on their lives.
The writer is correct in these statements, but then continues with the most bitter condemnation of teachers that


The Coaches Speak Out
LEAD:  Sam Wyche  On meeting Bill Walsh for the first time: ''I was a Cincinnati Bengals rookie.
I don't remember the first 'Hello' or 'How do you do?' I was a rookie walk-on trying to find out where Cincinnati was.''  On what he has learned from Walsh about being a head coach: ''He's an integral part of my style.


A Rabbi, a Slain Arab and an Inquiry
LEAD: Two days before Israel opened schools in the occupied West Bank last fall, Ibrahim Bali was buying new shoes for his young daughters at the downtown Hebron store of his friend, Khayed Salah, when both men were startled by the sound of gunfire.


3 Bobsledders Banned
LEAD: Three bobsledders have been suspended from the United States team after testing positive for the use of steroids, and five others have been reprimanded for inadvertantly using over-the-counter medications banned by the International Olympic Committee.
According to reports in The Lake Placid News and The Watertown Times, the one-year suspensions and the reprimands stemmed from tests administered at the world team trials in November.


Private Enclaves For London Epicures
LEAD: LONDON is the very mecca of clubland.
It contains clubs for every conceivable purpose, but one of the most universal is the consumption of food.
The dining club has long been a congenial place to gather with like-minded friends, and London offers two types, the traditional members' club, where food is only one of the home-away-from-home facilities, and the private dining club, sometimes sniffily called the checkbook club, but an option for Americans who are in


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mr. Bush's Hand
LEAD: President Bush's Inaugural Address contained no specific battle plan, no detailed agenda for the next Hundred Days.
But it offered something at least as important: a conciliatory and practical strategy for governing.


Exile of Apartheid
LEAD: Two years ago, when a one-man judicial commission appointed by President P. W. Botha of South Africa castigated a prominent commercial banker, Christopher J. W. Ball, for his anti-apartheid activities, his business colleagues said the action was a politically manipulated bid to destroy his career.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  WINTER CARNIVAL


Miami Officer Disputed On Shot That Led to Riot
LEAD: Witnesses to the fatal shooting that led to widespread racial violence here have given an account sharply at odds with that given by the lawyer for the police officer who fired the shot.


Leisure College
LEAD: As an all-America cornerback with a bright professional future, Deion Sanders has apparently not put too much store in the academic side of things at Florida State.
Indeed, according to rumors circulating in Tallahassee, after a stint at summer school to meet eligibility requirements for the fall season, Sanders, a fourth-year player, virtually dropped out of school during the football season and even skipped his final exams before playing against Auburn in the Sugar Bowl Jan.


And So to Bed
LEAD: THE top-floor aerie in San Francisco's Westin St.
Francis Hotel was everything a weary traveler from the East could fantasize.
Suite 3178 came with a wet bar in the foyer, sumptuous Biedermeier furniture, a marble bath with gold fixtures, a panoramic view.
I parted the drapes and gazed at hills aglitter with pinpoints of light that limned the contours of


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE INDIAN MUSEUM'S LAST STAND
LEAD: I have followed with interest and concern the plight of the Museum of the Amerian Indian.
Those negotiating its fate should look for a solution that will insure the museum's ability to preserve its collection and maximize the accessibility of the collection to the widest audience.
I believe there should be two facilities: a larger building in New York City, such as the Custom House, and another in Washington.


Vermont Official Is Sentenced
LEAD: George Sleeman, the former superintendent of Bennington schools who was convicted of embezzlement, was sentenced Wednesday to a minimum of two years in jail.


Emergency Landing in Britain
LEAD: A British Airways Boeing 757 carrying 82 people made an emergency landing at Heathrow Airport today after one of its two engines developed problems in flight, the airline said.
The airline first reported that the left engine had been shut off, but later it said the engine had just been slowed down after developing problems.


Bach Versus Computer
LEAD: ACCORDING to the famous ballad, John Henry pitted his steel-driving speed against that of the steam drill (and beat the newfangled contraption), but that historic confrontation may pale alongside the man-versus-machine competition coming up this Saturday at the State University of New York campus at


BEST SELLERS: January 22, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $19.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.
2
2
25
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy.


ALL THE TALL YOUNG MEN
LEAD:  A SEASON INSIDE  One Year in College Basketball.
By John Feinstein.  464 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $18.95.


Campaign Flawed, Dukakis Aide Agrees
LEAD: In a strikingly blunt post-mortem, the chief strategist for Michael S. Dukakis's Presidential campaign has tacitly accepted many of the criticisms directed at that organization, saying that it should have been more inclusive, that it lacked a central and unifying message and that it should have been more open about its disagreements with the Rev.


Thompson, Hoyas Come Back to Win
LEAD: One week after walking away to protest a new rule on freshman eligibility, John Thompson, the basketball coach at Georgetown, returned to the bench in triumph this afternoon.


CHILDREN AFTER DIVORCE
LEAD: AS RECENTLY as the 1970's, when the American divorce rate began to soar, divorce was thought to be a brief crisis that soon resolved itself.
Young children might have difficulty falling asleep and older children might have trouble at school.
Men and women might become depressed or frenetic, throwing themselves into sexual affairs or immersing themselves in work.


Q and A
LEAD:  Snowboarding


THE CRACK IN WOLF'S MIRROR
LEAD:  NO MAN'S LAND  By Martin Walser.
Translated by Leila Vennewitz.  160 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


Cuba Has Come Far Since Days of the Casinos; No Capital of Vice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Of Fraud, Markets, and the Future
LEAD: On Thursday it was disclosed that agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation had posed as commodities traders as part of a two-year investigation of the commodity futures markets.
Typical of the violations they reportedly discovered was ''bucket trading'' - where brokers and traders arrange deals in secret to purchase commodities for clients at prices that are too high.


Paris Art Thefts Meant Just as Spectator Sport
LEAD: A West German art student suspected of stealing works of art worth about $3.2 million told the French police that he took them only because he wanted to ''admire them quietly at home,'' the authorities report.


Correction
LEAD: An article on drug-testing technology in The Week in Review on Nov. 20 included an erroneous reference to ibuprofen, a drug used in some over-the-counter pain remedies.
Manufacturers of drug testing equipment say that there is no indication that the drug can cause a false positive reading for marijuana.


Views on Abortion Are Sharply Split 16 Years After Supreme Court Ruling
LEAD: On the 16th anniversary of the Supreme Court's landmark decision legalizing abortion, polls show that Americans remain sharply divided about their stands on abortion.


Miss Christ Wed on L.I.
LEAD: At St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I., Geraldine Payne Christ, a daughter of Justice and Mrs.
M.
Hallsted Christ of Oyster Bay, was married yesterday to Harold B. Cooper 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cooper Jr. of Waverly, Pa.
The Rev.
Steven Babos performed the ceremony.


The Environment as Local Jurisdiction
LEAD: AS part of the legacy of the Reagan Administration's New Federalism, states and local communities are taking on many responsibilities for protecting the environment that were once largely the province of the Federal Government.
While many state officials are glad to have more power, they complain that the


What the World Expects From George Bush: Japan
LEAD: WHEN President Bush turns his attention to Japan, he will find problems that center on trade and defense and, lurking in the background, increasing American technological dependence on Japan.


CONNECTICUT OPINION
LEAD: MANY of my best friends are gone.
I knew them well, admired their strengths and enjoyed their jokes, and in no time they were dead.


Schools Suing for Tax Money
LEAD: ALL 14 school districts in the Towns of Huntington and Smithtown and 5 of 11 in the Town of Islip are suing their respective towns, accusing the towns of violating the Suffolk County Tax Act by failing to forward tax-receipt money to them promptly.


FROM ALPHA TO OMEGA
LEAD:  CIVILIZATION OF THE ANCIENT MEDITERRANEAN: Greece and Rome.
Edited by Michael Grant and Rachel Kitzinger. (Scribners, $225.) That price is not a typographical error.
What you get here is 1,980 double-column pages in three volumes containing 97 chapters by 88 authorities on everything from farming and cooking to taxes, warfare and divinities in Greece and Rome.


Opening Shoreham Is No Solution
LEAD: Paul Townsend, editor of Long Island Business News (Jan. 1, ''Shoreham Impasse: Suggested Solutions'') said Shoreham should open, and called it ''nonpolluting as compared to fossil fuels''!


Banks and Bonds: A Barrier Falls
LEAD: New powers for banks were granted by the Federal Reserve, which approved giving them limited authority to underwrite corporate bonds.
The action is the most significant yet in breaking the barriers that the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 put between banking and the securities business.
Bankers have long complained that the law restrictsed them as securities firms encroached on the banks' traditional businesses.


Cuba Has Come Far Since Days of the Casinos; The War on AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Varieties of Sandpaper
LEAD: CHOOSING sandpaper from among the many varieties stocked by hardware stores often perplexes amateurs, and not surprisingly.


THE REGION: Cuomo Concedes; A Gap in the Drug War
LEAD: THE plague of drugs ''is the single most ominous phenomenon of our times,'' Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said in his State of the State address early in the month. ''Every day more children surrender their bodies and souls to crack, driven to madness, robbed of their childhood, left desperate and broken and dangerous.


Removing the Duds
LEAD: I am in general agreement with Karon Cooney's many criticisms of teachers.


Elizabeth Smith Becomes Bride Of D. H. Bartram
LEAD: The marriage of Elizabeth Ann Smith to David Hunt Bartram took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
William Donovan performed the ceremony.
He was assisted by the Rev.
James Whittemore, an Episcopal priest.


Getting Back on a Bicycle After 48 Years
LEAD: THERE I was, at 65, as close as I had ever been to serving on a jury.
One woman among eight men, the first to be questioned by the two lawyers.
Skipping from man to man, the lawyer for the defendant asked, ''Do you ride a bicycle?'' If the answer was yes, he wanted to know if it was a 10-speed.
Eventually, the questioner stood in front of me.


Those Knobs in The Back
LEAD: Among all the knobs and switches on stereo equipment, perhaps the most mystifying are the controls often found at the rear of the loudspeakers.
Most listeners have only a vague idea of their purpose - or none at all.


St. John's Rallies to Beat B.C.
LEAD: Jayson Williams scored 22 points, including 7 in a key second-half rally, to lead St.
John's to a 74-66 victory over Boston College tonight in a Big East Conference game.


Monastery in the Himalayas Reported Burned to Ground
LEAD: The main part of Thyangboche monastery, a landmark for hikers near Mount Everest, has burned to the ground, a Buddhist priest said today.


Killer, Facing Death, Is Confessing Many Slayings
LEAD: Theodore Bundy, linked by the authorities to about three dozen killings, confessed to at least nine additional murders today, while his lawyers maneuvered to block his execution scheduled for Tuesday, officials from two Western states said.


No. 1 Duke Falls To Wake Forest
LEAD: Derrick McQueen shrugged off foul trouble in the second half and scored a career-high 20 points today as Wake Forest defeated No. 1 Duke by 75-71 in an Atlantic Coast Conference game.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Blending the Old With the New; Developers Working Around Remnants of the Past in Towers
LEAD: IN their push to erect new towers, developers today are feeling pressure to work around pieces of history.
Projects are rising over, behind and around relics of the past.


Gilgo Beach: Don't Interfere
LEAD: Sharon Monahan's article ''Army Acts to Save Eroded Gilgo Beach in Babylon''  [ Dec. 25 ]  might well have been written by the Public Relations Department of the Army Corps of Engineers.
It ignores the wealth of geological and oceanic knowledge regarding our barrier island.


Cynthia Louise Donahue Is Engaged To Wed Andrew Hamilton Richards
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm M. Donahue of Westwood, Mass., of the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Louise Donahue to Andrew Hamilton Richards, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reuben F. Richards of Far Hills, N.J.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Iraqi Denies Libya Plant Role
LEAD: The owner of a company under criminal investigation for its role in the supply and construction of a suspected chemical weapons plant in Libya has denied the assertions.


Review/Jazz; 4 Artists Find Niche In Church
LEAD: Acoustically there is no space in New York more ideal for the delectation of acoustic jazz than St.
Clement's Church (423 West 46th Street).
Last season, when Lyn Austin's Music Theater group presented ''Prison-Made Tuxedos,'' an ambitious music-theater piece featuring the great alto saxophonist Frank Morgan, a muddled concept was redeemed by thrilling music perfectly projected.


Eileen O'Shaughnessy Weds Patrick Grasso
LEAD: The wedding of Eileen O'Shaughnessy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. O'Shaughnessy of Westfield, N.J., to Patrick Andrew Grasso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
P.
A.
Grasso of New Rochelle, N.Y., took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Joyce performed the ceremony.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: ...And See Who Salutes IVIA question of the year: What can East Hamptonites put on a flagpole?
The query began last year in the village when Morgan Rank put more than a flag on his flagpole.
An ''American primitive art'' dealer, Mr.
Rank decided to add some ''American primitive art'' to the landscape.


POSTINGS: Moving Market; Westward, Ho!
LEAD: Gambling on the future of the commercial real estate market in central New Jersey, two developers in the area will start construction in Bridgewater next month on two three-story office buildings with 325,000 square feet of rental space.
Named the Grande Commons at Bridgewater, the $60 million project on a 24-acre site on Route 22 near the junction of Route 28 is a joint venture of the Bellemead Development Corporation of Roseland and Claremont Properties of


Proposals to Avoid Insolvency in Medicare Trust Fund Bring Sharp Debate
LEAD: The fund that pays all Government reimbursement for hospital care of Medicare patients is projected to become insolvent in the next decade or so, but the proposed remedies hold little political appeal.


Executives Lend Their Skills to Charity
LEAD: EACH morning people like John Reilly, Donna Kuhn and Dominic Caruso report to work here at the office of the United Way of Westchester and Putnam.
Normally, they would be telling other people what to do at large companies like I.B.M., Ciba-Geigy and Texaco and at government agencies.
But now they are helping Ralph A.


Marilyn Silverman Engaged
LEAD: Marilyn Silverman and Paul Feiner, a Westchester County Legislator, plan to marry next month.
The future bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Silverman of Brooklyn, who have announced her engagement to the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Alan Feiner of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Silverman is a freelance book editor.


Success of Vista Hotel Draws Developers Downtown
LEAD: WHEN Hilton International announced a decade ago that it intended to build the financial district's first new hotel in over a century, many people in the hospitality industry smiled knowingly.
Hotels in Manhattan were equated with midtown and that's the way it would remain, ran the conventional wisdom.


A Freudian Spoof Is Slipped Past Many Scholars
LEAD: In a case more reminiscent of Pirandello than of Freud, scholars of psychoanalysis are in a furor over an article by an eminent historian.


Botha Is Expected to Be Discharged Soon
LEAD: South Africa's President, P. W. Botha, who suffered a mild stroke on Wednesday, will probably be discharged from the hospital early next week but will then require a six-week period of recuperation, Health Minister Willem A. van Niekerk said today.


Dust and Dreams From the Lone Star State
LEAD: Three score years ago, Larry L. King sprouted from the jackrabbit plains of West Texas, a barren space where the air stinks of crude oil somebody else owns, the dust burns in your nostrils like needles and the sky seems boundless principally because there are no trees.
Broadway, Harvard and Elaine's might as well have been on


Overseeing A Transitional Period At the Neuberger
LEAD: IT is one thing to wait for the outcome of a job application but quite another to be doing the job while waiting.
At the State University's Neuberger Museum here, that has been Nancy Miller's situation since the end of last year, when she became its acting director upon the departure of Suzanne Delehanty.


TALKING: Booklets; A Sampling Of Sources For Advice
LEAD: SPECIALIZED advice is usually quite costly, but not always.
For example, an excellent way to learn about buying, managing, maintaining or selling a piece of property from a variety of experts without spending more than a handful of dollars is to write for the many books and pamphlets available from government and private agencies.


In Hope and Dismay, Lenin's Heirs Speak
LEAD: In the Communist world, the underground joke is often the best index of conditions. ''What is Communism?'' asks one that has recently been making the rounds.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Football  Gary Leads South in Senior Bowl: Cleveland Gary of the University of Miami was voted the outstanding player in the Senior Bowl after he rushed for 97 yards to spark the South in a 13-12 victory over the North yesterday in Mobile, Ala.
Gary caught 5 passes for 42 yards, including a 10-yard catch on a fourth-and-2 at the North 41 to keep the game-winning drive going on the opening play of the fourth quarter.(AP)


Who Needs Punctuation?
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Data Base Buyers, a Choice
LEAD: Philippe Kahn, the chief executive of Borland International Inc., has set himself an unusual task, considering that he holds the French equivalent of a doctorate in mathematics.
His mission, he says, is to prove that 3.0 is greater than IV.
Yet a growing number of data base users are convinced of the validity of his thesis, which is, specifically, that Borland's Paradox 3.0 can outperform Ashton-Tate's new dBASE


Variations on a Theme
LEAD: WHAT becomes of a legend lost?
Bygone film stars slip into obscurity, obsolete fashions fade away, but antique flowers never die.
Although gardenias no longer adorn gentlemen's buttonholes, gardeners struggle to keep them living happily ever after on their windowsills.


Coping With the Met's Casting Headaches
LEAD: When it comes to casting leading roles in opera - and particularly in ''bread-and-butter'' works that are or used to be at the center of the repertory - people in the opera world repeatedly stress the sometimes insane conditions under which this complex and exotic art operates today, singers' vagaries being only one aspect, and not even the most difficult.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  JULIA PARADISE, by Rod Jones. (King Penguin, $6.95.) A Shanghai psychoanalyst cures a missionary's wife of tormenting fantasies by making love to her while she practices free association; in return, she helps him overcome a debilitating case of ennui.
In 1987, our reviewer, Wray Herbert, said this ''haunting first novel  [ is ]  a remarkable accomplishment.


A.T.&amp;T.'s New Call to Arms
LEAD: Five years after the breakup of the Bell system changed its world forever, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company finally seems willing to do what it takes to thrive in a fiercely competitive marketplace.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $262,500  188 Mount Pleasant Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1887 Victorian; eat-in kitchen, full basement, walk to schools and transportation; taxes $3,188.
Rye Brook, N.Y.  $430,000  19 Meadowlark Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; fireplace, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,960.


Modern Color Films Enter the Field
LEAD: POOR Agfa.
When we think of films in this country, we think first of Kodak, then of Fuji, and finally, maybe, of Agfa.
Few of us remember that Agfa was a pioneer of color films, back before World War II.


FICTION: A USER'S MANUAL
LEAD:  THE COMPANY WE KEEP  An Ethics of Fiction.
By Wayne C. Booth.  557 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $29.95.


REVIVAL FROM WITHIN: Huang Gang, Writer, China
LEAD: Huang Gang, a Chinese literary critic, writer and party member in his late 60's, is a member of a party wing that holds that Communism's basic principles are being forgotten.
He acknowledged that past crises, particularly the cultural revolution, challenged the party's integrity.
But, he argued, those ''mistakes'' have been recognized.


Lisa K. Schmitt to Marry Kenneth Buenker in May
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Charles G. Schmitt Jr. of Seaford, L.I., of the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Karen Schmitt, to Kenneth Arnold Buenker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Buenker, also of Seaford.
A May wedding is planned.


France Offers to Hold Cambodia Conference
LEAD: France said today that it was prepared to be the host of an international peace conference on Cambodia this year and planned to step up diplomatic contacts with all parties to the conflict.


Deaf People As Court Jurors
LEAD: SHOULD a deaf person be barred from serving on a trial jury?


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: If Martin and Steinbrenner can fall apart (and then make up) so many times, why not Winfield and Steinbrenner?


Haggis, a Scottish Tradition
LEAD:  Fair fa' your honest, sonsie face,  Great chieftain o' the puddin'-race!
Aboon them a' ye tak your place.
Painch, tripe or thairm:  Weel are ye wordy o' a grace  As lang's my arm.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burma Tries to Avoid Slips of the Authoritarian Lip
LEAD: It was a moment of high drama that severely tested the Burmese military Government's lurching, awkward efforts to open up a bit to the world.


Unsportsmanlike Conduct
LEAD: AS OUR 9-YEAR-OLD son stretched to turn off the television during the halftime show of the football game, my wife stopped him. ''That's the only part Daddy likes,'' she said.
We all laughed at the role turnabout in our household: My wife, an otherwise appealing woman, loves to watch football on television, and I do not.


Knicks' Problem: How to Stop Ellis
LEAD: One minute Dale Ellis would pop a shot from the wing or put up a 3-pointer.
Then he would drive the lane or crash the boards for a rebound.
Just when the Clippers thought they had the 6-foot-7-inch Seattle SuperSonic guard covered, he would pass the ball inside.


THE WORLD: Armenians vs. Azerbaijanis; How Moscow Hopes to Defuse an Ancient Ethnic Conflict
LEAD: IT is a little like watching someone try to slip the pin back into a live grenade.
Slowly and with a caution learned the hard way, Moscow has begun a new campaign to pacify the ethnic tensions in Armenia and Azerbaijan.
If the exercise is successful, it will bode better for the orderly resolution of ethnic discontents in other republics with restive non-Russian majorities.


FIRST-RATE FINDS
LEAD: Spending a few days in Biarritz, we'd been loafing at the Hotel du Palais, sampling the bustling open-air fish restaurants under the cliff, poking around the shops down at St.
Jean-de-Luz and, one night, enjoying a great dinner at the old and still-grand Cafe de Paris.


THE REGION: A Tight State Budget; Albany Needs $800 Million, but Who's Going to Raise Taxes?
LEAD: IN New York's capital, as in the nation's, taxes are out; revenues are in.
To prove it, the budget that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed last week calls for $800 million in new revenues, but no increase in the state's primary taxes on corporate and personal income and on sales.


From Heads to Tails to Placing Tidbits? You Bet!
LEAD: Going strictly by the book, more citizens become lawbreakers on Super Bowl Sunday than any day of the year.
Unless, that is, they spend the day in Nevada.


Game of Week Link to Baseball
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  On-Time Tally For Amtrak Is Still Eroding


Hands Across The Table
LEAD: To the Editor:


Building Incinerators: A Big Mistake
LEAD: As the prime cosponsor fo the legislation (A-4105) that would impose a one-year moratorium on the construction of garbage incinerators in New Jersey, I very much appreciated the Jan. 8 article on the subject (''Alternatives to Incinerators Are Sought'').
However, I would like to add a few thoughts that were not expressed by Assemblyman John


Becker Eliminates Canadian in a Flash
LEAD: Boris Becker did a good imitation of another famous West German tennis player tonight when he routed Chris Pridham of Canada in 70 minutes at the Australian Open.


An Encore for the Cleveland
LEAD: THE Hartford and Waterbury Symphonies started the new season yesterday evening, and you can catch the repeat of the Waterbury Symphony's Gershwin program at the Kennedy High School today at 3.
At least eight other orchestral programs hop on the musical bandwagon this week, beginning with tomorrow's annual visit of the Cleveland Orchestra to Bushnell Hall in


Miss Broadus, Law Firm Aide, Becomes Bride
LEAD: At the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York, Margaret Carlisle Broadus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Broadus of New York, was married yesterday to Carl Albert Saling Jr., the son of Madeline A. Hickman of Penn Valley, Pa., and the late Mr.
Saling.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony.


A DOCTRINE UNDER ATTACK: Nina A. Andreyeva, Teacher, Soviet Union
LEAD: A Soviet newspaper panicked the nation's liberals last March with an article signed by Nina A. Andreyeva, a 50-year-old Leningrad chemistry teacher, complaining that liberals were using glasnost to sow ideological confusion and blacken Soviet history.
Three weeks later, Pravda denounced the letter as an anti-perestroika manifesto; nonetheless, she said she has received many letters supporting her views.


What's Hot, What's Not
LEAD: To the Editor:


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: After 14 years, ''The Papers of William Livingston'' a major publishing project that was edited by Carl E. Prince, was completed last month when its fifth and final volume was issued by the Rutgers University Press.


Harlem of the 20's Echoes in America Today
LEAD: Nine-tenths of the way through this century, reverberations from one of its earliest eras still hold powerful sway over our collective imagination.
That era, depicted in ''Black and Blue'' (which opens Thursday at the Minskoff Theater), saw an explosion of black American culture, one that radically changed the nature of American and world entertainment.


Iraq Called Willing to Soften Stand in Its Talks With Iran
LEAD: A United Nations official left for the Persian Gulf today to hold new talks with Iran and Iraq as a report circulated that Iraq may be easing its stand.


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Steinbrenner and Winfield possess two totally incompatible personalities.
Their never-ending squabbles have left the Yankee organization in ruins and the national media laughing.
Soon, the integrity of every Yankee fan will be threatened.
Peace can only be achieved if: 1) the Yankees win the World Series; 2) Winfield resigns; 3) Steinbrenner resigns; 4) both Winfield and Steinbrenner resign, or 5) Donald Trump takes over the Yankees and dumps


Review/Dance; Exploring the Human Need for Help
LEAD: Terry Creach and Stephen Koester both create dances for themselves and commission works from guest choreographers.
What the resultant pieces have in common is their all-male casts.
Mr.
Creach and Mr.
Koester wish to explore all the possibilities of male dancing.


Order Restored After Violence At Capital Jail
LEAD: Heavily armed guards restored order early today to the District of Columbia prison complex after a night of disturbances by inmates left one prisoner dead, another injured and two buildings badly damaged by fire.


Strains Emerge in the Partnership Of 2 Who Lead New York Schools
LEAD: Signs of strain and even suspicion have begun to surface in the relationship between Schools Chancellor Richard R. Green and the man largely responsible for bringing him to New York City, the Board of Education President, Robert F. Wagner Jr.
Underlying the wary relationship is uncertainty about their respective roles as well as conflicting styles.


TV Documentary On Rodino Career
LEAD: PETER W. RODINO Jr. returned from World War II with a battlefield commission and a desire to enter politics.
Focusing on issues that were important to returning veterans, like housing, and supported by a growing Italian-American population in the 10th Congressional District, he unseated Fred A. Hartley, a Republican, in 1948 and began a 40-year career in Congress.


A June Wedding For Ms. Penney
LEAD: The engagement of Celeste Penney to Tyler Preston Benson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Benson of North Haven, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Mrs. and Mrs.
John S. Penney Jr. of Short Hills, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Noisy Crowds Lack Manners
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Mario Vargas Llosa Is Unhurt After Ambush, Paper Reports
LEAD: Two men waiting to throw dynamite at a plane carrying Mario Vargas Llosa, the author and politician, shot four people on Thursday after their attack was foiled, a newspaper said today.


Correction
LEAD: An article in the Education Life section on Jan. 8, headed ''The Financial-Aid Numbers Game,'' depicted the use of 401(k) plan contributions erroneously as a method to reduce income reported on aid forms.
For the forms, such retirement funds are considered untaxed income.
Money paid into rollover pensions may be excluded from consideration.


IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN: Gramercy Park
LEAD: SUCH is its allure that on a recent wintry day, when the melting detritus of a snowstorm was keeping most New Yorkers off the streets, Gramercy Park was zinging with activity.


Leah Goldfarb Marries
LEAD: At Temple Beth El in Portland, Me., Leah Beth Goldfarb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew S. Goldfarb of Portland, was married last evening to Michael Lubin Byer, a son of Hope L. Byer of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Charles H. Byer of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Harry Z. Sky and Cantor Kurt Messerschmidt performed the ceremony.


Troubled Hempstead Debates Its Renewal
LEAD: WITH its central location, rich commercial history and seemingly unsurpassed access to major transportation, downtown Hempstead offers perhaps the greatest potential for redevelopment of any business district on Long Island.


Baker's Five Points On Global Politics
LEAD: As he began testifying at his confirmation hearing last week before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, James A. Baker 3d, who will be President Bush's Secretary of State, outlined five ''very significant transformations'' taking place around the world.
They are:  Gains for democracy


More Feed, More Line, More Wood: Down (And Out) On the Farm
LEAD: SOMEONE described a boat as ''a hole in the water into which you throw money.'' A small farm is like that.


Once Again, a Kiss Is Just a Kiss As Sanity Returns in Social Mores
LEAD: IS it possible that the days of kissy-kissy are over?
That instant intimacy, like transcendental meditation, break dancing and all the other fads that spew from the tube, has run its course?


Maria del Carmel Valdivieso Is Married
LEAD: Maria del Carmel Valdivieso, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlos Valdivieso Salazar of Lima, Peru, was married there yesterday to Adam Matthew Shub, the son of Joyce Lasky Reed and Anatole Shub, both of Washington.
The Rev.
Antonino Hernando performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Chapel of Santa Maria Reina in San


A Spot of Paint Won't Hurt This Lily
LEAD: It is almost 24 years since the publication of an eccentric, brilliant, and eerily prescient advertisement for the Plaza Hotel.
The ad had no picture of the Plaza or of anything inside it; it was simply a parable, and it was called ''The Day New York Almost Vanished.''


Goal in Overtime Boosts Rangers
LEAD: If it wasn't beyond the call of duty, it certainly exceeded his job description.
Mark Hardy, who is not even a stylish defenseman, tonight performed a good imitation of a gifted left wing.
The odd change in role consequently preserved a familiar theme for the Rangers.


How the City Council Changed the Law Behind Its Own Back
LEAD: HOW could the New York City Council have changed a municipal law without knowing that it had done so?
The question reverberated around City Hall last week, as members of the Council and the Koch administration, alternately perplexed, embarrassed, defiant and defensive, tried to determine how the city had let the developer Harry


What the World Expects From George Bush: Latin America
LEAD: LATIN AMERICANS routinely shrug when new United States administrations pledge special interest in their region.
The record shows that other parts of the world invariably gain precedence.
But this time may be different.
Latin America's multifaceted crisis is so acute that its main problems - debt, drugs and democracy - may be difficult to ignore.


Insects Endangering Sugar Maples
LEAD: FOR years, maple sugar producers in Connecticut thought pollution was harming their sugar maples.
But this year, their concern is centered on another enemy - tiny insects that growers say have clearly weakened their already stressed trees.


Muttontown Zoning Opposed
LEAD: MUTTONTOWN's 3,900 acres have long been among the most exclusive on the North Shore, with its large open spaces preserved through the years by private individuals and municipal actions of the village.
However, a rapid increase in development in recent years has generated concern within the village.


Dillusion in Victory: Tran Bach Dang, Writer, Vietnam
LEAD: Tran Bach Dang joined the Vietnamese Communist Party at 17; two years later, in 1945, he was a leader of the uprising that briefly seized Saigon.
When Saigon fell again in 1975, Mr.
Dang had run the party for a decade in the enemy's capital.
A 62-year-old pensioner, he now lives in the city renamed for Ho Chi Minh.


EXCESSIVE, EVEN IN LEGEND
LEAD:  CATHERINE THE GREAT  Life and Legend.
By John T. Alexander.
Illustrated. 418 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press.


Cuba Has Come Far Since Days of the Casinos
LEAD: To the Editor:


Get Ready for Longer Gasoline Lines
LEAD: Fifteen years ago, during a few days in mid-October, the Arab oil-producing nations shut the global oil valve and plunged the free world into energy panic.
The 1973 oil embargo in the wake of the Yom Kippur War, coupled with American regulatory overreaction, led to the first gasoline lines at the pumps since World War


Varieties of Sandpaper
LEAD: CHOOSING sandpaper from among the many varieties stocked by hardware stores often perplexes amateurs, and not surprisingly.


TWO STEPS FORWARD, ONE STEP BACK
LEAD:  WAITING FOR PRIME TIME  The Women of Television News.
By Marlene Sanders and Marcia Rock.
Illustrated. 214 pp.
Urbana:  University of Illinois Press. $19.95.


A DISSOLVING MONOLITH: Arunas Zebriunas, 58, Soviet Union Filmmaker
LEAD: Arunas Zebriunas, chairman of the Filmmakers Union of Lithuania, is one of the leaders of Sajudis, the Lithuanian Movement for Perestroika, a grass-roots nationalist movement.
Now 58, he joined the Soviet Communist Party three years ago


PERSONAL FINANCE
LEAD: One-stop shopping for money management?
That's the idea behind an investment product increasingly being marketed by the big brokerage firms - the so-called wrap account.


Air Terrorist List Omits Contra Bomb in Mexico
LEAD: To the Editor:


Railroad a Peril for Moose
LEAD: Railroad locomotives have killed 61 moose in Alaska so far this winter, as against 329 from November to April a year ago.
The Alaska Railroad keeps moose kill figures in that five-month period because it is then that deep snow drives the moose from their summer range in the mountains down toward firm footing on or near the cleared railroad tracks.


SUPER BOWL XXIII QUARTERBACKS: While Esiason Emerges, Montana Survives; BENGALS' LEADER FINDS SUCCESS AFTER TRAVELING 'HARD ROADS'
LEAD: The little blond kid who used to threaten to climb the glass at Madison Square Garden hockey games to get at the bad guys can take things into his own hands now.


Outdoors; Spawning Run Restored
LEAD: Pleased with the results of its just-completed five-year plan aimed at restoring optimum spawning runs of Atlantic salmon in its rivers, the province of Quebec expects few changes in its sport-fishing regulations for the species in 1989.


Ms. Dorsey Plans to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin H. Dorsey of Chevy Chase, Md., of the engagement of their daughter Melanie Graham Dorsey to Daniel James Standish, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Standish of Englewood, Colo.
The couple plan to marry in April.


Contributors to the Neediest Cases Reach Beyond Boundaries
LEAD: The whole Schoenberger family - 17 people in all - spent the year-end holidays in Israel and had a wonderful time, but before they left they remembered The New York Times Neediest Cases.


A New Bill Threatens Greek Private Schools
LEAD: Greek education is in turmoil.
Many private schools and universities have come to a near standstill as staff, students and even parents have taken to the streets this week in a dispute over funding, educational change and politics.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  A WORD ON TREES  A free talk about ''Historic Trees of Westchester'' will be given at 2 P.M. today by Ted Kozlowski, the county forester with the Department of Parks, at Washington's Headquarters Museum in North White Plains.
Mr.
Kozlowski is in charge of the Westchester County Big Tree Register, on which some 40 of the largest trees of a particular species are listed.


NORTH AND SOUTH OF THE MAYONNAISE LINE
LEAD:  THE CLUSTERING OF AMERICA  By Michael J. Weiss.
Illustrated. 416 pp.
New York:  Tilden Press/Harper &amp; Row. $22.50.


Questions and Fear Follow 2 Larchmont Slayings
LEAD: Investigators say they have yet to find a suspect, motive or murder weapon in the stabbing deaths of an Indian-American couple here, and Indian-Americans in the region are becoming increasingly worried that the slayings may have been ethnically motivated.


George Cassidy, Race Starter, 82
LEAD: George Cassidy, the starter at New York Racing Association tracks for 53 years, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home in Brookville, L.I.
He was 82 years old and had been ill with liver cancer.


Larger Than Life
LEAD: THEY CALL ME MR.
MARDI Gras,'' Blaine Kern says, with some justification.
The float-and-prop design firm he founded 41 years ago, Blaine Kern Artists, is now responsible for much of the mobile decoration that parades through New Orleans during the notorious, pre-Lent carnival every year. (This year's celebration runs from mid-January through Feb.


Exile of the Opera
LEAD: What a grand operatic plan it was.
As artistic director of the new Bastille Opera of Paris, Daniel Barenboim, the Israeli conductor and pianist, assembled an international team of conductors, singers, directors and designers for three seasons to begin in 1990.
A $350 million theater for the opera is scheduled to open with a concert on July 14.


Suddenly, Youth Service Comes Closer
LEAD: National youth service, sidetracked for eight years by the Reagan Administration's resistance, suddenly is on the fast track.
The new Bush Administration is readying YES to America, a youth service foundation.
The Democratic Leadership Council, meanwhile, offers a plan to make service a prerequisite for Federal education aid.


Short Grows The List
LEAD: HOW COME,'' A LADY asks her husband in a James Stevenson cartoon in The New Yorker, ''you're never on anybody's &gt;short list?''


Spanish Boom Fuels Fight on Sharing Wealth
LEAD: A booming economy in Spain has proved to be an embarrassment of riches that is feeding tension and jeopardizing the parliamentary majority of the Socialist Party.


Buick Open Purse Raised to Million
LEAD: The purse for the 1989 Buick Open will be $1 million, up from $700,000 last year.
The 25-year-old tournament becomes the 15th on the PGA Tour with a purse of at least $1 million.


Child Abuse: Education Is Key
LEAD: The problem of child abuse and neglect is unfortunately ''more common and complex'' than the public realizes.
While solving the problem will undoubtedly require complex and creative approaches, there is one currently recognized remedy that is fairly simple, that of educating people in the art of parenting.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE INDIAN MUSEUM'S LAST STAND
LEAD: I object to the implication that the collection at the Museum of the American Indian melted away in vast numbers during my tenure as director (''The Indian Museum's Last Stand,'' by William Grimes, Nov. 27).
George Gustav Heye freely disposed of objects by exchange and sale; indeed, three major museums were largely created from the Heye collection by this practice.


Wende Sawyer To Marry in May
LEAD: Wende Ellen Sawyer and George Thompson Hutton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Hutton of Greenwich, Conn., and Seattle, plan to marry in May.
The engagement has been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Sawyer of San Mateo, Calif.


Grom Winter, When Sadness Reigns
LEAD: WINTER, a time of stark grays and cold whites, can also bring on the blues.
And overcoming the low spirits is a struggle that many find requires a well-planned strategy.


Last Bonn Envoys Leave Afghan Capital
LEAD: West Germany's diplomatic staff left Kabul today on orders from Bonn, and the Soviet press agency Tass reported that Moscow had begun an airlift of emergency food supplies to this beleaguered capital.


Comings and Goings
LEAD: The former coach of the Cleveland Browns, Marty Schottenheimer, has taken himself out of the running to become head coach of the San Diego Chargers and is now considered a candidate to take over the Kansas City Chiefs. . . .
Rob Castagna, an Iona College running back, has won the national Woody Hayes Scholar Athlete Award for Division III.


Peter Brook Conjures 'The Mahabharata' for TV
LEAD: Peter Brook, the magician who makes theater in unlikely places, is transforming his epic ''Mahabharata'' into a six-hour film for television, and a theatrical movie of about half that length.
Filming has just been completed in a formerly abandoned studio at Joinville, outside Paris.


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Absolutely not.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marvin Klein, Neurologist, 52
LEAD: Dr.
Marvin Klein, a pediatric neurologist, died of cancer yesterday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 52 years old and lived in Roslyn, L.I.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Only Men Need Apply


The Mall, A Member of the Family
LEAD: The shopping mall has long been villified as a pockmark on the face of suburbia.
Its detractors have faulted it for everything from the spread of mediocrity to the corruption of youth.
It's my belief, however, that these hostile critics are not the mothers of preschool children stuck inside on a slushy


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 22, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $5.95.) A bond trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
5
ROCK STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $4.95.) The glory and anguish of three rock-and-roll performers in tinselly southern California.


BURNING LEAVES AND APPLE PIE
LEAD:  BORDERLAND  Origins of the American Suburb, 1820-1939.
By John R. Stilgoe.
Illustrated. 353 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $35.


Diana Dorfman Engaged to Wed James Deutsch
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Dorfman of Brooklyn have made known the engagement of their daughter Diana Brooke Dorfman to Dr.
James Alan Deutsch, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Deutsch of Brooklyn.
The couple plan to marry in September.


Winterfest Plays Are ''Back to Basics''
LEAD: THE influences on the playwrights in this year's Winterfest series of the Yale Repertory Theater are eclectic, to say the least, and range from Euripides to Pat Boone.


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Steinbrenner's battles with Winfield are merely a result of his understandable frustration and boredom after years with a losing team.
The obvious cure is for the compassionate city of New York to take up a collection and send Our George to Los Angeles, where he can once again pursue his favorite pastime: destroying a winning team.


Bystander, 12, Shot and Killed In Drug Dispute
LEAD: A 12-year-old girl who was talking with a group of friends less than a block from her home was shot and killed Friday evening when she inadvertently walked into a drug-related dispute on a sidewalk in Brooklyn, the police said.


Reviews/Music; The Louisville Plays Works It Ordered
LEAD: For the last 40 years, the Louisville Orchestra has been giving American composers a specific reason to write symphonic music.
A decision in 1948 to commission works, and subsequent support by the Rockefeller Foundation, set in place a program that has put a little optimism in composers' hearts and some money in their pockets.


CASH OF CAMPAIGNS CAN GO ELSEWHERE
LEAD: Nearly 200 House members have stockpiled $39.2 million in campaign funds that they could use as retirement cushions because of a provision of the Federal election law, a new study reports.


'We've Got to Continue Enforcement'
LEAD: CAPT.
JAMES M. MOONEY of the State Police, has headed the Statewide Narcotics Task Force, a cooperative effort between state and local police officers, for the last five of its 11 years.
In that time he has seen some dramatic changes in drug use in Connecticut.


A July Wedding For Miss Muranyi
LEAD: Adrienne Carol Muranyi and Daniel Nathan Fuss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard L. Fuss of Delray Beach, Fla., plan to marry in July, the future bride's parents, Donna K. Muranyi and Joseph Muranyi, both of New York, have announced.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  CULINARY CRUISE  Nearly two dozen chefs from leading restaurants in Fairfield and Westchester Counties will participate Friday in the International Culinary Cruise, a black-tie benefit for the acute-care unit at the Silver Hill psychiatric treatment center in New Canaan.


Beth Otten Wed To Bruce Hood
LEAD: Barbara Ethel Otten, a daughter of Robert P. Otten of South Salem, N.Y., and the late Loisclaire S. Otten, and Bruce Edward Hood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ramon R. Hood of Wilmington, Del., were married last evening at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Weisenbach, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony, assisted by Walfred W.


When Your Luggage Includes a Bicycle
LEAD: IF you are a biking enthusiast you are probably already thinking about taking some extended trips come warmer weather.
Even though spring is still three months away, it is not too soon to start planning, especially if you intend to use a bicycle while vacationing abroad.


After Silence, Too Much Noise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Dance; Sleekness in 'Waltz' and 'Symphony'
LEAD: Take a newcomer to the kind of program the New York City Ballet presented on Friday night and you will see preconceptions about classical ballet break into shards.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I slept out at Shea Stadium once for the Who, and this is the President of the United States.''  - Mitchell Jaspan  of Oceanside, L.I.,  at the White House.  [ 20:5. ]


A Short-Lived Cold Spell


WINGING IT
LEAD: The fin is back.
Call it a bit of madness or simply a return to 1950's kitsch, but this angular, wing-like shape is cropping up as a design element in everything from vases to chairs.
Some 30 years ago, the fin became a symbol of modern efficiency and power.
Most notable was its appearance on cars like the 1957 Cadillac shown here.


The New Climate
LEAD: Just as Angola brought the breakdown of detente in the mid-1970's, it is an early beneficiary of the ''new climate'' in East-West relations.
But it is also a prime example of how much more is involved than decisions in Moscow and Washington.
The superpowers may command, but they are caught in local tides that run their course.


Which Way Does the New Breeze Blow?
LEAD: GEORGE BUSH assumed the Presidency as one of the best known and least understood figures in American politics, a many-sided man who can simultaneously embrace rugged individualism and self-denial, praising in his Inaugural Address both ''the exercise of free will unhampered by the state'' and the virtues of ''duty, sacrifice, commitment.


Specs Toporcer Had Keen Eye
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


WHAT'S DOING IN: Montreal
LEAD: Winter in Montreal can be as old-fashioned as a horse-drawn sleigh on Le Mont-Royal, the 500-acre park at the city's center, or as futuristic as the Olympic Stadium, built for the 1976 Summer Games and crowned a year ago with a 556-foot tower to hold up its retractable, seasonal roof.
It's this blend of the Old World and New France that makes Montreal intriguing.


Time Lapse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tenants and Pets and Best Friends
LEAD: I applaud the informative article on the legislative battle for tenants' rights to keep pets (Jan.l).
As a single musician with two cats, I can testify to the emotional necessity of the companionship they provide.


The People in Thousands, Get a Look at Their House
LEAD: George and Barbara Bush had a few thousand folks over this morning to show off their new house.


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Why not? Charity begins at home.


Going Home To Commack
LEAD: S. Dianne Moritz's article ''Going Home Again: But Where Is 'Home'?''  [ Opinion, Jan. 1 ]  brought to mind Commack as I knew it in 1953 to 1959; lovely suburban community with one general store.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Post-Hirohito, Japan Debates His War Role
LEAD: Slowly, tentatively, Japan is beginning to confront a once-taboo subject - whether Emperor Hirohito bears any responsibility for World War II.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $118,000  365 McConnell Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $2,500.
Medford  $102,000  2706 Eagle Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, oak floors, pool; taxes $1,300.


BOOM TOWN ON THE DANUBE
LEAD:  BUDAPEST 1900  A Historical Portrait of a City and Its Culture.
By John Lukacs.
Illustrated. 255 pp.
New York:  Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson.


Reviews/Music; Some Newcomers to Cast Of Met Opera 'Fledermaus'
LEAD: Five newcomers have joined the cast of the Met's ''Fledermaus'' since it opened in late December.
But the principal reasons to see this production - Hakan Hagegard's fine singing as Eisenstein and Sid Caesar's comic turns as Frosch, the jailer -have been there from the start.


Norma Varden, 90, TV and Film Actress
LEAD: Norma Varden, whose acting career in films, television and on the state included such roles as Jack Benny's mother and the housekeeper in ''The Sound of Music,'' has died at age 90.


FICTION
LEAD:  SAFE PASSAGE.
By Ellyn Bache. (Crown, $16.95.) Ellyn Bache's first novel begins with a mother's premonition of disaster: ''At four-thirty on Sunday morning Mag came up from sleep with her heart thumping and sweat pouring from her.'' Mag Singer's premonition rapidly proves true as she and her husband, Patrick, learn from an early-morning newscast that the Beirut airport, where one of their seven sons is stationed as a marine, has been destroyed by Lebanese terrorists.


Bigger Role for Air Agency Is Urged
LEAD: Three former chiefs of the Federal Aviation Administration and other experts are calling for more autonomy for the agency and a new push for technological solutions to a host of problems facing aviation.


SUPER BOWL XXIII
LEAD: The 49ers play the Bengals today. Some of the highlights of the coverage are:


Composers Who Pay Their Way
LEAD: Think of New York's concert life and one thinks first of the big, glamorous events: first nights at the Metropolitan Opera, famous recitalists and singers at Lincoln Center, glittering visiting orchestras at Carnegie Hall.


PERSPECTIVES: Housing the Homeless; The '100 Percent' Buildings Come on Line
LEAD: TUCKED away in corners of New York City, a new form of potentially troublesome low-income housing is being created in vacant city-owned buildings as part of the response to the problem of finding permanent apartments for the homeless.


Reviews/Dance; Post-Modernist Work by Three Choreographers By JENNIFER DUNNING
LEAD: The three choreographers presented by Dance Chance on Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater of Dance Theater Workshop have different styles, histories and choreographic interests.
But the new and recent works on the second program of a two-part series were recognizably of 1980's post-modernist dance, with its emphasis on sheer energy and physicality.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  The Artist as Beast


EVEN THE PALM TREES HAVE HAIRSTYLES
LEAD:  LOS ANGELES WITHOUT A MAP  By Richard Rayner.  186 pp.
New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $16.95.


2 Are Killed in a Queens Fire
LEAD: A 30-year-old woman and an unidentified man died early yesterday in a three-alarm fire that heavily damaged a three-story house in Maspeth, Queens, the authorities said.
A Police Department spokesman said the fire, which was declared not suspicious, broke out at about 6:30 A.M. in a kitchen at 59-30 57th Drive and ''consumed most of the house.


A Proposition 48 Success Story at Pitt
LEAD: It is a success story in the making, although Brian Shorter cannot be faulted if he doesn't always feel that way.
Sitting in the bleachers overlooking the basketball court that was off limits to him last year, Shorter fielded questions that are as familiar to him now as the terms grade-point average and Scholastic Aptitude


HIGHER EDUCATION: THE REAL CRISIS
LEAD: ON THE AFTERNOON OF MAY 18, 1988, COMMENCEMENT Day at Columbia University, more than 25,000 people - including 7,000 degree candidates and their families - sat outdoors beneath a driving rain, wondering what would happen to the graduation exercises.


Inescapable Super Stress
LEAD: Idaho State Penitentiary inmates are talking about a possible disturbance.


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  The Wicker Man  Starring Edward Woodward, Christopher Lee, Diane Cilento, Britt Ekland, Ingrid Pitt.
Directed by Robin Hardy. 1974.
Magnum Entertainment.  102 minutes. $59.98.
Rated R.


The Yugoslav Republic That Roared
LEAD: In weather and politics, the capital of Montenegro, Yugoslavia's smallest republic, is basking in a precocious springtime.


KNOWING WHICH READERS GROW WHEAT AND WHICH GROW CORN
LEAD: Driven by fierce competition, magazine publishers are finding innovative ways to compete for advertisers.
Consider a computerized process known as selective binding, which at least a handful of publishers are using to create custom editions for small clusters of subscribers who share similar characteristics.


The Tough Job Of Teaching Ethics
LEAD: At the Harvard Business School earlier this semester, a group of students gathered around a table on the spacious patio of Gallatin Hall to drink some Harpoon Ale (itself both soothing and a prod, since it is a successful product of two recent graduates), and talk cases.


An Eclectic Lineup, Fit for The Kronos
LEAD: Some years back, before the Kronos Quartet was the media darling it is today and before it had the large, hip following it now enjoys, the ensemble sometimes programmed an encore that proved deeply disturbing to many of its listeners, more upsetting than the new music it played or the wild costumes the players wore.


Super Bowls Have Their Moments
LEAD: One of the great truisms of the Super Bowl is that the games have been artistic failures 22 straight times, a series of high-platform belly-whoppers rated 7.5 by the judges in the stands and the press box.


Victoria Post Marries John Risko, a Banker
LEAD: Victoria Anne Post, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Post of Beachwood, Ohio, and John F. Risko, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Risko of Portsmouth, R.I., were married yesterday at the Beverly Hills (Calif.) Hotel.
The Rev.
Robert H. Stucky, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
E.
J.
Dionne Jr.


The Salt Alarm
LEAD: EVERY TIME SHE SEES ME SALTING THE spaghetti water, my daughter sucks in her breath with a slight, righteous whistle.
She eats the spaghetti (and the lightly salted sauce), but with a shrug of self-sacrifice, contemplating what this dietary indiscretion will do, sooner or later, to her blood pressure.


Umpire's 2d Chance
LEAD: After 12 years as a minor league umpire, Pam Postema, is getting a second chance to become the first woman to work behind a major league plate.
As it did last year, the National League has invited her to umpire during spring training.


Another View Of the Fog Game
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


The Waterfront Heart of the City
LEAD: AS the sun rises along a deep and smooth bend in the Huangpu River, where the boats known as sampans tie up at the mouth of the Suzhou Creek, the river bank already shows signs of bustle.
On the main street, Doric columns, Gothic windows and plaster friezes adorn the grand buildings towering above the rest of the city's low, flat-roofed houses and hint at the past presence of European brokers in the opium trade.


Through the Palestinian Labyrinth
LEAD: THE Palestine Liberation Organization has recently been talking a more moderate line, and that has thrust its older leaders into the spotlight and brought new prominence to some younger voices.
Radical P.L.O. groups have gone along with the avowals of moderation but have warned that if the peace process does not produce results, they will return to harsher tactics.


Soviets Foresee Budget Deficit of $162 Billion
LEAD: The Soviet budget deficit could reach $162 billion by 1990, according to figures published today in a Soviet newspaper.


Elmhurst's Pride: Winner of U.S. Literacy Contest
LEAD: Two years ago, Annie Goolabia, a 59-year-old mother of six, could not read this sentence.
Today she could probably write it herself.


Player Pay Asked In Nebraska Bill
LEAD: Sen.
Ernie Chambers has reintroduced a proposal in the Legislature calling for University of Nebraska football players to be paid by the state.
The same bill was passed by the Legislature last year, but vetoed by Gov.
Kay Orr.


Kicking the Lottery Habit
LEAD: I HAVE stopped playing the lottery.
I thought it would be difficult to kick the habit, because I viewed those bits of paper as my tickets to the good life.


3 Honored by Black Charities
LEAD: Associated Black Charities, a federation of 59 human service agencies in New York City, has named three winners of its annual Black History Maker awards for ''extraordinary achievement.'' The 1989 awards went to Franklin Thomas, president of the Ford Foundation, Rachel Robinson, chairwoman of the Jackie Robinson Foundation, and Arthur Mitchell, president of the Dance Theatre of Harlem.


Islanders Survive a Wild Shootout
LEAD: The game was one-dimensional, the goaltenders were besieged and the scoring came at breakneck speed.
So far as Coach Al Arbour was concerned, the game was a monstrosity, but he couldn't control the hint of a smile as he made that observation.


NAVY SEES LESSONS FROM PERSIAN GULF
LEAD: If there is a word to describe the United States Navy's operations now winding down in the Persian Gulf, it has to be ''improvise.'' Captains and crews had to adapt high-tech ships to what military people call a low-intensity conflict.


Bush Starts the Job Briskly, and With an Open House
LEAD: An energetic George Bush completed his first full day as President today with a flourish of symbolic gestures and conciliatory statements, including a renewed plea for the assistance of other countries in winning the release of American hostages in Lebanon.


Quayle, on a Bush Mission, To Meet Foes of Abortion
LEAD: In one of his first official acts, Vice President Dan Quayle will meet with anti-abortion leaders Monday at the request of President Bush, Administration officials said today.


Albany Notes; Cuomo Finds All Work and No Play Lacks Efficiency
LEAD: One thing the Cuomo administration had never been known for is its frivolity.
Indeed, one of the favored pastimes on the second floor of the State Capitol, where the top officials work, is to see who can stay even later than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo himself, a famed workaholic.


Some 'Small' Movies Can Be Very Big
LEAD: Movies are too easy to make.
When you come down to it, all it takes is money, which buys access to writers, directors and actors.
It buys long shooting schedules, location trips, special effects and stretch limos.
It also buys technicians who are so talented that they can make even a frivolous orangutan look like a serious orangutan, if not a movie maker of substance.


ART VIEW
LEAD: With the presence of ''German Art in the Late 80's'' here, the other shoe of the ''Binationale,'' an unusual German-American exhibition exchange, has dropped.
This survey of the work of 27 West German artists, reorganized by curators from three Dusseldorf museums, is on view at the Institute of Contemporary Art and the Museum of Fine Arts through next


A Few Problems Are Solved
LEAD: DO not delay mailing orders for seeds and plants to be sure of getting first choices.
Check mulches on flower borders, new shrubs and young trees; be sure trunks of new trees are protected with commercial tree wrap to prevent scald from winter sun.
Indoors plant seed of petunias and snapdragons.


ARMS AND MEN: WHO'S IN CONTROL?
LEAD:  WAR AND PEACE IN THE NUCLEAR AGE  By John Newhouse.
Illustrated. 486 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


FICTION
LEAD:  THE CARPATHIANS.
By Janet Frame. (Braziller, $17.50.) Janet Frame's 11th novel, her first in nine years, is an unconventional fantasy.
Told for the most part from the viewpoint of a wealthy, compulsive globe-trotter, a middle-aged New Yorker named Mattina Brecon, it describes her two-month stay in the fictional New Zealand town of Puamahara.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Saco, Me.; Old Textile Mill Gets New Role
LEAD: A CONVERSION of a group of buildings that once were part of a textile mill is bringing a year-round residential population to an island near the mouth of the Saco River.


Stamford's Old Town Hall May Have a Future in Art
LEAD: FOR the last quarter-century, the Old Town Hall, a designated national landmark in downtown Stamford, has stood virtually empty and very much out of place, a Beaux Arts anachronism in the midst of what has become a business district of modern corporate towers.
Now there are plans afoot to turn the hall into a museum of borrowed glories and local exhibits.


A Better Way to the Beach in Puerto Rico
LEAD: THE best road to the best beach in Puerto Rico - and one of the best in the world - isn't the main one.
The car rental agency in San Juan may tell you that Route 3 east from San Juan is the best way to reach Luquillo Beach - and they'd be half-right.
Route 3 is two-lane highway, and if a bit more beat-up than the average Interstate, it's fast and direct.


Flying Fees
LEAD: To the Editor:


OPENNESS ABOUT CYNICISM: ANONYMOUS, POET, CHINA
LEAD: A poet and assistant professor from Shanghai, he agreed to speak candidly only if his name was not used.
He joined the party in 1985, when he was asked to apply during his third year in college.
He said cynicism and disillusionment are widespread among younger party members, particularly among intellectuals.


Shoreham Impasse: Legislative View
LEAD: Your Jan. 1 story ''Shoreham Impasse: Suggested Solutions'' noticeably lacked a view from the Suffolk County Legislature.
This 18-member body has consistently served as Long Island's most effective defense against the safety and economic hazards posed by the Shoreham plant and will undoubtably be a leader and partner in any settlement of the


Shaw and Christmas
LEAD: To the Editor:


KISSING CUSTOMS
LEAD: Michael T. Kaufman's article about hand-kissing delighted me (About Men: ''Kissing Customs,'' Dec. 11).
Indeed, my mother always said that a communist government could take all material things away from you, but it could not deprive you of your education or your manners.


Give Attention to Teachers Who Care
LEAD: Karon Cooney's article, ''Failing in Teaching'' (Opinion page, Jan. 1), speaks of passionless teachers, but I expect it will arouse the passion of all effective teachers who read it.
Ms.
Cooney lifts the burden of guilt for our children's ills from parents' shoulders and drops it on the most popular scapegoat of the 80's - our nation's teachers.


Adventure On a First Blind Date
LEAD: SEATED on the Scarsdale train to New York, I was concentrating on what I was going to say, repeating phrases over and over again.
Ask him about himself, his interests, his children - all advice my friends had given me.
I also wondered what on earth I was doing in my good red coat, best black wool dress, being propelled by public transportation to a rendezvous in the same week that my third grandchild was born.


And That's Why They Say 'Vive la France'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Christine Henderson Wed To Stephen H. Beach 3d
LEAD: Christine Diane Henderson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas Henderson of Wellesley, Mass., was married there yesterday to Stephen Holbrook Beach 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Beach Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Vincent Warner performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church.


Perfect Stews to Warm a Winter Day
LEAD: STEWS are the most inviting and practical of winter food.
They can be made in one pot, cooked a day or more in advance and are economical, since cheaper cuts of meat are used.
They are also warming and filling on a cold day.
Here are some hints for making perfect stews: Use cheaper cuts of meat.
They will have less fat and more flavor.


Why Defend a Defenseless Defense?
LEAD: WHEN one of your favorite defensive systems runs into trouble, the solution is quite simple: Don't play it.
Yet it is just amazing how player after player can look down at the floor when the handwriting is on the wall.


Pointed Question
LEAD: To the Editor:


State Plays Bigger Role for Homeless L BY JEFFREY HOFF
LEAD: A SERIES of recent court decisions has substantially increased the state's responsibility to care for the homeless, straining a small supply of shelter beds and magnifying the difficulty of finding permanent low-cost housing.


Vietnam in Art and Words
LEAD: THE Vietnam War killed thousands of Americans, left others with painful memories and changed the way many people saw their country and themselves.
Many Americans wanted to forget the war and put it behind them.
But today, people are looking back and looking carefully at the war.


KEY MATCHUPS
LEAD:  Randy Cross, 49ers' center, vs.
Tim Krumrie, Bengals' nose tackle: Krumrie stays low, and he moves so quickly and so well laterally that he can take away the cutback by a running back.
Bill Walsh, the 49ers' coach, said it would take two men to block him. ''Krumrie is the foundation of our defense,'' said Dick LeBeau, the Bengals' defensive coordinator.


Painting and Sculpture at the Michener
LEAD: James Michener is a novelist whose biography reads like the invention of a novelist.
Itr begins with Mr.
Michener, an adopted child, growing up poor in Doylestown, Pa., continues with his obtaining, by dint of hard work and a scholarship to Swarthmore College, a good education and jobs as a school teacher and then an editor.


Cynthia C. Scully Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Watson Scully of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Crowell Scully, to Todd Hodges Doolan, the son of Mrs.
James A. Gobes of West Hartford, Conn., and Dwight M. Doolan of New York.
The couple plan to marry in September.


INSIDE
LEAD:  U.S. Hospital Fund Ailing


Melissa Ann Brown to Wed Sean McCrary Moore in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Archibald Hoadley Brown of Smith's Parish, Bermuda, and Boston, have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Ann Brown to Sean McCrary Moore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Moore of Montrose, Colo.
A June wedding is planned.


Votes for Hall Are Taken
LEAD: Terry Bradshaw, Bob Griese, Art Shell, Mel Blount, Ted Hendricks and Willie Wood attained the final yes-or-no vote today at the annual meeting of the Pro Football Hall of Fame selectors.


Paradox, Ambiguity And Ferruccio Busoni Photos of Ferruccio Busoni (Bettmann Archive); conductor Christoph von Dohnanyi confering with the soloist, Garrick Ohlsson (Jack Van Antwerp)
LEAD: It is the destiny of Ferruccio Busoni's music to be perpetually revived and re-examined, never established in the repertory yet not forgotten, either.
The composer guaranteed such a state of affairs; whatever cravings he had for popular success were more than gratified by his long career as a piano virtuoso, and he composed his music for a self-selecting audience of the curious and intelligent.


A Warning Signal Is Flashing
LEAD: Since the first week of December some short-term interest rates have moved up so sharply that they now exceed the rates on long-term securities.
In the past, such an occurrence, known on Wall Street as an ''inverted yield curve,'' has often been followed by a recession and falling stock and bond markets.


Tough Year for 'Market Timers'
LEAD: Last year was a tough one for the so-called ''market timers'' - money managers who frequently move back and forth from stocks to cash, depending upon their reading of economic or technical indicators.
Their approach, which some academics have questioned, is designed to take advantage of rallies while missing market downturns.


Exile in Limbo
LEAD: In recent years, the name of Idi Amin has cropped up mainly as a symbol of a tyranny nearly as bizarre as it was brutal.
Once the self-proclaimed President-for-Life of Uganda, whose whim meant death to thousands and exile to hundreds of thousands, he fled in 1979 and was given sanctuary in Saudi Arabia - on condition that he stay out of the public eye.


Argentinian Presence Is Here at Last
LEAD: OLE!
Argentina has come to Long Island.
Nassau-Suffolk's first Argentinian restaurant is La Estancia in Elmont.
This authentic, convivial South American storefront is muy bueno.


Dr. Jodi Singer Engaged
LEAD: Dr.
Jodi Sue Singer, a resident physician in pathology at the New York Hospital, and Dr.
Albert Sassoon, an obstetrician and gynecologist in New York, plan to marry in April.
The future bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Singer of Moorestown, N.J., who have announced her engagement to a son of Mrs.


Some Applause for A Generous Gesture
LEAD: THE annual award that used to be presented for the best sportsmanship in a given year would have had an obvious nominee in 1988.
It would surely have gone to the Swedish team that won the bronze medals at the world team championships in Venice in October.


Perfect Stews to Warm a Winter Day
LEAD: STEWS are the most inviting and practical of winter food.
They can be made in one pot, cooked a day or more in advance and are economical, since cheaper cuts of meat are used.
They are also warming and filling on a cold day.
Here are some hints for making perfect stews: Use cheaper cuts of meat.
They will have less fat and more flavor.


SCHEME AND VARIATIONS
LEAD:  LISTENING OUT LOUD  Becoming a Composer.
By Elizabeth Swados.  208 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $17.95.


Estate Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


'The Collar City' Is Loosening Its Ties to the Past
LEAD: Back in 1820, Orlando Montague, a blacksmith, complained to his wife, Hannah, that he did not have a clean white shirt in the evening when he came home from work.
Mrs.
Montague solved the problem by cutting collars off her husband's shirts, providing a clean one for him to wear whenever he wanted.


What the World Expects From George Bush: Western Europe
LEAD: IT has been a long time since Western Europe was so reassured by the transition from one American President to another.
In the hand-over from Ronald Reagan to George Bush, there is something almost European in the respect for continuity.


Question Of the Week; Can Winfield and Steinbrenner Find Peace?
LEAD: Winfield and Steinbrenner will never find peace.


Shipping Out From Shanghai
LEAD: AT the Shanghai Hai Xing Shipping Company dock, just down river from the steel skeleton of the Waibaidu Bridge, the summer holiday crush was on: Western backpackers, like the overburdened camels that once traveled the Silk Road, lumbered toward the inconceivably small immigration gate, while hundreds of old


Up From the Ruins
LEAD: On a dusty plain above the harbor hundreds of men and women sit at rickety stands, shielded from the sun by battered sheets of metal.
Spread in front of them are their wares: shoes and Coca-Cola, eggs, tomatoes, steel wool, whisky, vitamin B tablets . . .


Making the Grade
LEAD: 'People frequently misuse the word ''exploit,'' but to admit an athlete to an institution and then put him in basket-weaving courses, then drop them or push them through for four years without them being able to read is an abomination and it should not happen in higher education.' - Dr.
Frederick P.


Trip Planning
LEAD: To the Editor: I noted with interest Stanley Carr's answer to the question on how those using frequent-flier credits to fly overseas can find on their own the kind of inexpensive hotels and tours offered in package deals (Q &amp; A, Nov. 27).


Barbet Schroeder: From Bukowski To von Bulow
LEAD: Charles Bukowski and Claus von Bulow may seem like polar opposites of American society.
Nevertheless, the free-spirited writer who has chronicled Los Angeles's Skid Row and the New York socialite who stood trial and was acquitted of the attempted murder of his wife have at least one thing in common: Their stories come to the screen via the director Barbet


Israelis Kill 2 Arabs in Protests in West Bank
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and killed a 14-year-old youth and another Palestinian today in scattered demonstrations throughout the occupied West Bank.


MAGAZINES FOR SOUTHERN BRIDES AND HISPANIC ENTREPRENEURS
LEAD: Earlier in the century, publishers sought the lowest common denominator in editorial content, attempting to appeal to the widest spectrum of Americans and advertisers.
Look, Life and Reader's Digest were born.


Documenting an Outbreak of Self-Presentation
LEAD: No subject has held the attention of more types of photographers during the last 25 years than the self-portrait.
A list of those artists who have looked at themselves seriously - not just glancingly -would include such disparate stylists as Andy Warhol, Lee Friedlander, Anselm Kiefer, Eleanor Antin, Lucas Samaras, William Wegman, John Coplans, Judy Dater, Robert Mapplethorpe, Arnulf Rainer, Cindy Sherman, Chuck Close, Duane Michals, Adrian Piper, Bruce Charlesworth, Christian Boltanski and Ann Noggle.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-17


Assemblyman Challenges O'Rourke
LEAD: A 42-year-old State Assemblyman, Richard L. Brodsky, became the first official challenger today in a major effort by Westchester Democrats to unseat County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, a popular Republican who has held the county's top political post for seven years.


Annella M. White Becomes a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Annella Marie Tuolumne White, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Brooke White of New York, was married there yesterday to Roy Christopher Dignes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lyder Dignes of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
The ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church was performed by the Rev.
Susan C. Harriss.


Amnesty International Appeal
LEAD: Amnesty International released a report today urging the Brazilian Government to investigate ''the widespread killing of community leaders.'' The request came a month after the murder of Francisco Mendes Filho, an environmental campaigner for Amazon rain forests.


Calcavecchia Takes Charge
LEAD: Mark Calcavecchia, a husky, free-swinging long hitter,shot 6-under par over the stretch from No. 13 through 17 today to take a three-stroke lead in the $700,000 Phoenix Open.


Thelonious Monk Memorial Will Help Jazz Live
LEAD: The Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz introduced itself to Durham on Jan. 14with a high-voltage handshake at the Page Auditorium of Duke University: a concert by some of jazz's most noted musicians and appearances by Steve Allen; his wife, Jayne Meadows, and Clint Eastwood, who directed the movie ''Bird.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have cabinets of ash wood in my kitchen.
Food and dirt stains have accumulated around the handles and knobs on the cabinet doors.
Is it possible to clean off this dirt without also removing or damaging the finish, or must the cabinets be revarnished?


Building a World Within a World
LEAD: IT has been called a hedge against the extinction of life on earth and a step toward colonization of the moon and Mars: Biosphere II, an enclosed, airtight, 2.25-acre ecosystem in which plants, animals and humans could survive indefinitely in harmony.


Images of New York, in Anger and in Sorrow
LEAD: When commentators insisted that election year 1988 was one of ''peace and prosperity,'' some New Yorkers could only gape and snarl in disbelief.
In their neighborhoods, they saw homeless people begging outside luxury co-ops, friends dying of AIDS, teen-agers smoking crack; the nightly news intercut abused children, racist demagogues and poisoned beaches with voracious deal makers and free-spending consumers.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  CENTURIES OF FEMALE DAYS: Englishwomen's Private Diaries.
By Harriet Blodgett. (Rutgers University, $29.95.) On Oct. 23, 1848, Caroline Fox, the 29-year-old daughter of the eminent English scientist Robert Were Fox, noted succinctly in her diary, ''A wet day and all its luxuries.'' The following day she recorded as, ''A fine day and all its liabilities.


Nets Can't Sustain A Powerful Start
LEAD: For one half tonight, the Nets looked better than ever.
They were outplaying the team with the best record in the National Basketball Association.
They were functioning as a poised, cohesive unit.
And if they had been able to upset the Cleveland Cavaliers, it could have done wonders for New Jersey's confidence.


Now You See Her . . .
LEAD:  VANISHING ACT  Starring Mike Farrell (in photo), Elliott Gould, Fred Gwynne, Margot Kidder (in photo).
Directed by David Greene. 1986.
Vidmark Entertainment.  93 minutes. $89.95.
Rated PG.


Czech Police Block Protest Pilgrimage to Village
LEAD: The police prevented human rights protesters from making a pilgrimage today to the village that was the home of Jan Palach, who burned himself to death 20 years ago to protest the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia.


American Graffiti
LEAD: George Bush has the best handwriting of all the Republicans who vied for the Presidency last year, according to the National Coalition to Stamp Out Chicken Scratching.
The ''coalition'' is the creation of a ball-point pen manufacturer, whose not-so-hidden agenda is to promote them.
But, commerce apart, the stamper-outers have a legitimate cause: in the age of word processors, penmanship is getting sloppier.


Tough Guys in Black and White
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


DEBUNKING OF MAO: Li Shuxian, Professor, China
LEAD: Granddaughter of a wealthy landlord and daughter of a doctor who died when she was 5 years old, Li Shuxian, now 53, spent her youth in poverty.
She welcomed the revolution and joined the party in 1954, only to be expelled three years later in an ''anti-rightist'' campaign and then, finally, reinstated automatically along with other purge victims in 1979.


Unveiling the Unsung Heroes
LEAD: Nearly all eyes will be on Joe Montana and Boomer Esiason, Ickey Woods and Roger Craig, Jerry Rice and Eddie Brown, the prime players in Super Bowl XXIII.
They are the favorites to win the most valuable player award of the game.


BUD MCFARLANE: SEMPER FI
LEAD: ROBERT C. (BUD) MCFARLANE SOMETIMES has trouble with the truth, even when he is telling it.
Take the time in 1982 when he was deputy national security adviser, and an intelligence leak reached The New York Times.
McFarlane proposed that National Security Council staff members in the know be given lie-detector tests to find the leak, and he volunteered to go first.


Library's Stock Is Books on Family
LEAD: Colonial women in the Gloucester area depended on Isabel Babson, a midwife, to help deliver their babies.
Three hundred years later, parents and children can rely on a library devoted entirely to family topics that was inspired by the midwife's work.


Constitution Takes It on the Chin in North Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.29
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.71
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.26
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.59
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
17.25
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


NONFICTION
LEAD:  MEMBERS OF THE TRIBE: On the Road in Jewish America.
By Ze'ev Chafets. (Bantam, $18.95.) While the question ''Who is a Jew?'' has been raging in Israel, the answer in the United States is simple enough.
As a leader of the Jewish community of Waco, Tex., says: ''If somebody says he's Jewish, that's good enough.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Steinberg Live; Courtroom TV Is A Fixture, Even as New York Is Deciding
LEAD: THIRTEEN months have passed since New York State first allowed cameras a front-row seat at criminal trials.
So far at least, the only clear casualties of the experiment, a test of the effect of television on the judicial process, are courtroom artists who have been automated out of their jobs.


An Old Eli Performs As Kung Fu Star in China
LEAD: On the banks of the West Lake, an enchanted region of islands and temples shrouded by mist and magic in this city 100 miles southwest of Shanghai, a love story has been unfolding before the cameras.
It is a Chinese love story, in which the leading actress is both chased and - after a fleeting temptation - chaste.


North Korean Group Arrives On First Official Japan Visit
LEAD: A North Korean delegation arrived in Tokyo today on the first visit by Pyongyang officials, a spokesman for the Japan Socialist Party said.


For Bill Walsh, Two Doors Are Ajar
LEAD: His 49er players talk about Bill Walsh's ability to identify and exploit an opposing team's weakness on defense.
And when Super Bowl XXIII begins, the whispers are that the 49ers will try to exploit Reggie Williams, the Bengals' 34-year-old right outside linebacker.


One-Liners and One-Acters
LEAD: WITH Larry Shue's ''Nerd,'' a standard situation comedy on their main stage, and a pair of Christopher Durang's howlingly funny offbeat comic one-acts on its second stage, Port Jefferson's Theater Three is offering something for everyone.


Former Representatives And Their Leftover Campaign Funds
LEAD: U.S.
Representatives who left office in 1988 who were in office on or before Jan. 8, 1980.
Legally, they may keep leftover campaign funds for their personal use.
In some cases, it is not known how the money will be spent.
Robert E. Badham (R-Calif.) Retired.


Coins From the Siege
LEAD: SEIGE coins are representative of tumultuous eras and such is the case with the shekel of the First Revolt (A.D. 66-70) This shekel is one of only three examples of ancient silver Jewish coinage.
The other two being a miniscule coin from earliest times and the shekel of the Second Revolt (A.D. 132-135).


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have cabinets of ash wood in my kitchen.
Food and dirt stains have accumulated around the handles and knobs on the cabinet doors.
Is it possible to clean off this dirt without also removing or damaging the finish, or must the cabinets be revarnished?


What of '48 Refugees?
LEAD: To the Editor:


It's Time to Put a Tax on Imported Oil
LEAD: Something curious happened in early January.
With little more than two weeks of his term remaining, President Reagan endorsed a Commerce Department finding that rising petroleum imports threaten to impair national security, leaving the West dependent on potentially insecure sources.
Then, just a few hours after President Reagan's announcement, American Navy jets shot down two Libyan MIG's over the eastern


Fighting for a Place on Crowded Newsstands
LEAD: Magazine publishers seem undaunted by the fact that only two out of 10 new magazines survive beyond their fourth year.
Indeed, in 1987, 477 new consumer magazines appeared on the newsstands, a 28 percent increase over new launches in 1986.


A Debate Over Putting Nuclear Power in Orbit
LEAD: WHERE does a satellite get the electricity it needs as it orbits the earth?
The Soviet space program uses small nuclear reactors aboard some of its most important space vehicles, while American spacecraft tend to generate electricity from the sun.


AGAINST FATALISM
LEAD:  AIDS AND ITS METAPHORS  By Susan Sontag.  95 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14.95.


Now, Kohl Has to Plod His Way Out of the Libya Mess
LEAD: CRISES by definition never break at opportune times.


Dr. Lainie Friedman to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Friedman of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Lainie Sue Friedman, to John Louis Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Ross, also of Jericho.
Dr.
Friedman, a third-year pediatric resident at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, graduated from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public Affairs at Princeton University and the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.


Where Picasso Crafted His Ceramics
LEAD: IT doesn't take much more than a cursory glance to realize that Vallauris, a town in the Maritime Alps of France, is a pottery center of consequence.
Avenue Georges-Clemenceau, the main street, is lined with shops spilling their wares out onto the sidewalk.
Individual artisans and artists have studios and shops on the avenue and on adjoining side streets.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:  FALLEN ANGELS  By Walter Dean Myers.  309 pp.
New York:  Scholastic. $12.95. (Ages 14 and up)


Giuliani, Uncertain on Run for Mayor, Talks Tough on Drugs and Defense
LEAD: After Rudolph W. Giuliani brought a few prosecutions that made waves around the world, critics and admirers both said he was the only prosecutor in the country with a foreign policy.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about WZFM, the FM radio station in Pleasantville, gave an incorrect name for its weekly program of old rock-and-roll.
It is the ''Saturday Night Special.'' A co-host of the show was also misidentified.
He is Kerin McCue, not Kevin.


POSTINGS: A Proposal for Putnam; 139 Homes for a 388-Acre, 1860 Estate
LEAD: A half century ago, George and Ira Gershwin, Cole Porter and Jerome Kern were frequent visitors to the 388-acre Dreyfus estate in southeastern Putnam County, now the subject of a proposal before the Town Board of Southeast to divide it into 139 home sites.
The property features a three-story castle that evolved from an Italianate villa built in 1860 by Daniel Drew, the financier for whom Drew University, in Madison, N.J., is named.


POSTINGS: 3 Years of Planning; Revitalizing Stamford
LEAD: The Stamford Urban Redevelopment Commission has chosen the Lincoln Property Company of Dallas to build an $87 million mixed-use downtown project as one of the major pieces of Stamford's urban renewal plan.
Stamford Court, as the project is called, will have 365 rental apartments, 35 town houses, medical office space, a 1,020-car garage and a recreation center that will include movie houses and restaurants.


STILL THE GREATEST
LEAD:  THE RISE OF THE GREEKS  By Michael Grant.
Illustrated. 391 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.


DATA BANK: January 22, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,009.4
$3,988.4
$3,831.1
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.5
3.0
3.8
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
169.1
$162.7
$149.5


New York Property Values Up
LEAD: The assessed value of New York City real estate has jumped 11.6 percent, and owners of one-, two- and three-unit houses and some condominiums face average property-tax increases of $65 a year.


Jozef Cyrankiewicz Is Dead at 77; Polish Premier in 1970 Food Riots
LEAD: Jozef Cyrankiewicz, the Polish Prime Minister who was toppled by the violent food-price riots of 1970, died Friday, official Polish newspapers said today.
He was 77 years old.


The New Guard's Military Look
LEAD: PINNED to downtown denim and uptown designs, cloisonne French military insignia sold by a sidewalk vendor are a hot costume jewelry item in Manhattan.
The colorful pins have become especially popular since appearing in fashion magazines, said the vendor, James Kusnir, who sells them for $20 to $50 in SoHo and on Columbus


Anne R. Kurz Married To Jeffrey Alan Zenn
LEAD: Anne Robin Kurz, a daughter of Ruth Kurz of Clifton, N.J. and the late Nathan Kurz, was married in Summit, N.J., last evening to Jeffrey Alan Zenn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Zenn of Millburn, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Shaw performed the ceremony at the Summit Hotel.
Mrs.
Zenn is the associate director of resource development at the Hospital for Joint Diseases Orthopedic Institute in New York.


Schools Face Problems Paying Teachers
LEAD: SCHOOL boards have been agreeing to teachers' labor contracts that they may have difficulty financing.


Orchestre de Paris On Public Radio Series
LEAD: A weekly series of taped concerts by the Orchestre de Paris is being carried on more than 100 public radio stations in the United States and Canada until April, in conjunction with the orchestra's United States tour, which starts next month, and in celebration of the 200th anniversary of the French


Dedicated People
LEAD: Castigation of any profession in its entirety is both arrogant and inaccurate.
When Karon Cooney has no good words to say for the teaching profession, she must be wrong.


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Max Laemmle, 82, Theater Chain Owner
LEAD: Max Laemmle, whose chain of art theaters exposed Los Angeles moviegoers to such international film-makers as Ingmar Bergman, Costa-Gavras and Francois Truffaut, died of pulmonary congestion Friday night at his home.
He was 82 years old and lived Beverly Hills, Calif.


Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: Disappointed over the urbanization and industrialization of Italy and the high prices, we decided to follow Boccaccio's lead to the southern west coast towns that he described as perhaps the most beautiful part of Italy.


Jamie Broussard Wed To John D. Tierney 2d
LEAD: Jamie Ann Broussard, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Broussard of Tulsa, Okla., and John Donald Tierney 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Donald Tierney of Morristown, N.J., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J., by the Rev.
Patrick Brown.


Burnout From Caring
LEAD: I hope this is one of many letters of outrage you receive from administrators, teachers, parents and students in response to Karon Cooney's diatribe against teachers.
I cannot imagine what her experience has been to engender such hatred and bitterness, but I can vouch for mine.
I have been a teacher and guidance counselor in some of the most difficult schools in New York City for 24 years.


Varieties of Sandpaper
LEAD: CHOOSING sandpaper from among the many varieties stocked by hardware stores often perplexes amateurs, and not surprisingly.


The Case of the Curious 'Corner'
LEAD: The stock ''corner'' flourished in the age when it was every man for himself, and when insider trading was accepted as a normal practice.
Corners grew rarer and less profitable in the 1920's, and were supposed to have disappeared entirely until a series of transactions made it appear that a corner is now in the works.


Perfect Stews to Warm a Winter Day
LEAD: STEWS are the most inviting and practical of winter food.
They can be made in one pot, cooked a day or more in advance and are economical, since cheaper cuts of meat are used.
They are also warming and filling on a cold day.
Here are some hints for making perfect stews: Use cheaper cuts of meat.
They will have less fat and more flavor.


Atwater Rocks With a Rolling Stone


Masked Revels of a Belgian Mardi Gras
LEAD: IN the freezing predawn darkness of Mardi gras in the Belgian town of Binche, a drummer and two costumed men dance along a lamp-lighted alley to round up fellow celebrants for the day's procession.
The Binchois call this precarnival dawn ''the best moment.''


Ryder Golf on USA Cable
LEAD: For the first time, the USA Cable network will televise the Ryder Cup matches back to the United States, Sept. 22-24, according to a source close to television negotiations for the biennial professional golf match between the United States and European teams.


4 Musicians Scheduled For Off Stage Series
LEAD: Keith Jarrett, James Levine, Steve Reich and Wynton Marsalis will take part in the Lincoln Center Off Stage series of snacks and discussion beginning in March.
Each program begins with a wine-and-cheese reception at 5:30 P.M. and is followed by a talk and a question-answer session with the guest.


Rutgers Stops Slide
LEAD: Tom Savage scored 23 of his season-high 33 points in the second half, when Rutgers shot 80 percent from the field, and the Scarlet Knights defeated Duquesne by 102-87 today in an Atlantic 10 Conference game.


O'Rourke Maintains Cuomo's Budget is County's ''Bad News''
LEAD: AN angry County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said last week that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's ''bad news budget'' was a ''blatant attempt by the state'' to maintain a four-year income tax cut, at enormous cost to counties and municipalities.


Nana Smith Wed To James Milliken
LEAD: At the Judson Memorial Church in New York, Nana Graves Hilliard Smith, the daughter of Dr.
Gilbert Graves Smith of Raleigh, N.C., and the late Sherry Griffing Hatch, was married yesterday to James Bennett Milliken, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Milliken of Fremont, Neb.
The Rev.
Howard Moody, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony.


East Timor Bishop Assails Indonesia on Rights
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Bishop of East Timor, saying claims that human rights abuses had ended were ''lying propaganda,'' has accused the Indonesian Government of continuing to practice torture in the region.


England
LEAD: To the Editor: You mentioned (Travel, Nov. 27), ''Christmas is still a bit more secular and lighthearted for the English . . .'' Having spent several Christmases in England, it is fair to say the English Christmas today is one of religious services, family reunions and general merrymaking and carol singing.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''The trade deficit isn't taking on the magnitude of importance it had last year.
The focus is back on interest rates.''
Garrett R. Glass,
vice president for foreign exchange,
First Chicago Corporation.''


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have cabinets of ash wood in my kitchen.
Food and dirt stains have accumulated around the handles and knobs on the cabinet doors.
Is it possible to clean off this dirt without also removing or damaging the finish, or must the cabinets be revarnished?


Don't Implicate All Germans in What a Few Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hospital Leads Patients to Where All Bets Are Off
LEAD: Twenty-eight years after his first two-bit bet at the race track, the double life of lies and deception caught up with an insurance executive whose gambling debts had climbed into the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
The business he had built went bankrupt.
His marriage ended in bitter divorce.
Often, he considered killing himself.


2 San Jose Policemen Slain, as Is Their Killer
LEAD: A homeless man chased down and shot a policeman to death Friday, then mortally wounded another before being killed by other officers in a noontime gun battle on the street.


COASTAL LEGACY
LEAD: To understand the food of the Carolina Low Country, you have to know first a little geography and then a little history.
The Low Country is that narrow stretch of South Carolina coastline that runs from Pawleys Island in the north, southwest into Georgia, and inland 80 miles or so to the Fall Line, as Carolinians call the dramatic divide where the Sand Hills rise abruptly from the coastal plain.


Dr. Basil Harris, 70, Hospital Administrator
LEAD: Dr.
Basil Harris, former director of health services at Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan, died of lung cancer yesterday in Rutland Memorial Hospital in Rutland, Vt.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manchester Center, Vt.


21 Injured in Nebraska Bus
LEAD: A bus carrying a high school basketball team went out of control on a steep road and overturned Friday night, injuring 21 people, the authorities said.
The bus crashed while coming down a hill in a canyon area and came to rest in a ditch about seven miles south of this western Nebraska village.
A 16-year-old boy was hospitalized in serious condition with a head injury.


Estate Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brazilians Tell Of the Forest And the Fears
LEAD: In a stifling hall in the heart of the Amazon, a group of American legislators sat listening to the people of the rain forest -Indians and rubber tappers, who appealed for help from abroad to save their jungle habitat.


Masterpieces
LEAD: To the Editor: When in the past I went to pieces over masterpieces (Travel, Nov. 6) it was called art poisoning or art indigestion.
Now I can use a much more sophisticated name: Stendahl's Syndrome.
Thank you, Louis Inturrisi, for lifting me out of a country hick status.
FRANK MEISSNER Bethesda, Md.


TV Commentators Rely on Inside Information
LEAD: Merlin Olsen isn't saying, but he knows what the first play of Super Bowl XXIII will be.
In fact, he probably knows what the first half-dozen plays run by the Bengals and the 49ers will be.


Slighted by Trend Watchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Families' Apartment-Lease Rights Upheld
LEAD: The right of family members to remain in their rent-stabilized apartments in New York City after the tenant named on the lease has died or moved out was upheld last week by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Splat!
LEAD:  THE BLOB  Starring Shawnee Smith (in photo), Donovan Leitch, Kevin Dillon, Jeffrey DeMunn, Candy Clark, Del Close.
Directed by Chuck Russell. 1988.
RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Entertainment.  95 minutes. $89.95.
Closed captioned.
Rated R.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  CHIEFTAINS IN MONTCLAIR  The Chieftains - the Dublin-based ambassadors of traditional Irish music whose repertory of reels, jigs, airs and ballads are the product of centuries - will appear Thursday evening in Montclair.


The Case in Favor of Proposition 42
LEAD: In attempting to understand the controversy over Proposition 42, it is necessary to look to the reason behind it.
Students who enter college without basic academic skills will not have the opportunity to succeed without assistance in acquiring those skills.


Suzanne Patnode Is Wed To Thomas Edward Dean
LEAD: At the Old West Church in Boston, Suzanne Patnode, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Patnode of South Natick, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas Edward Dean, the son of Mrs.
George A. Dean Jr. of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Mr.
Dean.
The Rev.
Charles McCracken performed the Methodist ceremony.


HOMELESS GAINING WIDER VISIBILITY
LEAD: The visibility of the homeless has risen dramatically over the past three years, with a majority of Americans now saying they see the homeless problem at first hand and not just through the news media, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD:  The Man Who Looked Like Howard Cosell  By John Bartholomew Tucker  St.
Martin's Press. 250 pages. $16.95.
Catchy title, eh?
Immediate name recognition.
Everyone knows Howard Cosell, and everyone seems to have an opinion about him.
The ingenious dustjacket shows a smiling-eyed Mr.


What the World Expects From George Bush: Middle East
LEAD: WITH the Persian Gulf war stilled, the Arab world is looking to the new Administration to focus on an older and far more persistent priority - a settlement of the Palestinian dispute with Israel.


An Ancient Call From a Gifted People
LEAD: The world of the ancient Nazca civilization of South America comes alive in a killer whale rendered in a whiplash of clay and in boldly painted images on bottles and jars, depicting whiskered cougars, fierce-eyed condors and hummingbirds soaring.


DATA UPDATE: January 22, 1989
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Dec.
Nov.
Dec. 87
Rents
143.2
0.0
6.3
Homeowner's costs
149.1
0.1
6.0
Fuel and utilities
93.1
1.2
0.2
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk,
*4*Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union,
*4*Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


Taking No Chances With Romance
LEAD: The embrace that is also a stranglehold, the caress that becomes a blow: Images of this sort have emerged with surprising ferocity in new choreography.
These obsessive love-hate motifs are often criticized when they surface in the ballet world, but they are accepted and admired when explored in modern dance.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bloomingdale  $145,900  10 Sunrise Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 51-year-old ranch; family room, full basement, close to schools and shopping; taxes $2,875.
Butler  $149,900  84 Boonton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, century-old colonial; stone fireplace, patio, enclosed porch; taxes $2,320.


The Legacy of Benjamin Franklin's Colonial Privilege
LEAD: B. FREE FRANKLIN, was how he signed his name on envelopes as the first Postmaster General of the United States.


Michelle Gail Kaplan Weds Dr. Michael Sicklick
LEAD: Michelle Gail Kaplan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Kaplan of Marlboro, N.J., and Dr.
Michael Douglas Sicklick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Sicklick of Hackensack, N.J. were married last evening in Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi David Feldman performed the ceremony at the Short Hills.


A Lesson About Age
LEAD: HAVING broken off a relationship with a woman after 10 years, I find myself where I was 14 years ago when I was separated from my wife and subsequently divorced.
I remember going to my first singles dance and wine-tasting party in 1974 with a male friend also divorced but already into the scene.


U.S. Using Exchanges' Disciplinary Records in Commodity Inquiry
LEAD: Government prosecutors investigating possible fraud on the nation's two largest commodities exchanges are using documents from disciplinary proceedings conducted by the exchanges against traders to help build the criminal inquiry, people involved in the case said today.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  HEAVENLY MUSIC  For some musical tastes, the only thing better than one harp is two harps.
This truism is something that Eva Jaslar and Margery Fitts figured out in 1981, when they formed the New York Harp Duo.


Martha Bumsted Becomes Fiancee Of D. P. O'Hearn
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Joseph Bumsted of Vero Beach, Fla., and Lake Placid, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Martha Cleaver Bumsted, to Dennis Patrick O'Hearn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Charles O'Hearn Jr. of Fripp Island, S.C.
A June wedding is planned.


Drug Wars Don't Pause To Spare the Innocent
LEAD: The killing of innocent bystanders, particularly in the crossfires of this nation's drug wars, has suddenly become a phenomenon that greatly troubles experts on crime.
And the death of three young people in the first three weeks of this year in Brooklyn - including a 12-year-old girl on Friday - has focused attention on the severity of the situation in New York


N.B.A.


Taylor Keeps Title; Bout Halted After 7
LEAD: Meldrick Taylor beat John Meekins to retain his International Boxing Federation junior welterweight title today when Referee Steve Smoger, acting on the advice of the ringside physician, stopped the bout after the seventh round of a scheduled 12-rounder.


Stylishness That Never Goes Out of Style
LEAD: THINGS that are genuine tend to last, to hold up over the years.
Fads come and go, styles change.
But stylishness, if one really has it, and more importantly, a quiet gracefulness, tend to be constants, as impervious to whim as a skillful sailor is to slight variations in the wind.


Queens Democratic Chief Flexes Political Muscle
LEAD: Three years after Donald R. Manes first attempted suicide and threw the Queens Democratic organization into turmoil and investigations that overturned its leadership, a new leader is presiding over a tranquil Queens Democratic Party that is trying to reassert itself politically.


He's a New Man Now, Thanks to the Press
LEAD: AMERICANS depend on newspapers and television for an image of their President.
But their impression of George Bush depends substantially on whether they remember what they read and heard about him before he was elected President or since.


Richard Broomer and Kathleen Kelly, Historic Preservation Consultant, Wed
LEAD: Kathleen Anne Kelly and Richard Jeffrey Broomer were married last evening at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Joseph Kelly, in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mr.
Broomer is a son of Fay Broomer of Ossining, N.Y., and the late Cyril J. Broomer.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors, who presided at the marriage of the bride's parents 27 years ago, and Rabbi Abraham J.


Regents Decide Rural Librarians Won't Need Master's
LEAD: The Board of Regents has declined to approve mandating professional degrees for directors of small libraries.


INTRODUCING 'VIDEOZINES' - THEY ARE WATCHED, NOT READ
LEAD: Because of the stiff competition among traditional print magazines, some publishers are delivering magazines on video cassettes.
Of the handful of magazines now on video in this country, most are about sports.


Divorce, Wall Street Style
LEAD: This is yet another story of Wall Street in the 1980's - of four men in their 30's and 40's who came out of nowhere, secured a grubstake and used it to become big-time deal makers worth hundreds of millions of dollars and who rather than living happily ever after, have been fighting each other ever since.


Paying Cash For School Grades
LEAD: PUBLIC school pupils in Cleveland can get more than a diploma when they graduate.
Each can collect up to $4,800 toward a college education.


Q and A
LEAD:  Eviction-Co-op Rules


The Medium Is the Master: Video Creates Its Own Reality
LEAD: MARRIAGES are not made in heaven any more, they are made on the cutting-room floor.
This may not be news to those who have attended avant-garde wedding ceremonies in recent years, but there may be many like me who have not undergone this latest shock to the battered modern psyche.
My cautionary tale may serve to limit the trauma to the innocent among us.


Carl Furillo, 66, Outfielder for Brooklyn Dodgers
LEAD: Carl Furillo, the right fielder for the Brooklyn Dodgers during their glory years in the late 1940's and 50's, died yesterday at his home at Stony Creek Mills, Pa.
He was 66 years old.


Kaunda Urges Bush to Drop Angola Rebels
LEAD: President Kenneth D. Kaunda has urged the Bush Administration to recognize Angola and end United States support for the rebels led by Jonas Savimbi.


Deena Holliday Weds Stephen Howard Wolff
LEAD: The marriage of Deena Lynn Holliday, the daughter of Mrs.
Walter Cooperstein of Floral Park, Queens, and Morton Holliday of New York, to Stephen Howard Wolff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel E. Wolff of Essex, Conn., took place last evening at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson performed the ceremony.


Should Every Emigre Really Be Equal Under the Law?
LEAD: CONGRESS did away with quotas based on national origin when it overhauled the immigration law in 1965.
And in 1980 it abolished the presumption that anyone fleeing Communism was a refugee.
But experience in the last few months shows that it is much easier to write an evenhanded law than to carry it out in the face of political pressures reflecting special concern for particular groups of emigres.


The Good in Others
LEAD: Pilfering, substance abuse, profound ennui, malingering and uninspiring: Karon Cooney's list of sweeping accusations against her teaching companions is, indeed, frightfully all encompassing.


Familiar Comforts in a Cozy Setting
LEAD: WHAT was formerly the Quarterdeck in Stamford has evolved into a new restaurant called Crispin's.
In a freestanding house on Long Ridge Road, it is about one-quarter mile north of Lord &amp; Taylor's on the right hand side of the road.


Both Coaches Promising a Lively Game
LEAD: Did you hear that?
Promises, promises from Bill Walsh and Sam Wyche, the Super Bowl XXIII coaches, pals offering predictions.
Both guarantee that this will be one of the most exciting Super Bowls ever, a close, high-scoring affair full of twists.


DISGUST WITH TYRANTS: Erik M. Ametistov, Lawyer, Soviet Union
LEAD: Erik M. Ametistov, 54, a Moscow lawyer specializing in international law at a Government research institute, is a member of the Gorbachev generation.
He has recently been working on reforms of the legal code, and has been active in some unofficial political groups .


POSTINGS: Restoration Fund; Friend of Friends
LEAD: The New York Landmarks Conservancy has donated $5,000 from its Sacred Sites and Properties Fund to help restore the front of the Fifteenth Street Monthly Meeting building, a two-story Greek Revival structure more commonly called the Friends Meeting House, on the west side of Stuyvesant Square.
The funds will help defray the cost - estimated at $45,000 - of restoring the wood on the entrance doors and their portico.


Reviews/Dance; A Summation From Womanworks
LEAD: The Womanworks festival, devoted to female modern-dance choreographers, presented the last of its new programs Thursday night with works by Anna Sokolow and Bebe Miller.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have cabinets of ash wood in my kitchen.
Food and dirt stains have accumulated around the handles and knobs on the cabinet doors.
Is it possible to clean off this dirt without also removing or damaging the finish, or must the cabinets be revarnished?


SUPER BOWL XXIII QUARTERBACKS: While Esiason Emerges, Montana Survives; QUARTERBACK FOR 49ERS OVERCOMES INJURIES, DOUBTS
LEAD: To hear Joe Montana's perception of the perceptions of him, he will foolishly drag what is left of his 60-year-old body onto the field at Joe Robbie Stadium late this afternoon as the quarterback of the San Francisco 49ers in his latest attempt to succeed in a line of work designed for younger, sturdier people.


One Giants Fan Isn't Optimistic
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


CHARITY TO FOCUS ON UNDERCLASS
LEAD: The Rockefeller Foundation, known for its role in the fight against disease and hunger around the world, is turning more of its attention and resources to persistently poor Americans who have become the country's underclass.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:  Additional titles of interest:


The Supermarket Amaryllis
LEAD: For millions of Americans, today is the day the San Francisco 49ers and the Cincinnati Bengals meet in the Superbowl.
For some of them it is also the day that their supermarket amaryllis should bloom.
Finally.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; Is the Big East The Best Conference?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


AT REST IN GOOD COMPANY
LEAD: Cemeteries are, perhaps paradoxically, living catalogues of history, and when it comes to name-dropping there are few that can match Woodlawn Cemetery's roster of illustrious interments.
From the first burial there in 1865, Woodlawn's 400 splendidly landscaped acres have grown increasingly crowded; today there are almost 300,000 occupants.


'PLAY THE MAN AND NOT THE BOARD'
LEAD:  HENCE  By Brad Leithauser.  320 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: BREATHES there anyone who doesn't get a kick out of saving money, who doesn't love a bargain, who wouldn't take advantage of a discount that requires no coupon, no stamp and no effort?
Probably not - depending. . . .


MAKEUP MOVES
LEAD: Remember the advertisement for Popeil's Veg-O-Matic?
It diced, it sliced, it shredded, it chopped.
That marketing spirit is at work for makeup today.
It isn't enough for makeup to provide color; now, it has to deliver treatment benefits as well.


STREETSCAPES: Readers' Questions; Three Rats, and a Cocktail Lounge Atop a Bridge
LEAD: This is another in a series of columns answering questions about New York's changing streetscapes.


Transactions
LEAD:  FRIDAY
Baseball


Prospects; The Trade Gap Widens
LEAD: The trade figures for November showed a sharp and unexpected widening of the trade deficit to $12.5 billion, from $10.3 billion in October.
The cause of the increase was a surge in imports and a decrease in exports.
The question for the analysts is whether the growth in the deficit is an aberration or a trend.


Owners Contend Rozelle Is Slowing
LEAD: As the Super Bowl today closes another National Football League season, Pete Rozelle ends his 29th year as commissioner, a period in which the league has grown from a mom-and-pop operation of a dozen teams to a cultural institution of 28 franchises worth as much as $80 million each.


TV VIEW
LEAD: If something appalling goes on long enough, people become inured to it.
Witness the state of American television, where, due to the peculiar exigencies of commercial network economics, we do not even blink when a scene of the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. being assassinated is followed by a commercial for an underarm deodorant.


Transforming Downtown Brooklyn
LEAD: GEORGE BUGLIARELLO, the president of Polytechnic University in downtown Brooklyn, seems happy now to tell the story of being offered his job in 1973 and turning it down at first, not because of the school's faculty, finances or academic standing, but because of the urban blight surrounding its campus.


Pollution War: The Penalties Are Growing
LEAD: A CRACKDOWN on polluters netted the state more than $1 million in fines last year, more than twice as much as in 1987, Environmental Protection Department officials said.


Barnes Sets Mark In Indoor Shot-Put
LEAD: Randy Barnes may quickly outgrow the indoor shot-put.
Barnes's final attempt nearly hit the barrier at the back of the shot-put sector on the floor of the Sports Arena Friday night at the Sunskist Invitational.


Reviews/Music; Composer Adds Links to Neo-Classic Chain
LEAD: Three long pieces in short sections made up the concert of Lawrence Axelrod's compositions Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
The young composer has at least one enviable ability: It is not easy, in a time when convention no longer provides formal structures, to write persuasive and coherent half-hour spans.


Musical: Hollywood In the 30's
LEAD: FROM a work in progress, ''Tales of Tinseltown'' has devolved into a musical in regress.


17 Are Reported Hurt as Racists March in Atlanta
LEAD: At least 17 people were reported injured and 42 were arrested today as several hundred people broke through police barricades in an attempt to attack seven avowed racists parading in downtown Atlanta.


Dreams - And Realities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Downwardly Mobile
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perfect Stews to Warm a Winter Day
LEAD: STEWS are the most inviting and practical of winter food.
They can be made in one pot, cooked a day or more in advance and are economical, since cheaper cuts of meat are used.
They are also warming and filling on a cold day.
Here are some hints for making perfect stews: Use cheaper cuts of meat.
They will have less fat and more flavor.


Coda for Nick's
LEAD: To the Editor:


That's Entertainment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Victoria A. Chave Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Battell Chapel at Yale University in New Haven, Victoria Anne Chave, the daughter of Mrs.
Charles T. Chave of Madison, Conn., and the late Mr.
Chave, was married yesterday to Peter Wickham Clement, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold T. Clement of Buffalo.
The Rev.
John G. Macort Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


A Turn-of-the-Century Tale Resonates Through a Lifetime
LEAD: MY father-in-law died recently at the age of 96, and of all the memories I have of him, his telling of one small happening in his early years, which he kept in his memory for all of his life, has stayed with me for all of mine.
Perhaps that is because in the telling he revealed some part of himself that was not apparent, that told me something about the little boy who later became the ''Pater Familias'' whom I so loved and admired.


Stacey Cozzens Is Wed To Brian Boyle on L.I.
LEAD: Stacey Lynn Cozzens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart G. Cozzens of Manhasset, L.I., and Brian Owen Boyle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Boyle of Manhasset, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I.
Canon Rodney Michel performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


The Videodisk Comeback
LEAD: Staging a comeback - even a modest one - often suggests vindication and moral triumph.
There is a sense of an earlier injustice being righted, of wrongly withheld recognition bestowed at last, and true deserts finally enjoyed.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Jan. 7  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City  $193,000  200 Rector Place  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 616-sq.-ft. condo in a year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, pool and health club; common charge $359, taxes $179 (Broker: D.J. Knight)  Gracie Square


Aids Victims Suffer Enough Without Hostility
LEAD: AIDS has come to Long Island.
It's been here since nearly the beginning, of course, but much like the early turn of autumn leaves, few took notice.
Indeed, the first Long Islanders who developed the disease had the good taste to be diagnosed in the pernicious anonymity of the Big City, only to return home for the family support most never received.


POP VIEW
LEAD: On Jan. 12, The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences announced the nominations for this year's Grammy Awards, to be presented on Feb. 22 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles.
In the three decades since Domenico Modugno's ''Nel Blu Dipinto Di Blu (Volare)'' was voted both record and song of the year and Henry Mancini's ''Music From Peter Gunn'' was chosen best album, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences has grown from a small group of musicians and executives centered in Los Angeles and New York into a 6,000-member organization with chapters in seven cities.


RICO Redux
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Irish-Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Martha C. Little To Wed in May
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
David Little of Charlottesville, Va., have made known the engagement of their daughter Martha Cortelyou Little to Raoul Louis Rosenberg, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Roy A. Rosenberg of New York.
The wedding is planned for May.
Miss Little, a cum laude graduate of Mount Holyoke College, was until recently the director of public affairs at the Committee for National Security in Washington.


Madelon Rosen to Wed Lawrence M. Solomon
LEAD: Madelon Joyce Rosen and Lawrence Michael Solomon plan to be married in April.
The future bride, a senior account executive and theatrical publicity agent with the public relations company of Max Eisen in New York, is the daughter of Helen Beck Rosen of the Bronx, and the late Samuel Rosen.
Her fiance, the director of marketing and communications for MedComp Technologies in Armonk, N.Y., is a son of Mr.


Police Provide Details on Shooting of Officers, but Questions Linger
LEAD: The few minutes it took to make a telephone call about a search warrant was all the time it took for two New York City police officers to be shot Friday morning as they tried to arrest a murder suspect.


Bush Seen as Opposing Iran Arms
LEAD: At two White House meetings on the sale of American arms to Iran, in December 1985 and May 1986, George Bush supported Robert C. McFarlane's advice to Ronald Reagan that the operation should not proceed, according to a published interview with Mr.
McFarlane.


CRIME
LEAD: If the Italy of Magdalen Nabb's five earlier mysteries remains an unknown country, THE MARSHAL AND THE MADWOMAN (Scribners, $16.95) should correct that loss.
Although no less pristine in style than its series predecessors - provocative procedural cases solved, and occasionally forgiven, by the paternalistic Marshal Salvatore Guarnaccia of the Florence Carabinieri - the


Museum Theft: An Artist's Loss
LEAD: A story ''Museums Seek to Halt Thefts,'' Jan. 1 addressed a problem that I as a creative artist was confronted with in June: the theft of a piece of my artwork from a prestigious gallery on Long Island.


CLEESE FOR CHRISTMAS
LEAD: Thank you for the Christmas present - Bill Bryson's article on John Cleese (''Cleese Up Close,'' Dec. 25).


Florida Resort Offers a Slice Of Fantasy
LEAD: AT a small sign posted on a fence halfway between Miami and Miami Beach we turned off MacArthur Causeway and drove to the water's edge where a private ferry was waiting.
The ferry was called the Eagle. (Two others are available at all times, the Flamingo, and the Pelican.) A security guard in full regalia stopped us and requested identification.


THE INDIAN MUSEUM'S LAST STAND
LEAD: The founder of the Museum of the American Indian, George Heye, started the collection literally by taking the shirt off the back of a Native American.
I say, give every object in the museum back to its rightful owners, the Native Americans themselves.
Let them decide what they want to share and what they need for the spiritual nourishment of their nations.


Ban on Bow Hunting Is Without Logic
LEAD: I'd like to rebut Edwin Ritchie's letter of Jan. 8 in which he calls for a ban on bow hunting.
Mr.
Ritchie's request carries no supporting logic.
Instead I see a bitter diatribe of personal emotions laced together with his own opinions of what constitutes psychiatric behavior.


Varieties of Sandpaper
LEAD: CHOOSING sandpaper from among the many varieties stocked by hardware stores often perplexes amateurs, and not surprisingly.


A CONTESTED ELECTION: Dr. Anatoly N. Solovyev, Doctor, Soviet Union
LEAD: Anatoly N. Solovyev, 45, is chief doctor at a big hospital in the center of Moscow.
Neither his wife, who is also a doctor, nor his son, who is studying to be a doctor, is a party member.
He joined the party in 1970 and recently defeated two other candidates in an election for the Moscow City Council.


People's Choice: 49ers
LEAD: Just as they were in 1982, when they defeated the Cincinnati Bengals, 26-21, the San Francisco 49ers are the team the American public wants to see win the Super Bowl.


No Might in Sight
LEAD: To the Editor:


Besieged San Salvador Feels Realities of War
LEAD: After eight years, the civil war has returned to the capital and this seeming oasis is beginning to feel like a city under siege.


Washington Talk: Briefing; I'll See You Again
LEAD: True to his word, Charles Z. Wick, the departing director of the United States Information Agency, is moving back to California, where he will be close to his friend, former President Ronald Reagan.
But Mr.
Wick is not turning his back on the capital completely.
Last week Mr.
Reagan appointed him to the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts's board.The board meets three or four times a year.


'He Was Typical Joe Cool'
LEAD: FOR nearly a quarter of a century, the Super Bowl had been searching for this scenario: pro football's best quarterback taking pro football's best team the length of the field for the winning touchdown in the final minutes.
And now, at last, Joe Montana has played the part.


Stop Blaming the Victims in Campus Rape
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Tell Pilgrims From the Puritans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lilco Talks Adjourn With Little Progress Reported on Accord
LEAD: After a daylong meeting in Federal court in Brooklyn, the mediator in talks to settle a racketeering suit against the Long Island Lighting Company yesterday adjourned discussions without moving much closer to a final accord, participants in the talks said.


House Beautiful
LEAD: Laura Riordan has been named publisher of House Beautiful.
She succeeds Marcia Miller, who resigned from the Hearst magazine in November over policy differences.
For the last six years, Ms.
Riordan has run her own company, Marketing Concepts, where her clients included Conde Nast's Vogue and Vanity Fair.


Errors Cost Becker Trip to Quarterfinal
LEAD: Jonas Svensson upset error-prone Boris Becker, 7-6, 6-4, 6-3, today to advance to the quarterfinal round of the Australian Open.


Business and the Law; Shift in Applying Antitrust Rules
LEAD: A RECENT decision by a Federal appeals court about a proposed merger of the two biggest herbal tea companies is being seen as a signal by antitrust lawyers that times could be changing.


Builders Are Warned of Rising Loan Rates
LEAD: With nearly a third of the nation's home mortgage debt now tied to short-term interest rates, the economy is likely to be jolted by cutbacks in consumer spending next year if those rates continue to rise as expected.


U.S. Reported to Be Sending Agents to Peru in Drug Fight
LEAD: The Drug Enforcement Administration will send more than two dozen agents to Peru to augment a campaign against drug traffickers in an area of the country that has been the scene of civil unrest, according to a published report.


Markets Chief Is Named In Freddie Mac Revamping
LEAD: Mark J. Latimer has been named to head a new capital markets group as a vice president of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, the Government-chartered organization known as Freddie Mac that provides a flow of funds to mortgage lenders.


Aiming for Average
LEAD: Bowling one's average right on the nose may not be as difficult as rolling a perfect game, but it's probably a close second.
Yet, John Frampton of Lake Elsinore, Calif., did it three times in a row (in his case a 165) to qualify for the final in a somewhat unusual amateur bowling competition in Las


Reviews/Dance; From Shanghai, Opera And Mirth of Qi Shufang
LEAD: A mixture of song, dance, declamation and acrobatics, the traditional Chinese theatrical form known as Beijing opera is not confined to one Chinese city.
Wherever it may thrive, it can offer great entertainment.
That was evident Saturday night when the Qi Shufang Beijing Opera Troupe of Shanghai came to Symphony


KLA Instruments Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLA Instruments Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
41,453,000
25,505,000
Net inc
2,816,000
1,928,000
Share earns
.16
.11
6mo sales
80,238,000
48,956,000
Net inc
5,651,000
3,603,000
Share earns
.32
.20


Bills and Two-Year Notes to Be Auctioned
LEAD: Treasury financings this week begin with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Wednesday, the Treasury plans to auction a new two-year note.


Transit Account Seen For Ephron, Raboy
LEAD: After a month-long review, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has reportedly called on Ephron, Raboy &amp; Tsao Advertising to handle its advertising.
The budget is expected to be in the $5 million range.


IPCO Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IPCO Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
50,356,000
51,597,000
Net loss
1,549,000
b88,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,021,541
5,192,420
6mo sales
102,185,000
104,915,000
Net loss
2,651,000
b1,035,000
Share earns
-
.20
Shares outst
5,014,242
5,282,736


Book Theft Traced to Woman
LEAD: Thirty boxes of stolen books that turned up on a library doorstep Jan. 3 have been traced to a woman who died last year.
The boxes returned to the Thornhill Branch County Library yielded 4,369 books and magazines worth about $28,000, a library spokeswoman, Jo Ann Rogers, said Friday.
The mystery was solved when a lawyer for the woman's estate called and asked the library to pick up the remaining books, Ms.


Compromising on Solid Waste
LEAD: In his State of the State Message, Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York emphasized the urgency of reducing waste volume and recycling re-usable components, but added pointedly that incineration and landfill would also be necessary ''for the foreseeable future.'' Then he argued that decisions on solid waste facilities were best made by local governments.


Plessey Talks On Deal Seen
LEAD: Plessey P.L.C., facing a hostile British-German takeover bid, is close to signing a technology exchange deal in anti-submarine warfare with Thomson-CSF, The Financial Times said on Saturday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are answering, we are stretching out our hand, because there is an outstretched hand on the other side, too.''  - Lech Walesa.  [ A1:6. ]


Fairchild Takeover Defense
LEAD: The board of Fairchild Industries has adopted a shareholder rights plan intended to guard against various takeover tactics, the aerospace company announced Saturday.


Rates Expected to Remain Steady
LEAD: Barring sudden weakness in the dollar, credit market analysts predicted that interest rates should remain in a fairly narrow range for the next week or so.
The next real test, they believe, will not come until mid-February, when the Treasury will hold its quarterly refunding auctions.


First Capitol Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Capitol Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,528,000
3,393,000
6mo net loss
b2,350,000
c5,023,000
b-Included a tax benefit of $600,000 from an accounting change.
c-Included a loss of $1,468,000 on the extinguishment of debt.


Review/Music; A Flute and Harp Recital
LEAD: Sharon Levin, a flutist, and Karen Stern, a harpist, have been performing together as the Levin-Stern Duo since 1984, when they were both students at the Manhattan School of Music.
On Saturday afternoon, they made their New York debut at Weill Recital Hall, with a program that showed a temperamental affinity for the French repertory, if not quite the suppleness of sound that


New Turn In French Insider Case
LEAD: A Paris newspaper reported today that a report was sent to President Francois Mitterrand suggesting that one of his closest friends, Roger-Patrice Pelat, a businessman, bought 50,000 shares of Triangle Industries' stock just before Pechiney S.A. of France announced plans to acquire Triangle.


Bench Helps Knicks Defeat Trail Blazers
LEAD: The Knicks finally got their first victory of this road trip, and it was an improbable one at that.


Reviews/Music; The Romberg Habit
LEAD: Sigmund Romberg is less an acquired taste then an old habit hard to break.
The sentiments are paper-thin, the characters bogus, the timeliness long since expired; but Romberg offers at least fractional redemption with melodic turns that are often quite beautiful.
Almost as an act of archeology, the Light Opera of Manhattan is presenting his ''Student Prince'' at Playhouse 91 through Feb.


Aurora Environmental Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aurora Environmental Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,262,354
1,032,290
Net inc
206,220
81,651
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
5,794,000
5,632,000
9mo rev
5,630,554
2,674,105
Net inc
177,892
347,826
Share earns
.03
.06
Shares outst
5,925,000
5,644,000


Calcavecchia's 64 Seals Easy Victory
LEAD: Mark Calcavecchia, one of the most aggressive and longest hitters on the PGA Tour, never let up after the first nine holes of Saturday's third round of the 49th Phoenix Open, and ran away today with a seven-shot victory.


Review/Music; A Male Gospel Sextet
LEAD: Just when it seemed that the stylistic possibilities of group harmony singing had been carried into the furthest nooks and crannies of pop and jazz by groups like Manhattan Transfer and Jon Hendricks's family ensembles, along comes Take 6.


Designatronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designatronics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,922,000
6,080,000
Net inc
61,000
322,000
Share earns
.02
.11
Shares outst
2,921,000
2,977,000
Share earnings are adjusted for retroactive effect of 5 percent common stock dividends in September 1988 and September 1987.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Pat Sajak's Ratings


Consultant to Head Graphic Scanning
LEAD: The Graphic Scanning Corporation of Englewood, N.J., has picked an outside management consulting expert, Robert J. Cymbala, to fill its recently vacated chief executive post and also to assume the position of president.
The appointments are effective Feb. 6.
Mr.
Cymbala, who is 51 years old, is a partner in the consulting firm of Booz Allen &amp;


Adventure Time on the Rocks
LEAD: TO imagine what it is like to be an ice climber, think of yourself perched along the face of a frozen waterfall.
Picture the waterfall as a cascade of glass chandeliers overhanging a rock wall.
You are picking your way up slowly.
In your hand is an ice hammer, and a piton or ice screw for securing a belay rope to the top.


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,667,000
33,981,000
Net inc
237,000
3,094,000
Share earns
.08
.50


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Horse Racing  Cliffie Triumphs: Cliffie, ridden by Richard Migliore, won by a head in the $89,100 Broadway Handicap for New York State-bred fillies and mares 3 years old and up yesterday at Aqueduct.
Beru finished fast but had to settle for second place in the field of 10, 1 1/2 lengths ahead of Joe's Tammie.


Linda Edgerly Is Married
LEAD: Linda Edgerly, the daughter of Ruth H. Edgerly of Layton, N.J., and the late O. Chester Edgerly, and Loyd C. Moore, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Moore of Bellevue, Wash., were married yesterday at Evermay-on-the-Delaware, an inn in Erwinna, Pa.
The Rev.
Robb Shoaf, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony.


Letter: On U.S. Fiscal Policy; Deficit Levers Work World Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gandhi Party Seems Headed For Big Defeat in State Vote
LEAD: The party of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi appeared tonight to have been defeated decisively in a legislative election in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu.


How to Tell Pilgrims From the Puritans
LEAD: To the Editor:


As Bush Rides In, Is Capital Big Enough for Texans?
LEAD: Last time, it was the Californians; the time before that, it was the Georgians.
Now, with the advent of the Bush Administration, it is the Texans' turn to shine, which they did Saturday night at gala events all over the capital.


Big Bengal Play Not Big Enough
LEAD: On the second play of the fourth quarter of Super Bowl XXIII, the San Francisco 49ers had a first down on the Cincinnati Bengals' 14-yard line.
The official scoring summary described the play this way: ''Montana pass for Taylor in end zone broken up by Billups.''


Private Agency Facing Shortfall In Homeless Aid
LEAD: Because of a cut in Federal aid and a dropoff in private contributions, the largest private network for the homeless in New York City is struggling to keep its shelters and soup kitchens open.


A Slow but Sure Way to Get in Shape
LEAD: SO you are sedentary and the doctor has scared you with talk of heart disease and a lecture about your weight.
Or a significant other has delivered an ultimatum.
Or you have caught a glimpse of yourself in the bathroom mirror and been unhappy with what you saw.
It's time to get fit.
But how do you begin?


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; Bankruptcy of the Doctrinaire: Martin Jacques, Editor, Britain
LEAD: Martin Jacques's journal, Marxism Today, is a lively forum for criticism and discussion of Marxism and its relevance to British society.
It has an important influence on the British Labor Party, which is floundering after losing three general elections to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and the Conservatives.


Rice's Subtle Touch Shows
LEAD: After her son had accepted a most valuable player trophy he said he did not deserve, Jerry Rice's mother said she had been worried.


Across a Divided Europe, An Ideology Under Siege
LEAD: For a diminishing band of Communist believers in Europe, Mikhail S. Gorbachev - a riveting prophet, a Russian Jeremiah - holds out the promise of revitalizing a decaying system of belief.
But the scattered Communist faithful no longer share a single set of beliefs.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; Transormation of the Classes: Daniele Billitteri, Editor, Italy
LEAD: An editor at Giornale di Sicilia, Sicily's largest newspaper, Daniele Billitteri, 36, joined the Communist Youth Federation in 1966 but left the party in 1976 after it sought an alliance with the Christian Democrats.
Then, he said, ''It did not make sense to maintain a militant commitment to the party under those circumstances.


Wilson Suspended For Substance Use
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, a Cincinnati Bengal running back with a history of drug problems and two prior suspensions from the National Football League, was suspended again today for substance abuse.
His coach, Sam Wyche, said after the Super Bowl that Wilson's career was over.


Report Details Cheaper Source For Bomb Fuel
LEAD: The chronic difficulties in producing a critical gas for the nation's nuclear weapons could be solved for about a third the cost of the proposal being backed by the Energy Department, according to an executive report prepared for the department.


Britain's Inflation Rises
LEAD: Britain's annual inflation rate rose to 6.8 percent in December, from 6.4 percent in November, the Government said Friday.
The Department of Employment said its retail price index was up three-tenths of 1 percent in December from the previous month.
Market expectations had been for an annual rate of 6.7 percent to 7 percent and a monthly rate of three-tenths of 1 percent to one-half of 1 percent.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about bank earnings described Citicorp inaccurately.
Citicorp, the parent company of Citibank,is the largest banking company in the United States, not the largest bank.


Motorola, LSI Post Profits
LEAD: Belying reports of an electronics industry slowdown, Motorola Inc. reported on Friday record results for the fourth quarter and the year that ended on Dec. 31.
The LSI Logic Corporation, meanwhile, reported lower earnings for the quarter but higher profits for the year.


Reviews/Music; Kremer and Friends
LEAD: The violinist Gidon Kremer has built a bankable reputation on an ability to deliver performances that lead listeners off the beaten path, whether by including unusual cadenzas in war-horse concertos, or by programming new and provocative works.
He took the second approach on Saturday evening at Carnegie Hall, when he presided over a chamber-music concert with Annette Bik, a violinist; Tabea Zimmermann, a violist; Thomas Demenga, a cellist, and Alois Posch, a bassist.


Digilog Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digilog Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,244,050
3,582,054
Net inc
14,115
152,918
Share earns
.01
.06


Some Promising Signs For Turner's Empire
LEAD: Ted Turner has always had a knack for making headlines, but for the past three years most of the news has been bad.
The trouble began with his $1.5 billion purchase of the MGM/UA Entertainment Company in 1986, which submerged his relatively small company in what threatened to be overwhelming debt.


Kaydon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,127,000
31,078,000
Net inc
5,509,000
4,501,000
Share earns
.64
.53
Yr sales
135,029,000
133,473,000
Net inc
20,843,000
17,119,000
Share earns
2.43
2.00


Critic's Notebook; Dance Versatility: Is It Virtue or Vice?
LEAD: Versatility is often applauded in the arts, and many theatrical troupes are celebrated for their eclectic repertories.
Yet a strange thing has happened in ballet.
Versatility is now slightly suspect in some quarters.


Don't Let Salvador Become Lebanon
LEAD: Is the Bush Administration kidding itself, or the American people, about El Salvador?
James Baker, at his confirmation hearings, said that ''despite guerrilla violence the democratic political process has been established in El Salvador.'' But in recent weeks American diplomats and knowledgeable Salvadorans have been telling a very different story.


Peru Optimistic After Big Oil Find
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation has made a major oil discovery estimated at 600 million barrels that should convert Peru into a net exporter and guarantee supplies for 15 years, President Alan Garcia said.


Reviews/Dance; Learning To Hate Oneself
LEAD: David Rousseve has created a bold piece in ''Pull Your Head to the Moon. . . .
Tales of Creole Women,'' presented on Friday evening at Performance Space 122.
The second section in a three-part work, it makes use of text, movement and popular, operatic and religious music sung by black female performers to tell a story based on the experiences of two old residents of a small town in Louisiana, which was called


Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,746,216
23,497,223
Net inc
1,260,962
941,225
Share earns
.31
.23
6mo sales
53,158,273
48,286,761
Net inc
2,263,777
3,263,560
Share earns
.55
.64


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


A Big Store Gets a Big Ad Campaign
LEAD: THROUGHOUT much of the expansion splurge of the 1980's, retailers have agonized over how to market yet another new store.
The similarity in the looks and concepts of many new stores has presented the biggest marketing hurdle.


Review/Music; For Gunter Wand, an American Debut at Age 77
LEAD: A conductor of rare eloquence and dignity made his American debut here last week at the age of 77.
All of musical Chicago was talking about Gunter Wand after he led the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in two familiar symphonies Thursday night; the reports were sufficiently glowing to convince a visitor who came Friday for ''Aida'' at the Lyric Opera that it would be wiser to head for Orchestra Hall and Mr.


President Is Removed at Boston Company
LEAD: The Boston Company announced Friday that it had removed its president, James N. von Germeten, after having concluded that its after-tax earnings for the first three quarters of 1988 were overstated by $30 million - more than twice as much as a preliminary estimate.


Polish Union Issues a Text Of Its Reply
LEAD: Following is the text, as translated by The Associated Press, of a statement released today by Solidarity's leadership in response to a Communist Party offer to legalize the banned trade union federation:  Point 1


Dreams and Despair Collide As Miami Searches for Itself
LEAD: Carl (Moon) Mullins, a black man who came here 40 years ago from rural Georgia, found success and owns a string of shops.
But he said he also found blacks being treated as second-class citizens, and that he discourages his 12 children from building their lives in Miami. ''I just don't see a future for them here, not here,'' he said.


Soviet General Talks of Failure in Afghanistan
LEAD: A Soviet military commander acknowledged today that his country's forces are leaving Afghanistan with something of a sense of failure.
He also denied that the Soviets have resumed their pullout but said they still plan to be out of the country by Feb. 15.


For Publishing Giant, 55 Million Betty Crocker Cookbooks Is Just a Start
LEAD: For Prentice Hall, which next year will become the sole publisher of the Betty Crocker cookbooks, the challenge is a large one: to make a line that is already successful even more popular, at a time when there is a glut of cookbooks on the shelves.


Minneapolis Journal; Ah, for a Bone-Chilling, Icy Winter
LEAD: William C. Rogers has an idea whose time has come.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Sands Hotel &amp; Casino, San Juan, Puerto Rico, to Kaufman &amp; Maraffi Advertising, with a $1 million budget.


A Super Party Under The Sky
LEAD: Thousands of 49er fans staged a noisy celebration this evening moments after San Francisco's Super Bowl victory.


L.I. Medical Center Rebounding After Slip in Patient Care
LEAD: Six months ago public confidence in the Nassau County Medical Center, the largest hospital on Long Island, was badly shaken.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Two for the Road
LEAD: Robert A. Farmer, a key figure in the campaign of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, is planning to divide his time between his home in Boston and his new one in Washington.


Wyche Offers No Apologies for Bengals
LEAD: A defiant Sam Wyche, who expected to be dismissed after the Cincinnati Bengals' 4-11 season in 1987, made no apologies to or for his team after it lost Super Bowl XXIII today.


U.S. Foreign Aid Program Hasn't Paid for Abortions Since 1974
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; New Judgements on Stalin: Enrique Lister, Retired general, Spain
LEAD: A major figure in the Spanish Communist Party since before the Civil War, Enrique Lister, 81, survived two world wars and 40 years of Francoism.
A deeply committed party man, he is a member of the party's Central Committee and part of the faction of Spanish Communism that defeated and survived Santiago Carrillo, who pursued


INSIDE
LEAD:  All-Star Ballot in Moscow  Andrei Sakharov, Boris Yeltsin and a Politburo member are seeking the same congressional seat.
Page A3.
Commodity Complaints  An agricultural company's suspicions apparently started the fraud inquiry in Chicago.
Page D1.
Mixing In the Homeless  A day-care program in Manhattan brings children from affluent and homeless families together.Page B1.


POLISH UNION SAYS YES TO DISCUSSING ITS LEGAL STATUS
LEAD: Solidarity, banned since 1982, accepted a Government offer today to discuss the restoration of its legal status as a union.


Brazil Trade Surplus Up
LEAD: Brazil posted a record $19.09 billion trade surplus in 1988 amid large export drives by steel and soybean producers, according to official figures released Thursday.
The country's exports rose 22 percent, to $33.78 billion, while imports dipped 2 percent, to $14.70 billion, from 1987 levels.


Cutting Mileage Will Keep You Fit
LEAD: IF you've been running for five years or more, can't shake the injury syndrome, feel mentally stale or find your racing times at a plateau, the answer to your problems may be a revolutionary training system that is gaining acceptance among competitive runners across the country.
Cut your running to a mere 20 miles a week.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A New Outspokenness: Matjaz Kmecl, Politician, Yugoslavia
LEAD: Matjaz Kmecl, 54, a former professor of literature, switched careers to become the chief of culture and education for the Slovenian Communist Party, and he rose to the presidency of the Yugoslav republic.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A3-11


Reagans Settle In at 668 Saint Cloud
LEAD: It was an ordinary Sunday in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles, warm and slow and pleasant.
Jeff Hyland, a real estate broker, sat by his pool reading the paper and then went for a drive in his black Mercedes with his fiancee, Lori Wynn-Ferber, and her poodle, Jasmine.
Sandy and Teryn Wayne watched the Super Bowl with friends.


How to Tell Pilgrims From the Puritans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plane That Lost Engine Needed Safety Changes
LEAD: A Piedmont Airlines jet whose engine fell off just after takeoff had not yet undergone safety modifications ordered by the Federal Aviation Administration, a Federal official said Saturday.


The Sun Shines On Miami and Game
LEAD: POOR Miami finally caught a break.


Bush Plans Tough Ethics Message In First Working Day as President
LEAD: In his first week in office, President Bush plans to focus on the importance of ethics for Government officials, begin talks with Congressional leaders on the budget deficit and speak to allied leaders, Administration officials said today.


Ex-Klan Chief Places First in Louisiana Primary
LEAD: David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, placed first Saturday in a special primary election to fill a vacancy in the Louisiana House of Representatives.
He will compete in a runoff election Feb. 18 against a mainstream Republican, John Treen.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some editions of Business Day on Wednesday about Apple Computer Inc.'s earnings misidentified the microprocessor used in the Macintosh SE computer.
It is the Motorola 68000; the 68020 is used in the Macintosh II.


Market Place; New Acceptance For Junk Bonds
LEAD: THE ''junk bond'' business is booming, with prices high and worries low.
And, in what may be the ultimate in acceptance of junk bonds, a bond-rating agency has found a way to conclude that a mutual fund invested only in junk bonds can itself be rated investment grade.


Df Southeastern reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Df Southeastern (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,398,000
2,049,000
Share earns
.73
-
Yr net inc
9,714,000
5,905,000
The company said share earnings for the latest year, year-ago quarter and prior year are not applicable; the company went public Sept.


Metro Matters; Exploring Laws and the Legacy Of the Goetz Case
LEAD: The trial of Bernhard H. Goetz is history, but what has society learned from his crime of self-defense?


Christopher D. Landsberg Marries Debra W. Nahum
LEAD: Debra Wendy Nahum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Nahum of Paramus, N.J., and Christopher David Landsberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
John Landsberg of Bronxville, N.Y., were married yesterday in Livingston, N.J.
Mayor Samuel A. Spina of West Orange, N.J., officiated at the Livingston Country Club.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Trade Move Due
LEAD: The State Department's Bureau of European and Canadian Affairs is pressing for a major relaxation of East-West trade controls if the Soviets complete their withdrawal from Afghanistan by Feb. 15 as scheduled under the Geneva accords.


Dataproducts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataproducts Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 24
1988
1987
Revenue
94,480,000
91,171,000
Net inc
1,627,000
1,083,000
Share earns
.08
.05
9mo rev
268,111,000
249,233,000
Net inc
3,580,000
b5,268,000
Share earns
.18
-


No Headline
LEAD: Dr.
Kathryn Hinnant, the Bellevue pathologist, and Steven Smith, the man charged with her murder and rape, were both in Columbia, S.C., last April.
It was only coincidence.
They did not meet, nor is there any sign that they were ever aware of each other until their lives converged in violence two weeks ago.


Rover Group Chairman Taking Cadbury Post
LEAD: After 14 years as chairman of Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., Sir Adrian Cadbury is stepping down.
Sir Adrian, who will be 60 in April, the normal retirement age for directors, will formally take his leave after the annual meeting in May.
He will be succeeded by Sir Graham Day, chairman of Rover Group P.L.C.


For Scribners, Bookstore Closing Is Put Off but Not for Long
LEAD: Quietly, slowly, almost graciously, the Scribner Book Store in mid-Manhattan approached the twilight of business yesterday, with the question still unanswered as to what comes next for the glass-fronted, Beaux-Arts jewel case on Fifth Avenue.


Russo Won't Join Race For Governor in Jersey
LEAD: John F. Russo, president of the New Jersey Senate, has announced his withdrawal from the Democratic primary race for governor, strengthening the lead of State Representative James J. Florio, the front-runner in the June primary.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Medical International Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., a hospital owner and operator, elected Richard A. Gilleland, the company's new chief executive, to the additional post of chairman, succeeding Royce Diener.


Birtcher Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birtcher Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,594,700
1,532,500
Net inc
236,300
126,800
Share earns
.05
.03
6mo rev
3,183,100
2,954,100
Net inc
456,900
201,900
Share earns
.10
.05


Where G.I.'s Died, a Beach Is Brimming With Life
LEAD: Nero, who was born here and might be considered somewhat biased, liked this town so much that he would come back in the summer, living in a villa that he had built on a sheer cliff overlooking the Tyrrhenian Sea.
Caligula was also born here.
There are people who wonder how it is that Antium, as it used to be called, managed to produce two Roman emperors of such enduring infamy.


Rocky Mountain Medical Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Medical Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
654,399
583,088
Net loss
470,130
333,353
Shares outst
21,577,106
17,816,934
Revenue represented net revenue.


Executive Shift At Leo Burnett
LEAD: Leo Burnett International, Chicago, has named 49-year-old Sergio Suarez vice chairman.
Mr.
Suarez will be relocating from Chicago to the agency's Miami headquarters.
Replacing him as director of


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  MARKETS  The F.B.I. inquiry into commodity trading reportedly began after a large agricultural company, Archer-Daniels-Midland, complained of possible cheating.
Prosecutors are said to be using documents from the Chicago exchanges' disciplinary proceedings to help build their cases.  [ D1. ]  The U.S.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A Persistent Idealism: Ivan T. Berend, Economist, Hungary
LEAD: A respected intellectual, Ivan T. Berend, 58, is an economic theorist and a member of the Central Committee of Hungary's Communist Party.
He is a former rector of Karl Marx University in Budapest and president of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
He has traveled widely in the West and studied at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington.


Drought in Midwest Persists, Imperiling Crucial Wheat Crop
LEAD: The drought of 1988 has now reached into 1989.


Held in $4.5 Million Holdup, 2 Cadets Resign From V.M.I.
LEAD: Two Virginia Military Institute cadets charged with robbing an armored car in New Jersey, resigned from the school Saturday.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; Contempt for American Values: Jean-Pierre Quilgars, Factory worker, France
LEAD: Jean-Pierre Quilgars, 33, was dismissed from his job at the Renault factory in Boulogne-Billancourt, a Paris suburb, two years ago.
He said he was one of 10 party members and unionists dismissed for organizing protests against layoffs.
Renault also prosecuted them for various crimes, like theft.
All 10 were acquitted and are fighting to be rehired; three have won reinstatement.


South Bronx Rallies for a Firehouse
LEAD: Martin Rogers said he remembers Superbowl Sunday in 1988 well.
Not because of the game, he said yesterday, but because of what he called the ''sneaky'' way that New York City closed a Brooklyn firehouse.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Durable Goods Dec.
Friday  G.N.P. 4th Qtr.


One for the Early Birds
LEAD: When Coach Al Arbour was told to prepare the Islanders for an 11 o'clock game in Philadelphia this Saturday, he was worried about his players being too tired so late in the evening.
Then he found out the game was scheduled for 11 A.M., not 11 P.M.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 22, 1989:
MONDAY
Archer Daniels Midland
Mercury Svgs &amp; Ln Assn
Kennametal Inc
Meredith Corp
Lubrizol Corp
TUESDAY
Amoco Corp
Glenfed Inc
Ball Corp
Great Westn Finl Corp
Black Hills Corp
Jostens Inc
Cilcorp Inc
Rorer Group Inc
Consolidated Edison Co NY
USLife Corp
EDO Corp
WEDNESDAY
American Elec Pwr Inc
NCNB Corp
AMP Inc
Oneida Ltd
Baker Hughes Inc
Phelps Dodge Corp
Coast Svgs &amp; Loan L.A.


Let Washington Honor Treaties With Indians; Dependent Too Long
LEAD: To the Editor:


CZECH DISSIDENTS CITE 400 ARRESTS
LEAD: The police arrested at least 400 people who tried to attend a vigil at the grave of a student who burned himself to death to protest the 1968 Soviet-led invasion, dissidents said today.


Let Washington Honor Treaties With Indians; American Apartheid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hardy Helps Rangers Prevail
LEAD: In the chaotic elation of the Rangers' locker room Saturday night in Vancouver, a young boy walked up to Mark Hardy and shyly asked him to sign a hockey bubble gum card.


Holding Down Fort for Bush's Team
LEAD: In the hiatus from Inauguration Day to the confirmation of President Bush's nominees, midlevel officials and career civil servants have inherited legal authority to run the show at many Government agencies.


Advanced Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Magnetics
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,576,519
1,011,485
Net inc
157,201
29,393
Share earns
.05
.01


Illinois Makes Bid For Top Ranking
LEAD: Kenny Battle scored 25 points as Illinois rallied for a 103-92 double-overtime victory over Georgia Tech today to reinforce its claim to the No. 1 spot in the college basketball ranking by The Associated Press.


San Antonio Stadium Is Voted
LEAD: San Antonio area voters have approved a proposal to build a 65,000-seat stadium that has been unofficially called the Alamodome.


Chicago Case Spurs Tough Stance
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that enforcement of securities and commodity trading laws would be ''beefed up'' after reports of a widespread Federal inquiry into the Chicago commodity markets.


3 Mugged on Subway; 11 Youths Are Arrested
LEAD: Eleven teen-aged youths were arrested early yesterday as they stepped off a downtown N train at the 14th Street station in Manhattan and were charged with beating and robbing three subway passengers, the police said.


Reviews/Music; Dressed Up for Guitar
LEAD: Transcriptions might be described as the dressing of naked bodies in different clothes.
Powerful fashion statements drastically alter the wearer, but strong personalities have a way of surviving cosmetics and ornament.


Central Pennsylvania Finanial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Pennsylvania Finanial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,085,000
b1,098,000
Share earns
.59
.61
9mo net inc
3,196,000
b3,245,000
Share earns
1.74
1.74
b-Included tax benefits of $80,000 and $247,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Bush's Team: The First Choices
LEAD:  Former position in parentheses)  WHITE HOUSE  Gary Andres special assistant to the President for legislative affairs-House (executive director for Federal relations, Southwestern Bell Corporation)  Paul W. Bateman: director of administration (senior vice president, New England Council)


CXR Telcom Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CXR Telcom Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
6,900,000
3,800,000
Net inc
610,000
461,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
4,800,000
3,800,000
6mo sales
11,500,000
7,300,000
Net inc
1,021,000
762,000
Share earns
.23
.20
Shares outst
4,500,000
3,800,000


ATC Environmental Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATC Environmental Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,148,061
902,858
Net inc
319,284
98,764
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
5,055,000
3,600,000
9mo rev
5,294,193
2,304,408
Net inc
645,884
275,371
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
4,515,000
3,600,000


In Area Shattered by Unrest, a Pause for Cheering
LEAD: Under the orange-streaked clouds of dusk, shouts were heard again in Overtown this evening.
Small groups congregated.
Smoke curled from a fire on a street corner.
But unlike last week, none of this had anything to do with racial violence, and everything to do with touchdowns.


Police in South Korea Halt March by 10,000 Protesters
LEAD: The police clashed with thousands of demonstrators here today in a protest called by a coalition of dissident groups.


Heart Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heart Federal Savings &amp; Loan
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,213,000
1,807,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Yr net inc
7,649,000
7,412,000
Share earns
1.74
1.70
The company said the 1988 results reflected the effects of the changes in accounting for loan fees as a result of the implementation of FASB No.


&gt;Review/Television; Tributes to 8, Serious and Comic
LEAD: ''Television Academy Hall of Fame'' gets another annual broadcast tonight, at 8 on Channel 5 on Fox Broadcasting, and for the fifth consecutive year the distinguished producers Gary Smith and Dwight Hemion have put on the smooth and amiable awards ceremony.


A Strange Sentencing Reform Survives
LEAD: Despite misgivings about the ''peculiar institution'' Congress created in the name of penal reform, the Supreme Court has upheld the constitutionality of the United States Sentencing Commission.


Company's Aid to F.B.I. Reported
LEAD: The Government began its two-year undercover investigation of the nation's two largest commodities exchanges after a major agricultural company said it believed there was cheating by traders at the exchanges, people involved in the case said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some editions of the Business People column on Friday misidentified the new chief executive of Fuqua Industries.
He is Lawrence P. Klamon.


European Delay Seen in Meat Fight
LEAD: European foreign ministers will likely delay putting into effect tough duties on some American imports in an effort to defuse tensions over a ban on hormone-treated meat from the United States, officials said Friday.


Forest Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Laboratories Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
26,022,000
20,408,000
Net inc
5,604,000
4,101,000
Share earns
.31
.23
Shares outst
18,099,000
17,754,000
9mo rev
72,703,000
61,431,000
Net inc
15,495,000
11,929,000
Share earns
.87
.69
Shares outst
17,911,000
17,413,000


Bridge
LEAD: Tournaments, almost by definition, are held in one location.
But the Club Sectional in New York City last week was an exception.
The players competed in their own clubs but were scored across the whole field.


GAF Stock Trial Is Halted
LEAD: A Supreme Court justice yesterday evening halted jury selection in the GAF Corporation's criminal stock-manipulation trial after the defendants complained that the trial would violate the double-jeopardy clause of the Constitution.


Review/Music; Atwater's Other Hat: Stealing an Inaugural Show
LEAD: It was a night for boogying and head-scratching, as the Republicans ended their entertainment-filled inaugural weekend with a stirring, nearly four-hour rhythm-and-blues show Saturday at the Washington Convention Center.


Review/Dance; Delicate World Described
LEAD: Sanghi Wagner is a performer with a strong, quiet presence that quickly draws the viewer into the delicately fashioned world she establishes onstage.
And she presented two memorable pieces on Saturday evening at St.
Mark's Church in a program of new and recent dances shared with Linda Austin and presented by Danspace.


A Prosecutor on a Roll: Anton Ronald Valukas
LEAD: To some lawyers here, Anton Ronald Valukas, the United States Attorney in Chicago, is the Rudolph Giuliani of the Midwest.
But others, including some people who work on his staff, scoff at the notion.
Mr.
Valukas, they say, has been even more aggressive than his counterpart in Manhattan.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A Flourishing of the Arts: Henryk Kliszko, Party adviser, Poland
LEAD: Henryk Kliszko, 39, is an adviser to various Polish party groups, including the official labor unions.
A Marxist theoretician, he joined the party as a student in 1962 because he believed that membership was the most effective way to change the system.
If just a few years ago Polish youth was very unwilling, very cynical about anything called socialism or Marxism, well at the moment of Gorbachev coming to power this changed, especially with the youth of the intelligentsia, who were very frustrated.


'I'm Not Reagan'
LEAD: Remember the hit show, ''I'm Not Rappoport''?
The show now being directed by George Bush in Washington is ''I'm Not Reagan.''


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,277,000
5,203,000
Share earns
.49
.49
The year-ago quarter included additional interest income resulting from the payoff of participating loans equal to 6 cents a share.


Needle Exchange for Addicts Wins Foothold Against AIDS in Tacoma
LEAD: On a rain-swept street corner in this grimy mill town, just steps from a heroin shooting gallery, David Purchase gives out clean syringes in exchange for dirty ones - 13,000 needles in all since he set up his folding table five months ago.


Rough Ending For 49ers' Cross
LEAD: For 13 seasons, Randy Cross had played guard and then center for the San Francisco 49ers.
He announced last week that Super Bowl XXIII would be the last game of his career, and for most of the game it was a nightmare.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A Sense of Rectitude: Mario Benedetti, Auto mechanic, Italy
LEAD: An auto mechanic for more than 30 years, Mario Benedetti, 54, has a garage next to a big gas station where he employs his son and one other mechanic.
He is a painter and an avid reader, and he has been active in Italy's Communist Party since his youth.
No one else in his family has joined the party - proof, he says, of the freedom of choice that Communists allow.


Let Washington Honor Treaties With Indians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carl Furillo, 66, the Right Fielder With 'Boys of Summer,' Is Dead
LEAD: Carl Furillo, the right fielder for the Brooklyn Dodgers during their glory years in the late 1940's and 50's, died Saturday at his home in Stony Creek Mills, Pa.
He was 66 years old.


ESPN's Baseball-Rights Purchase: Game-Saving Catch
LEAD: FOR all the homers and stolen bases and knock-down pitches that will be shown, there will probably not be any money made for a while, if at all.
That, however, may be beside the point.


Gas Concern To Talk With Other Suitors
LEAD: The Texas Eastern Corporation, trying to fend off an unwanted $2.6 billion takeover bid from the Coastal Corporation, said yesterday that it was preparing to talk with other potential buyers.


49ers Snatch Victory With Last-Minute Score
LEAD: For all of the newfangled big-play offense the San Francisco 49ers and the Cincinnati Bengals were to provide in Super Bowl XXIII today, the first half ended in a 3-3 tie.
With 50 seconds remaining in the third quarter, the game was tied at 6-6.
Ho-hum.
Sure, there were stirring defensive hits and timely offensive trips, but this Super


People
LEAD: *
Charles E. Claggett Jr. has been named deputy managing director and chief creative officer and David W. Henke has been named group creative director at D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles/St.
Louis.
Mr.
Henke already is a senior vice president.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: Among the 28 National Football League teams, which one has gone the longest time without winning a playoff game?


Corvus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corvus Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
4,425,000
7,641,000
Net inc
213,000
c2,994,000
Share earns
.01
.10
6mo rev
8,791,000
15,823,000
Net loss
483,000
bc3,267,000
Share earns
-
.11


Al's Formal Wear reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Al's Formal Wear
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
6,223,951
5,797,452
Net inc
359,871
209,520
Share earns
.02
.01


New Account Of Shooting Of 2 Officers
LEAD: The police officers involved in a shootout with a murder suspect in a Brooklyn row house on Friday had not planned to arrest him, but to establish that he was staying there so a larger team of officers could apprehend him later, New York City's Chief of Detectives said yesterday.


'Strong' Quake Hits Soviet Central Asia
LEAD: A strong earthquake shook Tadzhikistan in Soviet Central Asia early today, destroying buildings and causing some deaths, the official news agency, Tass, reported.


Times Machinists Vote to Ratify Contract
LEAD: Machinists employed by The New York Times voted yesterday to ratify a six-year extension of a labor contract that expired nearly two years ago, thus becoming the last of 14 unions to approve agreements with the newspaper through March 1993.


Rabin Defends Moves to Quell Unrest
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin seems unyielding at the center of a national storm caused by his new directive that permits soldiers to use harsher tactics in the suppression of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories.


Buckley Byers, 72, Republican Official
LEAD: Buckley M. Byers, the deputy chairman of the Republican National Finance Committee since 1976, died of a stroke Friday in Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, where he lived.
He was 72 years old.


Checkpoint Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,693,000
10,802,000
Net inc
1,567,000
902,000
Share earns
.17
.10
Yr rev
44,370,000
35,430,000
Net inc
1,065,000
2,056,000
Share earns
.12
.22


GLOBAL BRIEFS
LEAD: *
West German inflation can be held at around 2 percent in 1989, Helmut Haussmann, the Economics Minister, predicted in a radio interview.
The Government's economic report for 1989, scheduled to be published Tuesday, is expected to include a forecast that the inflation rate will be 2.5 percent.
Figures for December put year-on-year inflation for 1988 at 1.6 percent.


Ndola Journal; Zambia's on Its Uppers (Just Try Buying Shoes)
LEAD: Five shop assistants and a cashier, all at loose ends, welcomed a customer into a shoe store in this industrial town that is the heart of Zambia's copper belt.


Last-Place Islanders Keeping the Faith
LEAD: While the Islanders were on their losing streak and seemed doomed to interminable failures, they were never quite able to believe they were a last-place team and the league's most resounding failure.


Action Staffing Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Staffing Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
27,086,461
14,423,700
Net inc
b63,895
b114,984
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $56,536 for the latest quarter and $98,551 for the year- earlier period.


Where the Scientists Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lawyer Is Picked for High State Department Post
LEAD: Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker 3d will name Robert M. Kimmett, a Washington lawyer who directed the search for President Bush's running mate, as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Bush Administration officials said today.


Close Competition
LEAD: Imitation may be the sincerest form of flattery, but when Miles Wolff heard about plans to establish a minor league baseball team in Raleigh, N.C., he felt neither flattered nor amused.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  FOURTH U.N.
REGIONAL CARTOGRAPHIC CONFERENCE FOR THE AMERICAS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Hong Kong Battle Over Market Plan
LEAD: The Hong Kong stock market - with trading volume running only about half of what it was before the October 1987 crash - is beginning to emerge from the darkness.


Argentina's Bustling Underground
LEAD: A woman recently bought an apartment in a pleasant Buenos Aires neighborhood for $33,000, paying for it in what the Argentines call ''greens'' -stacks of hundred-dollar bills.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A Place for Profits: Waldemar Zaprzaluk, Plant manager, Poland
LEAD: One of the new breed of Polish managers, Waldemar Zaprzaluk, 40, has been a member of the party since he was 20.
He appears to have no Marxist idols, and is proud to be running his pencil factory - which was nationalized in 1946 when the Communists took power - the way its capitalist owner ran it before the war.


Celebrity Prisoners Share a Spartan Space
LEAD: It is a small place: only 13 beds, a picnic table and a television set.
The men who live there watch ''Good Morning America'' or the ''Today'' show in the morning and the 6 o'clock news in the evening.
The way officials describe it, it is almost like living in a fraternity house.


2 Josephine Baker Films
LEAD: Two films starring Josephine Baker, the American music-hall entertainer who became a superstar in France in the 1930's, will be presented at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street, from Feb. 10 to 23.
The films, ''Zou Zou'' (1934) and ''Princess Tam Tam'' (1935), are subtitled in English.
Information: 431-1592.


Riding Tandem in Style
LEAD: It may be time to erase those romantic notions of a bicycle built for two.
Think instead of a stretched-out mountain bike and all the high-tech that goes with it.
It is today's newest version of the tandem, a bicycle that will take you to more places than picnics in the park.


Scenes of Poverty and Despair Prompt Gifts to the Neediest
LEAD: For the 37 people seen sleeping the other day on the uptown platform of the Astor Place subway station in Manhattan, John Foster sent $37 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


'Point of No Return'; Eastern Airlines' Prolonged Union Battle May Have Driven Fliers Away for Keeps
LEAD: As Eastern Airlines and the machinists' union continue their bitter fight over wages and working conditions, some airline industry analysts and executives are beginning to ask whether the carrier has reached a point from which it cannot emerge in a financially sound condition -even if labor peace is eventually achieved.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; Endurance of the Party: Georges Marchais, Party leader, France
LEAD: Georges Marchais, 68, has been general secretary of the French Communist Party since 1972.
He was drawn to the party through trade-union activity after World War II.
IN MY LIFE AS AN ACTIVIST, I went through many difficult periods but also many fairly exulting ones.
Let's say that in the period during which I was a member of the party, and just a member of the party, after 1947, I think the Communist Party -and this is how I felt it - can be very proud of the role it played in our country to end colonialism.


Is the Deficit Still Dangerous? Maybe Not, Some Start to Say
LEAD: President Bush's pledge Friday to bring down the Federal budget deficit embraced a central orthodoxy of the 1980's, that large deficits are harmful.
But gaining credence are opposing views, that the deficit is not such a problem after all and is certainly not an agent of imminent doom.


Coach's Schooling Laid Groundwork For His Protest
LEAD: Shortly after his team had welcomed him back with a 59-55 victory over Connecticut Saturday, John Thompson, the basketball coach at Georgetown University, wiped his brow and said that it certainly felt good to be on the bench again.


When Disney Buys a TV Station
LEAD: Viewers in Los Angeles have front-row seats for a battle among entertainment-industry leaders for the most competitive television market in the nation.


Outdoors: Ice Fishing From All Angles
LEAD: MOST anglers in the Northeast accept winter's interruption of their sport with equanimity, but others leave hearthside, study or workshop to dally on desolate frozen expanses of lakes and ponds across which fierce winds often howl.


Defenses Were in Control for Most of the Game
LEAD: Until the closing minutes of the Super Bowl game, the minutes that saw the San Francisco 49ers drive 92 yards for the winning touchdown, the defenses of both sides were the controlling factors.


Glamour to Ahern
LEAD: After a 12-agency review, Glamour magazine has awarded its account to Ahern &amp; Heussner, a two-year-old shop.
The budget is about $500,000.
David Deutsch Associates previously handed the Glamour account.
Advertising for the magazine, which will celebrate its 50th anniversary this spring, is expected to be ready by March.


John Duka, 39, Former Times Writer On Fashion and Art
LEAD: John Duka, a journalist who wrote with humor and grace about fashion, art and society, died Saturday morning at his Manhattan home.
He was 39 years old.


Onetime Walk-On Walks Off a Hero
LEAD: Jerry Rice had caught 11 passes for 215 yards.
John Taylor had dropped the only ball thrown to him.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Second Time Around
LEAD: In a sense, this is Corneliu Bogdan's second tour in Washington.
He was the Rumanian Ambassador from 1967 to 1978 and was widely credited at the time with being instrumental in improving his country's relations with the United States.
He later served in senior posts in the Rumanian Foreign Ministry.


Matlack Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
677,000
204,000
Net inc
430,000
b968,000
Share earns
.08
.18
b-Included a credit of $875,000, representing cumulative effect of an accounting change.
Matlack will be spun off by RLC Corp.


Soundings From East and West: Faith in the Face of Upheaval; A Conversion to Pragmatism: Hans-Alfred Rosenthal, Virologist, East Germany
LEAD: Hans-Alfred Rosenthal, 64, is the director of the Institute of Virology at Humboldt University in East Berlin and a frequent visitor to the West.
During World War II, he worked at forced labor, was arrested by the Gestapo and later freed,and spent some time in hiding.
He joined the party in 1946, a year after he was liberated by Soviet soldiers.


A Sakharov vs. Yeltsin Ballot? Maybe
LEAD: When citizens of Moscow vote in March to fill the city's only at-large seat in a new national congress, they may be handed ballots with the following surreal choice: a full member of the ruling Communist Party Politburo, a world-renowned dissident or a popular rogue Communist.


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,025,829
1,056,664
Net loss
b456,028
c61,633
Share earns
-
.02
9mo rev
2,995,252
2,945,647
Net loss
477,643
39,299
b-Included a $456,402 charge to close unprofitable stores.


Ex-Official Says Bush Urged End to Iran Arms Shipments
LEAD: George Bush advised President Reagan at White House meetings in December 1985 and in the spring of 1986 to end American arms shipments to Iran, Mr.
Reagan's former national security adviser said today.


Washington Talk: Economic Cycles; How Presidents Ride Recession to Re-election
LEAD: There is at least one widespread assumption in the capital that turns out to be valid when closely examined, perhaps more valid than the assumers realize: a well-performing economy is about the biggest asset a President can have.


For the Bastille, Very French Fireworks
LEAD: In a season of juicy scandals in France, politics, personal ambition and clashing visions of culture lurk at the heart of the angriest and nastiest scandal of all: the battle for control of the brand-new $350 million Bastille Opera.


Books of The Times; Dangers of Being a Nation of Number Numbskulls
LEAD:  Innumeracy  Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences  By John Allen Paulos  135 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $16.95.


Poor and Rich Children Join in a Day-Care Center
LEAD: At the sunny, seven-story school building among the glittering high-rises of one of the nation's most affluent neighborhoods, 2-year-old Ruben Torres and 4-year-old Nancy Raymond stretch their minds and their Play-Doh.


Drexel Hired by Southmark
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation, whose two top officers resigned under pressure from dissident creditors last week, said Friday that its directors had hired Drexel Burnam Lambert Inc. to advise the company on the sale of all or part of its assets.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Jan. 14 showing a model of a condominium, hotel and shopping complex planned for First Avenue and 60th Street was provided in error by the developers' press office.
It showed the original proposal for the project.
As approved by the City Planning Commission, the building was changed significantly, and its height was reduced by 189 feet.


Intellicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intellicorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,082,000
4,950,000
Net inc
b13,000
c972,000
6mo rev
10,452,000
10,009,000
Net inc
b424,000
c1,621,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-After tax credits of $4,000 for the quarter and $152,000 for the 6 months.


Review/Television; Nuclear Arms and the Superpowers
LEAD: A 13-hour documentary is public television's equivalent of a nuclear explosion.
Although no program can live up to the blast of a title like ''War and Peace in the Nuclear Age,'' the series that begins tonight at 10 P.M. on Channels 13 and 21 and at 9 P.M. on Channel 49 makes a considerable impact.


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Chattaooga reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Chattaooga
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,242,000
121,000
Share earns
.44
.04
6mo net inc
2,592,000
1,796,000
Share earns
.92
.64
The company said the second quarter and 6 months 1987 figures included a $2,335,000 loss on loan sale.


49ers Win Super Bowl On Last-Minute Score
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers drove 92 yards in the final minutes and scored a touchdown with 34 seconds left to defeat the Cincinnati Bengals, 20-16, yesterday in Super Bowl XXIII.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in some copies yesterday about the shooting of two New York City police officers in Brooklyn Friday misstated the circumstances under which they tried to arrest a murder suspect.
They arrived at 82 Hancock Street, where the suspect was hiding in a friend's apartment, with a warrant issued for the man's previous address, where they had earlier searched in vain.


A Stronger Savings Regulator
LEAD: The regulatory system that has been widely blamed for allowing the savings and loan industry to collapse is today in much sounder shape, according to analysts, industry executives and regulatory officials.


Handling Past Wrongs: Bayardo Arce, Politician, Nicaragua
LEAD: Bayardo Arce's responsibility in Nicaragua's ruling Sandinista National Directorate is to tend to the party structure.
He is sometimes classed among the country's more radical leaders.
A 39-year-old former journalist, he used his newspaper job before the Sandinistas took power as a cover for revolutionary activities.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,845,000
1,955,000
Per share
.44
.45
Yr net inc
7,405,000
7,620,000
Per share
1.75
1.91


First Interstate of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,013,000
3,268,000
Per share
.26
.28
Yr net inc
3,177,000
5,091,000
Per share
.27
.43


Michael Lepiner, 46, President of Telecom
LEAD: Michael Lepiner, president of Telecom Entertainment, producers of programs for commercial television, died of pancreatic cancer Sunday at Mt.
Sinai Medical Center.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Regional Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Federal Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
335,170
228,501
Per share
.44
.30
6mo net inc
612,087
538,079
Per share
.80
.71


Citicorp Had Loss in '88 In Global Equities
LEAD: John S. Reed, the chairman of Citicorp, said yesterday that the bank holding company had losses $100 million to $200 million in its global equities business last year.


NOMINEE OF BUSH'S IS SAID TO OPPOSE BANNING ABORTION
LEAD: Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, President Bush's choice for Secretary of Health and Human Services, has been telling members of Congress that he does not want the 16-year-old Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion to be reversed.
This puts him in conflict with Mr.
Bush, who today told abortion protesters in forceful terms that he favors reversal of the abortion ruling.


Losing Streak Ends
LEAD: The trainer Oscar Barrera broke a personal losing streak extending back to last May 16 when Home by Nine won Aqueduct's ninth race yesterday with Richard Castillo aboard.
Barrera had not had a winner among 130 consecutive horses he saddled going into yesterday's last race.
Jose Martinez, aboard the runner-up, Poster Run, alleged interference by Home by Nine but the claim was disallowed.


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,772,000
1,598,000
Per share
.46
.41
Yr net inc
6,635,000
5,905,000
Per share
1.71
1.53


Duke Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
844,846,000
898,769,000
Net inc
123,223,000
92,740,000
Share earns
1.09
.78
Yr rev
3,626,985,000
3,705,784,000
Net inc
550,383,000
500,198,000
Share earns
4.91
4.40


Reassessment of the Soviet Model, Arnoldo Martinez Verdugo, Artist, Mexico
LEAD: Arnoldo Martinez Verdugo, 63, was general secretary of the Mexican Communist Party from 1963 until 1981, when the party became part of the Unified Socialist Party of Mexico.
An artist and former presidential candidate, he has twice been elected to the Chamber of Deputies.
In 1982, he was the Unified Socialist Party's presidential candidate, winning less than 1 percent of the vote.


C.F.T.C. Insists It Had Role All Along
LEAD: Asserting that it has not been asleep as a regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission said today that it had been participating in the Government's investigation of trading at two Chicago commodity exchanges for more than two years.


How to Bring Whaling Outlaws to World Justice; Whom to Believe?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kemper Plans Restructuring
LEAD: In a significant restructuring move, the Kemper Corporation said today that it would divide its Kemper Group into two units to improve its performance and to raise the company's stock price.
The transaction was valued at between $280 million and $300 million.
Joseph E. Luecke, the


Careers; Difficulties For Women Lawyers
LEAD: SINCE women were first admitted to the bar in New York State 102 years ago, discrimination against them has weakened.
But for many women lawyers it remains.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q. How and why does a cat purr?
A.
Most researchers agree that the purr results from vibrations in the muscles of the larynx and in the diaphragm, according to Dr.
Leslie L. Cooper, a veterinarian specializing in animal behavior.


Red Wolves Reintroduced On Gulf Isle
LEAD: The effort to reintroduce the red wolf to the wild is expanding with the introduction of a pair of the animals to a wilderness area on Horn Island, in the Gulf of Mexico off the Mississippi coast.


First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Larange reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Larange
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
369,933
356,355
Share earns
.46
.44
Yr net inc
1,831,702
1,500,081
Share earns
2.28
1.86


First Charter Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Charter Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
696,102
663,467
Per share
.23
.22
Yr net inc
2,710,907
2,406,927
Per share
.91
.89


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Racial classifications are suspect, and that means that simple legislative assurances of good intention cannot suffice.''  - Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in opinion striking down a quota for minority contractors in Richmond, Va.  [ A18:2 ]


Ultra Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ultra Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,475,000
4,221,000
Per share
.92
.87
Yr net inc
17,116,000
15,826,000
Per share
3.52
3.27


BellSouth Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BellSouth Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,577,200,000
3,153,600,000
Net inc
419,300,000
411,500,000
Share earns
.90
.85
Yr rev
13,596,900,000
12,229,900,000
Net inc
1,655,500,000
1,664,800,000
Share earns
2.36
2.20


Rice's Career Is Moving At a Most Incredible Pace
LEAD: When Jerry Rice was attending Mississippi Valley State, a college without rich playboys, he drove a Datsun 300ZX, a car popular with playboys on other campuses.
He said he earned much of his money as a summertime hod carrier, handling bricks for his father for $200 a week.


China Will Launch U.S.-Built Satellite
LEAD: A Hong Kong company signed a $30 million contract today to fire an American-built satellite into space on a Chinese rocket - the first time China will launch a foreign-built satellite.


Lacroix Leads Way to a Lively Spring
LEAD: Christian Lacroix, whose stunning first collection two years ago inspired many other fashion houses to pursue new design areas, continues to be a pathfinder.
His spring and summer collection opened the couture showings Sunday with verve, color and the excitement of the unexpected.


Marine Illinois Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Illinois Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,963,000
1,537,000
Per share
.33
.25
Yr net inc
7,749,000
6,871,000
Per share
1.29
1.14


Chemical Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Financial Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,881,000
2,578,000
Share earns
1.02
.92
Yr net inc
9,115,000
8,054,000
Share earns
3.21
2.87
Share earnings have been restated for the 1988 acquisition of First National Bank &amp; Trust of Big Rapids, Mich., and the 10 percent stock dividend declared last month.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Richard Cohn, Robbie Goolrick, Jeff Greenberg and George Pouridas were named executive creative directors at AC&amp;R Advertising.
Mr.
Cohn and Mr.
Goolrick have also been promoted to senior vice president, while the others already hold that post.


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,436,779
807,496
Per share
.46
.36
Shares outst
3,099,399
2,263,177
Yr net inc
4,190,405
2,116,360
Per share
1.36
.92
Shares outst
3,089,488
2,300,391


S.A.S. Buys 6.33% Of Texas Air
LEAD: Scandinavian Airlines System disclosed that it had purchased a 6.33 percent stake in the Texas Air Corporation for $33.9 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Stockholm-based airline said it had bought the shares ''for investment purposes and in furtherance of its relationship with Texas Air.


Cross &amp; Trecker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cross &amp; Trecker Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
111,192,000
107,534,000
Net loss
7,505,000
1,363,000


Excerpts From Court Opinions in Voiding of Richmond's Contracting Plan
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the opinion of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor today as the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional a Richmond plan for awarding 30 percent of public works funds to minority-owned contractors.
Justice O'Connor's opinion was joined in most respects by Chief Justice William H.


Too Much by Half
LEAD: On the XXIIId try, the National Football League finally got a game that lived up to the title Super Bowl.
Perhaps after 23 more the league will figure out what to do about its halftime problem.


Lindberg Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,377,493
18,454,947
Net inc
685,970
559,112
Share earns
.15
.12
Yr sales
81,450,503
74,632,354
Net inc
3,558,701
b1,080,104
Share earns
.76
-
b-Net loss


Supreme Court Roundup; Copter Search Without a Warrant Is Upheld
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that the police do not need a search warrant to conduct low-altitude helicopter searches of private property.


Our Towns; At Youth Center, Need and Crack Are the Enemies
LEAD: William Collins has a picture of Mario Cuomo hanging in his office, but to tell the truth, lately he's been disappointed with the man.
The Governor doesn't want to raise income taxes (the Governor doesn't want to deter business) and Mr.
Collins could use some more tax dollars.
He runs the Wyandanch Youth


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  FOURTH REGIONAL CARTOGRAPHIC CONFERENCE FOR THE AMERICAS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Salvador Dali, Pioneer Surrealist, Dies at 84
LEAD: Salvador Dali, pioneer of European Surrealism and for more than half a century one of the best-known and most bitterly contested figures in the international art world, died yesterday at Figueras Hospital in Figueras, Spain.
He was 84 years old.


Trimedyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trimedyne Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,143,000
5,353,000
Net inc
b1,027,000
b1,025,000
Share earns
.15
.17
Shares outst
6,875,000
6,191,000
b-Included a $200,000 pretax charge for the start-up of the company's international sales operation for the latest quarter; the year-ago quarter included a gain from a tax credit of $301,386.


The Standoff in Poland; Beneath the Jubilation of Agreeing to Talk, Solidarity and Government Remain at Odds
LEAD: The prospect that the outlawed Solidarity union will be restored to legal status appears to be greater now than at any time in the last seven years.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the selection of a Washington lawyer as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs misidentified him.
He is Robert M. Kimmitt.


Cynicism About the Free Market: Gustavo Espinoza Montesinos
LEAD: Gustavo Espinoza Montesinos, 47, has been a member of the Central Committee of the Peruvian Communist Party since 1966.
A former teacher, he is part of the United Left bloc in Peru's congress, the second-largest bloc after that of the Government party.
He has not been arrested since 1979, but has often been beaten in protests.


National Westminster Banorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster Banorp Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
38,835,000
b49,351,000
Yr net inc
129,899,000
b223,628,000
b-Net loss  The latest year net included the amortization of goodwill of $29.2 million.


In Third World, the Legacy Of Marx Takes Many Shapes
LEAD: In countries that regard themselves as part of the third world, Communism has lost much of its power to bind and inspire with common, universal dreams and strategies.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Jersey Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
75,219,000
63,817,000
Net inc
b5,235,000
4,876,000
Share earns
.63
.63
Yr rev
251,303,000
255,361,000
Net inc
b15,051,000
12,150,000
Share earns
1.88
1.60


Federal Paper Board Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Paper Board Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
368,661,000
317,259,000
Net inc
57,877,000
25,131,000
Share earns
1.43
.60
Yr sales
1,116,941,000
1,025,727,000
Net inc
143,300,000
b65,763,000
Share earns
3.51
1.63


Garlic and Cancer
LEAD: Garlic and onions, food items that have often received mixed reviews in this country, have been credited in China with a benefit that has nothing to do with taste or odor.
A new study shows that they reduce the risk of stomach cancer.


In Peshawar, Everyone Awaits the Fall of Kabul
LEAD: ''In Afghanistan behind every mountain there is a king,'' an Afghan guerrilla commander said.


Carolina Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
330,000
665,000
Per share
.20
.40


Washington Talk: Briefing; Meteorite Umbrella
LEAD: Edward Teller has a new idea for those jaded by ''Star Wars'': a space-based defense against large meteorites.
Speaking recently at George Washington University, Dr.
Teller, the physicist who led the nation's hydrogen bomb team, said an international project could in effect render meteorites - called meteoroids before they enter Earth's atmosphere - impotent and obsolete at a cost of just $100 million or so.


Provena Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,435,696
7,595,194
Net inc
261,024
92,395
Share earns
.10
.04
Yr sales
31,276,497
31,168,305
Net inc
798,511
779,640
Share earns
.31
.36


School Official Admits Guilt in Bribery Case
LEAD: A vice president of the Newark Board of Education pleaded guilty today to Federal charges that he had solicited a $3,000 bribe from a teacher who was seeking a job as a vice principal.
United States Attorney Samuel A. Alito Jr. said an investigation of similar reported abuses was widening.


The (900) Numbers to the Stars
LEAD: Fans of the popular rap duo D.J.
Jazzy Jeff and Fresh Prince don't have to wait for a new album or local concert appearance to keep in touch with their heroes.
By dialing (900) 909-5333, they can hear the latest chapter in the duo's continuing adventures from the performers themselves.
Two-minute pre-recorded messages change daily.


Coalition Urges Albany to Delay Income-Tax Cut
LEAD: A statewide coalition of labor unions and local governments called today for a delay in the planned cut of $400 million in state income taxes this year, instead of layoffs or deep cuts in spending.


Ciprico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciprico Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,671,223
2,473,464
Net inc
120,332
288,322
Share earns
.06
.14


Books of The Times; Loss and Renewal for Middle-Aged Man
LEAD:  Five Seasons  By A. B. Yehoshua  Translated by Hillel Halkin. 359 pages.
Doubleday. $19.95.


Red Cross May Resume Operations in Lebanon
LEAD: A team from the International Committee of the Red Cross held talks here today on the possibility of resuming operations in Lebanon after a one-month suspension that followed death threats to its staff members.


Bonds and Notes Up in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds and notes moved higher in slow trading yesterday, despite a slip in the dollar.


Collective Bancorp () reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collective Bancorp ()
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,097,000
4,285,000
Per share
.36
.50
6mo net inc
6,130,000
8,727,000
Per share
.71
1.01
The company said comparisons with the fiscal 1988 periods continue to be adversely affected by a change in the method of accounting for loan fees and origination expenses for fiscal 1989.


Dynatech Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatech Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
98,038,000
97,212,000
Net inc
5,139,000
6,883,000
Share earns
.42
.56
9mo sales
301,263,000
274,675,000
Net inc
18,490,000
18,540,000
Share earns
1.50
1.51


Flagler Bank Corp reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagler Bank Corp
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
517,000
b205,000
Per share
.24
-
Yr net inc
1,880,000
1,004,000
Per share
.88
.47
b-Net loss


Bairnco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bairnco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
61,718,000
50,539,000
Net inc
5,500,000
c8,333,000
Share earns
.51
.79
Yr sales
227,502,000
187,536,000
Net inc
b25,465,000
c28,249,000
Share earns
2.39
2.68


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower After Central Bank Selling
LEAD: The dollar fell against most major currencies yesterday after more dollar selling by central banks and a bearish statement by a West German banking official.


Chang Yu-Yi Is Dead; Bank Official Was 88
LEAD: Chang Yu-Yi, vice president of the first women's bank in China from 1927 to 1937, died Saturday of cardiac arrest in her sleep at her home in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old.
Miss Chang was a member of a family that was influential in China before the Communist takeover in 1949.
She was the sister of Chang Chia-ao, who became chairman of the Bank of China, and Carsun Chang, a philosopher who became a high official in the Nationalist Government of Chiang


Many Programs in New York Area Might Be Affected by the Ruling
LEAD: New York, New Jersey and Connecticut all have laws intended to steer government contracts to minority businesses, but it is unclear how they would be affected by yesterday's Supreme Court decision about such a law in Richmond, Va.


Atlantic Richfield Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Richfield Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,548,000,000
4,622,000,000
Net inc
391,000,000
340,000,000
Share earns
2.22
1.86
Yr rev
18,324,000,000
16,977,000,000
Net inc
1,583,000,000
1,224,000,000
Share earns
8.78
6.68


Supreme Court Refuses To Block Bundy Death
LEAD: The Supreme Court refused tonight to block the execution of Theodore Bundy, who is scheduled to die Tuesday morning in Florida for the murder of a 12-year-old girl 11 years ago.


Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Upper East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn Upper East Tennessee
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,480,000
2,437,000
Share earns
.56
.55
Yr net inc
9,207,000
8,629,000
Share earns
2.07
1.94


National Intergroup Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Intergroup Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
778,585,000
682,619,000
Net inc
b22,484,000
c3,438,000
Share earns
.97
.10
9mo rev
2,218,873,000
2,498,675,000
Net loss
b18,374,000
cd9,714,000
Share earns
-
.26


Diebold Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diebold Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
117,156,000
119,259,000
Net inc
9,214,000
11,934,000
Share earns
.70
.91
Yr sales
450,571,000
439,063,000
Net inc
b35,824,000
35,768,000
Share earns
2.72
2.72


Healthcare International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthcare International Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
92,335,000
74,645,000
Net loss
b18,219,000
c196,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo rev
179,920,000
144,009,000
Net loss
b18,010,000
c322,000
Share earns
-
.01


Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,551,210
4,408,861
Per share
.75
.93
Yr net inc
15,724,027
19,228,947
Per share
3.33
4.07


Intrepid Explorer of Tangled Files
LEAD: IN 1520, the Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan navigated the treacherous straits that now bear his name.
His expedition around the world, which he did not live to complete, was beset by boredom, stark terror, anguish, blinding fog, hallucinations of horrible monsters and many cruel and capricious acts of a malevolent universe.


Business and Health; Key Labor Issue: Retaining Benefits
LEAD: PREPARING for bargaining with the telephone companies this spring, the Communications Workers of America recently drew up a statement outlining six broad objectives.
Among them, wage increases received one paragraph.
Health care was given more than two pages.


Wary Democrats Face Budget Talks
LEAD: Despite President Bush's invitation to bipartisanship, many Democrats in Congress say they are leery of being drawn too fast and too deeply into talks with the White House on the budget deficit.


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyondell Petrochemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,100,000,000
1,100,000,000
Net inc
156,000,000
55,000,000
Yr sales
4,700,000,000
3,900,000,000
Net inc
543,000,000
123,000,000
In 1988, Lyondell was a wholly owned subsidiary of Atlantic Richfield Co.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Bigger Roles For Sales Promoters
LEAD: ADD this to the reasons advertising agencies despise sales promotion agencies: more and more marketers are naming a sales promotion agency of record alongside an advertising agency of record.


First Capital Mississippi reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Capital Mississippi (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
27,524,492
26,217,082
Per share
2.80
2.67


Biegenwald Is Given New Death Sentence In Murder in Jersey
LEAD: A jury today sentenced Richard Biegenwald to death for the slaying of 19-year-old Anna Olesiewicz in Asbury Park more than five years ago.


High Court Lets Ruling On Seabrook Cost Stand
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court yesterday let stand a ruling that denied the bankrupt Public Service Company of New Hampshire the right to raise its rates to recover the cost of the Seabrook nuclear power plant.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Markets


Amoco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,198,000,000
5,941,000,000
Net inc
375,000,000
377,000,000
Share earns
1.45
1.47
Shares outst
258,432,000
257,722,000
Yr rev
23,929,000,000
22,455,000,000
Net inc
2,063,000,000
1,360,000,000
Share earns
8.01
5.31
Shares outst
257,726,000
256,291,000


For Walsh, The Next One Is Star Wars
LEAD: rrMany among the reporters waiting in the hotel ballroom for Bill Walsh to appear at the news conference yesterday morning expected him, in the best tradition of Groucho Marx, to say, Hello, I must be going.


Oil Plunges More Than $1 a Barrel
LEAD: Crude oil prices plunged yesterday on both sides of the Atlantic.
The heavy selling was even more pronounced in the gasoline and heating oil markets after crude oil dropped more than $1 a barrel.


Peoples Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
680,000
453,000
Per share
.31
.20
6mo net inc
1,555,000
1,102,000
Per share
.71
.50


Europeans Delay Retaliation Against U.S. in Meat Fight
LEAD: The European Community today postponed any retaliation it may take against American tariffs on its food products until Feb. 20, saying it wanted to give the Bush Administration time to negotiate.


Tickets, Anyone?
LEAD: There are few images as genteel as those of strawberries and cream and manicured grass at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club's annual Wimbledon fortnight.
But its ticket scalping makes America's Super Bowl look dainty.


Twin Disc Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Twin Disc Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
46,761,000
37,417,000
Net inc
2,653,000
2,170,000
Share earns
.89
.71
6mo sales
85,396,000
69,188,000
Net inc
4,613,000
3,588,000
Share earns
1.55
1.16


G.M. Rehiring Breaks Policy
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has broken with its traditional personnel policy by rehiring a top executive who had left for another car company.
Jim C. Perkins was lured on


INSIDE
LEAD:  Salvadoran Rebel Offer  In a sharp change, Salvadoran rebels offered to participate in elections if they are postponed.
Page A2.
Bush Calls Gorbachev  The new President spent part of his first working day on the phone to Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow.
Page B7.


JB's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 19
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JB's Restaurants (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 19
1988
1987
Revenue
23,363,000
21,895,000
Net inc
235,000
246,000
Share earns
.05
.05


Lightning Threat Underestimated, Studies Find
LEAD: Airplanes can trigger lightning bolts when lightning is not occurring naturally, suggesting that airplanes have a greater chance of being struck by lightning than previously believed, new studies show.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Tumi Luggage, Middlesex, N.J., to Janklow Bender, with a budget of more than $1 million.


Selvac Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selvac Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,070,527
1,370,442
Net inc
540,282
348,214
Share earns
.04
.02
6mo rev
5,847,178
2,714,290
Net inc
800,823
584,491
Share earns
.06
.04


2 Josephine Baker Films
LEAD: Two films starring Josephine Baker, the American music-hall entertainer who became a superstar in France in the 1930's, will be presented at Film Forum 2, 57 Watts Street, from Feb. 10 to 23.
The films, ''Zou Zou'' (1934) and ''Princess Tam Tam'' (1935), are subtitled in English.
Information: 431-1592.


Merrill Lynch Net Climbs
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, led by record earnings in its investment banking and trading divisions, yesterday reported sharp increases in earnings and revenues for the fourth quarter and the full year.


Derby Day Can Be a Winter Sport
LEAD: rrIf there were no such thing as a Kentucky Derby winter book, sportswriters might have to invent one.
It is far more convenient and official sounding to refer to Easy Goer as ''the winter-book favorite for the 115th Kentucky Derby'' than as ''the early choice of anyone but a dimwit.''


A Filene's Closing In Poughkeepsie
LEAD: Filene's, the fashion specialty store, will cease operations in the Galleria mall, in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., after little more than a year in the center.
The Filene's chain was acquired last year by the May Department Stores Company, St.
Louis, from Federated Department Stores.


Top New Jersey Court Upholds Shield Law
LEAD: The State Supreme Court upheld New Jersey's shield law today, ruling that a former newspaper reporter should not have to testify in the murder trial of a man he interviewed.


Rebel-Held Areas of Sudan to Get U.S. Food Aid
LEAD: In a move that reflects growing frustration with the Sudanese Government, the United States Agency for International Development plans to provide food to rebel-held areas in famine-stricken southern Sudan.


Patterns
LEAD:  June in January


Landmark Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Graphics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,187,000
5,980,000
Net inc
1,400,000
c484,000
Share earns
.18
.09
Shares outst
7,618,000
5,569,000
6mo rev
19,394,000
7,984,000
Net inc
b2,614,000
c1,011,000
Share earns
.39
-


KLLM Transport Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLLM Transport Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Revenue
26,271,000
20,061,000
Net inc
b743,000
640,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Yr rev
97,410,000
75,230,000
Net inc
b2,943,000
c3,013,000
Share earns
1.15
1.18


Computerland In Settlement
LEAD: Settling a five-year-old class action, the Computerland Corporation agreed today to cut its franchisees' royalty rates to 5 percent of sales, from 8 percent.


Schwab Weighs Buying Rose
LEAD: Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the nation's largest discount brokerage firm, announced yesterday that it was discussing the purchase of the Rose &amp; Company Investment Brokerage, a unit of the Chase Manhattan Corporation.


California Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Micro Devices (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,396,000
7,319,000
Net inc
24,000
437,000
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo rev
12,035,000
12,916,000
Net loss
751,000
b785,000
Share earns
-
.19


Civilian Band Seizes Argentine Barracks
LEAD: Fifty heavily armed men and women took over an army base in Argentina today and waged a daylong battle with soldiers and policemen trying to retake it.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,863,668,000
1,836,746,000
Net inc
303,412,000
300,098,000
Share earns
3.47
3.47
Shares outst
79,052,000
78,861,000
Corrected from Saturday, Jan.


DNA, Molecule of Heredity, Seen Directly for First Time
LEAD: THE first direct image of pure DNA, the double-stranded molecule of heredity, has been made with a microscope that magnifies objects one million times.


Parkvale Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parkvale Savings Assn
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
907,000
780,000
Share earns
.53
.46
6mo net inc
b1,558,000
1,445,000
Share earns
.91
.85
b-Included a gain of $400,000 from the favorable effect of reduced state taxes and a charge of $118,000 for the early payment of debt.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about the Soviet use of a new bomb against guerrillas in Afghanistan misstated the frequency of takeoffs and landings of Soviet IL-76 transport planes reported at the Kabul airport the previous week.
Eight to 12 was the number per day, not the weekly total.


Susquehanna Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Susquehanna Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,804,000
3,804,000
Per share
.60
.48
Yr net inc
18,491,000
b15,863,000
Per share
2.32
1.99
b-After a tax credit of $450,000.


Keino to Run
LEAD: Two outstanding middle-distance runners, Kip Keino and Mike Boit, both from Kenya, will compete in the Masters Mile in the Panasonic Millrose Games on Feb. 3 at Madison Square Garden, meet officials announced yesterday.


Photo Control Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photo Control Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,989,448
3,753,214
Net loss
44,285
b83,520
Share earns
-
.06
6mo sales
6,490,548
7,115,302
Net inc
108,019
116,516
Share earns
.07
.08
b-Net income


An Off-Duty Officer Kills Unarmed Man In a Traffic Dispute
LEAD: A 60-year-old unarmed man was fatally shot in the stomach by an off-duty police officer during a traffic dispute in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn yesterday, the police said.


William Como Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for William Como, the editor in chief of Dance Magazine, is to be held on Feb. 3 at 4 P.M. at City Center Theater, 131 West 55th Street.
Dancers from national and international companies are to participate in the tribute.


COURT BARS A PLAN SET UP TO PROVIDE JOBS TO MINORITIES
LEAD: The Supreme Court today cast constitutional doubt on a wide variety of government hiring and contract programs to aid minorities.
It did so by invalidating a law in Richmond that channeled 30 percent of public works funds to minority-owned construction companies.


Bridge
LEAD: The strongest event scheduled for this year in Europe, and perhaps in the world, ended Sunday in the Hague.
It was the third Unisys Staten Bank World Top tournament, which included 16 outstanding partnerships from four continents.


Plexus Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plexus Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,716,000
9,927,000
Net inc
411,000
b50,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Finding the Founder Fallible: Luis Sanchez Sancho, Politician, Nicaragua
LEAD: Luis Sanchez Sancho, 46, is a leader of the Nicaraguan Socialist Party, the first in Nicaragua to proclaim Marxist ideals.
For years the Socialist Party maintained direct ties to the Soviet Communist Party.
The Socialist Party sees itself as an opposition group, as does Nicaragua's Communist Party.


Union Carbide Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,139,000,000
1,845,000,000
Net inc
219,000,000
b23,000,000
Share earns
1.59
.17
Yr sales
8,324,000,000
6,914,000,000
Net inc
720,000,000
b232,000,000
Share earns
5.31
1.76


6 Guilty in Violence at Black March in Alabama
LEAD: Almost a decade after Ku Klux Klansmen clashed with black marchers in the northern Alabama city of Decatur, six men drew Federal sentences today ranging from a few months to two years for their roles in the violence.


Bush's Bold Message: Reagan Doesn't Work Here Anymore
LEAD: In style and substance, George Bush's message on his first working day at the Oval Office was perfectly straightforward.
The new President said, in effect, that the Reagan era was over.


Datascope Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datascope Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
26,750,000
24,550,000
Net inc
2,698,000
2,255,000
Share earns
.52
.51
Shares outst
5,188,000
4,415,000
6mo sales
51,450,000
45,850,000
Net inc
4,260,000
3,231,000
Share earns
.87
.73
Shares outst
4,891,000
4,425,000


Computer Upgrade Seen From Digital
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation will introduce a new mid-range computer upgrade for its 6200 line today, industry analysts said.
The new machine, to be named the 6300, is an enhancement for the year-old 6200 model and can be purchased in configurations ranging from one to six processors.


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,600,000
12,800,000
Per share
.44
.42
Yr net inc
b63,300,000
c67,400,000
Per share
2.07
2.27
b-After a $5 million gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Commodity Case Seen Expanding
LEAD: At least a dozen more subpoenas were delivered today in the Government's widening investigation of trading abuses on Chicago's huge commodity exchanges, a Federal official who has held discussions with the investigators said.


Ashland Oil Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,100,000,000
2,000,000,000
Net inc
b96,000,000
c80,000,000
Share earns
1.72
1.41
b-Included an after-tax gain of $18 million, or 33 cents a share, from the previously announced sale of Ashland's carbon black operations.


Battling A Scourge Borne By Water.


United Banks of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colorado (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
900,000
10,300,000
Per share
.02
.65
Yr net inc
9,000,000
670,000
Per share
.45
-
The per share figures are after preferred stock requirements, which for the full year 1987 exceeded net income.


Foreign Policy; Rightist Conservatives Keep Eye on Kissinger
LEAD: For most of the Reagan era Henry A. Kissinger's profile in Washington was low, except sporadically in 1983 when the former Secretary of State headed a Presidential commission on Central America.
Seven years ago his New York-based consulting firm, Kissinger Associates, opened offices here.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
704,000,000
714,000,000
Net inc
58,000,000
c38,000,000
Share earns
1.37
.90
Yr sales
2,831,000,000
2,891,000,000
Net inc
b189,000,000
c200,000,000
Share earns
4.51
4.81


Prof. Sydney Goldstein, 85, Dies
LEAD: Prof.
Sydney Goldstein, an authority on aerodynamics, died of heart failure Sunday at Cardinal Cushing Hospital, Brockton, Mass., after a brief illness.
He was 85 years old and lived in Randolph, Mass.


Gotti Is Seized In '86 Shooting Of Union Chief
LEAD: John Gotti, the reputed head of the Gambino organized-crime family, and two associates were arrested last night and charged with ordering the murder of a union leader who was shot but not killed in May 1986.


Mentor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,186,000
10,062,000
Net inc
1,402,000
b2,021,000
Share earns
.13
.18
Shares outst
10,871,000
11,238,000
9mo sales
31,468,000
29,235,000
Net inc
4,541,000
b4,872,000
Share earns
.42
.43
Shares outst
10,913,000
11,377,000


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insurance Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler Inspecion &amp; Insurance Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
18,308,000
16,302,000
Share earns
.90
.80
Yr net inc
70,659,000
60,644,000
Share earns
3.46
2.96
Results for 1987 are restated to reflect an accounting change.


Oshkosh Truck Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh Truck Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,075,000
b4,726,000
Share earns
.34
.52
b-Included a gain of $1,725,000, or 19 cents a share, from an accounting change.
The company's net shipments were $79,631,000 and $76,837,000 for the latest and year-ago periods, respectivley.


Worm Is Target in War on Debilitating Disease
LEAD: FIELDS of corn, peppers and beans were ripe for harvesting, but about a dozen farmers in this village recently sat idle, disabled by worms slowly emerging from their feet.


Fraser Wilkins Is Dead; Ex-U.S. Envoy Was 80
LEAD: Fraser Wilkins, who was the first United States Ambassador to the Republic of Cyprus, died of a stroke Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital here.
He was 80 years old.


Nikko Staff Cuts
LEAD: Japan's Nikko Securities Company International Inc. laid off 18 traders, salespeople and research staff members, abandoning the business of selling United States equities to American investors, a source close to the firm said Friday.
Nikko, the American unit of Nikko Securities Company Ltd., one of Japan's Big Four brokerage houses, still retains about 25 employees whose job is to buy and sell United States shares for Japanese investors.


M-A-R-C Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M-A-R-C Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,744,000
15,017,000
Net inc
789,000
854,000
Share earns
.25
.27
9mo rev
46,293,000
43,217,000
Net inc
2,013,000
2,164,000
Share earns
.63
.69


Reviews/Theater; Genesis, Yiddish Version
LEAD: There is surely nothing now onstage in New York that is more sprightly in any of our city's many tongues than ''Songs of Paradise,'' the first production of the Joseph Papp Yiddish Theater.
Recounting the story of Genesis, ''Songs of Paradise,'' now playing at the Public Theater, is witty, tuneful, contemporary and traditional.


Seven Youths Held in Rampage on West Side IRT
LEAD: Seven young people, including two 14-year-old boys and two homeless teen-age girls, were arrested early yesterday morning after they terrorized passengers in a rampage through a subway station on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the authorities said.


U.S. Challenges Shifts Of Teachers Over Race
LEAD: The Justice Department filed suit Monday seeking to block a Maryland school district from involuntarily transferring white teachers to achieve racially balanced faculties.


Atlas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
10,472,000
10,174,000
Net inc
1,854,000
c2,628,000
Share earns
.62
.84
6mo sales
19,936,000
18,966,000
Net loss
64,000
bc2,611,000
Share earns
-
.88


2 Ejected As Hoyas Defeat Redmen
LEAD: Names and numbers have changed, but the intensity that has characterized the St.
John's-Georgetown rivalry remains intact.


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
75,872,000
61,795,000
Net inc
1,842,000
422,000
Share earns
.44
.10


Community Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
292,000
452,000
Per share
.11
.29
Yr net inc
2,374,000
1,258,000
Per share
1.06
.82


Silt and Proneness to Quakes: It Has All Happened Before
LEAD: The earthquake in Tadzhikistan was very similar to a 1949 temblor in which an ensuing landslide, in a matter of seconds, covered the nearby town of Khait and virtually all its 12,000 inhabitants with 100 feet of mud and rock.


Burr-Brown Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
43,828,000
38,485,000
Net inc
2,856,000
1,685,000
Share earns
.30
.18
Yr sales
176,673,000
140,484,000
Net inc
11,549,000
4,286,000
Share earns
1.19
.44


Spring Is in the Air; Disappointment on the Horizon


Lotus Net Down 60.6%
LEAD: Plagued by delays in releasing a new version of its 1-2-3 spreadsheet program, the Lotus Development Corporation reported a drop in revenues and earnings for the fourth quarter.


Citizens Banking Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,611,000
4,492,000
Per share
.69
.65
Yr net inc
18,002,000
16,159,000
Per share
2.68
2.38


A Bad Trade Rule Begets Another
LEAD: Is a sporty van a car or a truck?
That's a mega-dollar question.
The Bush Administration's answer, which could come as early as this week, will be its first major test on trade policy.
If the answer is truck, Detroit's prospering auto makers will have wrested yet another unwarranted shield against imports.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
143,641,000
138,402,000
Net inc
7,106,000
b2,793,000
Share earns
.66
.26
b-Included an $8,522,000 gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change.


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
12,649,000
12,086,000
Per share
.82
.72
Yr net inc
49,497,000
47,300,000
Per share
3.20
3.01


To Treat Child Abuse, Let Pediatricians Identify High-Risk Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Midwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,501,000
b3,106,000
Per share
.58
.40
Yr net inc
15,134,000
b11,511,000
Per share
1.95
1.48
b-After tax credits of $464,000 for the quarter and $815,000 for the year.


Unresolved Issue: Is Nussbaum Culpable?
LEAD: Whatever the decision of the jury in the Joel B. Steinberg murder trial, in which deliberations began yesterday, one question will remain unresolved: how culpable is Hedda Nussbaum?


Reviews/Theater; Sadness as Life Slips By in Chekhov
LEAD: When Stanislavsky first read Chekhov's ''Three Sisters,'' written especially for the Moscow Art Theater, he was disappointed.
There were no real characters, the director complained, only hints of them.
Yet nearly a century later the characters who inhabit Chekhov's drawing rooms and gardens in provinical Russia speak more clearly to the eternal yearnings and frustrations of the human condition than those in a hundred contemporary plays.


Officer Arrested In Miami Death That Began Riot
LEAD: Seven days after his fatal shooting of a black motorcyclist set off three nights of racial violence, a 29-year-old Miami police officer was arrested today and accused by prosecutors of manslaughter.


Cem Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cem Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,851,000
3,119,000
Net inc
597,000
420,000
Share earns
.26
.19
6mo sales
7,465,000
6,071,000
Net inc
1,182,000
852,000
Share earns
.52
.38


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,926,000
4,114,000
Per share
.42
.44
Yr net inc
14,120,000
15,180,000
Per share
1.50
-
The year-ago per share figure was not applicable; the company went public in March 1987.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Trading Carefully
LEAD: Representative Charles E. Schumer of New York has a tale with a twist similar - sort of - to those medieval fables about the man who does a favor for the wizard and is in turn rewarded.


Robert G. Eoff, War Pilot, 93
LEAD: Robert Grimshaw Eoff, one of the last survivors of the Lafayette Escadrille, died of pneumonia Friday at his home here.
He was 93 years old.


Judge Instructs Jurors On Steinberg Charges
LEAD: The jury in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg began deliberating yesterday after Acting Justice Harold J. Rothwax had said it could consider four homicide charges against the defendant in Lisa Steinberg's death.


The Neediest Are Helped By Families
LEAD: Peter Janssen, age 12, is worried about homeless children and wanted to do something to help out.
He decided his family should make a contribution to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. ''It must feel really horrible to be really poor or have parents who don't have jobs or not enough food or clothes,''


Chemical Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Fabrics (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
9,742,000
8,895,000
Net inc
b1,157,000
c760,000
Share earns
.24
.17
6mo sales
17,991,000
16,337,000
Net inc
b1,797,000
c1,044,000
Share earns
.37
.23


Solitron Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitron Devices (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
8,776,000
9,065,000
Net loss
3,161,000
b930,000
Share earns
-
.21
9mo sales
28,658,000
31,636,000
Net loss
2,004,000
b1,947,000
Share earns
-
.44


Washington Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
446,851
363,172
Per share
.28
.23
Yr net inc
1,641,419
1,521,389
Per share
1.04
-
The 1987 net included a one-time writeoff of the FSLIC secondary reserve which decreased net income by $143,500, or 9 cents a share.


Fleming Plan To Shrink Brokerage
LEAD: Robert Fleming Inc. said yesterday that it would sharply curtail its research, sales and trading activities in American stocks and told its employees that many of them would lose their jobs.


Schulman Guilty Plea
LEAD: The imprisoned former president of Bevill, Bresler &amp; Schulman Inc. today pleaded guilty to perjury charges for denying his involvement in the fraud that led to the securities firm's collapse in 1985.


Chess
LEAD: The trouble with sizing up players of different generations is that they both cannot be in their prime at the same time.
Nevertheless, if the player of an earlier generation fades slowly when the younger generation is just making its mark, confrontations between them can be fascinating.


Do-It-Yourself Journalism
LEAD: Every major news office in the country has been going through a transition period of its own.
It happens after every Presidential election.


Salvador Rebels, Shifting Tactics, Offer to Join in Presidential Vote
LEAD: The guerrillas in El Salvador have offered to take part in new presidential elections and abide by the results if the voting is postponed by six months and the rebels receive security guarantees.


Acme-Cleveland Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme-Cleveland Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
43,859,816
43,527,729
Net inc
b901,396
c1,289,173
Share earns
.13
-
b-Included a $310,000 tax credit.
c-Net loss  Year-ago quarter included a $500,000 gain from the sale of a product line.


David Monroe Collins, Frick Administrator, 51
LEAD: David Monroe Collins, administrator and assistant secretary of the Frick Collection, died in his sleep Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old.


Oldtimers Key As Rangers' Road Streak Continues
LEAD: Guy Lafleur, John Ogrodnick, Lucien DeBlois.
They are a strange collection of goal scorers.
The three, who are humble enough to admit their primes are past, are also astute enough to understand that a very special year is unfolding in front of them.
And they are each in their own way determined to play a part in it.


Hudson Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson Foods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
136,029,694
129,804,813
Net inc
1,591,432
b5,693,343
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Soviet Report On Inflation
LEAD: A senior official of the Soviet Union acknowledged today that prices of some consumer goods had risen by up to 18 percent since 1985 and pledged substantial increases in production to catch up with demand.


Comshare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,102,900
21,680,900
Net inc
1,936,600
1,431,400
Share earns
.72
.53
6mo rev
42,974,300
39,010,900
Net inc
b2,119,900
485,100
Share earns
.79
.17


California Microwave Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,487,000
22,389,000
Net inc
1,232,000
725,000
Share earns
.15
.09
6mo sales
57,218,000
49,200,000
Net inc
2,418,000
1,450,000
Share earns
.29
.18


Liechtenstein Political Crisis
LEAD: The 15-member Parliament of this tiny Central European principality was dissolved today after a dispute between the two coalition parties.


NS Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NS Group Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,784,000
49,748,000
Net inc
801,000
3,272,000
Share earns
.06
.34


Hospital Staffing Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Staffing Services Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
5,217,648
2,654,399
Net inc
274,534
b173,545
Share earns
.09
.05
Yr rev
14,955,818
11,122,486
Net inc
776,262
b557,425
Share earns
.25
.18


Mayor of San Antonio Says He May Run After All
LEAD: Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio has hinted that he might reverse his decision to leave politics at the end of his current term.


Time Inc. to Merge Units
LEAD: Time Inc. said yesterday that it was combining the operations of two of its units that sell books, music and video products directly to the public.
The new division, to be called Time Inc.
Books Direct, will combine the operations of Book-of-the-Month Club, which operates the nation's oldest book club, with those of Time-Life Books, the largest direct marketer of continuity book, music and video products.


Eastern Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,010,000
1,006,000
Per share
.38
.37


GNW Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GNW Financial Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
983,000
206,000
Share earns
.50
.11
Yr net inc
b2,323,000
b1,797,000
Share earns
1.19
.92
b-Included tax expenses of $1,070,000 for the latest year and $875,000 for the year-ago period, and extraordinary charges of $53,000 and $37,000 for the latest year and year- ago period, respectively.


Auto-Trol Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Auto-Trol Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,302,000
22,209,000
Net inc
167,000
854,000
Share earns
.02
.13


Talks on Lilco Suit Split Over Monetary Amount
LEAD: A Federal mediator's proposal to settle the racketeering suit against the Long Island Lighting Company has moved negotiations ahead, but the participants remain sharply divided over what the utility can afford to pay to end the dispute, officials said yesterday.


Citing Decline in Coastal Waters, House Report Urges New Policy
LEAD: A Congressional report released today warned that the nation's coastal waters are in serious decline and called for several changes in Federal policy to help reverse the damage.


Tidewater Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tidewater Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
49,200,000
41,500,000
Net loss
1,500,000
10,400,000
9mo rev
145,000,000
111,300,000
Net loss
9,900,000
b20,200,000
b-Included net from discontinued operations of $14.1 million.


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of South Carolina
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
152,757
25,949
Per share
.29
.05
Yr net inc
366,246
b309,943
Per share
.69
-
b-Net loss


Precision Castparts Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Castparts Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
108,206,000
102,426,000
Net inc
7,249,000
9,717,000
Share earns
.43
.60
9mo sales
328,136,000
305,966,000
Net inc
22,719,000
27,518,000
Share earns
1.35
1.70


For an Honest Congress
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kean and Koch Plan to Use Inmates to Clean Shore
LEAD: Almost 200 minimum-security prisoners would be used to help clean beaches along the New Jersey and Staten Island shorelines under a plan announced yesterday.


Prodded by Lobbying Group, G.O.P. Reveals $100,000 Donors
LEAD: The Republican National Committee today made public the names of about 250 donors who gave at least $100,000 to the party last year, in effect protecting Robert A. Mosbacher Sr., the Commerce Secretary designate, from pointed questions about the list at his Senate confirmation hearing Tuesday.


Lendl Wins, Will Meet McEnroe
LEAD: Ivan Lendl and John McEnroe advanced to a quarterfinal showdown with straight-set victories today at the Australian Open championships.


Commerce Bancorp Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp Inc
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,505,000
1,303,000
Per share
.51
.43
Yr net inc
5,427,000
4,203,000
Per share
1.81
1.44
The per share figures reflected a 5 percent stock dividend to be paid Feb.


Howard Savings Bank of New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Savings Bank of New Jersey (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
15,478,000
9,510,000
Per share
1.07
.66
Yr net inc
35,102,000
34,856,000
Per share
2.43
2.41


Cypress Semiconductor Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
41,223,000
24,331,000
Net inc
6,277,000
3,977,000
Share earns
.17
.11
Yr rev
139,388,000
77,251,000
Net inc
20,829,000
b13,407,000
Share earns
.56
.37


A Moral Claim in Africa: Mzala, Writer, South Africa
LEAD: Mzala, 33, goes only by one name, and says his first name ''got lost'' when he was growing up.
A member of the South African Communist Party, he writes for journals of the African National Congress and the South African Communist Party.
Mzala, who has lived in exile in Britain since 1987 and is studying at Essex University for a doctorate in sociology, was detained several times by the South African authorities, the first time when he was 15.


Crane Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
343,869,000
276,858,000
Net inc
12,532,000
c13,500,000
Share earns
.56
.58
Yr sales
1,313,136,000
1,099,596,000
Net inc
b62,483,000
c59,286,000
Share earns
2.75
2.53


ARCO Net Up by 15% In 4th Period
LEAD: ARCO and Ashland Oil Inc. today reported strong increases in quarterly earnings, buoyed particularly by higher profits from refining operations.
But the Amoco Corporation, which also posted higher profits from refining, said its quarterly earnings fell slightly.


Golden West Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b36,495,000
c30,208,000
Share earns
1.16
.97
Yr net inc
138,347,000
c149,206,000
Share earns
4.41
4.77
b-After loan provisions of $823,000 and $1,904,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, and the year also included a gain of $5,381,000 on the sale of securities.


Catholic Churches Move to Embrace Blacks
LEAD: For generations, St.
Rocco's, St.
Stanislaus and other sturdy Roman Catholic churches were the heart of Irish, Italian and Eastern European communities here.
But now the neighborhoods are predominantly black.
Few residents, and few children in the churches' schools, are Catholic.


Corning Glass Works reports earnings for 12wks to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Glass Works (NYSE)
12wks to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
543,000,000
539,500,000
Net inc
b51,600,000
c59,000,000
Share earns
.58
.65
52wk sales
2,121,500,000
2,083,700,000
Net inc
b210,700,000
c207,500,000
Share earns
2.34
2.25


Soviets Honor Artist They Scorned
LEAD: An exhibition of Kasimir Malevich's work is being shown in his native country some 60 years after he fell from favor with the Government.


Neworld Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,324,000
2,332,000
Per share
.50
.48
Yr net inc
9,530,000
9,202,000
Per share
2.05
1.85
Shares outst
4,648,000
4,858,000
The company said the latest periods included loan loss provisions of $2.8 million for the quarter and $3.9 million for the year, compared with year- ago periods of $300,000 for the quarter and $800,000 for the year.


Too Many Hurdles for the Bengals
LEAD: In the end, the Cincinnati Bengals had too much to overcome.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Cavaliers 142, Warriors 109: Larry Nance took advantage of a considerable height edge and scored 22 points last night as Cleveland, playing at home, ended Golden State's eight-game winning streak.
The Cavaliers had seven players in double figures, and the 142 points represented their best output of the season.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Spaghetti Warehouse Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,382,392
5,604,967
Net inc
381,078
236,218
Share earns
.25
.16
6mo rev
13,311,896
11,606,975
Net inc
785,552
564,222
Share earns
.52
.38


Tim Cohane, 76, Sports Editor at Look
LEAD: Tim Cohane, who was the sports editor of Look magazine from 1944 until it ceased publication in 1965, died Sunday at a health care center in Nashua, N.H., after a lengthy illness.
Mr.
Cohane, who lived in Derry, N.H., was 76 years old.


For Gus Hall, the Fight is Good, if Not the Fortune
LEAD: Gus Hall, the leader of the Communist Party in the United States, leaned over the desk in his office on 23d Street in Manhattan and said that since Mikhail S. Gorbachev had come to power in the Soviet Union, his own party had grown more relevant.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-11  An earthquake in Soviet Central Asia set off an enormous landslide that killed about 1,000 farm villagers, the Government press agency Tass said.
Page A1


Starting Fast, Bush Phones Gorbachev
LEAD: On his first working day in office, President Bush moved quickly today to establish a personal dialogue with his foreign counterparts, including making a telephone call to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Martin Sticks To Reality
LEAD: Reality advertising lives.
In recent months American advertisers have been turning away from grainy black-and-white film and shaky hand-held cameras popularized in 1986-87 by the director Leslie Dektor, but the Martin Agency in Richmond continues to use both in its new campaign for the Signet Banking Corporation, which will be broadcast in Maryland, Virginia and Washington.


Soviets Report 1,000 Dead in Quake-Induced Slide
LEAD: An earthquake struck mountainous Soviet Central Asia at dawn today, setting off an enormous landslide that killed about 1,000 farm villagers, the Government press agency Tass said.


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcore Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,532,000
2,532,000
Per share
.49
.49
Yr net inc
9,054,000
6,827,000
Per share
1.77
1.32


More States Are Trimming Pension Fund Contributions
LEAD: More and more states are solving short-term budget problems by cutting back on the money they set aside to pay for their workers' retirement.
The recent move by New York State to cut the annual contribution to its workers' pension fund by $300 million is the latest in the trend.


Strategic Mortgage Investent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strategic Mortgage Investent Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,058,000
2,675,000
Shares earns
.38
.49
Yr net inc
10,385,000
11,951,000
Share earns
1.90
2.19


Fund's Choice Joining Texaco Board
LEAD: Texaco Inc., which may face another proxy fight with Carl C. Icahn this spring, said yesterday that it would elect to its board John Brademas, the president of New York University, and Charles H. Price, the departing Ambassador to Britain.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1988
From '87
Amoco Corp.
$ 375,000,000
-0.5
Ashland Oil Inc.
96,000,000
+20.0
Atlantic Richfield Co.
391,000,000
+15.0
Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co.
27,700,000
+13.1
BellSouth Corp.
419,300,000
+1.9
Consolidated Papers Inc.


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,813,000
b9,158,000
Per share
.49
-
Yr net inc
28,681,000
b24,490,000
Per share
1.79
-
b-Net loss  The prior year's results reflected a special provision of $110 million added to the reserve for possible loan losses for Latin Ameican loans.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keycorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
34,549,000
8,795,000
Per share
.80
.20
Yr net inc
119,860,000
72,662,000
Per share
2.90
1.83
The company said the year-ago quarter was hurt by chargeoffs on non-performing assets and provisions for loan losses in the company's Alaska and Utah units, amounting to 50 cents a share.


Reviews/Music; The Opera That Made Rossini's Reputation
LEAD: The bel canto revival - the restoration of operas by Rossini, Donizetti, Bellini and the young Verdi - has been one of the three or four most influential postwar operatic movements.
The Lyric Opera's current production of Rossini's ''Tancredi'' is arguably a state-of-the-art specimen - critical edition, uncut score, first-choice cast -and so Saturday evening's performance prompted as many thoughts about the bel canto scene in general as about the particular merits of ''Tancredi.


Lam Research Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lam Research Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
31,832,000
17,677,000
Net inc
2,411,000
b898,000
Share earns
.22
.08
6mo sales
58,224,000
32,791,000
Net inc
4,119,000
b1,187,000
Share earns
.38
.11


Film-Color Panel Seeks Meaning of 'American'
LEAD: The National Film Preservation Board, which was set up to help select movies to be protected as leading examples of American culture, met for the first time today and became mired in a discussion over just what an American film was.


Microscopes Reveal Sea Hitchhikers
LEAD: MARINE biologists in California have found evidence that the decomposing organic matter that constantly sinks to the ocean depths is colonized by a surprising variety of microscopic animals that appear to hitchhike rides part of the way down.


Rorkesdrift Journal; On an Old Battlefield, Zulus Are Given Their Due
LEAD: Only a fierce wind breaking across the rock buttress rising Gibraltar-like from the rolling sea of green hills disturbs the silence of Isandhlwana.
Shafts of sunlight break through the afternoon's gathering clouds to bathe a distant ridge.


Monsanto Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,881,000,000
1,846,000,000
Net inc
45,000,000
44,000,000
Share earns
.70
.62
Yr sales
8,293,000,000
7,639,000,000
Net inc
591,000,000
436,000,000
Share earns
8.27
5.63
Shares outst
71,500,000
77,500,000


How to Bring Whaling Outlaws to World Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choosing a College
LEAD: MUCH of the excitement in the personal computer industry revolves around the introduction of new or upgraded major software and hardware: a new word-processing or database program, a faster computer or modem, a bigger hard disk.
For many users, especially in large companies, a slight improvement in speed or convenience may mean a large improvement in productivity or training speed.


Weather Satellite For Television Fails
LEAD: A satellite that provided cloud pictures for television weather forecasts failed Saturday, depriving customers of views of the Western United States, officials said.


Alza Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alza Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,137,000
19,268,000
Net inc
4,380,000
4,037,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Yr rev
84,189,000
70,812,000
Net inc
17,003,000
13,984,000
Share earns
.51
.42


Close to Script, Right to a Thrilling End
LEAD: The Cincinnati Bengals were forced to swallow a bitter pill along with their loss Sunday in Super Bowl XXIII.
After San Francisco's 20-16 victory, which earned the 49ers the undisputed claim as the team of the 1980's, the Bengals solemnly slipped out of Joe Robbie Stadium able to answer in only one way the questions that had haunted them all week.


United Illuminating Co reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Illuminating Co
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
518,938,000
497,623,000
Net inc
b78,639,000
b8,649,000
Share earns
4.85
-
b-Included a reduction equal to $2.37 a share and $6.23 a share from the effect of SFAS 90 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


The Mini-Hiroshima Near Cincinnati
LEAD: On March 30, 1951, Frank J. Lausche, Governor of Ohio, received a momentous telegram from the Atomic Energy Commission announcing the construction of a uranium foundry in Fernald, a rural community near Cincinnati.
The facility would process fuel for nuclear weapons production reactors, providing thousands of jobs in the new and exciting field of atomic energy.


Galaxy Carpet Mills Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galaxy Carpet Mills Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
63,328,000
65,960,000
Net inc
858,000
b2,193,000
Share earns
.26
.65
b-Included a $1,149,000 gain from a change in accounting for income taxes and a $563,000 gain from a change in accounting to a new inventory method.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of agency appointments in the Advertising column of Business Day on Friday misstated Joel Weissman's title at FCB/Leber Katz Partners.
He was promoted to senior vice president and creative director.


Devils At a Loss To Explain This One
LEAD: After an inspiring overtime victory over the Washington Capitals Saturday night, the Devils tonight came up with another flat performance against a weaker team.


Cuba's Enduring Example: Patrica Hales, Architect, Chile
LEAD: Patricio Hales, 42, is a Santiago architect who has been in Chile for the 15 years since the military coup in 1973 that overthrew the Government of Salvador Allende Gossens, in which the Communists and Socialists were partners.
He has been detained several times, once on charges of aiding guerrilla groups.


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
8,100,000
21,200,000
Yr net loss
49,700,000
18,400,000
The prior year results included $24.9 million gain from the sale of Premier's credit card portfolio in June.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Arts &amp; Entertainment Cable Network, a venture of Hearst Corp., Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and NBC, named Seymour H. Lesser to the new position of executive vice president, chief financial and administrative officer.


FASHION: By Design; All That Glitters
LEAD: In the last few months silver has surged into the forefront as a favorite metal for jewelry and fashionable bits of trimming. (Yes, gold-toned Chanel-style jewelry is still the rage, too.) Silver first became chic in the mid-1970's when Tiffany &amp; Company started selling Elsa Peretti's bold, original bracelets and belt buckles.


Peoples Bancorp of Worceser reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp of Worceser (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,459,000
1,260,000
Per share
.49
.30
Shares outst
2,972,918
3,300,000
Yr net inc
5,909,000
4,846,000
Per share
1.89
1.47
Shares outst
3,130,213
3,300,000


International Shipholding Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Shipholding Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
40,298,000
38,180,000
Net inc
2,647,000
2,237,000
Share earns
.51
.45
Yr rev
170,433,000
136,004,000
Net inc
b20,901,000
6,241,000
Share earns
4.49
1.43


Los Angeles Journal; Neighbors Opposing Reagan Drug Center
LEAD: Probably few people in the Beverly Hills dinner crowd who paid $1,000 each Jan. 4 for a new drug rehabilitation center to be named after Nancy Reagan have ever visited the neighborhood where it would operate.


Reviews/Music; Modern Between Mozarts at Tully Hall
LEAD: The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center sandwiched two 20th-century scores between Mozart works at its Alice Tully Hall concert on Sunday afternoon.
The performance, which is to be repeated this evening, is one well worth hearing.


Greenspan Pleased With Long-Term Rates
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, expressed satisfaction today that the financial markets appeared to be impressed with the central bank's commitment to prevent any significant increase in inflation.


Bancorp New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp New Jersey
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
834,000
773,000
Per share
.31
.29
Yr net inc
3,341,000
3,214,000
Per share
1.24
-
The per share figure for 1987 was not available because Bancorp New Jersey converted from a mutual to a stock owned company on Aug.


Inmates From City and Jersey to Be Used for Beach Cleanup


Senators Prepare Sanctions Laws For Supply and Use of Poison Gas
LEAD: Congressional leaders plan to introduce legislation soon that would apply sanctions against companies that are responsible for the spread of chemical weapons and against countries that use the arms.


Murdoch Names Chief For Collins
LEAD: In the latest revamping of Rupert Murdoch's worldwide book publishing interests, George Craig, the president and chief executive of Harper &amp; Row, has been given the additional title of chief executive of William Collins P.L.C., the British publishing house.
The appointment was effective yesterday.


RPC Energy Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPC Energy Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,436,000
25,835,000
Net inc
1,648,000
893,000
Share earns
.11
.06
6mo rev
55,349,000
46,000,000
Net inc
3,799,000
1,009,000
Share earns
.26
.07


Wilkens to Coach East All-Stars
LEAD: Lenny Wilkens of the Cleveland Cavaliers will be the second man to coach both the East and West teams in a National Basketball Association All-Star Game.
This season, Wilkens will be coaching the East team when the All-Stars play on Feb. 12 at the Astrodome in Houston.
The last two times, in 1979 and '80, when he was the Seattle coach, Wilkens coached the


Studies Find Unequal Access to Kidney Transplants
LEAD: WHITE men receive a greatly disproportionate share of the nation's transplanted kidneys compared with white women and blacks of both sexes, three recent studies have shown.


Valley National Bancorp New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp New Jersey (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,833,428
7,579,958
Per share
.62
.60
Yr net inc
32,270,653
30,443,047
Per share
2.54
2.30


A Soviet Woman's Point of View
LEAD: Aleksandra P. Biryukova is indignant about the high prices charged by some of this country's new private businesses.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Boeing Co., Seattle, saw its stock fall by $1.375, to $58.50, after announcing last week that it might be forced to delay deliveries of the latest version of its 747 aircraft.


Review/Television; On 'Schoolbreak,' 60's Civil Rights
LEAD: ''My Past Is My Own,'' being presented as a ''Schoolbreak Special'' on CBS at 4 P.M. today, is one powerful scene surrounded by not very convincing contrivances.


Fines for Tesoro
LEAD: The Tesoro Petroleum Corporation of San Antonio has been ordered to pay more than $56 million to the Energy Department for regulatory violations between 1973 and 1981, the company said today.
According to the agency's final order, Tesoro has 30 days to make an initial payment of $25 million, after which six annual payments of $5.2 million will be due.


Savings Crisis Estimate Due
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board indicated today that the agency was likely to increase its estimate next week on the size of the savings and loan crisis.


Knicks' Replacements Get the Job Done
LEAD: About an hour before Sunday night's game here, word came from the Knick dressing room that Trent Tucker would replace Gerald Wilkins in the starting lineup at off guard.


Comfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comfed Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,358,000
b1,452,000
Per share
-
.17
9mo net inc
17,000
c2,444,000
b-Net income and included gains from loan servicing rights of $1.8 million.
c-Net loss and included a charge of $1.2 million from the writeoff of FSLIC secondary reserve.


Grove Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grove Bank for Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
438,000
539,000
Per share
.30
.37
Yr net inc
1,559,000
2,308,000
Per share
1.06
1.57


Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,579,000,000
2,375,000,000
Net inc
272,000,000
216,000,000
Share earns
1.21
.95
Shares outst
225,693,975
227,847,938
Yr sales
10,581,000,000
9,429,000,000
Net inc
1,154,000,000
918,000,000
Share earns
5.09
4.02
Shares outst
226,876,795
228,614,990


Temptation for the Freethinker: Roberto Freire, Politician, Brazil
LEAD: Roberto Freire, 46, is on the 12-member Executive Committee and the 63-member Central Committee of Brazil's Communist Party.
He holds one of three Communist seats in Congress.
Mr.
Freire, who comes from Recife, in Brazil's poor northeast, turned to politics in 1961. ''What finally led me to Communism was my disbelief in religion,'' he said.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.13
8.97
6.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.28
8.25
5.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.30
8.28
6.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.03
9.07
8.70
30-YR.


Union Camp Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
685,641,000
626,556,000
Net inc
78,460,000
58,937,000
Share earns
1.14
.81
Shares outst
68,793,039
72,506,177
Yr sales
2,660,918,000
2,361,684,000
Net inc
295,146,000
207,483,000
Share earns
4.25
2.83
Shares outst
69,433,734
73,391,106


Schlumberger Plans to Sell Unit
LEAD: Schlumberger Ltd., the New York-based oil services company, said it was planning to sell its defense systems unit, Fairchild Weston Systems.
Schlumberger did not say when the sale would occur or if the unit had a buyer.
It said the sale ''is in line with its strategy to refocus on its principal product lines.


First Colonial Bankshares () reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares ()
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,307,600
2,646,900
Per share
.39
.31
Yr net inc
10,735,100
9,830,300
Per share
1.26
1.14


Fine Homes International LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fine Homes International LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
175,046,000
146,474,000
Net loss
4,231,000
b23,806,000
Yr rev
792,233,000
-
Net inc
37,104,000
-
Share earns
1.25
-
b-Included a $12 million one-time charge associated with the partnership's restructuring of its mortgage financing operations.


3 Students Shot in Queens When Bullets Miss Principal
LEAD: Two high school girls and a college student were wounded by stray bullets outside a Queens high school yesterday, apparently when an assistant principal trying to break up a fight was fired upon, police and school officials said.


A Sense of Pointless Sacrifice: Govinda Pillai, Party Intellectual, India
LEAD: Govinda Pillai, 62, is a a member of the board of the Kerala State Film Development Corporation.
He is formerly editor of a Communist newspaper.
We don't oppose the opening of Soviet society.
They have to stop this process of people leaving the scene only when they die. . . .
But what I don't like is the sense of the messianic: The Great Gorbachev has come to give the movement a human face!


Veterans Returning to Vietnam to End a Haunting
LEAD: Twenty years ago this summer Edward Marcin looked up at the night sky from his seat on an Army sandbag along a swollen river in Vietnam.
Neil Armstrong had just walked on the moon; Mr.
Marcin had just stacked another body in an overcrowded morgue.


General Datacomm Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Datacomm Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
51,244,000
44,239,000
Net loss
490,000
7,604,000
The company said the year-ago quarter included $1,900,000 charge for restructuring activities.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day yesterday about Leo Burnett International's appointment of a vice chairman, Sergio Suarez, misidentified the office where he will work.
It is the agency's Chicago headquarters.


New England Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,440,000
2,102,000
Per share
.34
.29
Yr net inc
9,211,000
7,906,000
Per share
1.27
1.13


Silvar-Lisco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silvar-Lisco (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,567,000
-
Net loss
1,377,000
-
9mo rev
15,065,000
-
Net loss
3,311,000
-
Comparable year-ago figures were not applicable; the company changed end of fiscal year to March 31 from April 30.


Indiana Wins 13th In a Row
LEAD: Indiana ran its winning streak to 13 games, 6 in the Big Ten Conference, as Jay Edwards scored 20 second-half points to lead the 16th-ranked Hoosiers to a 71-70 victory over No. 10 Michigan tonight.


49ers Invited, 300,000 Show Up


Intergraph Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
214,821,000
195,322,000
Net inc
24,979,000
24,730,000
Share earns
.44
.44
Yr rev
800,160,000
641,083,000
Net inc
87,986,000
69,876,000
Share earns
1.55
1.23


George Case, 73, Dies; Had 349 Stolen Bases
LEAD: George Case, who led the American League in stolen bases six times, died at a hospital here today.
He was 73 years old.
Mr.
Case, who lived in Morrisville, Pa., had suffered from emphysema.


Credit Card Trust In $1 Billion Issue
LEAD: National Credit Card Trust 1989-1 plans to announce this week the interest rate for a $1 billion issue of credit-card-backed securities through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Second National Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Second National Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,200,000
2,300,000
Per share
.30
.32
Yr net inc
7,700,000
9,200,000
Per share
1.07
1.29


Safeco Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b78,960,000
c38,833,000
Share earns
1.22
.58
Yr net inc
b268,635,000
c253,010,000
Share earns
4.10
3.75
b-Included a gain from the sale of investments of $10,223,000 and $33,786,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Gandhi Gains Back Some Political Ground
LEAD: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi appeared today to have retrieved some ground lost in elections to state legislatures over the weekend.
His party's nominees took strong leads in the small northeastern states of Mizoram and Nagaland after suffering a defeat in an important vote in Tamil Nadu, in southern


Sifco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sifco Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,414,000
18,338,000
Net inc
880,000
679,000
Share earns
.40
.31


Work at Atom Plant Goes On
LEAD: Construction projects worth more than $80 million are in progress at the Federal Government's uranium-processing plant in nearby Fernald despite recommendations that the operation be closed by 1994.


Charles Swall, Executive, 46
LEAD: Charles Swall, a vice president of the International Business Machines Corporation, died of heart disease Saturday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 46 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.


Champion 49ers Greeted in Parade
LEAD: Nearly 300,000 fans lined Market Street today to welcome home the Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers, cheering, screaming, and blowing horns as the team paraded by on motorized cable cars.


The Pied Piper of Shoreham
LEAD: Long Island faces a paradox of power, political and electrical, of national consequence.
Its generating capacity has so narrow a margin of safety that blackouts could begin this summer.
A remedy is at hand in the form of Shoreham, the Long Island Lighting Company's 800-megawatt nuclear reactor, which is already operating safely at low power and ready to move toward full power as soon as it gets a license from dawdling nuclear regulators in


Market Place; S.E.C. Proposing Less Disclosure
LEAD: WITH little public attention, the Securities and Exchange Commission is moving toward a sharp reduction in the amount of financial disclosures that many companies will have to make to raise capital in the United States.


Closing the Book on Career
LEAD: While his teammates on the San Francisco 49ers leaped at the sight of a last-minute Super Bowl victory, Randy Cross lingered for one last look around Joe Robbie Stadium.
He could not recall any specific memory or vision, just the need to take one last mental snapshot.


Stalemate Over Kinsey Institute's Director
LEAD: The Kinsey Institute and Indiana University, where the institute is based, are at a stalemate over the future of June Reinisch, the institute's director.


Seat Prices and Trading Slip in Chicago
LEAD: Trading volume and seat prices have fallen sharply at the nation's largest commodity exchanges, and exchange officials are trying to allay the fears of traders and restore the confidence of the public.


Medicine Shoppe International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicine Shoppe International (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,079,513
5,744,766
Net inc
1,675,025
1,303,332
Share earns
.31
.24


Islam Can Offer Iran Economic Solutions
LEAD: To the Editor:


NASA Seeks Radar To Detect Space Debris
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, anticipating the day when whizzing junk could damage a manned space station, is asking industry to invent a radar that can spot a dime whirling 360 miles above Earth.


Review/Television; 2 New Shows About TV
LEAD: ''Time period premiere'' is what ABC calls it.
That's as opposed to the ''special preview'' used to introduce many new series.
There are two ABC time-period debuts upon us: ''A Fine Romance,'' going into the 8 P.M. slot on Thursday, and ''Studio 5B,'' also at 8 P.M. but on Sunday.
Neither ''premiere'' was available for sampling.


Social Security Fails in Effort to Use Own Lawyers to Judge Appeals
LEAD: The Government has rejected a request by the Social Security Administration to relax requirements for appointing administrative law judges so that the agency's attorneys would qualify for the positions.


The Sign Said, 'No Standing'


Woman Slain in Case Tied To Shooting of Two Officers
LEAD: The body of an elderly woman was found in her Brooklyn apartment yesterday, and the police said that Ralph C. Richardson, wanted on charges of shooting two police officers Friday, was almost certainly responsible for her death.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Back to the Stump?
LEAD: Will Dick Thornburgh's tenure as Attorney General be a short one?


Peebles Chain Is Acquired
LEAD: Peebles Holdings Inc., owner of the 49 Peebles department stores in seven mid-Atlantic states, said yesterday that it had been acquired by the PBL Acquisition Corporation for about $160 million in cash.


Wobbling of the Party Line: Safdar Hashmi, Theater Director, India
LEAD: Safdar Hashmi, 35, a founder of the pro-Marxist Students Federation of India at Delhi University in 1970, was a playwright, actor, director and leading figure in Indian street theater.
He was beaten to death by a street gang early this month after refusing to stop production of a street play.
The play supported a candidate running against a member of the Congress Party.


Bank of San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of San Francisco (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
404,000
260,000
Per share
.18
.14
Shares outst
2,259,100
1,826,443
Yr net inc
1,443,000
143,000
Per share
.74
.08
Shares outst
1,952,937
1,825,613


Pioneer Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b4,358,000
c1,252,000
Per share
-
.37
b-After a loss of $321,000 on disposal of a subsidiary.
c-Net income and after a tax benefit of $1,006,000.


Green to Replace School Deputy
LEAD: The Schools Chancellor, Richard R. Green, has decided to replace one of his top aides and a friend of nearly 30 years, Bruce L. Williams, in an effort to improve control over the Board of Education staff, board officials said yesterday.


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,564,000
4,528,000
Per share
.56
.46
Yr net inc
20,526,000
17,533,000
Per share
2.06
1.78


Super Bowl Ratings Rise
LEAD: The A. C. Nielsen Company said yesterday that overnight reports from 17 markets showed that the NBC broadcast of the Super Bowl Sunday had a slight increase in ratings over last year's audience for the Washington-Denver game broadcast by ABC.
The complete national ratings are expected to be available today.


Shelling From Cambodia Empties a Khmer Rouge Refugee Camp
LEAD: Heavy shelling from inside Cambodia has forced the complete evacuation of a refugee camp run by the Khmer Rouge and caused its 4,350 inhabitants to flee further into Thailand, relief officials and Western diplomats said today.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
13,610,000
12,060,000
Per share
1.06
.93
Yr net inc
53,419,000
46,053,000
Per share
4.15
3.60.


Affiliated Bankshares Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bankshares Colorado (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
598,175
1,747,879
Per share
.03
.15
Yr net loss
3,189,701
b8,559,563
Per share
-
.75
b-Net income


Phoenix Offers Refunding Bonds
LEAD: Phoenix is tentatively offering $61.5 million of general obligation refunding bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Tiny Contractors Fits a Hulking Client
LEAD: When the United States Army Band, ''Pershing's Own,'' led the Presidential inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington on Friday, Lynne Keber, Sharon Larkey and the eight employees of Sharon's Specialty Shop breathed a sigh of relief.


Varian Associates Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
287,400,000
265,000,000
Net inc
9,300,000
b17,600,000
Share earns
.44
-
b-Net loss


Houston Drops School Plan For Housing Homeless Pupils
LEAD: A trial program that opened the city's schools to students with no place else to sleep was suspended Friday because too few students sought shelter.


Sanctions Reported Possible Against Europe and Korea
LEAD: Complying with tough new trade legislation, the United States designated the European Community and South Korea for possible sanctions because they restrict imports of American telecommunications products, according to Administration and Congressional aides.


MTS Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MTS Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
34,603,200
23,329,000
Net inc
2,652,100
1,175,800
Share earns
.59
.27


Rollins Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
85,783,641
81,052,715
Net inc
3,233,759
3,159,317
Share earns
.14
.14
6mo rev
185,036,434
174,958,776
Net inc
9,368,964
8,198,330
Share earns
.40
.38


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSB Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,466,000
b2,605,000
Per share
.79
.84
Yr net inc
7,251,000
b9,826,000
Per share
2.32
3.15
b-After tax credits of $1,150,000 for the quarter and $3,650,000 for the year.


First Michigan Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,597,000
2,802,000
Per share
.64
.52
Yr net inc
12,761,000
10,753,000
Per share
2.31
1.99


Deposit Guaranty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deposit Guaranty Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,805,000
5,338,000
Per share
.72
.67
Yr net inc
31,538,000
25,640,000
Per share
3.94
3.17


Arts Exchange Needs Continued Support
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,300,000,000
12,030,000,000
Net inc
1,010,000,000
868,000,000
Share earns
1.12
.96
Yr sales
38,820,000,000
39,310,000,000
Net inc
3,386,000,000
2,915,000,000
Share earns
3.75
3.20


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section on Thursday about a private investigator misstated the year Charles A. Lindbergh's infant son was kidnapped.
It was 1932.


Consolidated Papers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
222,239,000
202,216,000
Net inc
36,857,000
32,645,000
Share earns
.85
.75
Yr sales
896,804,000
742,835,000
Net inc
149,883,000
95,798,000
Share earns
3.44
2.20


Philadelphia Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
778,825,000
737,540,000
Net inc
97,651,000
122,697,000
Share earns
.36
.51
Shares outst
205,366,262
195,734,514
Yr rev
3,228,712,000
3,181,464,000
Net inc
565,950,000
542,396,000
Share earns
2.33
2.33
Shares outst
201,516,834
192,489,330


Accord for Henke
LEAD: Tom Henke settled with the Toronto Blue Jays on a one-year contract for $975,000 yesterday, avoiding a second successive arbitration hearing.
Greg Gagne of the Minnesota Twins also settled his case, agreeing to a one-year contract for about $550,000.
Last year, Henke asked for $1.025 million and Toronto offered $725,000, the figure picked by the arbitrator, Raymond Goetz.


New Project Will Renovate The Garden
LEAD: A $1.3-billion plan to replace Madison Square Garden with an office complex and build a new arena west of the present site on the West Side of Manhattan has been abandoned in favor of a $100-million renovation of the Garden, public officials and real-estate executives said yesterday.


Persistence of Class Conflict: Saifuddin Chowdhury, Politician, India
LEAD: Saifuddin Chowdhury, 36, a member of the Communist Party of India - Marxist, says he was 15 or 16 when he decided to join the party.
He said he was a fugitive from the police and the Congress Party in Bengal from 1972 to 1977, when the Congress Party tried to destroy the Communist movement in the state.


Hospitals Get Orders To Reduce Crowding In Emergency Rooms
LEAD: The New York State Health Commissioner yesterday took four actions to reduce overcrowding in emergency rooms in New York City, including the installation of a citywide data bank to keep track of how many emergency room beds are available from moment to moment.


Man Sought in Bank Robberies Is Arrested
LEAD: A man wanted by the F.B.I. in 30 bank robberies was arrested yesterday by a Metro-North police officer who heard over his hand radio of a robbery in progress at a bank he was near.


Tyson Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyson Foods Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
502,414,000
437,745,000
Net inc
19,860,000
17,801,000
Share earns
.31
.28


TransTechnology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TransTechnology (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
60,241,000
53,253,000
Net inc
2,927,000
3,311,000
Share earns
.57
.63
9mo rev
162,955,000
143,314,000
Net inc
5,580,000
b8,440,000
Share earns
1.08
1.59


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday, with an article about hard times in Zambia since the decline of the copper industry, located the scene incorrectly.
It was in Ndola, Zambia, not Nairobi, Kenya.


For 25 Cents, Every Moviegoer Was Royalty
LEAD: In 1922, a young actress named Margaret Buckley swallowed five bichloride of mercury tablets, then calmly strolled to the opulent Capitol Theatre on Broadway in New York City.
There, succumbing while the theater orchestra played ''Espagna'' before the feature, she moaned, ''I had high ideals, but I couldn't live up to them.


California Water Service reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Water Service (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
25,751,000
24,985,000
Net inc
2,563,000
2,734,000
Share earns
.45
.47
Yr rev
113,755,000
113,785,000
Net inc
14,074,000
17,368,000
Share earns
2.45
3.02


Rochester Community Savngs Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Community Savngs Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Net inc
4,768,000
b7,192,000
Per share
.35
.52
Yr net inc
18,437,000
b26,976,000
Per share
1.37
1.95
b-After tax credits of $3,687,000 for the quarter and $11,651,000 for the year.


Ethyl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
515,494,000
470,639,000
Net inc
b58,851,000
c52,921,000
Share earns
.49
.44
Yr sales
2,011,487,000
1,720,338,000
Net inc
b231,016,000
c193,319,000
Share earns
1.91
1.57


To Avoid Scalpers, Try the Box Office
LEAD:  Have you asked of yourselves  What's the price you might pay?
From the song ''Red and Black'' in ''Les Miserables''


Candidate Drops Out of Race
LEAD: Former Representative Michael Barnes of Maryland is dropping out of the race for chairmanship of the Democratic Party and will endorse the candidacy of Ronald Brown, political sources said today.
The departure by Mr.
Barnes would leave four contenders for the post, now held by Paul G. Kirk Jr.
In addition to Mr.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Revenue
2,849,673,000
2,353,840,000
Net inc
b275,827,000
1,458,000
Share earns
2.69
-
Shares outst
100,658,000
105,859,000
Yr rev
10,547,175,000
9,876,718,000
Net inc
b463,182,000
c335,108,000
Share earns
4.29
3.07
Shares outst
103,746,000
108,621,000


Morley Drury, Ex-Football Star, 85
LEAD: Morley Drury, an all-America running back at Southern California in 1927, when he became the first Trojan to rush for 1,000 yards in a season, died Sunday at the age of 85.


Hubbell Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
154,861,000
146,763,000
Net inc
18,444,000
17,010,000
Share earns
.68
.62
Yr sales
614,237,000
581,087,000
Net inc
71,288,000
62,529,000
Share earns
2.61
2.28


Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becton, Dickinson &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
406,134,000
366,450,000
Net inc
b27,653,000
b24,460,000
Share earns
.69
.60
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $4,696,000 for the latest quarter and $3,702,000 for the year- earlier period.


Sad Legacy Of Abuse: The Search For Remedies
LEAD: CHILDREN and adults who were victims of child abuse are coming under intensified study by researchers who hope to learn what distinguishes those who go on to become abusers themselves from those who grow up to be good parents.


Peerless Manufacturing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peerless Manufacturing Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,968,160
2,646,131
Net inc
232,128
256,617
Share earns
.25
.28
6mo sales
7,312,584
5,982,896
Net inc
317,336
714,072
Share earns
.34
.77


Sister Ann Heintz, 58, Journalism Teacher
LEAD: Sister Ann Christine Heintz, a Roman Catholic nun who founded a national student-written news service, died of cancer here Friday.
She was 58 years old.


To Treat Child Abuse, Let Pediatricians Identify High-Risk Cases; Parent Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


East Germany to Cut Its Armed Forces by 10,000
LEAD: The East German leader, Erich Honecker, announced today that his country would reduce its armed forces by 10,000 and also cut military spending by 10 percent.


A Search for Clues to 'Dark Ages' of the Cosmos
LEAD: SCIENTISTS believe they are on the verge of major discoveries about the ''dark ages'' of the universe, the critical period from three minutes after the explosive moment of creation until the appearance of enormous galaxies.
They hope to answer one of the most perplexing questions in cosmology: how primeval particles, hurtling apart from the Big Bang, managed to combine into atoms, which then clumped together to eventually form stars, galaxies and clusters of galaxies in the evolving universe.


ServiceMaster LP reports earnings for Revenue
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ServiceMaster LP (NYSE)
Revenue
394,159,000
366,725,000
Net inc
15,484,000
14,824,000
Share earns
.47
.46
Yr rev
1,531,276,000
1,425,316,000
Net inc
64,626,000
60,001,000
Share earns
2.02
1.90


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
12mo Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,385,875,000
1,357,381,000
Net inc
226,872,000
130,773,000
Share earns
4.32
2.42
The company said prior 12 months included a gain of $16,847,000 from an accounting change and a writeoff of $91 million for a portion of the Zimmer generating station.


Bradshaw and Blount Among 4 Voted Into Hall
LEAD: Terry Bradshaw and Mel Blount, the quarterback and cornerback who helped the Pittsburgh Steelers win four Super Bowl championships in the 1970's, were named to the Pro Football Hall of Fame yesterday.
Art Shell, an offensive tackle for the Oakland and Los Angeles Raiders, and Willie Wood, a defensive back and punt-return specialist for the Green Bay


U.S. Said to Back Bonn Curbs On Chemical Trade to Libya
LEAD: A top Administration official told Congress today that the United States was satisfied with Bonn's recent efforts to stop West German companies from providing Libya with the equipment and expertise to make chemical weapons.


Capital Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,776,000
1,072,000
Per share
.40
.24
Yr net inc
7,010,000
b3,128,000
Per share
1.58
-
b-Net loss


It Takes a Stiff Upper Lip To Love Fish and Chips
LEAD: Fish and chips are to the British what hamburgers and fries are to Americans.
So every American who wants to go native will try fish and chips at least once on a visit.


American Healthcare Backs $311 Million Bid
LEAD: American Healthcare Management Inc., a hospital company that has been in bankruptcy for nearly two years, said today that its board had endorsed an buyout offer of about $311 million from Bain Capital and Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Varian Unit Has Suspension Lifted
LEAD: Varian Continental Electronics, a division of Varian Associates that was suspended last July from Federal contracts by the Defense Department in an inquiry into reported procurement fraud, has had its suspension lifted by the Navy, the parent company said.


Economic Scene; Why It Pays To Be Generous
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH'S inaugural call ''to celebrate the quieter, deeper successes that are not made of gold and silk'' probably will not persuade many free enterprisers to trade their Adam Smith neckties for ladles at the local soup kitchen.
For Smith, after all, the glory of competitive markets lay in their capacity to direct private greed to public benefit.


Wine Talk
LEAD: WHERE else but California?
Where else would one find an organization calling itself - in all seriousness - ''Association in Search of a Name''?


F&amp;M National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M National (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,980,000
2,650,000
Per share
.40
.36
Yr net inc
8,980,000
8,460,000
Per share
1.22
1.15


Adaptec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 23
1988
1987
Revenue
15,607,000
12,936,000
Net inc
220,000
431,000
Share earns
.03
.06
6mo rev
45,249,000
43,231,000
Net inc
715,000
3,106,000
Share earns
.09
.41


Eating Well
LEAD: AT Rancho La Puerta, a Mexican spa that advertises itself as the place ''where the fitness revolution began in 1940,'' lunch and dinner always begin with soup.


Income Rises at 3 Phone Companies
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group said yesterday that its earnings in the fourth quarter climbed by 66 percent from the corresponding period last year, which was depressed by several extraordinary items.


Caesars Palace Named For Leonard-Hearns
LEAD: While a Sugar Ray Leonard-Thomas Hearns match is not yet a fait accompli, it is apparently close to being one.


Knicks Hand Lakers Their First Home Loss
LEAD: Patrick Ewing walked around the hotel today telling everyone, ''I want to return the Lakers the favor.''


Merck &amp; Co Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,534,100,000
1,394,400,000
Net inc
307,300,000
232,400,000
Share earns
.77
.58
Yr sales
5,939,500,000
5,061,300,000
Net inc
1,206,800,000
906,400,000
Share earns
3.05
2.23


FMC Gold Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Gold Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
44,700,000
42,400,000
Net inc
15,300,000
13,800,000
Share earns
.23
.21
Yr sales
171,100,000
153,300,000
Net inc
61,200,000
49,800,000
Share earns
.93
.76


Midwest Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midwest Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,959,221
c4,301,000
Share earns
.99
.95
Yr net inc
b16,242,000
c18,105,000
Share earns
3.37
3.77
b-Included a gain of $1,863,000 from an accounting change.


First Albany Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Albany Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,237,000
14,590,000
Net inc
195,000
194,000
Share earns
.06
.06


British Troupe Is Bringing Its Plays and Pointers
LEAD: On a gray London afternoon four actors from the Royal National Theater took their places under the cold fluorescent lights of a church auditorium and delivered the opening lines of ''Apart From George,'' one of the two plays they are taking to theaters and college campuses in the United States.


U.S. Auto Companies Unite In Calling for Higher Tariff
LEAD: In an unusual show of solidarity, the Big Three auto makers have joined forces in urging the United States Treasury to uphold a 25 percent tariff on imported sport-utility vehicles and mini-vans.


Chief Executive Named At Amalgamated Bank
LEAD: Nicholas J. Palermo, a senior vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, has been named president and chief executive of the Amalgamated Bank of New York, a $1.6 billion institution owned by the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union.


NO VOTE ON RAISE, HOUSE WHIP SAYS
LEAD: A Democratic House leader said today that the House would not vote to halt a proposed 50 percent Congressional pay increase set to take effect automatically at 12:01 A.M.
Feb. 8.


South Carolina Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina Federal
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b1,659,000
c1,402,000
Per share
.72
.61
b-Included a gain on the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. preferred stock of $875,000 and is after a tax benefit of $116,000.


Kinark Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kinark Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,321,000
7,267,000
Net inc
483,000
b4,760,000
Share earns
.14
-
Yr sales
28,227,000
28,439,000
Net inc
1,441,000
b4,032,000
Share earns
.41
-
b-Net loss and after losses from discontinued operations of $5,120,000 for the quarter and $5,348,000 for the year.


Congress Would Vote Funds for More Refugees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Siege Ends at Argentine Army Base


Lendl Eliminates McEnroe to Reach Semifinal
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, playing almost perfect tennis, beat John McEnroe, 7-6, 6-2, 7-6, today to reach the Australian Open semifinals for the fourth straight time.


Europe Unity By '92 Doubted
LEAD: A leading American accounting firm said today that it was doubtful the European Community could achieve a single capital market by 1992.


Bundy Is Put to Death in Florida After Admitting Trail of Killings
LEAD: Theodore Bundy, among the most notorious killers in recent times, was electrocuted today, and about 200 people gathered outside the entrance of the Florida State Prison cheered when they heard the news.


Correction
LEAD: A recipe with the Eating Well column in The Living Section last Wednesday, for halibut and turnips, misstated the amount of lemon juice.
The correct amount is the juice of half a lemon.


Tandy Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Brands Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,555,000
27,524,000
Net inc
b5,077,000
c2,646,000
Share earns
1.26
.67
6mo sales
60,176,000
44,047,000
Net inc
b5,723,000
c3,181,000
Share earns
1.43
.81


Intercim reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intercim (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,700,522
754,031
Net inc
43,578
b144,142
Share earns
.01
-
6mo sales
3,004,949
1,142,176
Net inc
82,268
b406,928
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


A&amp;W Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A&amp;W Brands Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
20,832,000
17,166,000
Net inc
2,348,000
638,000
Share earns
.26
.06
Yr sales
102,354,000
74,862,000
Net inc
7,454,000
1,536,000
Share earns
.81
.20
Shares outst
9,020,000
7,047,000


Lloyd Gets Go-Ahead
LEAD: Commissioner Jay Ramsdell reversed an earlier decision yesterday and gave Lewis Lloyd permission to play for Cedar Rapids in the Continental Basketball Association immediately.
Ramsdell had refused to admit Lloyd to the league last November, saying that the former Drake guard had not shown over a long period that he had overcome the cocaine problem that brought his ban from the National Basketball Association two years ago.


James F. Collins, Is Dead at 85; General Headed Red Cross in War
LEAD: James F. Collins, a four-star general in the United States Army who in retirement served as president of the American Red Cross in the Vietnam War, died of prostate cancer on Sunday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 83 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


Choice Near for Pentagon Job
LEAD: Paul D. Wolfowitz, a former senior official in the State Department who is now Ambassador to Indonesia, is expected to be named to a high policy position in the Defense Department, Administration officials said Monday.


Union Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,582,100,000
1,377,900,000
Net inc
187,400,000
139,800,000
Share earns
1.65
1.23
Yr rev
6,067,600,000
5,350,800,000
Net inc
643,900,000
582,900,000
Share earns
5.65
5.10


GREENSPAN CALLS INFLATION TOO HIGH AND VOWS ACTION
LEAD: In an unusually direct statement, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that the nation's inflation rate was unacceptably high and that he would seek to reduce it.


Summcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summcorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,243,000
5,602,000
Per share
.60
.64
Yr net inc
19,304,000
17,206,000
Per share
2.20
1.90


Louisiana-Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
448,300,000
416,200,000
Net inc
31,100,000
30,100,000
Share earns
.81
.79
Yr sales
1,799,400,000
1,654,200,000
Net inc
135,200,000
118,800,000
Share earns
3.54
3.11


Tisch Family Gives $30 Million to N.Y.U.
LEAD: Laurence A. and Preston Robert Tisch and their families have given $30 million to New York University and its Medical Center.
In gratitude, the university said it was changing the name of the 26-year-old University Hospital on First Avenue to Tisch Hospital.


Cenvest Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvest Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,288,000
b874,000
Per share
.34
-
Yr net inc
4,203,000
3,469,000
Per share
1.15
.89
b-Net loss


Wilkins's 41 Help Defeat Cavaliers
LEAD: Dominique Wilkins scored 41 points, equaling his season high, and hit a key 3-point goal in the fourth quarter tonight to lead the Atlanta Hawks to a 121-105 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Helicopter Crash Kills Two
LEAD: A helicopter clipped power lines and crashed in flame Sunday in a remote area near former President Ronald Reagan's ranch, killing the two people aboard, the authorities said.
The crashed occurred about eight miles from Mr.
Reagan's ranch, said Deputy Don Friedley of the Santa Barbara County Sheriff's Department.


Imperial Oil Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,860,000,000
1,950,000,000
Net inc
73,000,000
b177,000,000
Share earns
.45
1.08
Yr rev
7,210,000,000
7,630,000,000
Net inc
501,000,000
b745,000,000
Share earns
3.06
4.55


Valley National Bancorp of New Jersey reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp of New Jersey (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,833,428
7,579,958
Per share
.62
.60
Yr net inc
32,270,653
30,443,047
Per share
2.54
2.40
The per share earnings have been adjusted retroactively to reflect the 3-for-2 stock split distributed to shareholders of record at June 13, 1988.


The Pop Life
LEAD:  Music and Movies It wasn't so long ago that the movies ''Fame,'' ''Flashdance'' and ''Footloose'' were being touted as harbingers of a revival of the movie musical built around peppy pop-rock music and music videos.
Since the genre still has not fully established itself, a lot is riding on the reception given to ''Sing,'' a contemporary movie musical set in Brooklyn that is to open in theaters on


Congress Would Vote Funds for More Refugees; Our Latin Quagmire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place; Closed-End Fund Draws a Suitor
LEAD: ANOTHER closed-end fund came under the gun yesterday as an investor group disclosed it had 10.82 percent of the shares in the Cypress Fund and demanded that the fund convert to open-end status.
Such a move would immediately raise the value of shares in the fund.


Review/Dance; Adding a Theater Role
LEAD: Michele Elliman combined acting with dancing in two examples of dance-theater on Sunday night at the Vital Arts Center.


Greek Jurists Protest Attacks
LEAD: Greece's courts came to a standstill today as judicial officials and lawyers began a 10-day strike in protest over recent terrorist attacks against their colleagues.


Congress Would Vote Funds for More Refugees; They Needn't Compete
LEAD: To the Editor:


Domestic Vehicle Sales Decline 11.5%
LEAD: Sales of new domestic cars and light trucks fell 11.5 percent in mid-January from a year earlier, the seven domestic manufacturers reported today.


Contraceptives Crucial in Fighting Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Capitals 4, Kings 4: Scott Stevens and Dave Christian scored in the final 49 seconds of regulation last night as Washington overcame a three-goal deficit in the final 13 minutes 22 seconds for the tie at Landover, Md.
With Washington behind by 4-3, Larry Murphy stopped a clearing pass by the Kings' goalie, Glenn Healy, behind the Los Angeles goal and centered the puck to Christian, who put a wrist shot just inside the right post with five seconds remaining for the tie.


In NATO, Brand New Missile Debate
LEAD: A major test of strength involving the United States, its West European allies and the Soviet Union is shaping up as the Bush Administration is settling into office, senior American and West European diplomats say.


Officials in New York Region Assess Effects of Bias Ruling
LEAD: While acknowledging the uncertainty raised by a United States Supreme Court decision issued Monday, Connecticut and New Jersey officials, vowed yesterday to continue with state programs that set aside a percentage of government contracts for minority-owned businesses.


Freeport McMoran Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
588,830,000
457,191,000
Net inc
54,498,000
53,255,000
Share earns
.78
.75
Yr rev
1,944,638,000
1,514,427,000
Net inc
288,569,000
234,735,000
Share earns
4.13
3.38


Southwestern Bell Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,186,200,000
2,152,700,000
Net inc
305,200,000
246,500,000
Share earns
1.02
.82
Yr rev
8,452,700,000
8,002,600,000
Net inc
1,060,100,000
1,047,100,000
Share earns
3.53
3.48


Carpenter Technology Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carpenter Technology Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
151,263,000
125,943,000
Net inc
8,251,000
4,022,000
Share earns
.90
.44
6mo sales
293,443,000
241,183,000
Net inc
14,818,000
6,108,000
Share earns
1.62
.67


Rohm &amp; Haas Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
594,600,000
531,900,000
Net inc
42,300,000
36,700,000
Share earns
.64
.55
Yr sales
2,535,000,000
2,203,200,000
Net inc
230,100,000
195,500,000
Share earns
3.46
2.85


Illinois Central Transportation Co reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Central Transportation Co (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
556,400,000
548,600,000
Net inc
b47,700,000
2,400,000
b-After a gain of $61.3 million from a change in accounting.
All figures are for the company as a subsidiary of Whitman Corp.


United Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
750,000
b149,000
Per share
.47
.09
Shares outst
1,550,723
1,650,000
Yr net inc
2,460,000
b2,422,000
Per share
1.52
1.41
Shares outst
1,566,607
1,650,000


Nets Edge Nuggets To Stop Slide By CLIFTON BROWN
LEAD: The Nets are sick of losing leads and tired of losing games.


Siberia-to-Alaska Ski Trip Planned by U.S.-Soviet Team
LEAD: In one of the more unusual sidelights to the improvement in Soviet-American relations, Eskimos and explorers from the two countries plan a trek across the ice in the Bering Strait from Siberia to Alaska this year, the first time such a trip is known to have been attempted on skis since 1914.


Curtice-Burns Foods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtice-Burns Foods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 23
1988
1987
Sales
212,136,000
193,051,000
Net inc
4,758,000
3,674,000
Share earns
.85
.66
6mo sales
379,803,000
350,811,000
Net inc
7,808,000
6,468,000
Share earns
1.40
1.16


Penn Central Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
468,600,000
371,100,000
Net inc
19,300,000
cd8,700,000
Share earns
.27
-
Yr sales
1,546,500,000
1,261,100,000
Net inc
b103,300,000
c36,200,000
Share earns
1.46
.46


Court Ruling Is a Bitter Irony for Richmond Blacks
LEAD: All things considered, a case might be made that this city no longer qualifies as the capital of the Confederacy, at least not in the old sense.


Beans, Old or New, Win Fans Among Chefs and Nutritionists
LEAD: ALTHOUGH people don't usually rhapsodize at cocktail parties about great bean dishes they have enjoyed lately, that is beginning to change.
As new varieties of dried beans arrive on the market, and research unveils ever greater nutritional properties, beans are finding passionate advocates among culinarians.


Mistrial Motion Is Denied in Steinberg Case
LEAD: The presiding judge in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg denied a defense motion for a mistrial yesterday as the jury, deliberating for the second day, asked to review a videotape of Hedda Nussbaum's injuries.


Toshiba Unit Starts Making Telephones
LEAD: The Toshiba Corporation said it had begun assembling cellular car telephones in the United States.
A Toshiba spokesman said that the company's Toshiba America Inc. subsidiary began production last week at its plant in Irvine, Calif., which assembles 10,000 to 12,000 mobile telephones a month, using Japanese components.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.10
9.10
6.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.22
8.28
5.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.26
8.30
6.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.97
9.03
8.34
30-YR.


Bush Confers on the Budget, Suggesting Weekly Meetings
LEAD: President Bush told Congressional leaders from both parties today that he would specify his budget priorities when he addresses Congress on Feb. 9.
He suggested weekly bipartisan budget negotiations between the two branches to work out a quick compromise.


About New York; Autism: Illness That Can Steal A Child's Sparkle
LEAD: ''People used to say to me they hoped they had a baby just like mine,'' Sarah said of Eric, her 3-year-old.
But a year ago, Eric was found to be autistic.
Layers and layers of a barrier that medical science little understands now separate the child from the world, and the world from the child.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Maine Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
60,819
423,271
Per share
.04
.30
Yr net inc
1,093,376
1,913,373
Per share
.79
1.36
The company said the decrease in earnings is primarily due to net securities losses of $475,864 in 1988, compared with net securities gains of $872,745 in 1987.


Detroit Edison Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
760,698,000
672,863,000
Net loss
b462,396,000
c106,804,000
Share earns
-
.60
Yr rev
3,102,172,000
2,856,731,000
Net loss
b378,826,000
c554,974,000
Share earns
-
3.25


Northern Telecom Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom Ltd (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,530,000,000
1,320,000,000
Net loss
17,500,000
b140,000,000
Share earns
-
.57
Yr rev
5,410,000,000
4,910,000,000
Net inc
183,200,000
347,200,000
Share earns
.70
1.39


Massbank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massbank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,154,000
1,304,000
Per share
.41
.43
Shares outst
2,827,763
3,053,893
Yr net inc
4,917,000
5,521,000
Per share
1.71
1.71
Shares outst
2,868,339
3,237,645


At Last, Food for the Starving in Sudan
LEAD: Thousands face death by starvation in the southern Sudan.
The Khartoum regime of Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi won't let relief agencies fly in food lest it feed non-Islamic rebels.
Until now, Washington scarcely uttered a peep for fear of pushing the Khartoum Government further into Libya's orbit.


Carl F. Jellinghaus, Editor, 71
LEAD: Carl F. Jellinghaus, a retired executive editor of The Record newspaper in Hackensack, N.J., died of congestive heart failure yesterday in Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.


Business May Cut Back, but Not on Its Private Jets
LEAD: Despite the focus on belt tightening at many companies, the business jet is becoming more popular than ever.


Employee Is Said to Detail German Link to Plant
LEAD: A prosecution witness has given new evidence further implicating a state-owned engineering company and the Imhausen chemical company in the construction of a chemical plant in Libya, Stern magazine says.


Short Sales Outstanding Drop by 0.4% on Nasdaq
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported a four-tenths of 1 percent monthly decrease in the ''short interest'' for the most active over-the-counter securities in its national market system.


Polaroid Board Spurns Offer
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation today rejected a sweetened $3.2 billion bid from Roy E. Disney's Shamrock Holdings Inc., calling it inadequate and not in the best interests of shareholders, but Shamrock immediately said it would pursue its offer for the instant-camera company.


Credit Cards Back $1 Billion Issue
LEAD: National Credit Card Trust 1989-1 is offering $1 billion of credit-card-backed securities, due in 1994, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Syracuse Beats Boston College, 72-60
LEAD: Sherman Douglas scored 19 points as 14th-ranked Syracuse snapped a three-game Big East Conference Closing streak tonight by defeating Boston College, 72-60.


AGFA Photo Division Uses McCann-Erickson
LEAD: The photo retail division of AGFA Leverkusen, a unit of Bayer G.m.b.H., based near Dusseldorf, West Germany, has retained McCann-Erickson Worldwide to create its advertising for Western Europe.
Several agencies formerly did the ads, which have about a $16 million budget.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Apogee Enterprises Inc., Minneapolis, a maker of windows and other glass products, named Gerald K. Anderson president, succeeding Donald W. Goldfus, who continues as chairman and chief executive.


Cannon Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cannon Express Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,999,924
3,134,075
Net inc
367,007
233,414
Share earns
.22
.14
6mo rev
8,007,299
5,799,799
Net inc
804,131
477,778
Share earns
.48
.28


Lake Sunapee Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Sunapee Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
252,000
220,000
Per share
.12
.09
Yr net inc
1,071,000
1,616,000
Per share
.50
.72


Ruling Slows U.S. Effort At Fish Market
LEAD: A Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday dealt a sharp setback to Federal prosecutors' efforts to limit what they have said is Mafia domination of the Fulton Fish Market.


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBB Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,926,000
4,114,000
Per share
.42
.44
Yr net inc
14,120,000
15,180,000
Per share
1.50
-
The 1987 year's per share figure was not applicable; the company went public in March 1987.


Morris Goldsmith, Jewish Legion Member, 98
LEAD: Morris Goldsmith, one of the last surviving members of the Jewish Legion, died Monday at the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J.
He was 98 years old and lived in Toms River, N.J.


Jackson Backs Mayor In the Chicago Primary
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today endorsed Mayor Eugene Sawyer for the Democratic mayoral nomination.


Bright Chicago Students Lured to Teaching
LEAD: Fifteen of Chicago's best and brightest high school seniors are being enticed into the teaching profession in a scholarship program under corporate sponsorship.


BMC Software Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMC Software Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,066,000
11,699,000
Net inc
3,726,000
2,387,000
Share earns
.23
.15
9mo rev
42,271,000
29,521,000
Net inc
8,404,000
6,170,000
Share earns
.53
.40


Thomas McConnell, 87; Led U. of Buffalo
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas B. McConnell, professor emeritus at the University of California Graduate School of Education at Berkeley, died of heart failure Jan. 16 at his home in Oakland, Calif.
He was 87 years old and suffered from Parkinson's disease.


Books of The Times; Exploring the South, or Rednecks Reconsidered
LEAD:  A Turn in the South  By V. S. Naipaul  307 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


U.S. Files Charges Against Drexel; A Guilty Plea by Firm Is Expected
LEAD: Following a month of negotiations between Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Federal prosecutors, the Government filed six felony counts of mail and securities fraud against the firm yesterday in a Federal court in Manhattan.


Salvador Balks at Rebels' Voting Plan
LEAD: After the Salvadoran rebels presented a proposal that they said would lead to their participation in elections for the first time in a decade, senior officials in the Government and ruling party today tentatively rejected the key point.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International A2-11


Trading Black Tie and Tray For White Tie and Spotlight
LEAD: Peter Stewart put on a white jacket and black tie last Thursday to serve lunch for 150 guests in the Seventh Regiment Armory.
On Sunday, he will get into white tie and tails to make his New York recital debut, singing works by Debussy, Tchaikovsky and Stephen Foster at Alice Tully Hall.


Incstar Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Incstar Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,472,500
3,655,400
Net inc
434,200
b258,700
Share earns
.13
.08
9mo sales
13,943,000
9,530,900
Net inc
1,445,800
b502,700
Share earns
.44
.16
b-After gains from tax benefits of $35,500 for the quarter and $78,300 for the 9 months; the 9 months also included a loss of $51,300 on early extinguishment of debt.


Aristophanes Understood Gresham's Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agnew Hurt in Bicycle Mishap
LEAD: Former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew tumbled off a bicycle and broke a hip Sunday.
Mr.
Agnew, 70 years old, was reported recovering in good condition in Eisenhower Medical Center, a hospital spokesman, Mike McFadden, said today.


California Financial Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Financial Holding (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,664,504
1,574,581
Share earns
.41
.39
Yr net inc
5,376,875
8,706,374
Share earns
1.34
2.17


Not All Miami Papers Focused on Weather
LEAD: To the Editor:


Loral Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loral Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
379,000,000
374,000,000
Net inc
22,000,000
18,700,000
Share earns
.88
.76
9mo sales
1,080,000,000
1,030,000,000
Net inc
62,600,000
51,700,000
Share earns
2.50
2.10


Winfield, Steinbrenner Agree to an Arbitrator
LEAD: Michael Armstrong, a prominent New York attorney and baseball fan, said yesterday that he had agreed to arbitrate the dispute between Dave Winfield, the Yankee outfielder, and George Steinbrenner over the Winfield Foundation.


Sun Co. Approached GAF
LEAD: The GAF Corporation disclosed yesterday that it was approached last month by the Sun Company, which expressed an interest in buying the company.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
119,943,000
107,116,000
Net inc
20,101,000
11,359,000
Share earns
.66
.37
Yr rev
460,468,000
426,145,000
Net inc
72,887,000
70,028,000
Share earns
2.35
2.34


First Financial Management Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Management Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
141,281,000
91,838,000
Net inc
10,060,000
4,436,000
Share earns
.61
.33
Yr rev
423,700,000
175,095,000
Net inc
29,295,000
11,641,000
Share earns
1.81
1.16


Washington Talk: The Presidency; Tough Words to Translate: 'Kinder and Gentler'
LEAD: Even as George Bush begins to define his Presidency, a vigorous debate has unfolded around what he meant when he promised a ''kinder, gentler nation.''


Details From the Drexel Charges
LEAD: The charges filed yesterday by the Government against Drexel Burnham Lambert provide details of six felony counts.
The investment firm pleaded not guilty and is expected to plead guilty once it settles a civil lawsuit brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Report Finds Need for Action To Close Gaps Between Races
LEAD: Asserting that the greatness of a nation is measured by its treatment of ''the least among us,'' the National Urban League today implored President Bush to narrow gaps between blacks and whites in poverty, employment, housing and education.


New Con Ed President In Line to Run Utility
LEAD: The Consolidated Edison Company of New York yesterday named Eugene R. McGrath president and chief operating officer, putting him in position to become the utility's next chief executive.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: STATE park rangers here are adding grist to the mill. Real grist. Real mill.


Goldin Requests Inquiry on Shift In S.R.O. Law
LEAD: The New York City Comptroller, Harrison J. Goldin, called yesterday for an independent investigation to determine how a city law was changed to allow the developer Harry Macklowe to start building a midtown hotel two years early.


Kidnapping Victim Found Slain in Jersey
LEAD: A 58-year-old warehouse supervisor was kidnapped while driving to work Monday morning and later slain, even though his wife left $25,000 in ransom in the parking lot of a diner here as demanded, the authorities said.


Profits Off At 3 Big Oil Companies
LEAD: Three major oil companies yesterday reported lower fourth-quarter profits, principally because of lower crude oil prices, the companies said.


McKesson Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,797,700,000
1,714,200,000
Net inc
b30,800,000
c28,100,000
Share earns
.73
.66
9mo rev
5,169,000,000
4,844,600,000
Net inc
b75,200,000
c72,500,000
Share earns
1.77
1.70


FMC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
882,100,000
856,300,000
Net inc
36,000,000
5,500,000
Share earns
1.00
.33
Yr sales
3,286,900,000
3,139,100,000
Net inc
129,200,000
180,500,000
Share earns
3.60
4.29


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:  Debt


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: ''OFTEN imitated, never duplicated'' boasts the sign at the shop where Irving and Edith Gorsky have been selling pepperoni rolls, a Youngstown favorite, for 18 years.
The sandwich is baked daily at the West Gate Deli &amp; Food Carry Out, the Gorskys' small storefront bakery-delicatessen on this city's west side.


Scowcroft Names Diplomats and Intelligence Officers to top National Security Posts
LEAD: President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, has selected a handful of experienced diplomats and intelligence officers to help him coordinate foreign policy and national security affairs for the new Administration.


3 Rescued From Mine That Collapsed in Peru
LEAD: Rescuers found three buried miners alive today and heard faint tapping inside a dilapidated gold mine where as many as 200 men were trapped in a cave-in, officials said.


Agreement on Drug Testing
LEAD: Olympic officials of East Germany and the United States have agreed to develop a joint anti-drug program, similar to the one being put together by the United States and the Soviet Union.


Brady Voices Concern Over Takeover Debts
LEAD: Saying that he and President Bush had a ''gnawing feeling'' about the surge of corporate takeovers, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that he was studying ways to curb the use of high-yield ''junk bonds'' to finance such deals.


So Grand At the Game
LEAD: As President Bush's glowing reviews prove again, the press follows the election returns even more closely than the Supreme Court does.


Top New York Wine Maker Resigns 2 Jobs
LEAD: JIM GIFFORD, the wine maker and president of Glenora Wine Cellars, a major commercial winery in Dundee, N.Y., in the Finger Lakes region, resigned both positions last week.


Arianespace's $3 Billion Order
LEAD: Arianespace, Europe's commercial space transport company, said it planned to order 50 Ariane 4 launching vehicles for about $3 billion from its industrial partners next month.
The Ariane 4 rockets will be used to put satellites into orbit between 1991 and 1999.


MAI Basic Move
LEAD: MAI Basic Four Inc. asked a Federal District Court judge to lift an order blocking its $20-a-share bid for Prime Computer Inc.
In court documents responding to a judge's concerns, MAI Basic said Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. was confident it could raise $875 million to finance the takeover.
Prime, based in Natick, Mass., said it would fight to keep the court order in place.


Officials in Cities and States Vow to Continue Minority Contractor Programs
LEAD: City and state officials around the nation vowed today to continue their efforts to aid minority contractors, despite the Supreme Court's decision on Monday to invalidate a Richmond law that channeled 30 percent of public works funds to businesses owned by minorities.


Murdoch to Introduce Sports Travel in June
LEAD: In June Murdoch Magazines will introduce Sports Travel, a trade magazine catering to sports-minded travel planners, athletic directors, promoters and travel agents.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:  DEAR DIARY:


Ahmanson, H F &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson, H F &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b67,751,000
c46,212,000
Share earns
.68
.47
Shares outst
98,988,642
98,541,040
Yr net inc
b201,960,000
c213,280,000
Share earns
2.04
2.17
Shares outst
98,923,661
98,478,74 5


Mother Jones Settles It: 60's Are Over
LEAD: IN the style of the television show ''Jeopardy,'' today the answer will come first.
It is: Susan Sarandon.


Review/Theater; An Aching to Be Hank Williams
LEAD: As ''The Night Hank Williams Died'' moves to its conclusion, a theatergoer may ponder the question of how a play can be so amusing and ultimately so poignant.
For the answer, look back at the inspiration: those country music songs that encouraged so many singers and songwriters to fantasize about conquering


Charles C. Hornbostel; Track Star Was 77
LEAD: Charles C. Hornbostel, a former holder of the world-best time for the 600-yard run indoors and the first full-time president of Financial Executives Institute, died of Parkinson's disease Jan. 13 in New London, N.H.
Mr.
Hornbostel, who had residences at Granthan, N.H., and Savannah, Ga., was 77 years old.


Ball Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
233,000,000
214,800,000
Net loss
11,400,000
c12,900,000
Share earns
-
.54
Yr sales
1,073,000,000
1,054,000,000
Net inc
b50,500,000
60,100,000
Share earns
2.17
2.54


Review/Film; Hong Kong View of China
LEAD: After the revolution of 1911 deposed China's Emperor, the country was in the hands of warlords who established fiefs, looted them and decamped quickly as the next gangster moved in to seize control.
This is the setting for ''Peking Opera Blues,'' a film from Hong Kong that opens today at Film Forum 1.


EASE SOVIET TRADE, SHULTZ ADVOCATED IN THE FINAL DAYS
LEAD: In one of his final acts as Secretary of State, George P. Shultz argued that the United States should in effect reward the Soviet Union for a timely withdrawal from Afghanistan by easing trade controls imposed when Soviet forces swept into the country, senior Administration officials said today.


Byelorussia Plans to Build Memorial to Stalin's Victims
LEAD: Authorities in the Soviet republic of Byelorussia have agreed to build a monument to thousands of people shot by Stalin's police in the Kuropaty Forest near Minsk in the 1930's, the Soviet press agency Tass said today.


First American Savings FA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Savings FA (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,345,020
1,651,051
Per share
.39
.48
Yr net inc
7,237,437
6,716,513
Per share
2.10
1.95


Digital Introduces Minicomputer Line
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation introduced the VAX 6300 series of minicomputers that is up to 35 percent faster than its 6200 line, its best-selling computers.
The company, based in Maynard, Mass., said the new line would probably be overhauled with improved models within nine months.
The prices of the new computers start at $155,200.


U.N. Chief Offers Proposal for Namibia Force
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar proposed cuts today in the size and cost of the peacekeeping force that the United Nations will send to Namibia this year to oversee its independence from South Africa.


Bemis Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
270,509,000
241,658,000
Net inc
12,627,000
10,194,000
Share earns
.47
.37
Yr sales
1,069,050,000
929,995,000
Net inc
39,646,000
31,965,000
Share earns
1.48
1.18


Dominion Textile Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Textile Inc
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
357,300,000
279,600,000
Net inc
2,500,000
b32,800,000
Share earns
.04
1.71
6mo sales
664,500,000
536,300,000
Net inc
200,000
b42,200,000
Share earns
-
2.16


Paccar Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
895,308,000
708,700,000
Net inc
46,366,000
35,419,000
Share earns
1.30
.98
Yr rev
3,301,976,000
2,573,639,000
Net inc
175,808,000
112,462,000
Share earns
4.90
3.13


CRS Sirrine Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CRS Sirrine Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
155,778,000
98,589,000
Net inc
2,571,000
1,242,000
Share earns
.41
.20
6mo rev
312,563,000
182,535,000
Net inc
4,706,000
9,390,000
Share earns
.76
1.50


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,428,000,000
2,412,000,000
Net inc
b249,000,000
c150,000,000
Share earns
.59
.35
Yr rev
9,483,000,000
9,156,000,000
Net inc
1,188,000,000
c950,000,000
Share earns
2.81
2.21


In China, A Scholar Of Culinary History
LEAD: WANG RENXING'S concentration is total as he absorbs the fragrance, texture and color of each dish.
His face is intent, eyebrows knitted together and forehead lightly beaded with sweat, while he tastes the food.


Transactions
LEAD:  BASEBALL  PITTSBURGH (NL) - Signed Bill Landrum and Bill Krueger, pitchers, and Mike LaValliere, catcher, to one-year contracts.
TEXAS (AL) - Signed Rick Leach, outfielder, to a one-year contract.
COLLEGES  BUCKNELL - Announced the resignation of George Landis, head football coach.


Earnings Up 32% at Merck
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company, the nation's leading pharmaceutical concern, said today that its fourth-quarter earnings increased 32 percent, to $307.3 million.


World News Is Resurrected
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc.'s World News operation, the business-reporting service that was abandoned by the publisher in a cost-cutting move late last year, has been resurrected as a private company by a former staff member.


HBO &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
51,583,000
49,134,000
Net inc
4,912,000
b6,683,000
Share earns
.31
.39
Yr rev
187,409,000
175,230,000
Net inc
12,519,000
b13,321,000
Share earns
.81
.62


Lincoln Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Financial Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,429,000
3,670,000
Per share
.78
.53
Yr net inc
18,322,000
14,673,000
Per share
2.64
2.12


Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison Co of New York Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,211,466,000
1,191,201,000
Net inc
94,228,000
61,107,000
Share earns
.75
.47
Yr rev
5,108,826,000
5,094,418,000
Net inc
599,282,000
550,114,000
Share earns
4.93
4.42


Bush Will Stand By Nominee To Health Post, Officials Say
LEAD: White House officials and leading Republican lawmakers expressed confidence today that Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan would remain President Bush's choice for Secretary of Health and Human Services and would be confirmed by the Senate, despite his latest collision with the President's views on abortion policy.


Bush Is Asked to Ban Oil Drilling in Arctic Refuge
LEAD: Leading conservation organizations called on President Bush today to review and reverse the Reagan Administration's decision to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling.


Leaving Miami, Wilson Gets in Touch With the Bengals
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the Cincinnati Bengal running back who had been missing since Saturday when he was discovered having just used cocaine, phoned the Bengals at 10:30 this morning from a hotel here.
He said he was with his parents and was leaving for the Miami Airport, said John Murdough, a Bengal business consultant.


Scandal Fells Another Japanese Official
LEAD: The head of the Economic Planning Agency resigned today after admitting that he had received a large political donation from the company at the heart of a scandal over insider stock dealings.


Gotti Free on Bail After Plea In Shooting of Union Leader
LEAD: After spending a night in jail, John Gotti, the reputed chief of the nation's largest organized-crime group, pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that he ordered the shooting of an official of a carpenters' union in Manhattan in 1986.


Sonoco Products Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
403,928,000
376,745,000
Net inc
24,374,000
12,085,000
Share earns
.56
.27
Yr sales
1,599,751,000
1,312,052,000
Net inc
96,277,000
61,482,000
Share earns
2.20
1.40


Freeport McMoran Resources Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Resources Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
312,464,000
272,773,000
Net inc
43,921,000
42,877,000
Share earns
.55
.62
Shares outst
79,966,000
69,507,000
Yr rev
1,159,505,000
893,306,000
Net inc
207,255,000
126,976,000
Share earns
2.77
1.93
Shares outst
74,905,000
65,829,000


Firstier Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstier Financial (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b25,349,000
c20,020,000
Per share
5.04
4.00
b-After income of $6,251,000 from discontinued operations.
c-After a loss of $320,000 from discontinued operations.


Book Notes
LEAD:  Awaiting the Other Shoe


Corrections
LEAD: A bank earnings listing in Business Day yesterday bore an erroneous company name.
The earnings, listed between those of New England Bancorp and Neworld Bancorp, were those of NBB Bancorp of New Bedford, Mass., not NBD Bancorp of Detroit.
A corrected version appears in the listing today.


Indonesia Patent Law
LEAD: Indonesia proposed legislation today to protect foreign patents after Washington announced trade sanctions on Thailand last week for refusing to do so.
The State Secretary, Major General Moerdiono, said Indonesia's first patent law would include protection of pharmaceutical brand names, one of the more widely pirated items in developing countries.


Morgan Stanley Net Soars; Shearson Reduces Its Loss
LEAD: Arranging corporate buyouts and mergers continues to be the bright spot in earnings at securities houses, while sales and trading of stocks and bonds remain sluggish.


If Police Can't Take Action, the Streets Will Be Even More Unsafe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,037,000
3,853,000
Per share
.49
.40
Yr net loss
10,433,000
b26,767,000
Per share
-
2.79
b-Net income


Corning Glass Works reports earnings for 12wks to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Glass Works (NYSE)
12wks to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
547,900,000
547,500,000
Net inc
b51,600,000
c59,000,000
Share earns
.58
.65
52wk sales
2,174,500,000
2,117,700,000
Net inc
b210,700,000
c207,500,000
Share earns
2.34
2.25


Review/Television; A Comedy Special Without the Bile
LEAD: There is something different about a comedy special currently on the schedule of Showtime, the pay-cable service. ''The Comedy and Magic Club's 10th Anniversary Special'' is downright affable.
While audiences might still be reeling from the poisonous spleen of Sam Kinison or the hate rallies of Andrew Dice Clay, along comes a batch of stand-up comics who seem quite willing to be amiable.


A Victorian Relic, Flogging, Arouses New Distaste
LEAD: Eight times last year, petty criminals were led into a bare room in the old Lai Chi Kok Prison where, stripped naked from the waist down, their hands and feet bound, they were forced to bend over a thick leather bar as they were beaten by a prison guard using a long rattan cane.


Best Buy Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Buy Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
171,970,000
161,399,000
Net inc
3,554,000
1,477,000
Share earns
.43
.18
9mo rev
400,912,000
332,466,000
Net inc
4,418,000
3,288,000
Share earns
.53
.40


Scorecard for the G.O.P. Money Team
LEAD: Though it finally acted mostly to avoid embarrassing President Bush's Commerce Secretary-designate, Robert Mosbacher, the Republican National Committee deserves credit for coming forward with a list of big money donors to the fall campaign.
Nonetheless Mr.
Mosbacher, who served as Mr.
Bush's chief fund-raiser, needs to make fuller disclosure before he is confirmed.


Five-Year Drive Raises $60 Million for Culver
LEAD: Culver Military Academy and Culver Girls Academy have raised a record $60 million in a five-year campaign, academy officials in Culver, Ind., have announced.


Stein Attacked on Campaign-Finance Refusal
LEAD: Representatives of four civic groups criticized City Council President Andrew J. Stein yesterday for declining to participate in a new campaign-financing program that restricts contributions and spending.


Japanese Cabinet Approves Budget Rise for Foreign Aid
LEAD: Japan's Cabinet approved a budget today that increases spending on foreign aid even more than a draft made public last week.


Escagenetics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Escagenetics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,054,108
627,798
Net loss
443,533
379,500
Shares outst
3,655,037
3,633,250
9mo rev
2,785,615
1,819,304
Net loss
1,473,581
924,499
Shares outst
3,645,955
3,633,250


U.S. Rebuffs Honeywell On Contract
LEAD: A Federal appeals board yesterday denied a protest by Honeywell Federal Systems Inc. of the Air Force's decision to award a $4.5 billion computer contract to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


S.E.C. Proposal To Congress
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has sent to Congress a legislative package that would expand the Federal agency's enforcement powers.


Rockefeller Center Properties Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockefeller Center Properties Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
10,583,000
c15,736,000
Share earns
.28
.41
Yr rev
124,824,000
105,570,000
Net inc
b49,690,000
c50,074,000
Share earns
1.32
1.33


The Macklowe Mess: Still a Mess
LEAD: The Macklowe case reveals a disturbing failure of New York City's government to do its job.
The more City Hall attempts to explain how it let Harry Macklowe start building his new midtown hotel two years early, the more embarrassing the matter becomes.


Vermont U. Surplus Yields a Deficit
LEAD: The University of Vermont is facing an unusual financial problem this year, a deficit caused by a surfeit of Vermont students.


Green Picks New Deputy Schools Chancellor
LEAD: The superintendent of Community School District 1 in lower Manhattan, Bernard Mecklowitz, will succeed Dr.
Bruce L. Williams as deputy schools chancellor.


Cray Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
330,885,000
163,610,000
Net inc
88,528,000
34,083,000
Share earns
2.80
1.08
Yr rev
756,306,000
687,336,000
Net inc
156,631,000
147,076,000
Share earns
4.99
4.65


Rayonier Timberlands LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rayonier Timberlands LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
15,803,000
11,166,000
Net inc
10,698,000
6,154,000
Share earns
.54
.37
Yr sales
90,600,000
68,719,000
Net inc
67,323,000
46,446,000
Share earns
3.34
2.34


Bond Yields at 7.2% to 7.75% For Carolina Power Agency
LEAD: The North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency tentatively priced yesterday $429.55 million of power system revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of about 7.75 percent for an issue due in 2012.


George Knudson, Pro Golfer, 51
LEAD: George Knudson, whom Ben Hogan once described as having the sweetest swing in professional golf, died of cancer today.
He was 51 years old.
Knudson, Canada's outstanding pro golfer of the 1960's and 70's, had been undergoing treatment for lung cancer since June 1987.


Director of N.J. Transit Quits
LEAD: The Executive Director of N.J.
Transit, Jerome C. Premo, whose use of an agency credit card came under scrutiny by the State Attorney General's office, resigned yesterday.
Under an agreement with the N.J.
Transit board of directors, the board will not seek any court action against Mr.
Premo.
The assistant commissioner of N.J.


Traders Goading the Policy Makers
LEAD: The fact that the dollar rally this year has been so persistent - and the fact that central bank intervention is finally quelling it - reflects an important change in the $400 billion foreign exchange market.


In Paris, Seductive Ungaro And Streamlined Lagerfeld
LEAD: Few designers ever lost caste by overestimating the demand for sexy clothes.
As the spring and summer couture openings continue here, Emanuel Ungaro, no stranger to the genre, achieved the apogee of seductive dressing this season.
He did it with flower prints, flaring skirts, open necklines, petticoats and tiny waistlines: all the classic appurtenances of appealing femininity.


Tougher Airline Security Steps Debated
LEAD: One month after a bomb destroyed a Pan American jetliner flying to New York from London, international aviation agencies and airlines are debating how broadly to apply new security measures aimed at preventing criminal attacks against passenger planes.


Court Doesn't Bar Affirmative Action, But Holds Plans to a Stringent Test
LEAD: In declaring unconstitutional the effort by Richmond to increase opportunities for blacks in the construction industry, the Supreme Court did not declare an end to government-sponsored affirmative action programs.


Heritage Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bancorp Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,970,000
2,631,000
Per share
.42
.38
Yr net inc
11,315,000
9,745,000
Per share
1.60
1.40
The fourth quarter results included a full write-down of $3.7 million investment in Cosine, a company formed to develop computer software to meet the data-processing needs of Heritage and other financial institutions.


Landmark Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancshares (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,405,000
1,125,000
Per share
.53
.21
Shares outst
6,349,000
5,226,000
Yr net inc
12,035,000
4,982,000
Per share
1.98
.95
Shares outst
5,944,000
5,071,000


Amerada Hess Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,193,819,000
1,274,601,000
Net inc
b66,277,000
cd79,568,000
Share earns
.80
-
Yr rev
4,263,544,000
4,784,589,000
Net inc
b124,217,000
d229,860,000
Share earns
1.51
2.73


One More Time, Islanders Find the Devils Too Much to Handle
LEAD: The Islanders harbor an avid dislike of the Devils, the team that soured their first-place divisional finish last spring by shoving them into a first-round playoff exit.
The Islanders believe the Devils stole their confidence back in April, and all the while they sank into last place in the league this season, they held a special grudge.


CNB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,398,000
2,914,000
Per share
.51
.43
Yr net inc
13,002,000
12,011,000
Per share
1.96
1.81


Acquittal in Slaying of Sergeant
LEAD: A 23-year-old woman has been cleared in the killing of a police sergeant during a raid at her apartment in which a fellow officer fired the fatal shot.


Seattle Journal; With Guru Deported, Disciples Struggle On
LEAD: Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh has changed his name again and his disciples are confused.
Reading the press release, No. 7/89 in a continuing series, didn't help much, even with its explanation that the Bhagwan part had to go because of the belated discovery that it meant ''genitals.''


Jennifer Convertibles reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jennifer Convertibles
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
6,000,492
2,481,386
Net loss
535,650
19,551
The results included the operations of two New York stores acquired in August 1988, as if these stores had been acquired in August 1987.


John Davidson, 80, Naval Academy Chief
LEAD: John Frederick Davidson, a retired rear admiral who was superintendent of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md., from 1960 to 1962, died Saturday at his home in Annapolis after suffering a heart attack.
He was 80 years old.


Armor All Products Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armor All Products Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
38,770,000
32,082,000
Net inc
6,304,000
5,608,000
Share earns
.30
.27
9mo rev
100,770,000
79,386,000
Net inc
17,117,000
13,819,000
Share earns
.82
.66


Officer Is Suspended From Force In Off-Duty Killing of a Motorist
LEAD: A New York City police officer was suspended without pay yesterday after he shot and killed a 62-year-old Brooklyn man Monday evening during a traffic dispute while he was off duty.


Sunwest Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
6,100,000
6,800,000
Per share
.65
.72
Yr net inc
23,300,000
32,300,000
Per share
2.50
3.30
The latest year net reflected the assimilation costs of two banks in Texas acquired early in the year, as well as a $7.7 million one-time securities gain taken during 1987.


Corrections
LEAD: The caption of a picture from The Associated Press on Dec. 12 showing Benazir Bhutto as she voted in the Pakistani election misidentified the woman with her.
The woman was the first wife of Ms.
Bhutto's father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, not Ms.
Bhutto's mother.


How to Gain Credibility On Eligibility
LEAD: Sports fans are generally uncomfortable when the real world intrudes on their games, so imagine how they squirmed last week when journalists and talk-show hosts were confronted with the disturbances in Miami, Proposition 42 and the suspension of Stanley Wilson, the Bengal fullback who was found using cocaine in his hotel room on the night before the biggest game of his career.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1988
From '87
Amerada Hess Corp.
$ 66,300,000
*
-
Ball Corp.
(11,400,000)
-
Browning-Ferris Industries
59,700,000
+
17.5
Chevron Corp.
175,000,000
-
25.2
Exxon Corp.


Niagara Share Corp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Share Corp (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Assets
191,237,509
169,110,721
Share earns
14.77
14.34
Shares outst
12,945,844
11,791,644
Assets represent net assets.
The latest assets and share earnings are after distributions from capital gains paid in 1988.


Psychiatric Nurse Wins British Literary Prize
LEAD: The first novel by a psychiatric nurse who began writing as a hobby won Britain's biggest literary prize on Tuesday, the Whitbread Book of the Year Award.


First Federal Bancorp of Michigan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Bancorp of Michigan (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,041,000
948,000
Per share
.28
.28
Shares outst
3,636,000
3,410,000
6mo net inc
2,053,000
1,565,000
Per share
.57
-
The per share earnings for the year- ago 6 months was not applicable; bank went public in September 1987.


Franklin Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
59,300,000
50,400,000
Net inc
18,200,000
16,000,000
Share earns
.69
.60
The company said year-ago revenue restated to reflect consolidation of previously unconsolidated subsidiaries.


SOVIET DEPARTURE IS SAID TO PROCEED
LEAD: Western diplomats said today that the Soviet Union might have withdrawn half its 30,000 troops from the area around the Afghan capital, Kabul.
Many of those remaining in the capital are expected to be gone by the end of this month, the diplomats said.


First Federal Savings Bank of Alabama reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Alabama
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b389,000
c578,000
Per share
.32
.50
b-Included an after-tax gain of $8,000 from the sale of mortgage- backed securities and a $53,000 after- tax charge relating to an accounting change.


Review/Theater; Hedda Gabler's Own Way
LEAD: Fresh from lampooning Ibsen and his ''new woman'' in a production of Shaw's early play ''The Philanderer,'' the Pearl Theater Company has turned its attention to the playwright himself with a workable revival of ''Hedda Gabler.''


Lessons
LEAD: With the exception of entertainment, it is hard to think of a field in which the United States dominates the world market more than it does in higher education.
Yet the system is fraught with contradictions.


Harris Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Revenue
555,222,000
492,847,000
Net inc
25,170,000
22,779,000
Share earns
.65
.56
6mo rev
1,041,693,000
999,472,000
Net inc
45,754,000
b76,602,000
Share earns
1.18
1.88


Woman Wins Approval To Be Episcopal Bishop
LEAD: The last barrier to the consecration of a woman as a bishop in the Episcopal Church fell yesterday when the Diocese of Massachusetts announced that its choice of the Rev.
Barbara C. Harris had been approved by a majority of the 118 bishops heading dioceses around the country.


SURVIVORS LEAVING SOVIET QUAKE AREA
LEAD: The authorities began evacuating women and children today from villages in a Soviet Central Asian republic where a mudslide after an earthquake buried parts of three settlements.
There was still uncertainty about how many people had died.


Onondaga Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onondaga Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,652,000
1,618,000
Per share
.43
.26
Yr net inc
7,958,000
7,006,000
Per share
1.30
-
The 1987 per share figure is not applicable because the bank went public on Aug.


Bush Has the Press Corps on the Run


Last 2 Plead Guilty In Slaying of Leader Of Custodial Union
LEAD: Two of four men charged in the 1987 gangland-style killing of Daniel F. Conlin, the head of the New York City school custodian's union, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder, conspiracy and weapons charges yesterday during a pre-trial hearing in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Mobil Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
13,886,000,000
14,214,000,000
Net inc
b469,000,000
c474,000,000
Share earns
1.14
1.15
Yr rev
54,877,000,000
51,387,000,000
Net inc
b2,094,000,000
c1,348,000,000
Share earns
5.09
3.28


Moore Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moore Financial Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b7,259,000
c5,075,000
Per share
.93
.66
Yr net inc
b25,464,000
c16,906,000
Per share
3.27
2.25
b-After provisions for credit losses of $2.6 million for the quarter and $10.9 million for the year.


Greenspan's Inflation Stance Spurs a Rally in the Dollar
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday, spurred by strong anti-inflation comments by Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and the absence of dollar-selling by central banks.


Schottenheimer Named Coach of Chiefs
LEAD: Marty Schottenheimer, whose Cleveland Browns teams compiled an impressive record of 46 victories and 31 defeats with four trips to the playoffs in four and a half seasons, was named yesterday to succeed Frank Gansz as coach of the Kansas City Chiefs.
Gansz, who was dismissed Jan. 5, won only four games in each of his two seasons with the Chiefs.


Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Southern Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
885,300,000
810,300,000
Net inc
b156,100,000
c113,700,000
Share earns
.99
.73
Yr rev
3,143,600,000
2,838,300,000
Net loss
b46,500,000
cd373,500,000
Share earns
-
2.37


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Utilities (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,279,491,000
2,080,898,000
Net inc
b233,922,000
b229,145,000
Share earns
2.15
2.11
b-Included net from discontinued operations of $9,078,000 and $14,616,000 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Germans See 2.5% Growth
LEAD: The West German economy is expected to grow at an inflation-adjusted rate of 2.5 percent this year after rising 3.4 percent in 1988, according to the Government's annual economic report, which was approved by the Cabinet today.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
197,879,000
177,764,000
Net inc
10,577,000
b9,771,000
Share earns
.29
-
Yr rev
773,978,000
731,488,000
Net inc
76,114,000
b168,711,000
Share earns
2.25
-


Arthur S. Hirsch, Judge, 80
LEAD: Arthur S. Hirsch, a retired New York State Supreme Court justice, died of heart failure Sunday at Villa Maria Nursing Home in Bay Harbor, Fla., where he was visiting.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Even So, Affirmative Action Lives
LEAD: The Supreme Court has made it harder for states and cities to give minorities an edge in competing for public works contracts that long went only to whites.
Harder, yes, but not impossible, for the Court once again has struck down one affirmative action plan while announcing rules by which others may survive.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: WHEN I think of Baltimore-style crab cakes I think of Obrycki's Crab House, a rollicking fish restaurant in a former row house on East Pratt Street in Baltimore.


Broadway Into the Backstrech
LEAD: The show is ''Broadway Melody of 1989,'' and the participants are to include Jerome Robbins, Mikhail Baryshnikov, Franz Kafka, Fiorello La Guardia, Garson Kanin, Joan Allen, Pauline Collins, Duke Ellington, Patti LaBelle, Eli Wallach, Anne Jackson, Edward Asner, Madeline Kahn, Philip Bosco, Victor


C-Cor Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,816,000
8,222,000
Net inc
1,354,000
b422,000
Share earns
.63
.21
6mo sales
25,035,000
15,679,000
Net inc
2,420,000
b706,000
Share earns
1.14
.35


Indian Museum Plan Favors Smithsonian Over New York Site
LEAD: A compromise reached last year that would have kept the bulk of the Museum of the American Indian in New York City has fallen apart, according to people familiar with talks on the matter that have been held in the past week.


Western Digital Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
258,403,000
160,676,000
Net inc
12,693,000
b8,333,000
Share earns
.44
.30
6mo rev
505,369,000
300,773,000
Net inc
25,547,000
b20,496,000
Share earns
.89
.73


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
274,804,000
249,753,000
Net inc
b53,246,000
c15,081,000
Share earns
9.91
-
Yr sales
1,102,994,000
1,001,370,000
Net inc
b258,544,000
c65,732,000
Share earns
48.69
-


Gallagher, Arthur J &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gallagher, Arthur J &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
38,165,000
34,986,000
Net inc
3,259,000
2,549,000
Share earns
.28
.21
Yr rev
156,035,000
143,281,000
Net inc
16,895,000
16,338,000
Share earns
1.41
1.34


Chevron Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,900,000,000
7,400,000,000
Net inc
175,000,000
234,000,000
Share earns
.51
.68
Yr rev
28,900,000,000
29,100,000,000
Net inc
1,768,000,000
1,250,000,000
Share earns
5.17
3.65


A Peripatetic President: Election Over, He Runs
LEAD: At 1:30 P.M., the announcement came over the loudspeaker in the White House press room: ''The travel pool should assemble in 10 minutes for a 1:50 movement.''


Kaisertech's Chairman Is Replaced by Maxxam
LEAD: In a surprise move, Kaisertech Ltd.'s new owner, Maxxam Inc., has ousted James S. Pasman as chairman and chief executive.


Statoil Plans Job Cuts
LEAD: Norway's state-owned oil company, Statoil S.A., the nation's largest concern, said today that it planned to shed jobs over three years to cut costs.
Statoil has been hit hard by lower crude prices and by cost overruns at a refinery project in western Norway.


Jerrico Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jerrico Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 28
1988
1987
Revenue
161,382,000
158,772,000
Net inc
5,809,000
5,226,000
Share earns
.30
.27
6mo rev
331,044,000
317,872,000
Net inc
12,821,000
b17,913,000
Share earns
.66
.91


Hometown Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hometown Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b191,000
c33,000
Per share
.10
.02
Yr net inc
b371,000
c125,000
Per share
.20
.12
b-After tax credits of $7,000 for the quarter and $72,000 for the year.


FHP International Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FHP International Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
160,940,000
116,251,000
Net inc
4,947,000
3,730,000
Share earns
.48
.30
Shares outst
10,270,000
12,541,000
6mo rev
312,919,000
222,577,000
Net inc
9,011,000
6,234,000
Share earns
.88
.50
Shares outst
10,244,000
12,541,000


Coffee Prices Fall Sharply; Bigger Brazil Supply Seen
LEAD: Coffee futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York.
The March contract dropped 6.34 cents, or 634 points, during the trading session.


Cliburn Plans Concert, His First in 10 Years
LEAD: Van Cliburn plans to perform with the Philadelphia Orchestra on June 19 in his first major concert in more than a decade.


RAIDERS SURRENDER AT ARGENTINE BASE
LEAD: Armed civilians holding out at an Argentine infantry barracks surrendered to the army today after a daylong assault in which at least 36 people were killed and scores wounded, the Government said.


Review/Music; Anniversary Flute Recital
LEAD: John Solum's flute-playing, teaching, concert-organizing and recording have spanned more than three decades, and to celebrate the 30th anniversary of his New York recital debut, he came to Merkin Concert Hall on Sunday afternoon.


Lacking Garbage, a Jersey Incinerator Is Losing Money
LEAD: Mechanically, Warren County's incinerator has worked just fine since opening here last July.
Financially, it has stumbled.
Amid a waste-disposal crisis across much of New Jersey, the state's first county incinerator doesn't have enough garbage.


Morley Drury, Former Football Star, 85
LEAD: Morley Drury, an all-America running back at Southern California in 1927, when he became the first Trojan to rush for 1,000 yards in a season, died Sunday at the age of 85.


Gotti Pleads Not Guilty to Assault Charge and Is Released on Bail


Accounts
LEAD: * 3M Corp. to Chiat/Day Advertising, San Francisco, for Scotchguard brands.


36,000 Farmers Fail to Seek Restructuring of Debt With U.S.
LEAD: More than 36,000 farmers have failed to meet a deadline for declaring an interest in restructuring overdue debts to the Government, an Agriculture Department official said today.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose again yesterday as market participants reacted positively to what essentially was a pessimistic outlook from Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.


City Officials Sign Foster-Care Contract
LEAD: New York City said yesterday that it had signed a new contract with private groups that provide foster care for some 20,000 children.
The contract is intended to improve placement and assure that the agencies abide by a Federal court decision requiring ''meaningful access'' to birth control.


'89 Milk Output Forecast
LEAD: Last year's drought is still having a lingering effect on the nation's dairy farmers, but an Agriculture Department report said on Monday that 1989 milk output could still set another record.
Production rose to a record 145.3 billion pounds in 1988 because of an increase of almost 3 percent in milk output per cow.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Much-Deserved Honor
LEAD: In an unusual mark of bipartisan esteem, Connie Gerrard, one of the capital's political long-distance runners who worked as a press assistant in the White House for 25 years, serving five Presidents, will be honored at a party at the Ritz Carlton Hotel Friday night by the 12 White House press secretaries for whom she worked.


Israeli Troops on Night Patrol Kill Arab Man
LEAD: Israeli troops on a night patrol in the occupied West Bank shot and killed a Palestinian man with a plastic bullet on Monday and wounded a second person, Palestinians and the army said today.


More Than 100 Subpoenas Served on Commodity Firms
LEAD: Subpoenas were served today on virtually every clearing firm on the nation's two largest commodity exchanges, in what appears to be the broadest search for information since an inquiry into possible trading fraud was disclosed last week.


Newton Goes Home
LEAD: C. M. Newton, basketball coach at Vanderbilt since 1981 and a member of Kentucky's top-ranked team in 1951, yesterday was named athletic director at Kentucky.
He will begin his duties on April 1, succeeding Cliff Hagan, a former Kentucky basketball star who resigned Nov. 15, after 13 years as athletic director, amid an investigation of the Wildcats' basketball program by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Our strategy continues to be centered on moving toward, and ultimately reaching, stable prices - that is, price levels sufficiently stable so that expectations of change do not become major factors in key economic decisions.
Current inflation rates, by that criterion, clearly are too high and must be brought down.


House in '88 Rated Most Liberal in 40 Years
LEAD: Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal advocacy group, said Monday that the House of Representatives last year had the most liberal record since the organization began rating Congressional voting records in 1947.


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,804,000
3,379,000
Per share
.63
.46
Yr net inc
14,322,000
b10,547,000
Per share
1.91
1.44
b-After a loss of $773,000 from debt redemption costs.


Roosevelt Financial Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Financial Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,339,000
b923,000
Per share
.77
.17
Yr net inc
16,788,000
b17,201,000
Per share
3.01
3.11
b-After tax credits of $42,000 for the quarter and $4,940,000 for the year.


Now Anyone Can Play Violin
LEAD: A Silicon Valley company has come up with what it thinks is the answer for those who have the desire to play guitar like Eric Clapton but lack the talented fingers to do so - an electronic kazoo.


Allegheny Power System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
524,940,000
530,829,000
Net inc
51,376,000
46,376,000
Share earns
.99
.90
Yr rev
2,170,490,000
1,981,242,000
Net inc
205,086,000
206,989,000
Share earns
3.96
4.05


Legislators Refuse Ethics Panel Request
LEAD: The leaders of the State Legislature, citing the separation of powers doctrine, refused yesterday to testify about campaign finance reform before Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's special ethics commission.


Surprise for Mullen
LEAD: The phone in Brian Mullen's Edmonton hotel room rang at 9 A.M. yesterday, which struck the left wing for the Rangers as curious.
Michel Bergeron, his coach, was on the other end asking him whether he had heard the news, which struck Mullen as downright ominous. ''He thought he'd been traded,'' Bergeron said of Mullen.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Inflation is unacceptably high, Alan Greenspan said, raising the possibility of higher short-term rates.
The markets responded favorably to his anti-inflation stance. [ Page A1. ] Criminal charges against Drexel Burnham Lambert were filed by the Government.
The details indicate a broader range of illegal activities than had been disclosed.


Rates Decline At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates declined yesterday for the first time in three weeks at Citicorp's auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
13,500,000
95,000,000
Yr net inc
b96,500,000
101,200,000
Share earns
.81
1.00
b-Included $165 million of pretax, non-recurring merger-related expenses associated with the company's acquisition of E.F.


Radionics Agrees To Be Acquired
LEAD: Radionics Inc. reached an agreement with Expamet International P.L.C. under which the London-based company will begin a tender offer of $20 a share, or about $88 million, for the security equipment maker.
Radionics' shares rose $6.125 today, to $19.625, in over-the-counter trading.


Florida City Offers Revenue Bonds
LEAD: Gainesville, Fla., is tentatively offering $100 million of tax-exempt subordinated utility system revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.4 percent for an issue due in 2013, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Exxon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
22,020,000,000
21,805,000,000
Net inc
1,380,000,000
1,555,000,000
Share earns
1.06
1.12
Yr rev
87,542,000,000
83,335,000,000
Net inc
5,260,000,000
4,840,000,000
Share earns
3.95
3.43


Food Notes
LEAD:  Elegant Carryout


Morgan Stanley Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,161,340,000
718,271,000
Net inc
108,303,000
31,364,000
Share earns
4.25
1.16
Yr rev
4,108,829,000
3,147,909,000
Net inc
394,645,000
230,944,000
Share earns
15.39
8.99


American Bionetics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bionetics Inc
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
1,046,106
888,451
Net loss
345,955
248,291
6mo sales
2,134,215
1,655,254
Net loss
720,307
510,723


MacGregor Sporting Goods Inc reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacGregor Sporting Goods Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,112,396
12,516,714
Net loss
b7,890,696
c15,652,423
Yr rev
28,886,859
60,270,036
Net loss
b3,979,539
c18,000,058
b-Included a gain of $250,000 on repayment of indebtedness at a discount for both periods; the quarter also included a loss of $1,855,151 from discontinued operations and a loss of $1,100,000 from reversal of a tax credit; the year also included a gain from discontinued operations of $15,260,676.


Union Planters Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Planters Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
5,400,000
b12,200,000
Per share
.72
-
Yr net inc
25,600,000
6,200,000
Per share
3.42
.82
b-Net loss  The loan loss provision for the latest fourth quarter totaled $2.2 million, compared with $19.1 million for the year-ago period.


Bridge
LEAD: On most bridge deals, a good player can inspect a 52-card diagram and decide with reasonable assurance whether a given contract will succeed with the best play by both sides.
But his verdict may be wrong.
How would you rate South's chances of success in five clubs doubled?


65th Birthday Party for a Voice of Liberal Opinion
LEAD: The advertising slogan proclaims that only 1 in 8,000 people in this country has ever read an issue of The New Leader (circulation about 20,000), which is celebrating its 65th anniversary today as a pathbreaker, a truthteller, a scarred survivor.
All the same, the slogan says, ''You've been influenced by it.


Opportunity For Bush
LEAD: The proliferation of all kinds of Soviet-American exchanges in the last couple of years is staggering.
Where once they involved a small number of experts, usually carefully vetted by Moscow, now people are jaunting back and forth to take a joint look at almost every imaginable issue.


Koch Imposes 2-Month Hiring Freeze
LEAD: The Koch administration said yesterday that it will impose a two-month partial hiring freeze and warned that New York City would face its toughest budget in this decade if the state spending plan proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is adopted.


Big East Suspensions
LEAD: When Jayson Williams, the high-scoring center for St.
John's, and John Turner, Georgetown's rugged forward, were ejected for fighting in a game Monday night, Connecticut and Seton Hall got the best of it.
Under Big East rules, each player will be suspended for his team's next conference game.
That means Williams will miss the St.


Washington Talk: Briefing; A Judge's Passion
LEAD: Like everyone else, Washington officials have their private passions.
For David Harfeld, an administrative law judge, it is musical comedy.
Beginning Saturday, Judge Harfeld will be host of a local weekly radio program, ''Curtain Up,'' that will feature the scores of musicals ''that you probably never heard of, but where great stars made their musical comedy debuts.


The Ranger Rookie Born to Be a Pro
LEAD: Tony Granato dropped into the seat of the airplane, spread a blanket over himself and barely got the plastic window shade closed before his eyelids slid shut as well.
As the plane rumbled through the late afternoon sky and the Badlands of South Dakota slipped by underneath, Granato curled up in a ball and slept deeply.


Sun Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,720,000,000
2,610,000,000
Net inc
76,000,000
83,000,000
Share earns
.72
.77
Shares outst
106,573,905
107,108,276
Yr rev
10,000,000,000
9,820,000,000
Net inc
7,000,000
348,000,000
Share earns
.06
3.21
Shares outst
106,138,784
108,042,264


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Browning-Ferris Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
583,207,000
478,775,000
Net inc
59,650,000
50,826,000
Share earns
.40
.34


Short-Story Readings
LEAD: ''Selected Shorts: A Celebration of the Short Story'' is to begin its fifth season at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, at 6:30 P.M. tonight.
The program features Irene Worth, Estelle Parsons and Charles Keating reading stories by Chekhov, Flannery O'Connor and Robertson Davies.
Information: 864-1414.


Willie Wells, 82, Dies; Star in Negro Leagues
LEAD: Willie Wells, a shortstop who batted .358 over his career in the Negro leagues from 1924-45 but never played in the major leagues, died last Sunday.
He was 82 years old.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council


Gradco Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gradco Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
30,381,000
24,844,000
Net inc
b1,550,000
c1,340,000
Share earns
.24
.21
9mo rev
86,267,000
63,330,000
Net inc
b4,378,000
c2,869,000
Share earns
.69
.48


Audiovox Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
80,625,000
78,311,000
Net loss
1,754,000
b1,697,000
Share earns
-
.19
Yr sales
320,150,000
276,986,000
Net inc
291,000
6,469,000
Share earns
.03
.82


Quaker Oats Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Oats Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,349,600,000
1,228,300,000
Net inc
41,400,000
45,500,000
Share earns
.53
.56
6mo sales
2,781,200,000
2,495,400,000
Net inc
90,100,000
86,600,000
Share earns
1.14
1.08


Freeport McMoran Copper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Copper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
128,433,000
76,921,000
Net inc
42,764,000
24,450,000
Share earns
2.00
1.15
Yr rev
334,986,000
189,952,000
Net inc
94,213,000
43,379,000
Share earns
4.41
2.03


Fireman's Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fireman's Fund (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
71,337,000
35,185,000
Share earns
1.34
.58
Shares outst
53,245,000
60,845,000
Yr net inc
b235,409,000
c362,340,000
Share earns
4.51
5.62
Shares outst
52,219,000
64,452,000


Colleges Bend Admissions for More Than Athletes
LEAD: The uproar over a new rule that would impose tighter minimum scholarship standards for freshman athletes is focusing attention on other college applicants for whom admissions rules are sometimes bent.


Ransburg Signs Accord
LEAD: The Ransburg Corporation, which makes industrial equipment, said today that it had signed an agreement to be acquired by Illinois Tool Works Inc. in a transaction valued at nearly $163 million.


Jerome Doyle, 79, Noted Lawyer Who Became a Public Defender
LEAD: Jerome Doyle, a corporate lawyer who in retirement donated his services as the public defender for the Barnstable County (Mass.) District Court, died of heart failure Monday at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 79 years old and had lived in Osterville, Mass., since retiring from the Manhattan law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp;


Keith Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keith Group
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
1,550,529
1,339,293
Net loss
124,073
230,972


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 20
Jan. 13
Jan. 22
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
236.4
234.4
234.9
Distillate stocks
120.2
123.9
129.1
Crude imports, daily
5.1
5.2
4.2
Product imports, daily
2.8
3.2
2.3
Crude stocks
326.2
324.2
341.2
Crude production, daily
7.9
7.9
8.2
Refinery utilization (%)
85.9
85.6
83.4


Shell Canada Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Canada Ltd
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,300,000,000
1,300,000,000
Net inc
128,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
1.15
.77
Yr rev
5,010,000,000
4,860,000,000
Net inc
427,000,000
350,000,000
Share earns
3.77
3.01


Adams String Of 3-Pointers Ends at 79
LEAD: Michael Adams of the Denver Nuggets scored 8 points against the Nets tonight, but missed all seven of his 3-point attempts, ending his National Basketball Association record of 79 consecutive games with a 3-point basket.


Improper Test at Savannah River Causes New Accident in Reactor
LEAD: An accident resulted from an improper testing procedure at the Savannah River Plant in South Carolina last weekend, causing several large valves to rupture in the cooling system of a nuclear reactor there, the Department of Energy said today.


Martin Marietta Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,535,140,000
1,319,418,000
Net inc
b23,714,000
59,384,000
Share earns
.45
1.12
Yr sales
5,727,482,000
5,172,954,000
Net inc
358,875,000
230,650,000
Share earns
6.75
4.25


Mutual Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mutual Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
331,000
390,000
Share earns
.29
.34


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Resignation in Japan


New Chairman for Landmarks Panel; David Fenton Michie Todd
LEAD: At the age of 73, David F. M. Todd is about to take a long journey across a short space - from one side of the table at which he has been sitting for four years, as a flintily independent member of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, into the chairman's post.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: LOW in fiber and high in saturated fat, the chef's special each Thursday night at the Wayside Restaurant here is an old-timer's dream and a nutritionist's nightmare.
The special, salt pork and milk gravy, is a traditional New England supper that fans say can be found at no other restaurant in the area.


Shelton Jones 76er Pact
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers have signed Shelton Jones, the former St.
John's star, to a contract for the rest of the season.
Jones, a rookie forward, had played out two 10-day contracts as the replacement for Cliff Robinson, who may miss the remainder of the season with a knee injury.
Jones played in seven games for the 76ers and has scored 22 points.(


Formula One to Phoenix
LEAD: Phoenix's first Formula One Grand Prix auto race will be run June 2-4 through the downtown area, officials announced today.


Hahn's Ex-Boss Pleads Guilty
LEAD: A Long Island minister, facing the prospect of damaging testimony from Jessica Hahn, his secretary who became embroiled in the downfall of Jim Bakker, the television evangelist, pleaded guilty today to reduced charges before his tax-evasion trial could begin.
The Rev.
Eugene Profeta's plea to two of 18 state charges came before Miss Hahn was to testify in a pretrial hearing.


Trump to Close a 'Tacky' Trader Vic's
LEAD: Trader Vic's, the Polynesian bar in the Plaza that has played host to generations of moneyed gadabouts, prep school students on R&amp;R and fans of its Samoan Fog Cutters, has ''gotten tacky'' and will be closed, the hotel's owner, Donald J. Trump, said yesterday.


Cellular Phone Pact Reached
LEAD: A cellular phone industry group announced yesterday that a disagreement over transmission standards had been settled, helping to clear the way for the next generation of cheaper, more secure mobile phones.


Ameron Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameron Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
100,822,000
85,680,000
Net inc
b3,978,000
c3,116,000
Share earns
.97
.64
Yr sales
363,625,000
308,191,000
Net inc
b12,065,000
d16,368,000
Share earns
2.83
3.37


Washington Talk: Briefing; Was Quayle President?
LEAD: Was Dan Quayle Acting President of the United States for three and a half minutes last Friday afternoon?
Authorities who believe he was, including officials of the Senate Rules Committee, cite Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution, which provides, regarding the President, that ''before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following oath or affirmation.


BRIEFS
LEAD: * Amoco Corp., Chicago, approved a 2-for-1 split of its common stock.


International Microelectronic Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microelectronic Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Revenue
12,400,000
13,100,000
Net inc
205,000
1,800,000
Share earns
.01
.07
9mo rev
40,300,000
38,100,000
Net inc
3,500,000
5,100,000
Share earns
.14
.20


Commerce Choice Vows To Work With Industry
LEAD: Robert A. Mosbacher, President Bush's nominee to become Commerce Secretary, said today that he would seek closer cooperation between government and industry, possibly through the relaxation of antitrust laws, to help American manufacturers compete more effectively in the global market for high technology.


Jury Questions Capital Mayor
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. appeared today for the second time before a Federal grand jury investigating his ties to a drug suspect, but his lawyer stressed again that Mr.
Barry was not a target of the inquiry.
Federal officials refused to comment on Mr.
Barry's appearances, but have said before that they are trying to determine if the Mayor thwarted a police drug investigation last month.


Secret Magnet Sweeps Top 40 Science Prizes
LEAD:  PROJECT TITLE


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* San Diego Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
525,915,000
530,192,000
Net inc
47,353,000
49,959,000
Share earns
.80
.84
Yr rev
2,080,000,000
1,900,000,000
Net inc
189,365,000
196,803,000
Share earns
3.18
3.28


Citizens Savings Bank of Maryland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Savings Bank of Maryland
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
423,000
703,000
Per share
.22
.35
Yr net inc
3,026,000
3,087,000
Per share
1.53
1.56
The net income for 1987 included an after-tax gain of $491,000, or 25 cents a share, on termination of the company's former pension plan and an after- tax expense of $368,000 on the writeoff of the company's FSLIC secondary reserve.


National Banc of Commerce Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce Co
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,220,000
1,051,000
Per share
.33
.29
Yr net inc
4,422,000
4,065,000
Per share
1.20
1.11


Mixed Results For Fireman's
LEAD: The Fireman's Fund Corporation today reported higher earnings in the fourth quarter but a decline for the year over all, which it attributed to swings in the capital market and pricing pressures in the insurance industry.


Charter Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
614,000
b296,000
Per share
-
.08
6mo net loss
420,000
b2,149,000
Per share
-
.59
b-Net income


Jazz at the Y
LEAD: The jazz pianist and composer Dick Hyman is to present Jazz Piano at the Y, two lectures and performances on jazz history and improvisational techniques, at 4 P.M. on Feb. 26 and March 12 at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Mr.
Hyman, whose compositions include movie scores, piano, chamber and orchestral works, is to be assisted by Derek Smith, a pianist.


Tower Begins Confirmation Hearings Today
LEAD: John G. Tower, the Secretary of Defense-designate, begins on Wednesday what may be the most prolonged Senate hearing for an appointee to President Bush's Cabinet.


6.2% Yield Is Set For Iowa Notes
LEAD: Iowa yesterday tentatively priced $100 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.


Freeport McMoran Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,358,000
30,189,000
Net inc
3,985,000
14,410,000
Share earns
.10
.35
Yr rev
106,070,000
101,332,000
Net inc
28,519,000
34,479,000
Share earns
.69
.84


Arts Figures in New York Protest Arrest of Czechoslovak Dramatist
LEAD: Responding to the arrest of the Czechoslovak playwright Vaclav Havel, a group of influential figures in the arts in New York staged a program of protest on Monday night.


American Savings Financial of Washington reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Financial of Washington
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,500,000
b948,000
Per share
-
.44
6mo net loss
686,000
b1,726,000
Per share
-
.80
b-Net income  The latest periods' losses included $2.4 million writedown of its only residual interest of a collateralized mortgage obligation security investment and a $687,000 addition to Amercian Savings' loan loss reserve.


Real Estate; L.I. Town Acts To Curb Retail Boom
LEAD: BROOKHAVEN, the fastest-growing town on Long Island, has taken a bold step to rein in its rapid retail development.


Graphic Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graphic Technology Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,306,000
6,435,000
Net inc
569,000
546,000
Share earns
.20
.19
6mo sales
13,920,000
11,943,000
Net inc
1,105,000
1,057,000
Share earns
.39
.37


Cilcorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cilcorp Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
111,419,000
101,450,000
Net inc
6,097,000
b6,401,000
Share earns
.45
-
Yr rev
470,907,000
454,523,000
Net inc
44,822,000
34,240,000
Share earns
3.31
2.52


Deposit-Fee Option Studied
LEAD: To resolve the crisis in the savings industry, the Treasury Department is considering charging a fee on deposits at insured institutions, a Congressional aide said today.


Review/Music; By the Franciscan Quartet
LEAD: The Franciscan String Quartet was founded at the San Francisco Conservatory in 1982, and is now the quartet in residence at Dartmouth College.
Its sound is gentle and warm, and its interpretive personality more relaxed than that of many other young groups.
Yet in their Sunday afternoon concert at Town Hall, the players never seemed to lack drive or energy.


Reagan Is to Get Winston Churchill Award
LEAD: Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, will present a Winston Churchill Award to former President Ronald Reagan at a dinner in Beverly Hills in May, it was announced yesterday.


DPL Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DPL Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
263,017,000
248,341,000
Net inc
17,772,000
bc12,145,000
Share earns
.43
-
Yr rev
988,713,000
941,210,000
Net inc
124,677,000
c107,902,000
Share earns
3.01
2.60


Washington Trust Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Trust Bancorp Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,520,694
1,359,336
Per share
.83
.73
Yr net inc
5,915,264
5,306,748
Per share
3.20
2.84


Amity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amity Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
372,995
339,199
Per share
.38
.35
Yr net inc
1,452,562
1,372,777
Per share
1.47
1.41


A Ford Chair at Michigan U.
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it would endow a professorial chair for the University of Michigan's new program that unites the study of engineering, manufacturing and business.


Airport Staff Makes a Gift To Neediest
LEAD: The plight of men and women who use the terminals at Kennedy International Airport as their homes has deeply troubled a group of airline employees.


Raleigh Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raleigh Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
845,000
1,356,000
Per share
.24
.39
Yr net inc
4,423,000
4,248,000
Per share
1.28
1.23


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
154,974,000
-
Net inc
37,875,000
-
Share earns
1.02
-
Yr rev
552,975,000
-
Net inc
121,014,000
-
Share earns
3.26
-
Share earnings represent units.


City Mark for Anderson
LEAD: Kenny Anderson, considered the nation's best high school player, scored 40 points yesterday and became New York City's top-scoring schoolboy player ever.
In leading Archbishop Molloy to a 73-61 victory over Xaverian in Brooklyn, Anderson raised his career point total to 2,377.
Anderson, a 6-foot-2-inch guard who will attend Georgia Tech next season, entered the game needing 15 points to break the record of 2,351 set by Duane Ivory of Our Savior Lutheran in the Bronx from 1982 through '86.


Twins Sign Puckett
LEAD: Kirby Puckett avoided salary arbitration by signing a one-year deal with the Minnesota Twins yesterday.
Puckett, the All-Star center fielder, had asked for $2.15 million, while the Twins had offered $1.9 million.
General Manager Andy MacPhail and Puckett's agent, Ron Shapiro, said the two sides met in the middle.


Chairman Is Retiring At American Standard
LEAD: American Standard Inc., known for its plumbing fixtures and which has gone private through a leveraged buyout, said yesterday that William B. Boyd was retiring as chairman, president and chief executive.


MAN IN THE NEWS: Donald Jesse Atwood; Manager for Pentagon
LEAD: Donald J. Atwood, a General Motors executive named today to the No. 2 job in the Defense Department, is a seasoned manager whose biggest task may be to run the department's daily operations while contending with a tighter budget.


Soviet Quake Area A Vast Sea of Mud; Death Toll Reduced
LEAD: When Saifuo Khodzhaya was found on Monday, after an earthquake shook this tiny village and a landslide buried it in mud and clay, he was dead, crushed when the roof of his house fell.
His arms were stretched through a window, and in them lay his 6-day-old daughter, alive and crying.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Party Race Appears Over  Ronald H. Brown has enough votes to become the first black chairman of the Democratic Party, he and other Democrats said.
Page A12.
Radiation Efforts Faulted  Procedures to protect workers dealing with radioactive material at the Savannah River Plant are deficient, a U.S.


Is What Bon Jovi Plays Chamber Music? Maybe
LEAD: Can performances by the Miles Davis Quintet, the Art Ensemble of Chicago or Bon Jovi be considered chamber music?
That was one of the questions raised this week during a panel discussion called ''Chamber Music in the 20th Century,'' part of Chamber Music America's 11th national conference.
And it was a notion that did not seem to raise any hackles among the conference's participants, representatives of a field normally regarded as conservative.


Koch Proposes Police Academy For South Bronx
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch's plan for a new police academy and a major middle-income housing complex in the South Bronx would be a boon for that beleaguered neighborhood and its Hispanic political constituency, whose support the Mayor wants to retain.


Graf Overwhelms Sabatini
LEAD: Steffi Graf, the defending champion, turned on her awesome power after a shaky start today and overwhelmed Gabriela Sabatini, 6-3, 6-0, in the Australian Open to reach her eighth straight Grand Slam final.


Transco to Sell Assets of Unit
LEAD: The Transco Exploration Company, a subsidiary of the Transco Energy Corporation, said today that it intended to sell all the oil and gas assets of its Transco Exploration Partners L.P. and to liquidate the partnership.
Transco owns 74 percent of the partnership, which is publicly traded on the New York Stock


Washington Talk: Briefing; 'Hi, Governor'
LEAD: In Washington some titles have a way of sticking, as Charles S. Robb, the former Democratic Governor of Virginia and newly elected Senator, has discovered. ''When I telephone my office, they answer: 'Senator Robb's office,' but the moment they realize who is calling, they say, 'Oh, Hi Governor, what can we do for you?


A Visit to Thailand
LEAD: The diplomatic assumptions of the last decade in Southeast Asia shifted more than a little today, as the Thai Government welcomed Hun Sen, Prime Minister in the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh.


Mullen Brothers Go From Roller Hockey to the Elite on Ice
LEAD: The temperature didn't have to sink to any specific number.
There simply had to be a touch of cool air in the summer night on the West Side of Manhattan and the sticks and roller skates would disappear from Marion Mullen's hallway.


Income Flat at Unisys; Apollo, Prime Do Poorly
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation, the nation's third-largest computer maker, said yesterday that its earnings for the fourth quarter were essentially flat in the face of a year the company called unexpectedly difficult.


Catchers Are Swapped
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants and the Baltimore Orioles traded starting catchers on Tuesday with the Giants acquiring 32-year-old Terry Kennedy, a left-handed batter with a $850,000 salary in exchange for Bob Melvin, 27, a right-handed batter whose salary last season was $145,000.
Yesterday, the Orioles signed Melvin for one year at a salary of about $215,000.


Texas Audits Are Faulted
LEAD: The General Accounting Office will soon release a study showing that some of the nation's largest accounting firms failed to detect and report problems at ailing Texas savings and loan associations just before they failed, Government officials said tonight.


Brazil Stirred By a Manhunt In the Jungle
LEAD: As dawn filtered into the forest around this jungle village, policemen once again fanned out along rutted roads and trails, trying to solve a murder that has mesmerized Brazil.


Cuban Envoy Defects to U.S.
LEAD: A veteran Cuban diplomat secretly defected to the United States three months ago after becoming disillusioned with widespread official corruption and with Cuban support for Marxist rebels in at least three Latin American countries.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The answer to the problem of drugs lies more on solving the demand side of the equation than it does on the supply side - than it does on interdiction or sealing the borders or something of that nature.
And so it is going to have to be a major educational effort, and the private sector and the schools are all going to have to be involved in this.


Home Resales Up by 11.4%
LEAD: Sales of existing single-family homes shot up 11.4 percent in December, as sales for all of 1988 reached the highest level in nine years, a real estate trade group reported today.


President of Lyphomed Seeks to Stop Red Ink
LEAD: Gary E. Nei's job is to restore a once high-flying pharmaceutical company that has been battered by a traumatic year in which everything that could go wrong seems to have done so.


Steel, Velvet And a Wall In Brooklyn
LEAD: As a young pitcher, Carl Erskine was called little Carl by his Brooklyn Dodger teammates because Carl Furillo was already established in right field.
Now little Carl, white-haired and wearing a black tie, stood up by the sprays of flowers near the open casket to give the eulogy at Carl Furillo's funeral service.


Review/Television A History Of Spying In America
LEAD: A clip of Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North testifying at the 1987 Iran-contra hearings sets the cautionary theme of ''Secret Intelligence,'' a four-hour history of the development of American espionage that begins tonight at 9 on Channel 13 and continues in three weekly chapters.
At issue is the secrecy treasured by spies versus the openness required by democracy.


Senators Propose Rollback if House Lets Raise Become Law


Consolidated Gas Debenture Sale
LEAD: The Consolidated Natural Gas Company in Pittsburgh tapped the debt market yesterday through the competitive sale of $100 million in debentures due in 1997.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Shift at DDB Unit
LEAD: Bernard Rochand, 50 years old, previously chief executive at Eurocom, has been chosen president of DDB Needham International, a Paris-based operation of the DDB Needham Worldwide network.
He will replace John Bradstock, 55, who will become corporate executive vice president in charge of global accounts.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A YEAR ago Pam Faulds, whose mother had died of breast cancer when Ms.
Faulds was 6 years old, told her own three children that she had developed the disease.
Since that time, her children have tried to make sense of their mother's cancer and to manage the stress of living with a seriously ill parent.


In China, Only Foreign Students Know Comfort; Advice to Africans
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Rival Shiite Armies Declare A New Cease-Fire in Lebanon
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militias announced a cease-fire today in their monthlong gun battles here and in southern Lebanon but failed to resolve political differences that provoked the violence.


Calender: Unearthing Manhattan History
LEAD:  The Past Unearthed, South Street Seaport Museum Gallery, 213 Water Street, off Beekman Street; 212-669-9430.


2 Democrats in House Subpoenaed by North
LEAD: Lawyers for Oliver L. North have subpoenaed two Democratic members of the House of Representatives, Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma and Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, to testify in Mr.
North's defense in his criminal trial, officials in the House said today.


Charles C. Hornbostel, Former Track Star, 77
LEAD: Charles C. Hornbostel, a former holder of the world-best time for the 600-yard run indoors and the first full-time president of Financial Executives Institute, died of Parkinson's disease Jan. 13 in New London, N.H.
He was 77 years old.


New Design Head at Arts Endowment
LEAD: RANDOLPH McAUSLAND, the president of Design Publications Inc., which publishes Industrial Design magazine in New York, has been named director of the design arts program of the National Endowment for the Arts.
He succeeds Adele Chatfield-Taylor, who recently became president of the American Academy in


U.S. Surgical Admits Spying on Animal-Rights Groups
LEAD: The president of a Connecticut surgical-supplies manufacturer, who was the target of a bombing attempt by an animal-rights advocate last November, said yesterday that his company has used paid informers to infiltrate animal-rights organizations since the early 1980's.


Review/Theater; In Pursuit Of Giggles And Gasps
LEAD: The theme music from ''Superman'' is a prelude to Stephen Gregg's ''Sex Lives of Superheroes,'' a tale of craven cowardice.
A hero-worshiping young man (Barry Miller) allows his former girlfriend (Andrea Weber) to strip their apartment, item by item, of all its furnishings.
Finally all that remains is a poster of Superman.


Timepieces, From Sundial to Swatch
LEAD: IN the age of the digital watch, the public timepiece has become a lost communal art.
The famous Biltmore Hotel clock in New York is now tucked away in the atrium of a bank building, only five of New York City's historic clocks have landmark status and few new public spaces post the time.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; People
LEAD: *
Susan M. Machtiger has been named senior vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Cray Expects Drop In Quarterly Profit
LEAD: Cray Research Inc., the supercomputer maker, said it expected earnings and revenues in the first quarter ending in March to be below those of a year earlier, sending the company's share price tumbling.
Already well below the 52-week high of $88.50, the share price skidded $4.25, to $60.25, in active trading on the New York Stock


Michael Lland, Dancer And Ballet Master, 64
LEAD: Michael Lland, a dancer and ballet master at the American Ballet Theater, died last Friday at Tuomey Hospital in Sumter, S.C.
He was 64 years old.


San Antonio Mayor Stands By Decision To Stay Out of Race
LEAD: Mayor Henry Cisneros on Tuesday reaffirmed his decision not to seek a fifth term after key supporters said they would back the campaign of his opponent even if he sought re-election.


A Place for Children Helps Parents, Too
LEAD: THE story of Kids Place is a story of a community that took on a big-city-style problem, delivering social services to poor families, and solved it in a small-town way, with money raised through piano-bench races and flea markets.


A Kinder, Smarter Mayor Koch
LEAD: Mayor Edward Koch of New York proved again yesterday that no matter how beleaguered he may be, he has not lost his political touch.
His State of the City address was a masterful election year performance and an example of politics at its best.
Mr.
Koch responded to the growing number of New Yorkers worried about quality of life in their city, while keeping the opposition off balance; in the process he offered rational, humanitarian priorities and programs that merit support.


Honduran Who Promoted U.S. Aid to Contras Is Slain
LEAD: The former armed forces chief who closely cooperated with Washington in supporting the Nicaraguan rebel movement in Honduras was assassinated today by six men who riddled his car with gunfire, officials said.


U.S. Plans a Ditch in California To Stem the Flow of Illegal Aliens
LEAD: The Government announced plans today to build a four-mile long ditch along the United States border with Mexico to deter illegal immigration and drug smuggling, while a private group here detailed its own proposal for a 50-mile metal fence along the border.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A3-10  High-level Chilean officials, in conversations in 1978, acknowledged the responsibility of the head of the intelligence police for two killings in Washington in 1976, a retired Chilean diplomat has asserted.
Page A1


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball


Economist's Deficit Figure Is Triple Kremlin's
LEAD: A leading official economic adviser said tonight that the real Soviet budget deficit is the equivalent of $165 billion, nearly three times the official estimate, and called the colossal deficit the most important economic problem facing the country.


Reagan Agrees to Write Memoirs
LEAD: Simon &amp; Schuster announced yesterday that it would publish Ronald Reagan's memoirs and a collection of speeches selected by the former President.


As New York Watches for Drought, Suburbs Take Heed
LEAD: The water shortages that prompted the declaration of a drought watch last week in New York City and Westchester County do not extend to most of Connecticut, New Jersey and Long Island.
But mindful of rising demand and climatic fickleness, governments throughout the region are encouraging conservation.


A Custody Case With Extra Tangles
LEAD: In January 1985, Norma Lee Stotsky of Pataskala, Ohio, gave her day-old baby girl to Beverly Seymour and Richard Reams, a married couple for whom she had agreed to bear the child in return for $10,000 and expenses.


Green Seeks 11% Rise In His Schools Budget
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Richard R. Green proposed a $6.4 billion budget yesterday for New York City's schools, the first move in what is expected to be months of negotiations with the state and city governments.


Appointment in Samarra
LEAD: A democratic nation, like a person with free will, has some control over its destiny.
If it denies wrongdoing and flees from moral responsibility, that nation surrenders to Fate's retribution; but if its people are moved to root out corruption, that nation can overcome its past and shape its future.


Bush, Citing Cost, Says Drug War Will Focus Largely on Education
LEAD: President Bush said today that the all-out war on drugs he promised in his Inaugural Address would be mainly an educational effort rather than a law-enforcement crackdown.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Deal for Stone &amp; Adler Creates New HDM Unit
LEAD: HDM, a joint venture of Young &amp; Rubicam, Dentsu and Eurocom, has acquired Stone &amp; Adler, a direct-response firm, for an undisclosed amount from Young &amp; Rubicam.
A new entity called HDM Direct Marketing Group will be looking after Stone &amp; Adler and HDM Worldwide Direct, which will have combined billings of $50 million, The client list of HDM Worldwide Direct, which was formed 18 months ago, includes Nintendo, Suzuki and Hertz.


Have Drill, Will Travel: Dentists Visit Elderly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texaco Profit Rises Sharply
LEAD: Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it had posted a fourth-quarter profit of $296 million, or $1.21 a share, in contrast to a year ago, when the company lost more than $4.6 billion because of the settlement of its lawsuit with the Pennzoil Company and write-offs from a restructuring.


Hazy Sight Tied to Some Colored Contact Lenses
LEAD: Wearing some contact lenses that change the color of the iris may cause some haziness of peripheral vision, researchers at the Louisiana State University Eye Center in New Orleans have concluded.


New Light for the Salvador Tunnel
LEAD: El Salvador's Marxist guerrillas welcomed Ronald Reagan's Administration with an unsuccessful but bloody ''final offensive.'' Now they greet George Bush by proposing to take part in democratic elections this year.
It's an abrupt change, subject to many questions.
Yet Washington, which has long declared guerrilla rejectionism to be El


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.28
9.10
6.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.29
8.26
6.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.34
8.26
6.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.03
8.97
8.15
30-YR.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; One-Stop Shopping To Reach Alumni
LEAD: Students at the Wharton School, the University of Pennsylvania's graduate school of business, have assembled the alumni magazines of seven top business schools into a unified advertising network called the Management Network.


HEALTH: Geriatrics; Juggling Family, Job and Aged Dependent
LEAD: A substantial number of working mothers are finding that they must juggle another responsibility: providing unpaid personal care in the homes of elderly relatives and friends.


Tyson Bid Studied
LEAD: The Holly Farms Corporation indicated it would consider endorsing a sweetened $63.50-a-share offer from Tyson Foods Inc., but it left room for Conagra Inc., a rival bidder, to raise its offer.
It was the first indication that Holly's board would consider a deal with Tyson.
Tyson's latest offer values the poultry company at about $1.1 billion.


Iran Experts Foresee New Policy Stressing Economy
LEAD: The Islamic regime of Iran will end its first decade in power next month with its revolutionary aims severely trimmed, its armed forces spent and its economy in urgent need of revival, according to experts on Iran.


P.L.O. Goes Back to Debating How to Create Its Exile State
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization has resumed its divisive debate over the declaration of a provisional government in the Israeli-occupied territories, according to senior P.L.O. officials here.


Metro Matters; A Closer Look At the Gorillas Of G.O.P. Finance
LEAD: When you're looking for a job in the Bush Administration or if you're a Republican thinking of running for mayor or governor, it couldn't hurt to have contributed $100,000 or more to the Bush campaign for President.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about telephone companies' earnings, and a listing in the Company Earnings table, misstated the earnings per share for the BellSouth Corporation.
The company earned $3.51 a share in 1988 and $3.45 a share in 1987.


Net Up at Bell Atlantic and U S West
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation and U S West Inc., two regional Bell telephone companies, yesterday reported higher earnings for the fourth quarter of 1988 and for the year.
Analysts said the results were in line with projections.


Interest in Guidry
LEAD: Ron Guidry, spurned by the Yankees when they refused to offer him a contract for the coming season, is close to reaching a deal with one of three teams, according to his agent, Reggie Ringuet.
The Los Angeles Dodgers, the Toronto Blue Jays and the Minnesota Twins all have contacted Ringuet about a one-year contract for the 38-year-old Guidry.


Man Wanted in Officers' Shooting Kills Himself After a Crime Spree
LEAD: A man wanted in the shooting last week of two New York City police officers was found dead early yesterday in a stolen car after shooting himself, the police said.


Metro Datelines; Smoke Injures 25 In Fire at Kennedy
LEAD: A smoky three-alarm fire that began in a storage area behind a restaurant forced the evacuation of one wing of the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy International Airport last night, officials said.
Eighteen firefighters and seven Port Authority police officers were treated for smoke inhalation.


Du Pont Plans Stock Buyback
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said today that it would buy and retire up to 20 million of its own shares, or about 8 percent of the stock outstanding, to enhance the price of the stock.


Joseph B. Ridder, 68, Publisher in San Jose
LEAD: Joseph B. Ridder, the retired publisher and president of The San Jose Mercury News, died of complications from emphysema Monday at Queens Hospital in Honolulu, where he lived.
He was 68 years old and also had a home in Saratoga, Calif.


U.S. Data Since 1895 Fail To Show Warming Trend
LEAD: After examining climate data extending back nearly 100 years, a team of Government scientists has concluded that there has been no significant change in average temperatures or rainfall in the United States over that entire period.


Weirton Steel Sets Plan to Sell Stock
LEAD: Settling a longstanding debate with the Independent Steelworkers Union, the management of the Weirton Steel Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell 15 percent of its shares to the public as part of a $600 million modernization plan.


Bush Cautious on Anti-Inflation Steps
LEAD: President Bush cautioned the Federal Reserve Board today against overreacting to the threat of inflation, saying the central bank should not risk curtailing the nation's long economic expansion.


Washington Talk: Briefing; Clearing the Air
LEAD: There was a meeting on the Clean Air Act of the House-Senate Environmental and Energy Study Conference yesterday morning in an unventilated room of the Capitol building called E.F. 100.
According to a participant, the room was packed and the air became increasingly fetid.
Two people fainted.


College Hall Adds 11
LEAD: Six backs and five linemen who won all-America acclaim during their playing days have been selected for induction into the National Football Foundation and Hall of Fame on Dec. 5 at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The honorees are Donnie Anderson, Texas Tech, halfback, 1963-65; Paul Cleary, Southern California, end, 1946-47; Larry Csonka, Syracuse, fullback, 1965-67; Chalmers (Bump) Elliott, halfback, Purdue, 1944, Michigan, 1946-47; Roman Gabriel, North Carolina State, quarterback, 1959-61; Bob Johnson, Tennessee, center, 1965-67; Ted Kwalick, Penn State, end, 1966-68; Archie Manning,


Warren H. Reed, Ex-Executive, Dies at 62
LEAD: Warren H. Reed, a specialist in management training and a retired vice president of Paine Webber, died of AIDS on Sunday at University Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I.
He was 62 years old and lived in Cherry Grove, L.I.


Dividend Tax Cut Is Favored
LEAD: The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission said today that he favored the elimination of double taxation on dividends.


Increase Is Sought In Foremost Stake
LEAD: Two Texas investors said they would seek clearance from Federal antitrust regulators to increase their stake in the Foremost Corporation of America to 24.9 percent from 14.9 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, David Bonderman and W. Robert Cotham, associates of the Bass family of Fort Worth, said they would file their request with the Federal Trade


Morgan Stanley Post
LEAD: The Morgan Stanley Group said Tuesday that Robert F. Greenhill had been named to the newly created position of vice chairman.
Mr.
Greenhill, who joined Morgan in 1962, will remain director of the firm's investment banking division.
The announcement was made by S. Parker Gilbert, chairman, and Richard B.


Rebels Disrupting the Eradication of Coca in Peru
LEAD: A surge of leftist guerrilla activity is bringing new difficulties to a United States-backed campaign to eradicate coca production and break up drug trafficking gangs in Peru's main coca-growing region.


Sam Halper, Journalist, 72
LEAD: Sam Halper, a journalist who was with Time magazine for many years, died of Alzheimer's disease Tuesday at the Wilton Meadows Health Care Facility in Wilton, Conn.
He was 72 years old and lived in Wilton.


Steinberg Jury Notes: Reading of Tea Leaves
LEAD: Every time the jury in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg sends a note to the judge, everyone involved in the trial rushes to the 11th floor courtroom in the Manhattan Criminal Court Building on the chance that the panel has reached a verdict.


SmithKline President Quits Over Differences With Chief
LEAD: The president and chief operating officer of the SmithKline Beckman Corporation abruptly resigned yesterday because of policy differences with the company's chief executive, both men said.


Makarova Plans to Dance in Leningrad
LEAD: The ballerina Natalia Makarova, who is making her first visit to the Soviet Union since her defection in 1970, is to perform with her old company, the Kirov Ballet, in Leningrad on Wednesday.
The ballerina's first performance with the company since she defected was last Aug. 6 in London.
In Leningrad, Miss Makarova is to dance two pas de deux from John Cranko's ''Onegin'' at the Kirov Theater and is expected to dance them again next


For Subaru, Luxury Is a Necessity
LEAD: Subaru of America Inc. is counting on a powerful and luxurious new compact vehicle and high-tech gadgetry to pull it out of a two-year sales slump.


Coleman Sanctioned
LEAD: Derrick Coleman, a junior basketball player who was named to several preseason all-America teams, was one of five students at Syracuse University who have been sanctioned by a university judicial board in connection with a fight and series of apartment break-ins last month.
Coleman, who still faces charges of fourth-degree criminal mischief (a misdemeanor) and harassment (a violation) stemming from the incident on Dec.


LFC May Raise Bid for Ransburg
LEAD: One day after the Ransburg Corporation signed an agreement to be acquired by Illinois Tool Works Inc. for $20 a share, or about $163 million, the LFC Financial Corporation said it would consider submitting a higher bid for Ransburg.
Frank P. Slattery Jr., president of LFC, described the bidding process for the Indianapolis-based Ransburg as a ''skewed auction'' in a letter to the Ransburg board today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  Markets


Chilean Official Links a General, Long Suspect, to Letelier Killing
LEAD: A retired Chilean diplomat has asserted that high-level Chilean officials, in conversations in 1978, acknowledged the responsibility of the head of the intelligence police for two killings in Washington in 1976.


Lord Basnett, Union Leader, 64
LEAD: Lord Basnett, a former union leader often blamed by his fellow members of the Labor Party for helping to put Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in power, died today.
He was 64 years old.


Energy Dept. Says A-Bomb Plant's Safeguards for Workers Are Lax
LEAD: Procedures intended to protect the 15,000 workers who deal with radioactive material at the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina are deficient in dozens of areas, the Energy Department said today.
The department said weak management and complacent attitudes at Savannah River, which is operated for the agency by E.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the reaction in Richmond to the Supreme Court decision striking down that city's program to aid minority contractors misstated the race of the Mayor, Geline B. Williams, in some editions.
She is white.
In some copies a picture caption with the article misidentified Henry L.


Child Care, as Seen by Children
LEAD: PARENTS often talk about the stress of juggling work and children, of searching for child care that is of high quality but affordable, consistent rather than erratic.
But what about the children who are living through the social upheavals taking place?
What do they think of the arrangements being made for them?


Notes and Bonds Post Declines
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds retreated in fairly light trading yesterday, pushed lower by softness in the dollar, a rise in oil prices and profit taking by dealers following Tuesday's rally.


Postcard Reprints Peep Into the American Past
LEAD: SCENIC postcards have been an evocative record of the changing American landscape.
The Curt Teich Postcard Collection at the Lake County Museum in Wauconda, Ill., is one of the best.
For those unable to get to Wauconda, the Preservation Press has put out two books, ''Picture Palaces'' and ''Ducks &amp; Diners,'' each consisting of 24 ready-to-mail postcards reproduced from the Teich


New Delhi Journal; Now at Least, the Customer Is Sometimes Right
LEAD: In a country abounding with complaints about shoddy manufactured goods, corrupt public services and adulterated food and drink, a small band of public and private citizens is taking on the monumental task of making consumer protection a national issue.


Excerpts From Bush's Interview on Issues Ranging From Taxes to Drugs
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview with President Bush by Gerald M. Boyd of The New York Times and Katherine Lewis of The Houston Post, as transcribed by the White House.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, was present.


T.B.A.: Two Rooms By Graves
LEAD: THE Brooklyn Museum is known for its period rooms from the 17th to the 20th centuries.
But tucked away in storage is a pair of rooms from recent post-modern history: the library, right, and child's bedroom Michael Graves designed for Susan and John Reinhold's apartment on Central Park West.


Funny Thing Happens At the Forum
LEAD: Magic Johnson calls it ''winning time.''


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON PALESTINIAN RIGHTS -10:30 A.M.
Economic and Social Council  REGIONAL CARTOGRAPHIC CONFERENCE FOR THE AMERICAS - 10 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.Our dry walls were originally covered with a rough-texture paint.
Over the years there has been scraping, patching and repainting so that some of the roughness has been smoothed out in places, but the walls still do not have the uniformly flat look we prefer.
Can you suggest how to achieve that look, short of replacing the walls?


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Pro Bono
LEAD: *
A series of radio spots featuring the entertainer Steve Allen urging people to be tested regularly for colon cancer has been developed for the Advertising Council by Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector.


Genentech Posts a Net Loss
LEAD: Genentech Inc. today reported a net loss of $15.4 million for the fourth quarter of 1988, after a special charge relating to an excess inventory of its leading drug, tissue plasminogen activator.


Personal Health
LEAD: A child starts learning about sexuality from the first day of life, and parents are the primary source of this education.
Each touch, caress, hug, smile and coo tells the infant that he or she is lovable and attractive, knowledge that is the precursor to a healthy ego and normal sexual functioning.


Hitachi Files Suit
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. filed a Federal lawsuit accusing Motorola Inc. of patent infringment on a microprocessor.
The lawsuit follows a similar suit filed last week by Motorola against Hitachi.
The dispute centers on Motorola's 68HC11 and Hitachi's H-8 microprocessors, digital electronic devices that perform the control and arithmetic functions of televisions, watches, videorecorders and other products.


EXPERTS ON BUDGET VOICING OPTIMISM ON GOAL ON DEFICIT
LEAD: Many budget specialists in both parties have concluded that the deficit limit can be met this year without raising taxes, meaning that it is possible for President Bush to maintain his central campaign pledge of ''no new taxes'' for the first year of his term.


Dana Agrees to Buy Champion Spark Plug
LEAD: The Dana Corporation, a giant auto parts company, agreed to buy the 82-year-old Champion Spark Plug Company for about $600 million in cash and stock, the companies said today.


Washington Talk: The Presidency; Bush Begins Perhaps His Toughest Job: Taming Press Corps
LEAD: For the last eight years White House reporters dealt with a President, Ronald Reagan, who spoke to them mostly in two ways: responding to shouted questions, with a grin and a shrug, at picture-taking events, or craning his ear over the sound of a helicopter on the White House lawn.


Bethlehem Steel's Profit Off; Increase Posted at Lukens
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's third-largest steel producer, said yesterday that its net income fell by 8.1 percent in the fourth quarter.
It attributed the decline to higher operating costs and special charges.


Kean Urges Spending Cuts In Budget Plan
LEAD: Marking the end of six flush years for New Jersey government, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean today released a proposed $12.09 billion budget for the next fiscal year that he described as ''tight,'' ''frugal'' and ''bordering on the austere.''


Washington Talk: Briefing; Making His Day
LEAD: With obvious relish, the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
Carlisle A. H. Trost, told students at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., a sea story the other day about Marshal Sergei F. Akhromeyev, the former chief of staff of the Soviet Union's armed forces.


Calcavecchia on Mission
LEAD: Ever since Tony Jacklin, the European Ryder Cup captain, said last July that the European golf pros were better than their American rivals, Mark Calcavecchia has set his sights on revenge.
The long-hitting Florida pro, who easily won the Phoenix Open last Sunday, sounds like a man on a crusade to bring the Ryder Cup back to the United


Ex-Jackson Aide Confident Of Winning Top Party Post
LEAD: Ronald H. Brown, a former aide to both Senator Edward M. Kennedy and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, has lined up the votes to become the new chairman of the Democratic Party, Mr.
Brown and other Democrats said today.


Pilot Unaware Engine Fell Off Until After Landing
LEAD: An airline pilot misunderstood an air traffic controller who told him ''you've lost the engine,'' not realizing it had actually fallen off the plane until he landed safely, a transcript of cockpit conversations shows.


Yugo Importer Has Layoffs
LEAD: Global Motors Inc., the company that imports and markets Yugo cars in the United States, acknowledged today that several dozen employees, including some top officers, were laid off Monday night in a move to conserve its limited finances.


Dow Up by 9.46; Institutional Buying Cited
LEAD: Stock prices rose moderately yesterday as the Dow Jones industrial average once again reached a post-crash high.


Homeless Organize to Fight for Themselves
LEAD: Like thousands of other New York gadflies, Ruth Young and Jean Chappell organize and agitate, register voters, denounce City Hall, speak out at meetings of the P.T.A. and the Board of Estimate and mass-produce news releases on everything from the crack crisis to the need for better housing for poor people.


Farewell, Samoan Fog Cutter
LEAD: A superannuated Ivy Leaguer complains that New York City developers keep slamming doors on his past.
First it was the lobby under the clock at the old Biltmore Hotel, once a watering hole for generations of students returning to school in the Northeast.
Now Donald Trump is closing Trader Vic's, which for 25 years has occupied the basement of his latest acquisition, the


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Madonna Joins Pepsi Lineup
LEAD: Madonna, the rock star, has signed a one-year contract with the Pepsi-Cola Company, joining Michael Jackson, Tina Turner, David Bowie, Lionel Richie and the Miami Sound Machine as spokesmen for the soft drink.


Americans Happy in the Water, or on It
LEAD: The manager of a Manhattan fishing-tackle store is looking forward to a winner of a season, with the new President providing free publicity and public opinion already on his side.


The Budget Conspirators
LEAD: A skeptical world awaits President Bush's showing that he can balance the Federal books with a ''flexible freeze'' on spending.
But well before his Feb. 9 presentation to Congress, the word is already out that he's likely to embrace the Reagan Administration's ''rosy scenario'' tactic for forecasting tax revenue and interest costs.


Export Rumor Aids Wheat; Corn and Soybeans Decline
LEAD: Spurred by export rumors, futures prices for wheat rose, but most corn and soybean prices dipped yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.
In other markets, meat and livestock futures were mostly higher.


East, West And Design All Mingle
LEAD: THE growing influence of Eastern design on the West and Western design on the East is the subject of an exhibition, ''The Archeology of the Present: East Meets West in Design,'' on view from Sunday through Feb. 3 at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.


Big Sofa, Little Space
LEAD: YOU'VE tried everything: squeezing it into the elevator, coaxing it up the back stairs.
You've even considered hoisting it through a window.
But no matter what you try, you can't get your new sofa into your apartment.
It's a city dweller's nightmare.
Luckily, there are skilled people who can cut and reassemble furniture in your apartment.


Dollar's Advance Is Halted After Intervention by Fed
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday after the Federal Reserve once again entered the market to sell dollars, traders said.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1988
From '87
American Express Co.
$ 231,000,000
*-
Baker Hughes Inc.
17,400,000
-47.4
Baxter International
121,000,000
+23.5
Beckman Instruments Inc.
11,200,000
-12.5
Bell Atlantic Corp.
302,600,000
+6.2
Bethlehem Steel Corp.


Bridge
LEAD: Every player in North America, barring a handful clinging to Ely Culbertson's honor-trick method, uses the 4-3-2-1 point-count introduced early in the century by Milton Work.
He was a decisive loser to Culbertson in the battle of systems in the 30's, but he has had the last laugh in the area of valuation.


Carlos Alfredo Yorio, Linguistics Teacher, 48
LEAD: Dr.
Carlos Alfredo Yorio, a professor of linguistics at Lehman College and at the City University Graduate Center, died Monday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 48 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Service for Lekachman
LEAD: A service for Robert Lekachman, professor of economics at Herbert H. Lehman College and the City University Graduate School, will be held Wednesday at 3:30 P.M. at the Theater of the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue in the Bedford Park area of the Bronx.


Saint Laurant Deals His Strong Suit: Easy Separates
LEAD: Yves Saint Laurent says that his message for spring is ''easy dressing'' and that it is best expressed in his suits.


Gilbert L. Voss, 70, a Conservationist, Dies
LEAD: Gilbert L. Voss, professor emeritus of biological oceanography at the University of Miami, died of liver cancer Monday at his home in Miami.
He was 70 years old.


HOCKEY: Notebook; At Long Last, East Beats West
LEAD: Hockey East, a league with high expectations that have not been realized, had an ego-building weekend against the mighty Western Collegiate Athletic Association.


Too Much Truffle?
LEAD: Once in a while something comes along that makes one feel lucky to be alive at the end of the 20th century.


Newsweek Losing President
LEAD: Christopher M. Little, the president of Newsweek Inc. since 1986, will step down March 1 to become president of Cowles Magazines Inc., Cowles and the Washington Post Company said yesterday.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: SINCE the summer of 1976, when I was convalescing from an illness, my younger daughter and I have watched a soap opera.
I had never seen one before that July: turning on ''Days of Our Lives'' was a way to break an otherwise shapeless day into segments.
The other ways were a) to talk on the phone in the morning, b) nap from 2 to 3, c) wobble outside to view the filming of ''Kojak'' episodes on my street.


Review/Dance; Zeromoving's German Expressionism
LEAD: The Zeromoving Dance Company has come a long way.
Although, to speak literally, it has come from Philadelphia - which may not seem far at all - the company has covered great distance artistically.
Sporadic previous visits to New York have always given dancegoers much to think about.
But, on Tuesday night when Zeromoving opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, the troupe revealed that it has gained an authoritative stage presence, making


Soviets Limit Their Quick-Strike Ability
LEAD: New details about Moscow's plan to withdraw some military forces from Eastern Europe suggest that the withdrawal will substantially blunt Moscow's ability to mount an attack on short notice against Western Europe, according to American experts inside and outside the Government.


Poaching Operation Found Killing Bears For Aphrodisiac Use
LEAD: Ten people have been arrested in an undercover operation against poaching in the Northeast that turned up the slaughter of more than 400 black bears for their gall bladders, which are prized as aphrodisiacs in the Far East.


Corrections
LEAD: The Favorite Stocks chart in some copies of Business Day yesterday, with the article about the stock market, carried outdated prices.
Rather than Monday's closing prices, it should have used Tuesday's, which appeared in the stock market tables.


Molson, Carling
LEAD: The Molson Companies and the Carling O'Keefe Breweries, a unit of the Australian-based conglomerate Elders IXL Ltd., said they would close seven of 16 breweries across Canada in the next three years after completing the proposed merger of their North American beer operations.
The companies would eliminate 500 full-time jobs and slash their payrolls by another 900 employees through attrition and early retirement incentives.


Boston Journal; Waiting for the Snow to Fall and Wondering Why
LEAD: What would Henry James have had to write about this winter?
What would John Singer Sargent have had to paint?
The artists who captured this city's temperament using scenes of the snow-touched Boston Common might have been frustrated this January, the first in recent memory with no real snowfall.


Restored Housing and Rent Control Don't Mix
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Voices His Strong Support For Beleaguered Health Nominee
LEAD: President Bush today expressed strong support for Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, his nominee for Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Then he dispatched Dr.
Sullivan to Capitol Hill to soothe the fears of conservative Republican Senators who have voiced concern over Dr.
Sullivan's position on abortion.


Senator Proposes Simultaneous Poll Closing
LEAD: Legislation to set a uniform nationwide time for closing the polls in Presidential elections was introduced today by Senator Brock Adams, a Washington Democrat.


Tar Heels Roll Over Wake Forest
LEAD: Kevin Madden and J. R. Reid sparked North Carolina in the opening nine minutes as the seventh-ranked Tar Heels rolled past Wake Forest, 88-74, tonight in an Atlantic Coast Conference game.


Talking Deals; Is Europe Ready for Big Takeovers?
LEAD: Even though the move to put together a consortium bid of up to $14 billion for Britain's General Electric Company collapsed last week, the effort showed that Europe appears ready to follow the United States in making mammoth bids for major corporations previously thought invulnerable.


In New Era, Banks May Avoid Blue-Chip Bonds
LEAD: As banking companies expand into the corporate bond market for the first time in more than 50 years, they are expected to avoid some low-profit sectors like bonds of blue-chip companies and concentrate on more lucrative financings involving lower-quality companies and new sectors of the market.


Note Offering By Sallie Mae
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, also known as Sallie Mae, is offering $250 million worth of fixed-rate notes due in 1994 at a price of 100 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Please Face the Rear of the Airplane
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Women Killed as Sailboat Explodes off the Florida Keys
LEAD: Two women were killed and two male companions sailed to safety today when their 38-foot sailboat exploded off Adams Key in Biscayne National Park, the authorities said.


New Contract Rewards Wyche, Bengals Coach
LEAD: Sam Wyche said yesterday that he has agreed to remain as coach of the Cincinnati Bengals under terms of a new five-year contract.
Wyche's team had one of the most dramatic turnarounds in N.F.L. history this past season.
After going 4-11 in 1987, the Bengals won the 1988 American Conference championship before losing to the San Francisco 49ers in the Super Bowl.


Youth Admits Burning Synagogue; Term of Weekends in Jail Planned
LEAD: In an emotionally charged hearing in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, a 16-year-old boy pleaded guilty yesterday to the burning and desecration of a synagogue in which five Torah scrolls were destroyed.
The judge said he would sentence the youth to weekends in jail, community service and probation.


From the Man Who Drew Mobil With a Red 'O'
LEAD: Accidents and fear, he will gladly tell you, pervade the artistic life of Ivan Chermayeff.
Best known as the founding partner in the design firm of Chermayeff &amp; Geismar Associates, creators of corporate images for powerful and prestigious clients, Mr.
Chermayeff is also a painter, illustrator and collagist.


New Japanese Car Out
LEAD: A little car named Lettuce, aimed to appeal basically to women, went on sale at supermarkets in Japan this week.
Sold exclusively through supermarkets, the Lettuce costs $4,700.
The mini-car is made by Mitsubishi and is being offered in red, white or black.


No. 2 at the Pentagon


Graf Reaches Australian Open Final


Koch, Citing Rising Burdens, Lays Out Goals
LEAD: In a speech that seemed to herald his campaign for another term, Mayor Edward I. Koch unveiled ambitious responses yesterday to drug addiction, homelessness and other urban ills, although he left doubt about how and when some of them would be put into effect.


Brazil Pays Late Interest
LEAD: Brazil paid commercial banks about $530 million in overdue interest yesterday, reassuring some bankers who had feared that a new debt suspension might be in the offing.


Justice Allows 2d GAF Trial
LEAD: A Supreme Court Justice cleared the way today for a second trial of the GAF Corporation on charges of stock manipulation.
Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall lifted his order that blocked a new trial on possible grounds of ''double jeopardy.''


Blueprints For the Disabled
LEAD: Since 1976, the Eastern chapter of the Paralyzed Veterans Association, an advocacy and support group for veterans with spinal cord injuries or diseases, has prepared blueprints for improved wheelchair accessibility in the homes of paralyzed veterans.
The organization has just made available a booklet of the blueprints titled 'Wheelchair House Designs.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Cambodian Doctor


Review/Recital; A Piano Prizewinner, 40 Years Later
LEAD: Seymour Lipkin played his way into the forefront of America's young pianists more than 40 years ago when he won the Rachmaninoff Competition, but he subsequently dropped out of the keyboard spotlight to pursue a conducting career and teach.
That he has not lost his interest in the piano or his command of the instrument was clear on Tuesday evening at the Juilliard Theater, where he performed in the school's Faculty Recital Series.


Making Things Easier May Not Mean Better
LEAD: AS the days lengthen and thinking about spring becomes less and less a silly notion, I would like to put in a word for the high virtue of inconvenience in a gardener's life.
Or maybe say a few grouchy things about convenience.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Accounts
LEAD: *
Revlon's Mitchum and Lady Mitchum line of anti-perspirants to Sudler &amp; Hennessey, with a seven-figure budget.


People Who Love New York Give to Neediest
LEAD: Expressing his ''thanks to your great city for the many pleasures it's provided me this year,'' Jonathan Ballard of New Haven sent $2,500 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Lilco Rate-Increase Request: Topic for Yet Another Day
LEAD: Avoiding an increasingly volatile question once again, a divided State Public Service Commission voted today to postpone action on a $98 million rate increase request by the Long Island Lighting Company.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Contel Corp., Atlanta, a telephone holding company, named Alan B. Salisbury president of the Contel Technology Center.
It is part of Contel Federal Systems, Fairfax, Va., a provider of telecommunications and information to government agencies.


Nathan Jacobs, 83, an Ex-Justice Of the New Jersey Supreme Court
LEAD: Nathan L. Jacobs, a retired associate justice of the New Jersey Supreme Court and an influential figure in court reform in the state, died yesterday at his home in Livingston, N.J.
He was 83 years old.


Records, of Course, At the '88 Auctions
LEAD: IN 1988, auction fever reigned at antiques and collectibles sales everywhere, defying earlier predictions of a market collapse.
It was a year when objects of quality and rarity with a pedigree - whether they were Andy Warhol's cookie jars or Marie Antoinette's console table - caused buying frenzies.


Portrait Power: The Warhol Look
LEAD: JUDGING by two current movies the power accessory women prefer is multiportraits in the style of Andy Warhol.
In ''Beaches,'' Bette Midler's hang in a Mae West-style apartment; Sigourney Weaver's, in ''Working Girl,'' hang amid rare woods and flouncy chintz a la Mario Buatta.
Forget gilded mirrors.


Christmas Trees That Live On
LEAD: In January, Christmas trees are a sad sight, naked and brittle, piled up on curbs, waiting to be hauled away.
But for the Green Guerillas, a nonprofit horticultural group, these holiday leftovers can help spruce up New York's asphalt jungle.


Profits at Philip Morris Fell By 28.5% in Fourth Quarter
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that its net income in the fourth quarter fell 28.5 percent, to $342 million, or $1.48 a share, from $478 million in 1987, or $2.02 a share, as a result of a $348 million pretax charge to cover a restructuring of its General Foods subsidiary.


Air Force Move Against Official
LEAD: The Air Force said today that it had begun legal proceedings to suspend a top contracting official who has been implicated in the Pentagon fraud investigation.


Car Output Up in Japan
LEAD: Japanese auto makers built a record 12.7 million cars, trucks and buses in 1988, an increase of 3.7 percent from the previous year, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association announced today.


CHICAGO EXCHANGE APPOINTS A PANEL TO PRESS CHANGES
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange said today that it had appointed a special panel to recommend some of the most extensive changes in its 115 years of trading.


S.E.C. Sues 2 Brokers Over 'Corner'
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission accused two brokers for Moore &amp; Schley, Cameron &amp; Company yesterday of trying to corner the stock of Chase Medical Group Inc.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; English Role In Hispanic Marketing
LEAD: VISTA magazine, an English-language Sunday newspaper supplement whose material is intended for Hispanic audiences, is expected to turn its first profit this year, a success it owes to the increasing use of English marketing by advertisers trying to reach Hispanic consumers.


Boy Seized With .32 at School
LEAD: A 14-year-old student who was showing off his unloaded .32-caliber Beretta pistol to a fellow student yesterday during a school fire drill in the Bronx was arrested, the police said.
The student, who was not identified because of his age, was charged as a juvenile after his 2:35 P.M. arrest at Junior High School 127 at 1560 Purdy Street in the Westchester section, said a police spokesman, Sgt.


Pro-Life? Or Pro-Death?
LEAD: On the President's first day in office, he lost no time in congratulating foes of safe, legal abortion for their extraordinary valor on the part of fetal - if not human - life.
In a phone call to anti-abortion demonstrators, President Bush made it absolutely clear that his vision of a gentler America does not include any gentleness for women of childbearing age.


Pitt, in Big-Game Mode, Registers Another Upset
LEAD: Early in the second half tonight, P. J. Carlesimo shed his suit jacket and knelt in front of Seton Hall's bench with a worried look on his face.
The Pirates' coach sensed his team was in trouble.


3 CONCERNS RAIDED BY BONN IN INQUIRY
LEAD: West German customs officials today raided 3 companies and 12 private homes in search of evidence that Libya received aid in building what is said to be a poison-gas plant.


Tower Tells Hearing Panel He'll Accept Military Cuts
LEAD: John G. Tower, President Bush's choice to be Secretary of Defense, sought today to dispel concern about his consulting work for military contractors and past support for huge military budget increases.


Small Rise In Yields
LEAD: Yields for certificates of deposit, bank money market accounts and money market mutual funds rose for the week that ended yesterday, but the increases were smaller than those of the previous week.


Woman Who Will Be Bishop Acts to Avoid a Radical Image
LEAD: The Rev.
Barbara C. Harris sought yesterday to soften her image as a political and theological radical as she prepared to become the first female bishop of the Episcopal Church.


MITCHELL DETAILS DEMOCRATIC GOALS
LEAD: George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, today set bipartisanship in foreign policy and the establishment of a ''new social contract'' between the Government and its citizens as the major objectives of Senate Democrats in the 101st Congress.


Review/Opera; 'Postman' in Washington
LEAD: The Washington Opera has revived ''The Postman Always Rings Twice,'' the 1982 operatic adaptation of James M. Cain's famous and twice-filmed novel of ruthlessness, frustration and violence in Depression-era California.


Clarence Norris, The Last Survivor of 'Scottsboro Boys', Dies at 76
LEAD: Clarence Norris, the last survivor of the ''Scottsboro Boys'' rape case, which became a symbol of racial injustice in the Deep South in the 1930's, died Monday at Bronx Community Hospital after a long illness.
He was 76 years old.


HEALTH: Medical Training; A New Specialty in Emergency Care Causing Fierce Debate in Hospitals
LEAD: In a major change over the past 10 years, emergency rooms in many American hospitals have begun to rely on a corps of doctors trained in an entirely new medical speciality: emergency room medicine.


Independent Oil Nations May Back OPEC Pact
LEAD: Oil traders were closely watching developments in London today for signs that oil-producing countries that are not OPEC members may join in an effort to keep prices high.


Probert Suspended
LEAD: Bob Probert, the Detroit Red Wings' forward, was suspended for the second time this season when he arrived 25 minutes late for the team's game last night against the Buffalo Sabres. ''He showed up at 6:10 P.M. and he was supposed to be here at 5:45 P.M.,'' said Bill Jamieson, director of public relations for the Red Wings.


Cross-Country Skiing to the Inn
LEAD: Cross-country skiing usually involves traversing trails that go in loops that eventually take skiers back to their starting point.
Cross-country skiing can, however, lead to a destination and, even better, to a cozy, country inn that offers a warm fire, a comfortable bed for the night and home-cooked meals.


Agreement Reached on Indian Museum Shift
LEAD: Negotiators from New York City and the Museum of the American Indian in upper Manhattan said tonight that an agreement had been reached to shift the museum's holdings to the Smithsonian Institution.
The Smithsonian would build a new museum on the Mall in Washington and also operate a large adjunct museum at the United States Custom House in lower


Susan Sontag, as Image and as Herself
LEAD: The first exhibit - as Susan Sontag might begin if she were writing an essay about herself - is a thin volume entitled ''AIDS and Its Metaphors,'' which adds itself to a growing collection of volumes sharing a widely recognized characteristic.
They all strive to be on the cusp of cultural discovery.


Savings Unit Rescue Plan
LEAD: The nation's largest savings and loan trade association proposed a plan on Tuesday that would call on taxpayers to rescue hundreds of insolvent savings institutions.
The plan would reduce the long-term cost of the rescue to the healthy segment of the industry.


Jordan Hits 10,000 But Bulls Fall to 76ers
LEAD: Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls scored the 10,000th point of his career tonight, but the Bulls lost to the Philadelphia 76ers, 120-108.


Doctor Loses Practice Over Genital Surgery
LEAD: A gynecologist who had performed surgery to alter women's genitals can no longer practice medicine in the United States, the Ohio Medical Board said today.


American Express Reports $231 Million Net in Quarter
LEAD: The American Express Company said yesterday that it earned $231 million, or 54 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, in contrast to a loss of $104 million, or 24 cents a share, in the corresponding period in 1987.


Federal Farm Credit Banks In $2.4 Billion Offerings
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday announced the interest rates on three consolidated systemwide bond issues totaling $2.4 billion, which were offered at a price of 100 through various securities dealers and dealer banks.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.H.L.
Whalers 3, Blues 3: Paul MacDermid of Hartford scored with 11 minutes 9 seconds left as the Whalers battled the St.
Louis Blues to a tie in Hartford last night.
MacDermid broke in free from the blue line off a pass from Dean Evason and converted a backhander to give the Whalers the tying goal with his 10th of the season.


Drexel Expected to Dismiss Milken as Part of a Plea Deal
LEAD: Michael R. Milken, the head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s ''junk bond'' operations, is expected to be dismissed within the next two weeks as part of an agreement between the Government and the firm that was disclosed yesterday.


Salvadoran Leader Rejects Rebel Plan on Election
LEAD: President Jose Napoleon Duarte tonight dismissed a proposal by the Salvadoran guerrillas laying out conditions for their participation in presidential elections, saying it amounted to a ''proposal of war.''


Police Killings Highest in Death-Penalty States
LEAD: To the Editor:


In China, Only Foreign Students Know Comfort
LEAD: To the Editor:


King Glorious Will Miss Derby Because of Injury
LEAD: King Glorious, the undefeated California colt who had been rated the early second choice for the Kentucky Derby May 6, is no longer being pointed for the race because of a minor knee injury, his trainer said today.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: ACOUSTICAL tiles, which are made of porous wood or mineral fibers, are commonly used to cover new and replacement ceilings.
Although they are excellent for absorbing sound, they are also soft, easily broken and often hard to clean.
Damaged or stained tiles generally must be replaced.


Bundy Toll May Be 50, Prosecutor in Case Says
LEAD: The prosecutor who sent Ted Bundy to the electric chair said today that the killer might have slain 50 young women, a toll that investigators have sought to prove for years.


Bush Weighs User Fee on Savings Deposits
LEAD: President Bush said today that his Administration was considering imposing a user fee on depositors at savings and loan associations, commercial banks and credit unions in an effort to raise billions of dollars to solve the nation's savings crisis.


DISARMING OF 5 MX'S IN '88 IS REPORTED
LEAD: An MX missile came loose from its support and fell as much as a foot inside its underground silo last year, causing the Air Force to remove that missile's 10-warhead payload and those of four other MX's found to be defective, according to an article published today.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the acquittal of a woman in the death of a New York City police officer misstated the charges in some editions.
She was charged with second-degree manslaughter, not first-degree.


Books of The Times; Scoops and Scuttlebutt of a British Correspondent
LEAD:  Special Relationships  A Foreign Correspondent's Memoirs From Roosevelt to Reagan  By Henry Brandon  Illustrated. 436 pages.
Atheneum. $24.95.


Parceling Things Out
LEAD: The white minority Government that used to rule Rhodesia and its black successor in Zimbabwe have one attitude ironically in common.
Both like to run a dirigiste economy, effectively deciding who can do what kind of business.


Two Who Fell Far Land in Same Place
LEAD: On the synthesizer keyboard, Denny McLain played the Motown tune ''Stop!
In the Name of Love,'' which was made popular by the Supremes more than two decades ago, when McLain was one of baseball's best pitchers.


Review/Jazz; A New Spin on the Old Sounds of Swing
LEAD: In the late 1930's and early 40's when the big swing bands dominated popular music, the John Kirby Sextet provided a novel contrast to the bands' heavy drives.
With its light-voiced front line of alto saxophone, clarinet and trumpet, the Kirby group had a crisp, brisk, tightly arranged approach to swing.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Meineke Assignment To Lintas Detroit
LEAD: Meineke Discount Mufflers, known for its ''I'm not gonna pay a lot for this muffler'' campaign, has assigned its $20 million account to Lintas: Campbell-Ewald, Detroit, a unit of Lintas:USA.
The agency search began three months ago, initially with some 100 agencies.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Campeau Corp., Toronto, a Canadian retailer, said its 1988 sales were better than the flat results projected last April.


CHINA AND VIETNAM REPORTED IN PACT
LEAD: China and Vietnam have agreed on a broad outline for a Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Cambodia by the end of September, a Vietnamese diplomat here said today.


U.S. Considers Relaxing Rules At Its Reactors
LEAD: The Department of Energy is considering reducing its safety requirements so it can speed the reopening of the troubled reactors at its Savannah River Plant, the chairman of a safety advisory panel said today.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady's testimony on corporate takeovers misidentified the man with Mr.
Brady.
He was Assistant Treasury Secretary John K. Meagher.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council  FOURTH REGIONAL CARTOGRAPHIC CONFERENCE FOR THE AMERICAS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Interlake Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interlake Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
245,217,000
222,297,000
Net inc
12,600,000
b23,500,000
Share earns
1.22
2.04
Yr sales
892,218,000
823,058,000
Net inc
39,600,000
b54,400,000
Share earns
3.75
4.69


A.T.&amp; T. Says Annual Loss, Its First, Was $1.67 Billion
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday reported, as expected, the first annual loss in its 104 years in business.


Room With a View
LEAD: There is a spacious room on the second floor of the Old Executive Office Building with a splendid view of the White House.
One of its first occupants, if not the first, was Redfield Proctor, the Secretary of War under President Benjamin Harrison a century ago.


Durable Orders Up Brisk 6.4% in December
LEAD: New orders for durable goods rose by 6.4 percent in December, a much stronger gain than had been expected.
Analysts said yesterday that the report was a sign that the economy was entering 1989 with plenty of momentum for continued growth.


Message From Kabul
LEAD: Among the world leaders who sent congratulatory messages to President Bush was Najibullah, the President of Afghanistan.
The Afghan Embassy was so eager to get his message out that it took the unusual step of reprinting it in a four-page press release.


MCA Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
962,111,000
674,406,000
Net inc
75,714,000
21,808,000
Share earns
1.04
.30
Yr rev
3,023,672,000
2,589,623,000
Net inc
164,916,000
137,254,000
Share earns
2.26
1.82


Portland, Ore., Passes a Ban On Polystyrene Foam Items
LEAD: The City Council has banned polystyrene foam, joining a growing number of communities in which the substance, commonly used in fast-food packaging, is unwelcome.


U.S.-PANAMA TIES FACE 3 KEY TESTS
LEAD: The Bush Administration will soon face three critical tests in the political and economic campaign to oust the Noriega Government, Panamanian political leaders and foreign diplomats say.


Con Brio's Schubert
LEAD: The Con Brio Ensemble - Joyce Hammann-Feibel, violinist; Bruce Wang, cellist; Victor Battipaglia, clarinetist, and Diana Mittler, pianist - is to play the Schubert Trio in B flat major, Dvorak's ''Dumky'' Trio, and William Ryden's ''Rags for Tomorrow'' at 3 P.M.
Sunday at the Community House of the Church in the Gardens, 15 Borage Place, Forest Hills, Queens.


Souvenirs of Justice
LEAD: The Supreme Court probably does not leap to mind as the place to shop for souvenirs.
But for years, a tiny kiosk on the Court's ground floor did a brisk business in pocket-size Constitutions and key rings decorated with the scales of justice.


Mead Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mead Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,044,600,000
1,063,000,000
Net inc
b43,400,000
c33,200,000
Share earns
.68
.53
Shares outst
67,400,000
62,900,000
Yr sales
4,463,900,000
4,208,800,000
Net inc
b352,700,000
c216,700,000
Share earns
5.37
3.45
Shares outst
67,300,000
62,800,000


Stone Agrees To Acquire Paper Maker
LEAD: In the first of what could be several friendly takeover deals outside the country, the Stone Container Corporation said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to buy Consolidated-Bathurst Inc., a big Canadian paper and packaging company, for $2.6 billion in cash.


Vladimir Feltsman
LEAD: The pianist Vladimir Feltsman is to play Beethoven's first and last Sonatas and Mussorgsky's ''Pictures at an Exhibition'' at 3 P.M.
Sunday at Avery Fisher Hall.
Tickets are $12 to $23.
Information: 874-6770.


Kean Chooses Nominee For Attorney General
LEAD: Gov.
Thomas H. Kean today said he will nominate Peter Perretti Jr., a partner in a Newark law firm, as state Attorney General.
Mr.
Perretti, 57 years old, would succeed W. Cary Edwards, who resigned last week to consider a possible run for governor.


HAWK IS BACK AGAIN, AND SO IS RINGO STARR
LEAD: Two new weekly series are making their debuts this weekend.
On commercial television, ABC is offering ''A Man Called Hawk'' on Saturdays at 9 P.M.
This is a spinoff from the canceled ''Spenser: For Hire,'' and is based on a character created by Robert B. Parker, author of the ''Spenser'' detective novels.


No. 1 Illinois Shocked by Minnesota
LEAD: Minnesota upset top-ranked Illinois, 69-62, tonight as Willie Burton scored 20 points and grabbed 13 rebounds to spark a first-half spurt that sent the Illini to their first loss of the season.


REBEL PLAN SPLITS U.S. AND SALVADOR
LEAD: The State Department reacted positively today to a proposal by guerrillas in El Salvador despite President Jose Napoleon Duarte's statement that it amounted to a ''proposal of war.''


Credit Rating Cut On Du Pont Debt
LEAD: The credit ratings have been reduced on $3.7 billion of the debt of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the debt of its Du Pont Overseas Capital N.V. unit, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said yesterday.


Review/Theater; Black Blues and Jazz
LEAD: ''Black and Blue,'' the new revue at the Minskoff, is a festive tribute to great black American jazz and blues artists as only a madcap pair of Argentine set and costume designers could have imagined it.


Fairies' Godmother
LEAD: If ever a memory deserved the masks of comedy and tragedy, surely remembrance of Bea Lillie does.
Beatrice Lillie, who died last week at her home at Henley-on-Thames at the age of 94, embodied the comic spirit on stage while suffering tragedy in her private life as Lady Peel.


Honda Develops Traction System
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company has developed what it said was the first automatic traction-control system for front-wheel-drive cars.
The company said it had solved the problem of maximizing traction during acceleration on slippery surfaces while retaining enough of the tires' lateral force to turn sharp corners.


Hype And Reality
LEAD: After many soppy eulogies on the air and in print, as Ronald Reagan's eight years in the Presidency finally came to a close, the Supreme Court has given the nation a hard look at the real Reagan legacy.


WILDER TO LAUNCH RUN FOR GOVERNOR
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, a black who confounded political experts in 1985 by winning statewide office in the conservative South, opened a campaign for Governor today.


Only Two Ways to Free College Sport
LEAD: When Dale Brown was asked why he was trying to recruit a 7-foot-4-inch, 285-pound basketball player from Lithuania named Arvidas Sabonis to attend Louisiana State University, the coach said it was for humanitarian reasons.


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,193,200,000
1,008,800,000
Net inc
74,400,000
56,400,000
Share earns
1.47
1.12
Yr rev
4,258,300,000
3,585,800,000
Net inc
224,400,000
173,800,000
Share earns
4.41
3.47


Managua Journal; It's a Mad, Mad City. But Bienvenido, Anyway
LEAD: Foreigners who visit Managua these days are often pleased to learn that they can safely drink the water.


Computer Sciences Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Revenue
345,475,000
287,343,000
Net inc
11,958,000
10,311,000
Share earns
.75
.65
9mo rev
944,247,000
843,217,000
Net inc
35,640,000
29,665,000
Share earns
2.23
1.86


Sara Lee Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sara Lee Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
3,075,400,000
2,644,100,000
Net inc
b137,300,000
99,100,000
Share earns
1.19
.88
6mo sales
5,825,500,000
5,043,000,000
Net inc
b212,800,000
161,000,000
Share earns
1.84
1.42


Barnes Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
118,767,000
114,807,000
Net inc
4,039,000
4,649,000
Share earns
.63
.74
Shares outst
5,558,703
6,138,755
Yr sales
496,060,000
458,016,000
Net inc
18,848,000
17,840,000
Share earns
3.06
2.80
Shares outst
5,465,188
6,321,315


Polish Priest Buried; Many Suspect Murder
LEAD: Thousands of Poles today attended a funeral service for a popular priest who was found dead in his rectory over the weekend, apparently a murder victim.


Integrated-I.C.H. Deal Is Challenged
LEAD: Frederick A. Moran, president of Moran Asset Management Inc., an investment advisory firm in Greenwich, Conn., said he would oppose the merger agreement between Integrated Resources Inc. and the I.C.H.
Corporation.
Mr.
Moran holds a 4.97 percent in Integrated.


Robert Burmester, 58, Accounting Executive
LEAD: Robert W. Burmester, national director of accounting and auditing for the Arthur Young accounting firm, died of a heart attack Monday night at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 58 years old.


Time Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,207,000,000
1,138,000,000
Net inc
b58,000,000
c52,000,000
Share earns
1.01
.88
Yr rev
4,507,000,000
4,193,000,000
Net inc
b289,000,000
c250,000,000
Share earns
5.01
4.18


Deluxe Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
332,604,998
245,493,046
Net inc
44,958,270
42,638,457
Share earns
.53
.50
Yr sales
1,195,970,816
948,010,118
Net inc
143,354,011
148,512,414
Share earns
1.68
1.74


How Albany Can Keep Libraries Open When Schools Are Closed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Garden to Close The Felt Forum For Two Years
LEAD: The Felt Forum in Madison Square Garden will be closed for two years as part of a $100 million renovation of the sports and entertainment complex, its president said yesterday.


Review/Opera; 'Barber' in Washington
LEAD: A performance of ''The Barber of Seville'' that had the whole audience beaming with pleasure - most of all those who know and love the score best - was given Wednesday evening at the Eisenhower Theater by the Washington Opera Company.
A consistently excellent cast, a stage director who did certain important things right, a conductor with the imagination to give the score some rethinking, an intimate theater in which details could tell: With all these ingredients in place,


Review/Music; Playing With Ideas, in Different Voices
LEAD: There was a bit of esthetic tension onstage at the Blue Note on Monday night.
The saxophonist Kenny Garrett and the pianist Geri Allen, who have known each other since they were children in Detroit, play with different musical voices.
Mr.
Garrett is an old-fashioned blistering soloist whose playing is infused with soul and blues ideas that often reach exultant climaxes, fervent as a gospel performance.


Foundations, Citing Homeless, Aid Neediest
LEAD: Departing from usual practice, the James A. Macdonald Foundation of White Plains asked that this year's gift to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund be directed particularly to solving the problems of housing the homeless and the elderly.


Emerson Radio Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Radio Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
216,827,000
199,815,000
Net inc
b3,590,000
c102,000
Share earns
.10
-
9mo sales
590,585,000
597,685,000
Net inc
b8,158,000
c11,465,000
Share earns
.22
-


Procter &amp; Gamble Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procter &amp; Gamble Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,268,000,000
4,839,000,000
Net inc
325,000,000
261,000,000
Share earns
1.92
1.52
6mo sales
10,535,000,000
9,503,000,000
Net inc
725,000,000
617,000,000
Share earns
4.28
3.61


Reviews/Music; Balalaikas, Piccolo to Octobass
LEAD: The Osipov Balalaika Orchestra arrived in New York this week from the Soviet Union to begin a 40-city tour of the United States, its first visit to this country since 1977.
At Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening, the orchestra and its guests, the Babinka Folk Ensemble, offered vibrant, finely polished and timbrally variegated performances of


Chester Hammond, 77, A Retired Industrialist
LEAD: Chester Hammond, a retired industrialist who served as a millitary aide to Franklin D. Roosevelt, died of cardiac arrest Tuesday at the Maplewood Manse Rest Home in Peterborough, N.H.
He was 77 years old and lived in Peterborough.


A.C.L.U., Though Buoyed by Surge of Recruits, Still Frets Over Presidential Campaign Fallout
LEAD: Precariousness is a way of life for the American Civil Liberties Union, but even by that standard 1988 seemed like a disaster.
Through Labor Day only 15,000 new members had enlisted, which did not even cover attrition.
The stock market crash, the defeat of Judge Robert H. Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court and the end of the Reagan era all made for malaise.


Gatx Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gatx Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
157,700,000
145,300,000
Net inc
9,000,000
8,100,000
Share earns
.97
.87
Yr rev
587,100,000
547,100,000
Net inc
47,000,000
34,700,000
Share earns
5.04
3.64


Abortion for Injured Wife Sought
LEAD: A Long Island man whose pregnant wife is in a coma said today that he wanted to be appointed her guardian so he could authorize an abortion in an attempt to help her recover.


Globex Trading System Gains
LEAD: Members of the New York Mercantile Exchange have authorized their board to pursue negotiations to join the Globex electronic trading system for futures and options contracts, the exchange announced yesterday.
It said the vote by members was 392 to 122 in favor of the proposal.


Death Penalty Likely to Gain, Miller Predicts
LEAD: Assembly Speaker Mel Miller has warned Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of the ''distinct possibility'' that the Legislature will reinstate the death penalty in New York this year.


Unheralded, Apartments Are Reborn For Homeless
LEAD: The apartment is completely bare, except for a table and chairs in the middle of the living room and beds covered by green blankets in the bedrooms.
But when Clarence Rollocks Jr. is asked what he thinks of his new apartment, he lights up in a smile and his answer is brief. ''Heaven,'' he says.


Khomeini Is Well, Daughter Says
LEAD: Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the 88-year-old Iranian leader, is ''in good health,'' works hard and sometimes performs marriage ceremonies, his daughter says.


Chauncey Stillman, 81, Philanthropist, Is Dead
LEAD: Chauncey Devereux Stillman, an investor and philanthropist, died Tuesday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


U.S. Orders More Inspections Of Engine Mountings on Jets
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board recommended today that airlines increase their inspections of bolts holding engines to Boeing 737 jets to prevent recurrences of the episode Friday in which an engine fell off a plane taking off in Chicago.


Wicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
212,491,000
192,792,000
Net inc
12,587,000
10,796,000
Share earns
1.86
1.63
Yr rev
754,186 000
677,602,000
Net inc
33,030,000
18,896,000
Share earns
4.91
2.85


Perlman in Sibelius
LEAD: Itzhak Perlman is to perform the Sibelius Violin Concerto with the New York Philharmonic at 8 tonight at Avery Fisher Hall.
The all-Sibelius program, which is to be conducted by Zubin Mehta, also includes the Symphony No. 1 and ''The Swan of Tuonela.'' The concert is to be repeated at 8 P.M. tomorrow.


Restaurants
LEAD:  Mitsukoshi


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Anchor Savings Bank FSB, Hewlett, L.I., appointed David W. Beal executive vice president-mortgages.


Paine Webber Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
696,229,000
541,325,000
Net inc
b512,000
7,010,000
Share earns
-
.16
Yr rev
2,512,261,000
2,436,963,000
Net inc
b42,360,000
72,020,000
Share earns
.58
2.17


One Good Quarter Not Enough for Nets
LEAD: An optimist would say the Nets almost pulled off a great comeback tonight.
A realist would say the Nets had no business falling 12 points behind the Sacramento Kings in the first place.


To Cut Local Taxes, Kean Urges Shifting Some Costs to State
LEAD: In response to growing outrage over rising property taxes in New Jersey, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean proposed today that the state take over from the counties the costs of the welfare and state court systems to save those who pay property taxes more than $320 million.


Dallas Office for DDB
LEAD: DDB Needham Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, said it would open a Dallas office, exclusively to service the $20 million American Airlines international account that the agency retained after a six-week competition with Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, Dallas.
Bozell will continue to handle the $120 million domestic account.


Report Says Math Teaching In U.S. Needs an Overhaul
LEAD: The way mathematics is taught and perceived in the United States needs a major overhaul because most students leave school without enough skills to meet job demands or to continue their education effectively, prominent mathematicians, scientists and engineers said in a report today.


Educational Mediocrity Hurts Our Economy; Find Bright Students
LEAD: To the Editor:


SOME OTHER INNS IN NEW YORK AND CONNECTICUT
LEAD: Dozens of additional country inns can be found surprisingly close to New York City.
Here are some of the others in upstate New York and western Connecticut, within about 125 miles of Manhattan. (All rates are per night double occupancy during the winter off-season, unless indicated otherwise. Spring, summer and fall rates are higher at some inns.)


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
173,073,000
167,924,000
Net inc
26,838,000
22,753,000
Share earns
.53
.45
Yr rev
701,908,000
655,276,000
Net inc
b153,418,000
120,353,000
Share earns
3.06
2.29


Northern States Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern States Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
483,900,000
428,900,000
Net inc
22,300,000
28,800,000
Share earns
.27
.39
Yr rev
2,006,500,000
1,770,300,000
Net inc
214,800,000
204,900,000
Share earns
3.11
3.01


American President Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
618,500,000
507,200,000
Net inc
15,500,000
14,200,000
Share earns
.60
.58
Yr rev
2,131,200,000
1,824,800,000
Net inc
81,300,000
79,100,000
Share earns
3.26
3.23


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  Three big accounting firms are being sued by Federal regulators who contend the firms failed to detect problems that led to insolvencies at savings and loan associations, the industry's chief regulator told Congress.
He said most Big Eight accounting firms would face similar suits.


After 40 Years Making the Law, Rodino Now Teaches It
LEAD: His silver hair swept back, his glasses perched imperially on the bridge of his nose, Peter W. Rodino Jr. was doing what he has done for the last 40 years: instructing on the Constitution and the rule of law.


Ms. Pearson, Designer, Weds Aaron N. Heine
LEAD: The wedding of Randi Ellen Pearson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rubin Peck of New York, to Aaron Noah Heine, a son of Aaron Heine of Philadelphia and Miriam Shindler of Miami Beach, Fla., took place yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Stanley M. Davids performed the ceremony in his study at the Central Synagogue.


Experts Say North's Use of Selected Data in Trial Poses No Threat
LEAD: Government experts have tentatively decided that Oliver L. North may use selected secret documents as evidence in his criminal trial without posing major security problems, Bush Administration officials said today.


BCE Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BCE Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,010,000,000
3,860,000,000
Net inc
123,000,000
340,000,000
Share earns
.42
1.22
Shares outst
288,900,000
272,500,000
Yr rev
15,250,000,000
14,730,000,000
Net inc
887,000,000
1,090,000,000
Share earns
3.09
3.91
Shares outst
285,400,000
269,400,000


Hershel Cohen, 89, Retired Rabbi in Jersey
LEAD: Rabbi Hershel Cohen, a Talmudic scholar and the spiritual leader of Ahawas Achim B'nai Jacob synagogue in Newark for several decades, died of congestive heart failure last Friday at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 89 years old and a resident of Livingston.


Total Petroleum North Amerca Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum North Amerca Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
491,583,000
458,219,000
Net inc
b39,647,000
c2,872,000
Share earns
1.38
-
Yr rev
1,833,540,000
1,747,009,000
Net inc
b72,749,000
c26,823,000
Share earns
2.55
-


Farley Extends Bid
LEAD: Farley Inc. said it was extending for the ninth time its $1.4 billion hostile takeover bid for West Point-Pepperell Inc.
The new deadline is next Wednesday, a week later than the previous deadline.
About 15.7 million shares of West Point-Pepperell common stock had been tendered by shareholders, which gives Farley about 62 percent of Pepperell common stock.


Review/Film; Soviet Eye Examines Atom War
LEAD: What do you look for in a Soviet film that, like the American television series ''The Day After'' in 1983, depicts the ultimate human drama -death and survival after the nuclear holocaust?
There are those in the West who have long suspected that the Soviet Government, always carefully controlling its own peace movement, wanted to encourage greater fear of the nuclear catastrophe among other people than among its own citizens.


Edwards Charts a Course On More Familiar Turf
LEAD: There is no pretending that these are the good old days, when her world revolved around going to classes, basketball practice and the games.
Teresa Edwards is 24 years old now, back at the University of Georgia to complete some unfinished business, too far removed from college life to envy the Lady Dawgs working out on the


Cominco Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cominco Ltd
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
505,400,000
397,800,000
Net inc
b112,000,000
c75,000,000
Share earns
1.39
.98
Yr rev
1,660,400,000
1,306,100,000
Net inc
b242,000,000
c172,000,000
Share earns
2.92
2.18


Rorer Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
325,189,000
281,433,000
Net inc
26,909,000
22,456,000
Share earns
.85
.71
Yr sales
1,041,612,000
928,796,000
Net inc
61,841,000
54,340,000
Share earns
1.96
1.67


UAL Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UAL Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,221,937,000
2,103,717,000
Net inc
b20,869,000
c209,943,000
Share earns
.97
3.68
Shares outst
21,570,000
57,100,000
Yr rev
8,981,743,000
8,304,972,000
Net inc
b1,124,300,000
c335,117,000
Share earns
37.87
6.02
Shares outst
29,681,000
55,632,000


Sonat Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonat Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
363,307,000
346,831,000
Net inc
11,667,000
c19,390,000
Share earns
.29
.48
Yr rev
1,392,384,000
1,418,489,000
Net inc
b97,804,000
c104,043,000
Share earns
2.41
2.57


Selfish, Sanctimonious Anti-Smokers
LEAD: Recently, I boarded a flight from Boston to New York.
As I sat down, the attendant announced that the flight was scheduled to take less than two hours (it actually took four hours) and consequently ''in accord with Federal Aviation Association regulations this is a nonsmoking flight.'' A large number of the passengers cheered and applauded.


Lendl Eliminates Muster, Will Face Mecir in Final
LEAD: Ivan Lendl, closing in on a Grand Slam title he has never won, outplayed 11th-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-2, 6-4, 5-7, 7-5, in a grueling baseline duel today to reach his second Australian Open final.


AUCTIONS
LEAD:  Netsuke and Lacquers


Contel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
848,861,000
761,606,000
Net inc
b50,352,000
cd93,841,000
Share earns
.64
-
Yr rev
2,963,714,000
2,731,643,000
Net inc
b276,111,000
d43,002,000
Share earns
3.50
.55


Health Officials Face Fears Created by Meningitis Cases
LEAD: Hundreds of anxious telephone calls are coming into the offices of Long Island health officials in the wake of three unrelated deaths from meningitis caused by the meningococcus bacterium, but officials say there is no cause for alarm.


Broadcast News Awards
LEAD: CBS won two of broadcast journalism's highest awards yesterday when ''60 Minutes'' received the Alfred I. du Pont-Columbia University Gold Baton and the ''CBS Evening News'' received a Silver Baton for its coverage of the Persian Gulf in the final weeks of the Iran-Iraq War.


Arafat, in Reversal, Refuses An Invitation to Talk in U.S.
LEAD: An aide to Yasir Arafat said today that the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman had decided not to ask the United States for a visa to let him address an Arab-American group.


U.S. to Allow Hanoi Official To Attend Capitol Reception
LEAD: The United States has allowed a Vietnamese official to visit Washington, the State Department said today.


Bugged Embassy in Moscow Gets Chance for a New Life
LEAD: An American trade group has offered to buy the unfinished United States Embassy building in Moscow as office space, State Department officials said today.
Washington halted construction on the building last year after concluding that it had been embedded with enough eavesdropping devices to turn it into an eight-story microphone.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''To begin with, I don't believe that we can devise an umbrella that can protect the entire American population from nuclear incineration.
I think that's unrealistic.''  - John G. Tower.  [ A1:6. ]


New York Is First State To Try to Curb Caesareans
LEAD: The New York State Health Department has begun the first statewide program in the nation to reduce the rate of Caesarean births.


Economic Scene; Bush's Hopes, Greenspan's Fear,
LEAD: THE American economy is moving too fast for the comfort of Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
In Congressional testimony this week, he made clear his intention of slowing it down rather than risk an acceleration of inflation, saying that the Fed would rather ''err more on the side of restrictiveness than stimulus.


Squibb Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Squibb Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
664,800,000
592,600,000
Net inc
97,500,000
84,600,000
Share earns
1.00
.81
Yr sales
2,585,800,000
2,156,500,000
Net inc
425,500,000
358,400,000
Share earns
4.30
3.42


Teen-Age Gunman Wounds 4 Students At School in Capital
LEAD: A teen-age gunman with a nine-millimeter automatic pistol wounded four students today as they were leaving Woodrow Wilson High School in the Northwest section of the city.


Paris Coiffures Recall the 30's
LEAD: Coiffures, many of them revivals, have attracted attention at the round of couture fashion shows for spring and summer this week.
In recent seasons, simple French knots and buns have prevailed, giving the models a well-groomed look that did not distract from the clothes.
This time the hairdo is part of the atmosphere, recalling the grand days of the couture in the 1930's.


Free Shave For Bush
LEAD: Even Richard M. Nixon, probably the most divisive figure to have attained the Presidency in this century, was granted a Presidential honeymoon.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
336,234,000
296,263,000
Net inc
25,200,000
b34,185,000
Share earns
.39
-
Yr rev
1,340,169,000
1,289,638,000
Net inc
171,467,000
b177,700,000
Share earns
2.81
-


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on Dec. 13 about a Federal bankruptcy proceeding reported that a Canadian businessman, Stephen J. Mernick, was the high bidder for the PTL television ministry.
The article described Mr.
Mernick as an Orthodox Jew.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An obituary on Sunday about George Cassidy, the official starter at New York Racing Association tracks, omitted a survivor.
She is a daughter, Sheila Cassidy Outcault.


McDonald's Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,451,220,000
1,265,797,000
Net inc
151,480,000
129,600,000
Share earns
.81
.68
Yr rev
5,566,262,000
4,893,538,000
Net inc
645,863,000
b596,462,000
Share earns
3.43
3.14


Paine Webber Net Plummets
LEAD: Paine Webber Group Inc., the brokerage house, yesterday reported net earnings of $512,000 in the fourth quarter, a decline of 92.9 percent from $7 million, or 16 cents a share, in the 1987 period.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about computer makers' earnings misstated the stock price of Prime Computer Inc. in some editions.
Its shares closed Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange at $19.375, up 25 cents.


Field of Democrats Narrows
LEAD: Democrats today began rallying around the man who seems certain to be their new national chairman, although conservatives were still worried the party was again placing itself too far to the left of the political mainstream.


Harland, John H Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harland, John H Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
83,206,309
79,054,255
Net inc
14,072,913
12,729,768
Share earns
.37
.34
Yr sales
333,315,000
318,141,433
Net inc
53,323,335
47,514,387
Share earns
1.41
1.26


TOWER DECLARES 'STAR WARS' SHIELD CAN'T BE COMPLETE
LEAD: Moving away from Ronald Reagan's vision of an impregnable shield against missiles, the Secretary of Defense-designate said today that the Bush Administration did not consider it possible to ''devise an umbrella that can protect the entire American population from nuclear incineration.''


Dokes in Title Defense Against Holyfield
LEAD: Michael Dokes, former World Boxing Association heavyweight champion, had to fight back tears yesterday as he looked back on a career that was nearly destroyed by a cocaine habit.
At a news conference in Manhattan to announce his defense of the Continental Americas heavyweight title against Evander Holyfield on March 11 in Las Vegas, Nev., the 30-year-old Dokes conceded: ''It took changes to bring me to the point I'm at now.


Nynex Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,243,000,000
3,103,200,000
Net inc
342,200,000
322,500,000
Share earns
1.74
1.59
Yr rev
12,660,800,000
12,083,700,000
Net inc
1,315,000,000
1,276,500,000
Share earns
6.63
6.26


American Income Life Insurnce Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Income Life Insurnce Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b6,016,000
c3,317,000
Share earns
.52
.28
Yr net inc
b22,506,000
c17,044,000
Share earns
1.92
1.35
b-After capital losses of $1,333,000 and $3,144,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Bush Plans China Visit After Hirohito Funeral
LEAD: The White House announced today that President Bush plans to visit China next month after attending the funeral of Emperor Hirohito in Tokyo.


The Greenhouse Effect Is for Real
LEAD: A team of Government scientists report no sign of a warming trend in the average temperatures in the United States over the last century.
Does that mean the greenhouse effect, the feared heating of the earth's atmosphere by burning coal and oil, is just another false alarm?
The answer, unfortunately, is an emphatic no.


Givenchy: Romance You Can Count On
LEAD: Couture designers are not obligated to create a brave new world of fashion with every collection.
Making clothes that help women look pretty and feel secure is also an accomplishment.
Because he is so skilled at designing clothes that are flattering and familiar without looking strange, Hubert de Givenchy received a standing ovation this morning from an international audience of retailers and customers.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Gain
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds inched higher in fairly active trading yesterday, erasing what had been an early selloff.


Franklin's Birthday
LEAD: To the Editor:


Interior Nominee Pledges Development With Care
LEAD: Manuel Lujan Jr., President Bush's choice to be Interior Secretary, pledged today to be a careful steward of the nation's lands but said that environmentally sound development of public resources was possible and desirable.


Educational Mediocrity Hurts Our Economy; Study Japanese
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Art; An Architect's Dreams And What He Built
LEAD: Frederick Kiesler was nearly 75 years old and his death was only a few months away when his first major building, the Shrine of the Book in Jerusalem, was finally completed in 1965.
Until then, he had designed shop windows at Saks Fifth Avenue, stage sets for the Juilliard School's opera program, a movie house in Greenwich Village and a handful of contemporary art galleries.


Amdahl Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
545,711,000
482,935,000
Net inc
b72,975,000
c53,002,000
Share earns
.68
.50
Yr rev
1,801,807,000
1,505,160,000
Net inc
b223,333,000
c145,985,000
Share earns
2.08
1.41


Oliver H. Durrell, Book Publisher, 81
LEAD: Oliver H. Durrell, retired chairman of Durrell Publications, a publisher of books on New England and the Bahamas, died of congestive heart failure Wednesday at New Hanover Memorial Hospital in Wilmington, N.C., where he lived.
He was 81 years old.


For Children; Shows, Nature, Museums
LEAD:  ''THE GIRL WITH THE ENAMEL EYES (The Coppelia Suite),'' a ballet show by the Children's Ballet Theater and the Neubert Ballet Company, 3:30 P.M.
Sundays through March 12, at the Neubert Ballet Theater, Carnegie Hall, Suite 819, 881 Seventh Avenue.
Tickets: $10.
Information: 246-3166.  ''HANSEL AND GRETEL,'' a show by Nicolas Coppola's Puppetworks, 1 and 3 P.M.


Officer Did Not Realize Gunman Was Fugitive
LEAD: Several hours had passed before Police Officer Jannet Caban realized she had been in a shootout with one of New York City's most wanted fugitives during a robbery Tuesday night, she said yesterday.


U.S. Lifts Sundstrand Suspension
LEAD: The Defense Department ended the suspension of the Sundstrand Corporation today, permitting the supplier of aeropsace components to bid for Government business again, but only after the company agreed to repay the Government $62.5 million in excess charges.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Christian Dior Perfumes to HDM New York for United States advertising of its entire line of fragrances, cosmetics and treatment products.
HDM is a joint venture of Young &amp; Rubicam, Dentsu of Japan and Havas-Conseil of France.


Jury Rehears a Doctor's Testimony on Nussbaum
LEAD: The jury in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg asked yesterday for a re-reading of testimony by a doctor who had said that on the night Lisa Steinberg was fatally beaten, Hedda Nussbaum was ''wasted'' and at risk of death from the beatings she said she received from Mr.
Steinberg.


UAL Posts A Profit; Delta Down
LEAD: The UAL Corporation yesterday reported fourth-quarter earnings of $45.4 million, or $2.11 a share, in contrast to a loss of $80.4 million in the fourth quarter of 1987 from continuing operations.


Cleveland at Carnegie
LEAD: Christoph von Dohnanyi is to lead the Cleveland Orchestra in Mozart's Symphony No. 39 (K. 543) and the Busoni Piano Concerto (Op. 39) at 8 tonight at Carnegie Hall.
Garrick Ohlsson is to be the soloist in the Busoni piece.
The orchestra is to play another program at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall, with the soprano Kathleen Battle as the soloist in Villa-Lobos's '' Bachiana Brasileira'' No.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:  Blythe's Mood at Indigo


South African Official Quits After Reports on Help to Son
LEAD: A Cabinet minister has resigned following newspaper reports that he had abused his position to further his son's business interests.


Army Takes Offensive Against Contract Fraud
LEAD: Ever since the first gusts of Operation Ill Wind, the Department of Justice's investigation into possible fraud in the Pentagon's procurement of arms and equipment, the Army's officers and civilian officials have been watching warily.


Sihanouk Says He Is Withdrawing From Cambodia Settlement Talks
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the Cambodian opposition and a key figure in the resolution of Cambodia's future, announced today that he would withdraw from talks about his country next month.


BRIEFS
LEAD:  Preferred Stock


Telerate Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telerate Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
114,000,000
97,200,000
Net inc
20,500,000
23,300,000
Share earns
.22
.25
Yr rev
440,400,000
335,800,000
Net inc
91,200,000
75,200,000
Share earns
.96
.79


German Inflation 2.5%
LEAD: West Germany's average annual inflation rate rose sharply in January, to 2.5 percent, its highest level in three and a half years, preliminary figures showed today.


Prague Releases 6 Protesters
LEAD: Communist authorities in Czechoslovakia have released six human-rights advocates arrested 10 days ago at a rally in central Prague, an emigre source reported today.
But the banned playwright Vaclav Havel and two other dissidents remain in custody and, like the six who were released Wednesday in Prague, face trial on charges of disturbing the peace and hooliganism.


Georgia-Pacific Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,567,000,000
2,229,000,000
Net inc
129,000,000
112,000,000
Share earns
1.36
1.06
Yr sales
9,509,000,000
8,603,000,000
Net inc
467,000,000
458,000,000
Share earns
4.76
4.23


Policeman Shoots Man In Dispute at Hospital
LEAD: An off-duty police officer seeking treatment for his wife in a Brooklyn hospital following a car accident last night, shot and critically wounded a man who had been involved in the accident during a dispute in the hospital emergency room, the police said.


Mcorp to Be Reviewed By Federal Examiners
LEAD: More than 100 Federal examiners are assembling in Dallas to begin reviewing loans throughout the 25 banks owned by Mcorp, the second-largest bank-holding company in Texas, regulatory officials in Washington said today.


Cherokee Colony Back in Stride
LEAD: The most unexpected and welcome comeback of the new racing season has been Cherokee Colony, who has returned from obscurity to become the early favorite for the $500,000 Strub Stakes at Santa Anita Feb. 5.


FPS Computing reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPS Computing
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,792,000
18,173,000
Net loss
11,272,000
15,003,000
Yr rev
70,785,000
84,269,000
Net loss
27,760,000
29,241,000


Liberal? Conservative? What's in a Name?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Delta Air Lines Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Air Lines Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,858,100,000
1,699,800,000
Net inc
b85,169,000
88,318,000
Share earns
1.73
1.82
6mo rev
3,740,000,000
3,331,691,000
Net inc
b185,120,000
c147,423,000
Share earns
3.76
3.03


Remember Those Killed on the Liberty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tiger International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiger International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
370,749,000
353,157,000
Net inc
32,845,000
b12,564,000
Share earns
.83
.33
Shares outst
37,424,000
32,864,000
Yr rev
1,357,525,000
1,231,896,000
Net inc
89,479,000
b57,779,000
Share earns
2.36
1.55
Shares outst
35,545,000
32,985,000


Illinois Central
LEAD: The Archer Daniels Midland Company plans to increase its stake in the Illinois Central Transportation Company to at least 15 percent, Illinois Central said.


France Vows No Cover-Up
LEAD: The French Finance Minister promised a parliamentary committee today that there would be no cover-up of an insider trading scandal involving a close friend of President Francois Mitterrand.


Budget Deficit Falls Briefly
LEAD: A temporary shift in the payment of Social Security benefits held last month's budget deficit to less than half the level of a year earlier, but economists still expect the shortfall for the 1989 fiscal year to exceed last year's level.


The Stamps of Incumbency
LEAD: Congressional leaders voice concern about the steady decline in real competition for House and Senate seats.
Yet they now propose to add to incumbents' overwhelming advantage by fattening next year's Congressional mailing budget.


Western Company of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Company of North America (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
55,034,000
57,614,000
Net inc
2,427,000
b32,830,000
Share earns
.05
-
Yr rev
208,891,000
176,542,000
Net loss
10,234,000
189,897,000


THE EAST VILLAGE'S ART GALLERIES ARE ALIVE IN SOHO
LEAD: The East Village art scene may be defunct, but its legacy lives on deep in the complicated heart of SoHo, where art and money, glamour and real estate continue to mingle in evermore varied combinations.
The move of galleries out of the East Village, which started in earnest last season, still continues and is in its second and probably final phase.


Ocean Drilling &amp; Exploration Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ocean Drilling &amp; Exploration Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
114,100,000
104,930,000
Net inc
4,542,000
b113,202,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr rev
405,700,000
390,084,000
Net loss
30,440,000
129,325,000


American Television &amp; Comunications Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Television &amp; Comunications Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
212,090,000
186,904,000
Net inc
22,502,000
13,107,000
Share earns
.21
.12
Yr rev
811,893,000
714,390,000
Net inc
b70,422,000
49,472,000
Share earns
.65
.45


Time Inc. Profits Rise by 11.5% in Quarter
LEAD: Time Inc. said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 11.5 percent, to $58 million, or $1.01 a share, from $52 million, or 88 cents a share, in the 1987 quarter.
The increase came despite a $35 million charge for writing down the value of a satellite venture.


Avnet Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
495,400,000
429,300,000
Net inc
11,800,000
12,900,000
Share earns
.33
.36
6mo sales
986,900,000
870,400,000
Net inc
23,500,000
25,000,000
Share earns
.66
.70
Shares outst
35,750,000
35,790,000


Colgate to Rename a Toothpaste
LEAD: After more than three years of pressure from shareholders, religious groups and blacks, the Colgate-Palmolive Company announced yesterday that it would rename Darkie, a popular toothpaste that it sells in Asia, and redesign its logotype, a minstrel in blackface.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.25
9.32
6.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.25
8.29
5.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.36
8.34
6.06
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.03
9.03
8.11
30-YR.


Independent Oil Producers And OPEC in Loose Accord
LEAD: Represententatives of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and independent oil producers ended a two-day meeting in London with an agreement to work together on pushing oil prices higher.


Books of The Times; A Simple Miracle to Start, Then High Complexity
LEAD:  The Satanic Verses  By Salman Rushdie  547 pages. Viking. $19.95.


BUSH PUTS STRESS ON PUBLIC SERVICE
LEAD: President Bush today called Government ''an opportunity for public service, not private gain,'' and urged senior career Federal officials ''to simply know right from wrong to avoid even the appearance of wrong.''


Nicaragua Devalues
LEAD: In a move to salvage Nicaragua's war-ravaged economy, the Government devalued its currency Wednesday for the second time in a month.
Managua has increased the official cordoba exchange rate 13 percent, to 2,300 cordobas to the dollar from 2,000, the official daily Barricada said.
The currency was devalued from 920 cordobas to the dollar on Jan.


2 'Tabloid' Programs Gain As TV Officials' Parley Ends
LEAD: The convention of the National Association of Television Program Executives ended today with Fox Television's ''A Current Affair'' and ''Tabloid,'' a new program by the Paramount Pictures Corporation, making large gains in sales to program buyers from local stations across the country.


People
LEAD: *
Joseph Dell'Aquila has been appointed executive vice president on the M&amp;M/Mars confectionery business at Backer Spielvogel Bates, the U.S. company of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide.


The Chip Industry Is Sliding Again
LEAD: After a boom that lasted less than two years, the nation's semiconductor industry appears to be headed back into a slump.


Prelate Says Convent at Auschwitz Will Move
LEAD: A Carmelite convent that Jewish groups have protested because it is at the site of the Auschwitz death camp will soon be moved to another site, France's Roman Catholic Primate has announced.


Square D Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
426,411,000
379,580,000
Net inc
26,011,000
19,350,000
Share earns
1.00
.70
Yr sales
1,656,772,000
1,484,221,000
Net inc
118,934,000
110,001,000
Share earns
4.44
3.82


Esposito Trial Put Off 3 Weeks
LEAD: Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court yesterday changed the date for the tax-fraud and bribery trial of Meade H. Esposito, the former Brooklyn Democratic leader, from Feb. 6 to Feb. 27 in response to a motion by Mr.
Esposito's lawyer, James LaRossa.
Mr.
Esposito, 82 years old, had a malignant bladder tumor removed last month.


Maytag Merger Is Completed
LEAD: The Maytag Corporation, a leading appliance maker, and the Chicago Pacific Company, the manufacturer of Hoover vacuum cleaners, announced the completion of their $1 billion merger.
The combination was approved by stockholders of both companies and became effective with the filing of legal documents in Delaware, where Maytag is incorporated.


On Stage
LEAD:  Let the Musicals Begin


Race Forums In Westchester Turn Unruly
LEAD: It was supposed to be an exercise in reason, an effort to use electronic gadgetry to rise above the angry rhetoric of the past and examine issues of racism and housing in Westchester County.


Flames Show Rangers Why They're Top Team
LEAD: There wasn't much the Rangers could do all night, and so there wasn't much they could find to say about the game after it was over.
Quiet resignation to the obvious had characterized their play against the Flames, and thus it dominated their muted conversation afterward.


Review/Music; The Not-So-Serious Strauss
LEAD: The Johann Strauss family and its immediate predecessors wrote music the Viennese public vastly preferred to Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms, Bruckner and Mahler.
We should not forget that a repertory so delicious to us was, in its way, painful to them.


Reviews/Film; Burt Reynolds Up a Creek With Many Red Herrings
LEAD: The fact that the weary, red-herring-strewn thriller ''Physical Evidence'' has been advertised as being ''from the producer of 'Jagged Edge' '' may give some idea of what the film's other selling points are worth.
Actually, the presence of Burt Reynolds ought to help, since Mr.
Reynolds looks great here and manages to seem smarter and more substantial than anyone else in the cast.


Quantum Chemcial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Chemcial Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
806,700,000
665,800,000
Net inc
b97,300,000
c60,200,000
Share earns
4.14
1.96
Shares outst
23,534,008
30,775,246
Yr sales
2,921,900,000
2,263,500,000
Net inc
b382,700,000
c251,600,000
Share earns
14.57
7.75
Shares outst
26,264,321
32,052,850


Dow Jones &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
412,999,000
417,214,000
Net inc
43,063,000
50,345,000
Share earns
.43
.52
Yr rev
1,603,110,000
1,314,443,000
Net inc
228,178,000
203,018,000
Share earns
2.35
2.10


Dollar Rises as Traders Test Resolve of Central Banks
LEAD: Foreign exchange traders pushed the dollar slightly higher yesterday, again testing central banks' commitment to holding the dollar in check.


Clarksville Journal; Hailing the Return of the Eagles (They Hope)
LEAD: If most of the swallows spurned Capistrano some year, it might give a clue to what it's like to be here in Clarksville on the brink of Eagle Days with hardly a dark wing to be seen skimming over the Mississippi River.


Review/Art; Introducing Swiss Sculptors to U.S. and Vice Versa
LEAD: Although ''Sculpture: Material and Abstraction'' was presented in museum spaces in Aarau and Lausanne, Switzerland, it is not a museum show.
Its approach to its subject, post-Minimalism in Switzerland and the United States, is schematic and vague.
Any show partly conceived to introduce five American sculptors to Switzerland and five Swiss sculptors to the United


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,132,449,000
1,020,890,000
Net inc
123,064,000
104,470,000
Share earns
.66
.56
Yr rev
4,267,377,000
3,788,502,000
Net inc
498,960,000
b439,053,000
Share earns
2.67
2.36


Hornets Beat Jazz At Buzzer
LEAD: Kurt Rambis grabbed a loose ball under the Charlotte basket and banked it in at the buzzer tonight to give the Hornets an 89-88 victory over the Utah Jazz.


Account Review Is Set By Shearson Lehman
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton has placed its $25 million advertising account, which has been at McCann-Erickson in one form or another for more than five years, into review, a McCann spokeswoman said yesterday.
Last fall the agency created a sober, straightforward ad campaign in which former Secretary of State Henry A.


Capitals and Flames To Head Overseas
LEAD: Although the official announcement will not be made until next month, it appears certain that the Washington Capitals and the Calgary Flames will be the two National Hockey League teams that tour the Soviet Union and Scandinavia in the fall.


Our Towns; For Drug Addict, Spot Awaits Him, Probably in a Jail
LEAD: If a drug addict says, 'Yes, I'll take residential treatment,'' counselors want to grab him and throw him in a program, pronto. ''The addict will say yes today - he'll say no tomorrow,'' said Kevin Frawley, who knows.


Surging Islanders Frustrate the Jets
LEAD: Time was when it was an Islander coach, either the departed Terry Simpson or the incumbent Al Arbour, who made his mute comment on the club's performances this season with a weary hand pressed in frustration to his brow.


Dining Out Guide: Country Fireplaces
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in the Connecticut, Long Island, New Jersey and Westchester Sunday regional sections of The New York Times.
Ratings - poor, satisfactory, good, very good, excellent and extraordinary -are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current, and only weekend hours are given.


Calfed Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calfed Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
17,600,000
30,500,000
Share earns
.70
1.23
Yr net inc
134,800,000
166,900,000
Share earns
5.39
6.67
The company said the decline in 1988 earnings primarily resulted from a loss of $9.3 million in the company's life insurance operations due to the previously reported sale of three product lines and a general strengthening of reserves.


Review/Film; Chocolate As Capital
LEAD: All those aspects of adolescence that are best forgotten - the sullenness, the self-importance, the taste for self-dramatization and the tendency to be insufferably smug - are lovingly enshrined in ''The Chocolate War,'' a film about schoolboys that has its own unmistakably schoolboy point of view.


Bruno's Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruno's Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
569,814,000
484,653,000
Net inc
b11,932,000
11,295,000
Share earns
.15
.14
6mo sales
1,037,176,000
956,368,000
Net inc
b25,907,000
21,586,000
Share earns
.32
.27


Papers Show 1962 U.S. Plan Against Castro
LEAD: More than a year after an American-backed invasion of Cuba failed at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, the United States actively pursued another clandestine plan to overthrow Fidel Castro, according to newly declassified American documents made available here today.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Math Education Criticized


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-9  The U.S.
Embassy in Afghanistan will close, James Baker 3d has decided in his first major decision as Secretary of State, because of mounting instability during the final stages of a Soviet troop withdrawal.
Page A1


J. Floyd Andrews, 69; Founded an Airline
LEAD: J. Floyd Andrews, the retired president of Pacific Southwest Airlines, died of lung cancer Tuesday at Sharp Memorial Hospital in San Diego.
He was 69 years old and lived in San Diego.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:  Park Bistro


Will This Scourge End?
LEAD: President Bush, in his first post-Inaugural comment on fighting drugs, said education was very important.


France Trade Gap Wider
LEAD: France recorded a trade deficit of 33 billion francs ($5.3 billion) in 1988, its largest annual trade deficit in five years, the nation's customs office reported today.
The 1988 performance was slightly wider than the gap of 31.5 billion francs in 1987, but less than the deficit of 48.9 billion francs reported in 1983.


No Time to Change U.S. Defense Policy
LEAD: Transition is the key word these days in Washington - and, according to many observers, in international affairs as well.
There is a widespread sense that 1988 was a watershed year in international affairs - a year that marked the beginning of a ''new era,'' requiring a radically new approach to relationships with our allies as well as our adversaries.


Wilson's Agent Reacts
LEAD: The agent for Stanley Wilson of the Cincinnati Bengals, the running back suspended before the Super Bowl last Sunday because of drug use, said yesterday that the Bengals might have contributed to Wilson's relapse into cocaine use by not closely monitoring his nonfootball activities in Miami. ''I can't say they're totally to blame, but there are things you have to do under the simplest form of rehabilitation that weren't done,'' said Reginald Turner of Los Angeles, the agent.


Oakland to Pay Raider Legal Fee
LEAD: The city of Oakland and the Los Angeles Raiders reached an out-of-court settlement today in which the city will pay $3 million for the team's legal fees over a four-year period.


Review/Film; That's 1, 2, 3, 4 and Dip!
LEAD: ''Tango Bar'' is a combination dance lesson and history lecture, describing the evolution of the tango and its important role in the culture of Argentina.
The dance is described as a sexy, gritty, vital expression of street values, which places it in unfortunately sharp contrast with the film itself.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD: Sounds of Ghana


Pryor Bout Canceled
LEAD: The former junior welterweight champion Aaron Pryor, scheduled to continue his comeback attempt, was taken off the card in Rochester yesterday after doctors determined that his left eye was too badly damaged to allow him to fight. ''The final decision was mine,'' said Randy Gordon, chairman of the New York State Athletic Commission.


I.B.M. Enters Journalism Experiment
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation has donated more than $2 million to the University of Missouri School of Journalism to ''explore new uses in journalism of the latest microcomputer technology.''


Carson Meets With Browns Again About Coaching Job
LEAD: Bud Carson, the Jets' defensive coordinator, met again last night with Art Modell, the Cleveland Browns' owner, who wants to name his new head coach today.


Rustic Havens: Inns So Near, Yet So Far From, Big-City Bustle
LEAD: Just a few hours from the nerve-jangling heart of New York City, there exists an almost unrecognizably idyllic world where secluded country inns offer an escape into another, more peaceful time and place.


FRIDAY
LEAD: SHALL WE DANCE?
Ballroom dancing has enjoyed a recent resurgence of popularity as countless competitions, classes and clubs have been created for people seeking the romance of waltzing and fox trotting.
A photographic chronicle of contemporary ballroom dancers of all ages in the United States, Canada and England is on view at the Midtown Y Photographic Gallery, 344 East 14th Street.


Wetterau Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wetterau Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,300,000,000
1,000,000,000
Net inc
13,300,000
11,800,000
Share earns
.56
.50
9mo sales
3,700,000,000
3,000,000,000
Net inc
33,200,000
29,800,000
Share earns
1.40
1.23


Educational Mediocrity Hurts Our Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. TO WITHDRAW STAFF OF EMBASSY IN AFGHAN CAPITAL
LEAD: In his first major decision as Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d has decided to close the American Embassy in Afghanistan because of increasing instability during the final stages of a Soviet troop withdrawal, senior Administration officials said today.


Review/Dance; A Menu of Ballet to Baked Alaska
LEAD: Baked Alaska was last on the menu at the New York City Ballet's dinner dance and performance to raise money for its affiliated School of American Ballet.
The problem apparently was what to do for starters on the entertainment side.


Toyota Reportedly Plans Europe Plant
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation is reportedly close to announcing plans for a $1.2 billion European car plant.
Toyota officials confirmed that the Japanese company had narrowed the list of possible sites and partners for European passenger car production.


Death Forms in 2 States Ask About Tobacco Use
LEAD: Oregon and Utah have become the first states to ask doctors to specify on death certificates whether tobacco use contributed to death, a change that the American Medical Association has urged other areas to imitate.


U.S. and Angola Discuss Forging Diplomatic Ties
LEAD: The United States and Angola have been discussing the possibility of establishing low-level diplomatic representation in each other's capitals, American officials said today.


Way to Hasten Tax Refunds
LEAD: Taxpayers who are due a refund will be able to get it within three to five days if they use an electronic filing service announced yesterday by the Dollar Dry Dock Bank.


Lafarge Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
332,501,000
317,097,000
Net inc
20,381,000
18,765,000
Share earns
.41
.41
Shares outst
50,086,000
43,638,000
Yr sales
1,309,187,000
1,221,478,000
Net inc
93,486,000
75,048,000
Share earns
1.96
1.65
Shares outst
46,640,000
41,643,000


Review/Film; Fugitives, Ne Fugitifs
LEAD: ''Three Fugitives,'' which opens today at the Sutton and other theaters, demonstrates that there's all the difference in the world between what is actually funny and what merely appears to be.
This comedy has the earmarks of humor and even a few genuine laughs, but it also has a prefabricated, automatic-pilot feeling.


Du Pont, E I de Nemours &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont, E I de Nemours &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
8,400,000,000
7,900,000,000
Net inc
b500,000,000
c439,000,000
Share earns
2.08
1.82
Yr sales
32,900,000,000
30,500,000,000
Net inc
b2,190,000,000
c1,786,000,000
Share earns
9.11
7.39


SOJOURNING IN JERSEY BY RIVER AND SEA
LEAD: New Jersey may be America's most densely populated state, but it has an abundance of tranquil small towns and countryside with a more than ample stock of country inns.
The historic seaside resort of Cape May is a trove of Victorian inns, the scenic Delaware River region in the northwestern region has many intimate and charming accommodations and small inns can be found throughout the state.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
A.M.E.
Inc., Burbank, Calif., said it had extended the date, originally Jan. 13, for concluding a buyout agreement with ADAG Inc. and that a third party had expressed an interest in proposing an alternative to ADAG's proposal.


Death of 3 Georgia Quadruplets Is a Mystery
LEAD: After more than 200 hours of medical investigation, the police and medical examiners said today they had been unable to solve the mystery of the deaths of three infants from a set of quadruplets.


Asarco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asarco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
599,254,000
429,914,000
Net inc
73,120,000
55,826,000
Share earns
1.74
1.27
Yr rev
1,988,087,000
1,355,224,000
Net inc
207,244,000
b256,565,000
Share earns
4.92
6.70


Kidnapping Suspect Arraigned in New Jersey


Acme Steel Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Steel Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
108,032,000
91,954,000
Net inc
3,983,000
c3,392,000
Share earns
.75
.58
Yr sales
412,453,000
335,488,000
Net inc
b19,599,000
c12,983,000
Share earns
3.39
2.22


'User Fee' on Savings: What It Means
LEAD: When Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady casually mentioned on Tuesday that his staff was considering imposing a ''user fee'' on customers at banks and savings institutions, a storm of protest arose.


Deals Said to Be Offered In Commodities Scandal
LEAD: Prosecutors investigating the commodities-trading scandal here have begun telling people they question that if they cooperate they will face no jail time or at least a reduced sentence under new Federal sentencing guidelines, lawyers involved in the case said today.


Prague Rock In a Benefit For Prisoner
LEAD: In Czechoslovakia, rock music can be played for high stakes: cracked heads, jail sentences, exile.
All have been a part of life for the Plastic People of the Universe, which got started in 1968 as a progressive-rock band and became, in the 1970's, the target of Government prosecution and a rallying point for Czechoslovak artists, intellectuals and human-rights activists.


Brush Wellman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brush Wellman Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
81,300,000
86,200,000
Net inc
9,900,000
8,500,000
Share earns
.56
.45
Shares outst
17,665,790
18,745,960
Yr sales
345,800,000
307,600,000
Net inc
32,500,000
26,200,000
Share earns
1.79
1.38
Shares outst
18,210,000
18,938,535


Leaders in the House Set a Tentative Pact On Salary Increase
LEAD: Leaders in the House of Representatives have tentatively worked out a package that would impose significant financial restrictions on House members in return for a 50 percent pay increase, leadership sources said today.


Elizabeth Knowlton Is Dead at 93; Pioneer of Himalayas in the 30's
LEAD: Elizabeth Knowlton, a mountain climber who in 1932 became the first woman to climb as high as 20,000 feet in the Himalayas, died of heart disease Sunday at the Ocean Manor Nursing Home in Scituate, Mass., where she lived for the last four years.
She was 93 years old and a longtime resident of Cambridge,


A Dance Troupe Lands, and Takes Off
LEAD: Philadelphia is a choreographic crossroads, thanks to the Zeromoving Dance Company.
That group - now at the Joyce Theater through Sunday - has made the city stand at an intersection between German Expressionism and American modern and postmodern dance.


No More 'Steak' for The Post
LEAD: THE agency that added meat to The New York Post's sizzling image has been banished from the kitchen.


Donnelley, R R &amp; Sons Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelley, R R &amp; Sons Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
880,342,000
773,062,000
Net inc
64,499,000
57,208,000
Share earns
.83
.73
Yr sales
2,878,432,000
2,482,865,000
Net inc
205,303,000
218,196,000
Share earns
2.64
2.80


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Germain Leads: Dot Germain, who last won a tournament in 1980, birdied the last two holes yesterday to finish with a 4-under-par 68 and a one-shot lead after the opening round of the LPGA Oldsmobile Classic in Boca Raton, Fla.
Germain sank a 15-foot putt on her 17th hole to pull even with Jody Rosenthal, Dottie Mochrie and Beth Daniel and made a 10-footer on the final hole to take the lead.(AP)


ON L.I. , SOME QUIET PLACES TO UNWIND
LEAD: The word ''inn'' appears in the name of many dining and lodging establishments on Long Island, but don't be misled.
If you are looking for a peaceful abode with character and interesting food, you may have to make some compromises.
Only a handful of places on Long Island's suburban and rural 110-mile peninsula merit a recommendation.


Malaise Among Maryland Lawyers
LEAD: The work can be interesting, the pay spectacular and the perquisites extravagant, yet the mood in the legal profession is oddly grim.
While job dissatisfaction has been detected by lawyers and discussed in the legal press, there have been few efforts to measure it.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Duome &amp; Associates, a financial public relations firm, and Mannensha International, a Japan-based ad agency, have formed Duome/Manneninter, which will specialize in public relations and advertising in the U.S., Europe and East Asia.


Walsh Resigns as Coach And Seifert Replaces Him
LEAD: Bill Walsh, the offensive specialist who led the San Francisco 49ers to three Super Bowl championships in 10 seasons, stepped aside as head coach today and was named the team's executive vice president for football operations.
He was replaced by George Seifert, the team's highly respected defensive coordinator.


2 With Classics
LEAD: Sue Ann Kahn, a flutist, and Andrew Willis, a fortepianist, are to play ''Classical Variations,'' a program of works by J. C. Bach, Mozart, Hummel, Beethoven and E. A. Finckel at 5:30 P.M.
Sunday at CAMI Hall, 165 West 57th Street.
Tickets are $5.
Information: 799-5783


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the proposed Congressional pay raise misstated the position of Common Cause on the proposal.
The group favors the proposal and accompanying legislation to ban honorariums and related payments by private groups.


F.T.C. Charges Campbell Soup
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission charged the Campbell Soup Company yesterday with deceptive advertising that contended its soups could reduce ''the risk of heart disease'' while not disclosing what the commission considers a high sodium content in the products.


Muncie Jailed
LEAD: Chuck Muncie, 35 years old, a former running back with the New Orleans Saints, the San Diego Chargers and the Minnesota Vikings, was jailed in San Diego Wednesday after testing positive for drug use while awaiting sentencing on a Federal cocaine charge.
Muncie had been free on $20,000 bond since pleading guilty last Dec.


In Brooklyn
LEAD: The tenor Carlo Bergonzi is to be the soloist with the Brooklyn Philharmonic and Il Piccolo Teatro del Opera chorus in arias by Verdi, Puccini and Donizetti at 8 tonight at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, in the Fort Greene section.
Lukas Foss is to conduct the program, which also includes Verdi's rarely heard ''Hymn of the Nations'' and Tchaikovsky's ''Francesca da Rimini'' Overture.


McDonald's Profit Rises
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation said today that its earnings rose 16.8 percent, to $151.5 million, in the fourth quarter and that it planned to open 600 restaurants this year.


Biggest British Privatization
LEAD: Shares in Britain's electricity industry will be sold off in four stages to avoid overloading the stock market with London's largest privatization to date, the Energy Secretary, Cecil Parkinson, said on Wednesday.


About Real Estate; Condo Project Sells Well in the Bronx
LEAD: Within six months of going on the market, the largest low-rise development of middle-income condominiums to be built in the Bronx is selling so well that the developers have raised their prices and are planning another increase in the spring.


Some Film Series Around Town
LEAD: A number of film series are playing this weekend, some with personal appearances by the filmmakers.
The following programs are among them:  'Early Kurosawa'


Market Place; Behind Advance In the Blue Chips
LEAD: IT is an institutional party, but small investors have joined the merrymaking as the stock market relentlessly moves to new highs.


Allegheny Plan Under Attack
LEAD: A plan of reorganization that the board of Allegheny International had recently endorsed came under attack in Bankruptcy Court in Pittsburgh yesterday from two suitors, creditors and a competitor.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1988
From '87
Amdahl Corp.
$ 73,000,000
+
37.7
A.T.&amp;T.
(3,342,000,000)
-
Asarco Inc.
73,100,000
+
31.0
Contel Corp.
50,400,000
*
-
Cooper Industries
74,400,000
+
31.9
Delta Air Lines Inc.
85,200,000
-
3.5
Dow Jones &amp; Co.


Reporter's Notebook; Russian Politics: It's Pandemonium
LEAD: The late arrivals had already toppled a fence, surged past the police and cracked one window, and now they were pressing their collective weight against the glass front doors of the Moscow Council of Trade Unions Hall.


Liggett Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liggett Group Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
148,100,000
147,200,000
Net inc
12,685,000
10,896,000
Share earns
.53
.46
Shares outst
24,000,000
23,700,000
9mo sales
379,400,000
419,500,000
Net inc
25,381,000
25,347,000
Share earns
1.06
1.19
Shares outst
24,000,000
21,236,364


Board Votes Homeless Center on E. 77th St.
LEAD: The Board of Estimate, ending months of controversy, voted last night to finance a 24-hour drop-in center for 75 homeless men and women on the Upper East Side.


On Early Instruments
LEAD: La Stravaganza, an early-instruments chamber orchestra directed by Dongsok Shin, is to perform music by Boyce, Arne and Handel at 5 P.M.
Sunday at the Church of the Holy Trinity, 316 East 88th Street.
Among the works on the program are Arne's Harpsichord Concerto No. 5, in which Mr.
Shin will be the soloist; a Handel Organ Concerto (Op.


Soviets Admit Double Afghan Defeat: Najibullah's and Their Own
LEAD: Soviet officials and Government news accounts now all but openly say there is little question that the Afghan Government will collapse after the Soviets finish withdrawing their troops next month.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Jan. 7 about the opening of the Ottoman archives on the mass killing of Armenians referred incorrectly to the World War I alliance that included the Ottoman Empire.
It was the Central Powers, not the Axis.


Cabot Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
480,084,000
386,745,000
Net inc
22,783,000
b15,400,000
Share earns
.81
.57
b-After a charge of $816,000 from refinancing of debt.


Scott Undergoes Test
LEAD: Byron Scott of the Los Angeles Lakers, who has been suffering from internal bleeding, underwent urological tests yesterday and will miss tonight's home game against Charlotte.
Team doctors recommended that the 27-year-old guard not play until the condition clears.
Scott, in his sixth National Basketball Association season is the club's third-leading scorer with an average of 19.4 points.


The New Medicare: No Catastrophe
LEAD: Older Americans cheered last year when Congress broadened Medicare health insurance.
Now that they have examined it closely, some of the cheers have turned to harsh complaint.
Payments for Medicare coverage under the new catastrophic-illness plan seem to be increasing more than the added benefits are worth.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article on the Washington Talk page yesterday about President Bush's relationship with the press rendered two quotations incorrectly in some editions.
Jody Powell, a former White House press secretary, said of an experiment in which President Carter was interviewed by a few reporters, ''In the end I backed off and I regret I did.


Legislature May Reject Lilco Pact, Leaders Say
LEAD: As Federal court negotiations over the future of the Long Island Lighting Company and its Shoreham nuclear power plant intensify, legislative leaders are warning that any accord requiring the Legislature's approval will face a doubtful future.


Educational Mediocrity Hurts Our Economy; Protect Technology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oboe Quartet
LEAD: The Odyssey Chamber Players are to perform the world premiere of Thomas Flaherty's Oboe Quartet at 8 tonight at the Brooklyn Music School, 126 Felix Street, Fort Greene section.
The program also includes a Haydn Flute Trio (Hob. XV:15), and the Brahms Piano Quartet No. 1 in G minor (Op. 25).
The Odyssey Chamber Players are Wendy Rolfe, flutist; Mark Hill, oboist; Miriam Lockhart, clarinetist; Mowry Pearson, violinist; Lois Martin, violist, and Jeffrey Szabo, cellist.


American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
9,207,000,000
8,652,000,000
Net loss
b3,342,000,000
c498,000,000
Share earns
-
.46
Yr rev
35,210,000,000
33,768,000,000
Net loss
b1,669,000,000
c2,044,000,000
Share earns
-
1.88


At the Movies
LEAD:  Anatomy of a Movie


Review/Film; Dubious Housekeeping In Balaban's 'Parents'
LEAD: Sometimes it seems that beneath every mild, low-budget comedy there's a slasher film waiting to jump out.
In ''Parents,'' that happens to be true.
Except for the few seconds of teasing horror-movie music and the close-up of an eyeball at the very start, the first half could be a television send-up of shows like ''Leave it to Beaver.


Jefferson Smurfit Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Smurfit Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
312,036,000
290,361,000
Net inc
38,298,000
31,333,000
Share earns
.98
.81
Yr sales
1,255,273,000
1,099,465,000
Net inc
144,495,000
91,996,000
Share earns
3.72
2.39


5 in Bronx Indicted in First Cases In Inquiry on City's School Boards
LEAD: In the first criminal charges since the investigation of New York City's community school boards began last year, four school board members and a former district superintendent from the Bronx were indicted yesterday on charges ranging from theft of school property to bribe-taking.


Changes Asked in 24 A-Plants
LEAD: The protective containment vessels on nearly one-quarter of the nation's commercial nuclear reactors should be modified to reduce the risk of rupture in a major accident, the staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today.


At Weill Hall
LEAD: Mary Ann Hart, the mezzo-soprano who won third prize in the 1987 Carnegie Hall International American Music Competition, is to sing Dominick Argento's ''Diary of Virginia Woolf,'' Ravel's ''Chansons Madecasses'' and music by George Gershwin and Irving Berlin at 8 tonight at Weill Recital Hall.
Tickets are $12.


Top Bush Economist Sees Growth As Slower Than Reagan Projected
LEAD: The man chosen by President Bush as his chief economist, Michael J. Boskin, disassociated himself today from President Reagan's final forecast for the economy and predicted somewhat slower growth this year.


U.S. AGENCY SUING ACCOUNTING FIRMS ON SAVINGS AUDITS
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board disclosed today that his agency had lawsuits pending against three of the nation's largest accounting firms for failing to detect fraud and mismanagement that contributed to insolvencies at various savings and loan associations.
Insolvencies at savings institutions are costing the Government billions of dollars.


Stockton Takes Lead With a 65 in Pro-Am
LEAD: Dave Stockton was the best there was around the greens during the height of his career, when he won the PGA Championship in 1970 and 1976.
But the 47-year-old former wizard of the wedge and putter has only occassionally played in PGA Tour events in recent years.


Law Degree Wanes as Passport to Business Job
LEAD: Lawyers, once marketable commodities as business executives, have been devalued in the corporate marketplace.
Personnel executives and business school administrators say a job seeker's legal training is as likely to be seen now as a liability as an asset, and lawyers trying to switch careers say they are often typecast as narrow-minded, confrontational and unimaginative.


President's Successor Is Chosen at Raytheon
LEAD: The Raytheon Company, the electronics company that had $8.2 billion in sales last year, has named Dennis J. Picard, 56 years old, as its next president.


Affirmative Action Booms in Atlanta
LEAD: Before 1973, when this city started its first affirmative action program, less than 1 percent of city-financed construction went to minority contractors.
Today minority contractors win 37 percent of city contracts, a dizzying demonstration of affirmative action progress that has spilled over to the private market as well.


Jordan Tops All-Star Vote
LEAD: Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson finished 1-2 in fan balloting for the National Basketball Association All-Star Game, and Atlanta placed two players in the starting lineup announced yesterday.
The game will be played Feb. 12 at the Houston Astrodome.


Robert Rienow, 79, Author and a Professor
LEAD: Dr.
Robert Rienow, a retired professor of political science at the State University of New York at Albany and an author and environmentalist who had warned about the depletion of natural resources, died on Sunday in a fire that destroyed his farmhouse in Selkirk, N.Y.
He was 79 years old.


Greenspan Shuns Curb On Buyouts
LEAD: The recent wave of leveraged buyouts and other forms of corporate restructuring has probably crested, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, said today.
He urged Congress to shun legislation to restrict such transactions.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
254,256,000
262,027,000
Net inc
17,123,000
15,713,000
Share earns
.63
.59
Yr rev
903,399,000
671,855,000
Net inc
48,045,000
35,531,000
Share earns
1.76
1.32


MIM-Southdown
LEAD: MIM Ltd., the British investment firm, said it held a 6.9 percent stake in Southdown Inc., a oil and gas development company in Houston.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, MIM said it had acquired 473,200 Southdown preferred shares and 35,500 Southdown common shares for investment purposes only.


Baltimore Sun Computerizing
LEAD: The Baltimore Sun announced plans Wednesday for a fully computerized production system by 1992 that an analyst said would make it the nation's most technologically advanced newspaper.
The newspaper has chosen


Michael Gilbert, Pediatrician, 69
LEAD: Dr.
Michael Gilbert, a pediatrician and one of the founding physicians at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., died of heart failure Tuesday at his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 69 years old.
Dr.
Gilbert was born in Brooklyn and graduated from Washington &amp; Lee University and New York University Medical School.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 454 money market mutual funds increased by $737.2 million, to $285.34 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 137 institutional funds increased by $1.05 billion, to $74.99 billion.
Those of the 226 general-purpose funds were down by $240.8 million, to $89.92 billion.


Clark Triples Salary
LEAD: Will Clark tripled his salary yesterday, agreeing to a one-year contract for $1.125 million with the San Francisco Giants.
Clark, eligible for arbitration for the first time, made $345,000 in 1988, when he batted .282 with 29 home runs and a league-leading 109 runs batted in.
The first baseman had asked for $1.2 million in arbitration and the Giants had offered $900,000.


Sister Helen M. Ingraham, Educator, 101
LEAD: Sister Helen Madeline Ingraham, who in 1919 founded Emmanuel College, the first Roman Catholic college for women in New England, died Tuesday.
She was 101 years old.


E-Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Systems Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
388,031,000
315,555,000
Net inc
20,383,000
17,719,000
Share earns
.65
.57
Yr sales
1,439,012,000
1,227,237,000
Net inc
74,570,000
60,400,000
Share earns
2.40
1.95


The Issue Of Wilson's Baby Sitter
LEAD: Stanley Wilson's agent, an objective soul who regularly takes his bite out of the running back's checks, says that the Bengals may have contributed to his client's drug relapse on the night before the Super Bowl.


Optical Specialties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optical Specialties
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,500,000
1,300,000
Net loss
381,000
1,400,000


A. William Salomone, A History Professor, 73
LEAD: A. William Salomone, professor emeritus of history at the University of Rochester, died of cancer Tuesday at Lankenau Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 73 years old and lived in Ardmore, Pa.


Kemp Vows Effort on 'Appalling' Homelessness
LEAD: Jack F. Kemp, President's Bush's nominee to be Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, today called homelessness a ''national tragedy of appalling proportions'' and promised a Senate committee he would make it his top priority.


Evert's Retirement Plan Includes a Cutback in Her Schedule
LEAD: The retirement question has been raised every year since she turned 30.
Although Chris Evert has admitted that it was becoming more difficult to keep up with players half her age, she has invariably wrinkled her nose, squinted across the net, grunted for all she was worth and given another tennis prodigy a spanking.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Alaska Air Group Inc., Seattle, said its Alaska Airlines unit would purchase six additional MD-80 aircraft from McDonnell Douglas Corp. in addition to a previous order for seven other MD-80 aircraft.
The two orders represent a commitment of approximately $390 million.


Delta Woodside Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Woodside Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
135,001,000
113,175,000
Net inc
5,888,000
6,383,000
Share earns
.32
.37
6mo rev
257,682,000
223,029,000
Net inc
11,689,000
12,461,000
Share earns
.65
.72


Emanuel A. Salma, Educator, 81
LEAD: Emanuel A. Salma, former associate dean of the College of Engineering and Science at New York University, died of congestive heart failure on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


About New York; Shall We Dance? A Day to Party For the Ailing
LEAD: The 504 patients at Beth Abraham Hospital in the Bronx are very, very sick.
So sick that each year half of them die.
The ones who linger on suffer from chronic ailments like strokes, Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis.


Media General Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Media General Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
191,400,000
183,800,000
Net loss
29,600,000
b11,400,000
Share earns
-
.40
Yr rev
755,747,000
715,311,000
Net inc
8,819,000
42,921,000
Share earns
.31
1.50


William A. Ott, Newspaper Publisher, 61
LEAD: William A. Ott, president and publisher of The San Jose Mercury News, died of cancer Thursday, He was 61 years old.


Senate Panel Moves Swiftly To Approve Trade Nominee
LEAD: The nomination of Carla A. Hills as the United States trade representative sailed through the Senate Finance Committee today after a confirmation hearing in which she said she would not hesitate to impose sanctions on countries that do not ''show results'' in reducing trade barriers that Washington deems unfair.


Soviets Buy U.S. Grain
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought another 25,000 metric tons of United Sates wheat at subsidized prices, the Agriculture Department said today.
The wheat was part of an authorization of more than two million tons under the Export Enhancement Program.
Counting some left over from a previous arrangement and a newly authorized two million tons this week, the Soviets have more than 2.01 million tons still available under the program.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE
6.50
6.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.18
9.25
6.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.32
8.35
5.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.34
8.36
6.03
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
9.00
9.03
8.05
30-YR.


Steinberg Jury Hears Testimony a 3d Time
LEAD: The jury in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg indicated yesterday that it was still divided on whether the defendant struck the blows that killed Lisa Steinberg.


Ohio Casualty Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Casualty Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b42,575,000
cd13,310,000
Share earns
1.97
-
Yr net inc
b128,036,000
c78,553,000
Share earns
5.88
3.48
b-Included after-tax realized investment losses of $5,948,000 and $14,052,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


2 More in Soviet Bloc To Cut Armed Forces
LEAD: Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria today joined other East bloc countries in announcing military cuts.


Harvey Bristol Move
LEAD: John Harvey &amp; Sons Ltd. will keep Bristol in the brand name of its sherry, but the company said today that it was moving most of its operations to Spain and Portugal.
Nearly 300 jobs, or about two-thirds of the company's British work force, will be lost when the factories that blend, bottle and distribute sherry and port are closed in June.


Anadarko Petroleum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anadarko Petroleum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
93,000,000
66,300,000
Net inc
14,100,000
6,800,000
Share earns
.27
.13
Yr rev
333,100,000
229,600,000
Net inc
39,800,000
9,100,000
Share earns
.76
.18


Ambiguity Between Best Girlfriends
LEAD:  Cat's Eye  By Margaret Atwood  446 pages. Doubleday. $18.95.


Determining Suicide: Fugitive's End Is Traced
LEAD: When Ralph Richardson was found dead in a stolen car in Brooklyn Wednesday morning, New York City authorities, using a synthesis of physical evidence and experience, determined that he had committed suicide.


Policy Management Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Policy Management Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
57,431,000
48,772,000
Net inc
5,613,000
4,745,000
Share earns
.36
.29
Yr rev
216,943,000
180,035,000
Net inc
20,461,000
17,098,000
Share earns
1.30
1.05


And Now a Question for the Press
LEAD: In his first full-fledged news conference as President, George Bush today turned the tables on the White House press corps, questioning the reporters about the convention of the follow-up question.
The results were blurred.


Roadway Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Services Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
741,600,000
614,506,000
Net inc
31,793,000
18,736,000
Share earns
.80
.47
Yr rev
2,184,531,000
1,908,747,000
Net inc
80,239,000
50,508,000
Share earns
2.00
1.26


Alliance Capital Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Capital Management (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
34,245,000
-
Net inc
4,302,000
-
Share earns
.15
-
36wk rev
94,004,000
-
Net inc
12,153,000
-
Share earns
.43
-
Share earnings represent units.


Countrywide Mortgage Inestments Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Countrywide Mortgage Inestments Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,303,000
1,691,000
Share earns
.24
.22
Shares outst
13,645,000
7,745,000
Yr net inc
9,322,000
9,949,000
Share earns
.94
1.29
Shares outst
9,959,521
7,742,500


Taco Viva reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 11
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taco Viva (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 11
1988
1987
Sales
3,639,000
4,116,000
Net loss
622,000
516,000
6mo sales
8,618,000
9,679,000
Net loss
1,216,000
674,000
Latest quarter comprises 12 weeks; 6-month period comprises 28 weeks.


Conner Peripherals Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
96,178,000
51,209,000
Net inc
5,196,000
6,035,000
Share earns
.15
.20
Shares outst
35,812,000
30,552,000
Yr sales
256,639,000
113,236,000
Net inc
19,768,000
11,377,000
Share earns
.58
.43
Shares outst
34,297,000
26,450,000


ARX Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ARX Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,396,000
14,628,000
Net loss
6,031,000
b1,481,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo sales
43,846,000
26,360,000
Net loss
5,548,000
bc2,130,000
Share earns
-
.28


Time Marches On, to a Band's Beat
LEAD: The Inaugural Parade last week was many things: a patriotic effusion, a stirring spectacle, a sometimes campy pageant, ambulatory choreography and, not least, a heady succession of musical performances that echoed Charles Ives in its ebullient cacophony.
But the parade was something more, a marching history lesson in the evolution of the


Cedar Income Fund I Ltd reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cedar Income Fund I Ltd
Year to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
418,992
b670,263
Share earns
.29
.47
b-Included a gain of $13,575 from the sale of securities.


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,459,000
2,730,000
Share earns
.72
.57
Yr net inc
12,789,000
11,171,000
Share earns
2.67
2.33


Editors' Note
LEAD: A report in the TV Notes column on Thursday described a dispute over a Channel 13 program, ''The 11th Hour,'' about proposals for the old Penn Central rail yards on the West Side of Manhattan.
John Young, an architect who gave the producers information about red tape in such projects, appeared on the program but did not speak.


Corrections
LEAD: A report yesterday about the marriage of Randi Ellen Pearson misidentified the bridegroom.
He is Andrew Noah Heine.


When Health Care Comes to the Home
LEAD: With more people getting health care at home, instead of or in addition to hospital and nursing-home care, licensing of the agencies providing this service is expanding.


Boole &amp; Babbage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boole &amp; Babbage (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
17,053,000
12,307,000
Net inc
1,003,000
b686,000
Share earns
.28
.21
b-Excluded a gain of $3,256,000, or 99 cents a share, from sale of a product family.


Texas Instruments Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,692,100,000
1,534,700,000
Net inc
b95,300,000
91,000,000
Share earns
1.04
1.02
Yr sales
6,294,800,000
5,594,500,000
Net inc
366,300,000
321,400,000
Share earns
4.05
3.74


Customary Law of Sea Allows a 12-Mile Limit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patronage Takes On Personal Touches as Parties Wane
LEAD: The City Hall job-dispensing that came under an unaccustomed and unflattering spotlight before a state investigating commission recently was as much a case of personal as political patronage.


Butler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
173,089,000
168,312,000
Net inc
3,891,000
b3,768,000
Share earns
.87
-
Yr sales
645,624,000
614,974,000
Net inc
15,343,000
3,723,000
Share earns
3.41
.77


Carroll Sidelined
LEAD: Joe Barry Carroll, the Nets' starting center, will miss the game against Philadelphia tonight because of an acute lower back strain.
Carroll suffered the injury during a 112-109 loss to Sacramento Thursday night.
Roy Hinson will start.
Carroll, averaging 15.2 points and 8.8 rebounds, will be re-examined on a day-to-day basis.


Faberge Exhibit for Soviets
LEAD: The first major exhibition in the Soviet Union of the work of Peter Carl Faberge, jeweler to the czars, is to open Feb. 8 at the Museum of Applied Arts in Elagin Palace in Leningrad.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about indictments of five New York City school officials carried an incomplete description in some editions for Silver Burdett &amp; Ginn, depicted as the target of a bribe attempt, and omitted any comment from the company.
Silver Burdett is a publishing company, and its comment is reported today on page 31.


Coping: With Film Processing
LEAD: Getting film developed and printed used to be a simple matter.
You took your exposed rolls to the neighborhood drugstore, where they were put in envelopes and sent off.
Two weeks or so later, you picked up the printed and developed negatives.


For Aged, Night Falls Are Most Common
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.N.P. Increases by 2%
LEAD: The nation's economy grew at an annual rate of 2 percent in fourth quarter of 1988, reduced 1.1 percent by the summer's drought.
Page 35.


Jill Burns Is Married To Frederick Kemper
LEAD: Jill Burns and Frederick William Kemper, 1988 graduates of Brigham Young University, were married yesterday at the Washington Temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Bishop Morgan Bates performed the ceremony.


Olympia &amp; York
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. said it was considering taking 49.9 percent of the BCE Development Corporation, a subsidiary of BCE Inc., the Canadian telephone company.


Study Notes Fare Rises at Hub Airports
LEAD: Airlines that dominate schedules at airports serving as hubs for connecting flights have in recent years raised their fares at those locations considerably faster than the national average, the Transportation Department said today.


2 Queens Men Charged by U.S. In Bomb Scheme
LEAD: A college student and a bank teller were arrested and charged in Federal District Court in Brooklyn yesterday in connection with the attempted bombing at a surgical supply company that uses dogs in its research.


Louisiana General Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana General Services (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
42,312,000
38,338,000
Net inc
1,768,000
1,530,000
Share earns
.30
.26
The latest first quarter revenue included non-recurring revenue of $687,000.


Carson Signs to Coach Browns
LEAD: As expected, Bud Carson, the Jets' innovative defensive coordinator, was officially named coach of the Browns in Cleveland yesterday.
Afterward, Coach Joe Walton of the Jets conceded that the loss of his assistant was a setback for the team.


Albert Hofstadter, Philosopher, 78
LEAD: Professor Albert Hofstadter, professor emeritus of philosophy at Columbia University and the University of California at Santa Cruz, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Santa Cruz.
He was 78 years old.


Merger of Detroit Papers Is Upheld
LEAD: The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit yesterday approved the proposed merger of the business operations of The Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News.
The ruling by a three-judge panel rejected an appeal from a group of readers, advertisers and elected officials that had sought to preserve two independent newspaper companies in


Scowcroft Names Chief Of Middle East Policy
LEAD: President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, has selected a former State Department official to be his top assistant for Middle East and Persian Gulf policy, Administration officials say.


Kansas Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
262,583,000
303,693,000
Net inc
12,480,000
19,241,000
Share earns
.34
.55
Yr rev
1,166,114,000
1,166,458,000
Net inc
79,791,000
88,691,000
Share earns
2.25
2.46


A Decent, but Incomplete, Homeless Plan
LEAD: In his State of the City address this week, Mayor Edward Koch recognized that New York's ''quality of life suffers a serious decline'' because of the homeless camped out in public.
His commitment is encouraging.
But the program he proposes won't address the most serious part of the problem - the homeless who are mentally ill.


No Headline
LEAD: When Harold E. Ballard suffered a heart attack a year ago, shares in Maple Leaf Gardens Ltd., the company that owns the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey team and the arena where they play, jumped $3.50 (Canadian) on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Six months later, when Mr.
Ballard entered the hospital for a quintuple heart-bypass operation, the stock rose again, by $2.75 a share.


New Transit Police Contract
LEAD: New York City and the Transit Authority Patrolmen's Benevolent Association reached a tentative agreement yesterday on a $55 million contract that will increase wages by 18 percent over three years.
The contract is retroactive to July 1, 1987.
Robert W. Linn, director of the city's Office of Labor Relations, said the pact was patterned on one reached with the city police last May.


Johannesburg Lawyers Condemn a Judge's Ruling
LEAD: The Johannesburg Bar has taken the rare step of formally condemning a judge's decision that let a white farmer avoid jail after he killed a black laborer who ran over his dogs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about an offer to purchase the unfinished United States Embassy building in Moscow referred incorrectly, in some copies, to a halt in construction.
Work was halted in 1985, not last year.


Homeowners Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeowners Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,403,000
6,830,000
Net inc
623,000
829,000
Share earns
.10
.17
Shares outst
5,962,000
4,962,000
Yr rev
31,333,000
24,779,000
Net inc
3,320,000
2,765,000
Share earns
.62
.56
Shares outst
5,405,000
4,962,000


'Speed-the-Plow' Gets Mixed London Reviews
LEAD: ''Speed-the-Plow,'' David Mamet's acerbic comedy about the mores of Hollywood, opened at the National Theater Wednesday night to mixed reviews from London's theater critics.


Hughes Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hughes Homes
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,156,000
14,749,000
Net inc
387,000
200,000
Share earns
.14
.08
Shares outst
2,8080,000
1,968,000
6mo rev
36,303,000
36,932,000
Net inc
794,000
550,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Shares outst
2,797,000
1,968,000


John Holden, 77, Dies; Founder of a School
LEAD: John S. Holden, founder of the Colorado Rocky Mountain School in Carbondale, Colo., died of cancer Sunday in Glenwood Springs, Colo.
He was 77 years old and lived in Carbondale.


Louisville Gas &amp; Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisville Gas &amp; Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
154,693,000
138,632,000
Net inc
10,460,000
8,488,000
Share earns
.39
.30
Yr rev
659,682,000
631,178,000
Net inc
85,038,000
76,161,000
Share earns
3.70
3.34


Graf Overcomes Sukova To Win Australian Open
LEAD: Steffi Graf, overcoming her toughest test of this tournament, beat fifth-seeded Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 6-4, at the Australian Open today to capture her fifth straight Grand Slam title.


Analysis &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysis &amp; Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
19,246,000
19,484,000
Net inc
767,000
682,000
Share earns
.35
.32
9mo rev
59,375,000
59,947,000
Net inc
2,341,000
2,130,000
Share earns
1.07
1.00


Review/Ballet; Violence In Freud's Shadow
LEAD: In ''Ivesiana,'' a quicksand of a ballet whose choreographic texture shifts as trickily as its music, George Balanchine made his sharpest comment on alienation.


President's News Conference: Affirmative Action and Tax on Capital Gains
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:
OPENING STATEMENT


Taiwan Goes Fishing for Its Notion of Lost Souls
LEAD: For nearly 40 years, defecting in a fighter plane was almost the only way for a citizen of China to visit Taiwan.
These days Taiwan is cooling its invitation to pilots and instead is admitting private individuals from the mainland for the first time.


Concurrent Computer Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concurrent Computer Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
90,680,000
19,003,000
Net loss
14,823,000
b931,000
Share earns
-
.06
6mo sales
109,402,000
39,293,000
Net loss
15,193,000
bc2,293,000
Share earns
-
.15


Universal Security reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Security (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,854,577
5,918,823
Net loss
65,831
97,916
9mo sales
17,393,732
16,639,849
Net loss
213,866
167,889


Quaker State Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker State Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
204,642,000
210,597,000
Net inc
b5,768,000
3,400,000
Share earns
.22
.13
Yr sales
869,104,000
903,774,000
Net inc
14,933,000
c48,933,000
Share earns
.57
-


Allied Security Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Security Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,904,343
19,099,155
Net inc
624,562
527,303
Share earns
1.27
1.04
6mo sales
44,746,446
36,734,269
Net inc
b928,206
871,269
Share earns
1.86
1.72


Continental Information Sysems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Information Sysems Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
198,010,000
155,594,000
Net loss
5,347,000
b5,559,000
Share earns
-
.43
9mo rev
558,934,000
330,151,000
Net loss
15,608,000
b11,236,000
Share earns
-
.88


American Steel &amp; Wire Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Steel &amp; Wire Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
50,700,000
36,905,000
Net inc
1,727,000
b3,951,000
Share earns
.22
.70
Shares outst
7,652,000
5,583,000
6mo sales
97,855,000
66,344,000
Net inc
3,369,000
b3,420,000
Share earns
.49
.61
Shares outst
6,765,000
5,563,000


Pepperell Says It's Studying 3 Options
LEAD: In the latest development in a three-month-long battle, West Point-Pepperell Inc. said it was considering a restructuring, a sale of the company or a leveraged buyout as alternatives to the hostile $1.4 billion offer from Farley Industries.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, West


Bush Says U.S. Will Seek a Role In Kabul's Post-Kremlin Stability
LEAD: As turmoil grows and security conditions worsen in Afghanistan, President Bush said today that the United States would try to help bring stability to that country after the Soviets complete their troop withdrawal.


Production Operators reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Production Operators (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
11,966,000
12,160,000
Net inc
1,017,000
752,000
Share earns
.15
.22


American and Delta Discuss Venture
LEAD: American Airlines said that it was talking with Delta Air Lines about establishing a computer reservation system that would combine the resources of the system now being used by each airline.
American's move to join with Delta was considered unusual, since American's Sabre reservation system is the largest in the nation.


New Subway Restrictions Will Be Debated
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority voted yesterday to open a three-month period of public discussion on rules that would restrict musicians, speakers, pamphleteers, solicitors for charity and other people involved in nontransit activities in the New York City subways.


Oakwood Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oakwood Homes (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
16,360,000
13,398,000
Net inc
46,000
b841,000
Share earns
.01
.15
b-Included net gain of about $980,000 related to the sale of one of the company's manufacturing housing communities.


Sprague Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sprague Technologies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
124,700,000
111,800,000
Net inc
1,400,000
1,400,000
Share earns
.08
.07
Shares outst
18,200,000
20,400,000
Yr sales
504,600,000
437,300,000
Net inc
13,200,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.72
.18
Shares outst
18,300,000
20,400,000


TV Satellite Merger
LEAD: Two television satellite transmission companies, Bonneville Satellite Communications and Wold Communications Inc., have agreed to merge, the companies announced today.
The privately held concerns declined to disclose financial terms other than to say that Salt Lake City-based Bonneville would own 60 percent of the new entity and Wold, of Los Angeles, would hold 40 percent.


Truck Crash Kills 50 Haitians
LEAD: Fifty people, including three children, were killed today and 46 injured when a military truck loaded with Haitian workers on their way to Dominican sugar fields flipped over.
The truck was bound for the Jaina refinery. ''The driver was speeding and it looked like he fell asleep,'' said a survivor, Louis Raphael.


Medical Dynamics reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Dynamics
Year to Sept 30
1988
1987
Revenue
3,336,500
3,659,700
Net loss
484,800
149,300


Soo Line Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Soo Line Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
137,281,000
151,105,000
Net inc
3,082,000
4,396,000
Share earns
.32
.46
Yr rev
570,496,000
613,124,000
Net inc
15,567,000
b8,704,000
Share earns
1.64
-


INSIDE
LEAD:  New Approach in Angola?


Balk Change Comes to Stop
LEAD: Baseball has decided to foresake the change in the interpretation of the balk rule that caused so much trouble in 1988.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  International 2-5, 28  Bringing stability to Afghanistan after the Soviets complete their troop withdrawal will be an aim of United States, President Bush said.
Page 1  Possible collapse of the Afghan Army is a danger to Soviet troops in the last three weeks of their withdrawal through mountain passes that hold hundreds of ambush sites and thousands of Afghan guerrillas.


Anderson Sets State Mark
LEAD: Kenny Anderson, who broke the New York City schoolboy career scoring record Tuesday night, scored a game-high 32 points last night to set a state record, leading Archbishop Molloy to a 77-62 victory over Holy Cross High School in Fresh Meadows, Queens.


Carlisle Humelsine, 73, Who Led Board of Colonial Williamsburg
LEAD: Carlisle H. Humelsine, former chairman of the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, died of heart disease Wednesday at Williamsburg (Va.) Community Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Williamsburg.


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Sales
49,754,000
46,696,000
Net inc
b356,000
c2,853,000
Share earns
.07
-
Yr sales
224,224,000
156,769,000
Net inc
b1,517,000
c2,192,000
Share earns
.31
-


United Saver's Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Saver's Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
716,000
12,065,000
Yr net inc
5,469,000
b4,456,000
Share earns
1.19
-
b-Net loss  The latest quarter loss is after a pre- tax addition of $4.1 million to the company's loan loss provisions.


Dominion Resources Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
863,700,000
764,200,000
Net inc
90,600,000
84,300,000
Share earns
.92
.88
Shares outst
97,900,000
95,800,000
Yr rev
3,358,900,000
3,267,200,000
Net inc
438,400,000
430,500,000
Share earns
4.52
4.54
Shares outst
97,000,000
94,000,000


Angola Gives Hints of Willingness To Seek Political Solution to War
LEAD: In a sharp break with past policy, Angolan officials now indicate that they will seek a political solution to their nation's long-running civil war.


Visiting Hanoi Officials Seek Indian Aid in Cambodia Crisis
LEAD: Nearing the end of a weeklong visit to India, Vietnamese officials said today that they they wanted New Delhi to play a major role in supervising a political solution to the decade-old war in Cambodia.


Schuller Wins Prize
LEAD: Gunther Schuller, the 63-year-old American composer, has been named the winner of Columbia University's William Schuman Award.
The prize of $50,000, for lifetime achievement in American musical composition, was presented Thursday evening in a ceremony at the university.
The award, named for the American composer, was established in 1981 through a gift to Columbia from the Bydale Foundation.


Trilling Medical Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trilling Medical Technologies
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
874,655
1,594
Net inc
b128,980
c255,598
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a $58,000 tax credit.
c-Net loss


ICO Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICO Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,328,000
10,563,000
Net loss
347,000
395,000


WCI Holdings
LEAD: The WCI Holdings Corporation, formerly the Wickes Companies, has sold four apparel businesses to Taren Holdings, a corporation formed by Odyssey Partners and James I. Spiegel.
The price was not disclosed.
The companies acquired are Catalina, Cole of California and Colonial Apparel - all of which were part of Wickes's Kayser-Roth Corporation subsidiary - and the Mode O'Day women's apparel retail chain with 350 stores.


McDonnell Douglas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,340,000,000
3,660,000,000
Net inc
145,000,000
93,000,000
Share earns
3.79
2.32
Yr rev
15,070,000,000
13,680,000,000
Net inc
350,000,000
313,000,000
Share earns
9.13
7.75


Assistants Urge the Removal Of U.S. Attorney in Boston
LEAD: Twenty-eight Federal prosecutors in Massachusetts urged the resignation or removal of their boss, United States Attorney Frank L. McNamara Jr., today in a letter to Attorney General Dick Thornburgh.


SAVERS ARE GIVEN BUSH'S ASSURANCE ON DEPOSIT SAFETY
LEAD: Concerned that people were withdrawing deposits from savings institutions after reports earlier this week that the Administration might impose fees on accounts, President Bush sought today to assure the public that savings deposits are safe.


Arafat Meets Formally With European Community
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, held his first official talks with the European Community today.





Effort to Ban Assault Rifles Gains Momentum
LEAD: A gunman's rampage in a schoolyard in Stockton, Calif., and a wave of gang killings have dramatically improved the chances for laws banning the sale of military assault guns to the public.


Guilford Mills Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guilford Mills Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Revenue
143,955,000
136,114,000
Net inc
3,414,000
4,698,000
Share earns
.35
.46
6mo rev
278,989,000
264,899,000
Net inc
8,521,000
9,623,000
Share earns
.87
.92


SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ
LEAD: Question are based on news reports in The Times this week.
Answers appear on page 50.


Watkins-Johnson Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watkins-Johnson Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
80,560,000
69,624,000
Net inc
5,624,000
4,851,000
Share earns
.67
.58
Yr sales
292,205,000
264,251,000
Net inc
20,598,000
b17,116,000
Share earns
2.46
2.05


Kean Proposes Attorney General
LEAD: Gov.
Thomas H. Kean has decided to nominate Peter Perretti Jr., a partner in a leading Newark law firm, as state attorney general.


International Recovery Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Recovery Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
16,776,000
12,170,000
Net inc
560,000
87,000
Share earns
.15
.02
9mo rev
44,598,000
29,988,000
Net inc
1,618,000
633,000
Share earns
.45
.18


No More Killing Fields in Cambodia
LEAD: Americans agree on two goals in Cambodia: First, Vietnam should end its occupation and let Cambodians choose their own government.
Second, no solution is morally tolerable if it permits a return to power by Pol Pot and the mass murderers of the Khmer Rouge.
Now a whirl of diplomacy has brought the first goal in sight.


Lieut. Christopher M. Long And Susan Mosmiller Wed
LEAD: Susan Marie Mosmiller, an assistant account executive at the Reeves advertising agency in Baltimore, and Second Lieut.
Christopher Matthew Long, an instructor pilot at Reese Air Force Base in Texas, were married yesterday at St.
Mark Chapel in Baltimore.
The Rev.
Michael Carrion performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Offer Increased For Champion
LEAD: Phonicam Inc., an investment vehicle formed by the New York brokerage firm Walsh, Greenwood &amp; Company, has increased its offer to acquire Champion Products Inc. to $61 a share in cash, or $244 million, from an earlier offer of $55 a share, or $220 million.


Jerry Blatt, 47, Dies; Composer Worked With Bette Midler
LEAD: Jerry Blatt, a composer and lyricist who had collaborated with Bette Midler since 1975, died Jan. 19 in Amsterdam.
He was 47 years old.


Two Charged in Plot To Murder Giuliani
LEAD: Two brothers were charged yesterday with participating in a racketeering conspiracy that prosecutors said included a plot to kill the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
152,100,000
224,900,000
Net inc
1,000,000
7,000,000
Share earns
.03
.23
Yr rev
726,300,000
828,400,000
Net loss
b33,300,000
c24,800,000
Share earns
-
.80


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  N.B.A.
Bulls 117, Bullets 106: Michael Jordan, held to 5 points in the first quarter, scored 16 of his 33 points during a six-minute second-period burst last night, leading Chicago over Washington in Chicago.
The victory, which ended the Bullets' three-game winning streak, was the eighth in 10 games for the Bulls.(AP)


Review/Theater; Lessons of Love and Despair by the Sea
LEAD: With its distilled oracular diction, repetitious imagery, and use of narrative indirection to grasp at the profound, the prose of Marguerite Duras strikes one as simultaneously poetic and pretentious.
Such self-conscious writing would also seem to resist dramatization.
But in ''The Malady of Death,'' one of two new theater pieces by the Talking Band, the experimental company founded by veterans of Joseph Chaikin's Open


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Robert W. Burmester, an accounting executive who died on Monday, misstated his age and misidentified his wife.
He was 55 years old; his wife was the former Barbara Hosek.


Seashells And Straw
LEAD: Patrick Kelly, an American ready-to-wear designer, staged an exhibition of his couture styles in his workroom at 6 rue du Parc-Royal in the Marais district here Thursday afternoon.
The theme was jungle prints, and the exhibit was a precursor, the designer explained, of his full-fledged entry into the couture.


Mrs. Bush Should Learn About Mrs. Roosevelt
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rabbi Search Goes On; Abduction Is Ruled Out
LEAD: Almost two weeks after the disappearance of a Manhattan Hasidic rabbi, his family, friends and neighbors are continuing a citywide search for him, visiting shelters for the homeless, hospitals and Jewish neighborhoods where he may have gravitated.


Customary Law of Sea Allows a 12-Mile Limit; Trawler Encounters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge in Iran-Contra Case Asserts He Can Order President to Testify
LEAD: Federal District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell said today that he had the authority to order President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan to testify at the criminal trial of Oliver L. North, who has subpoenaed them as defense witnesses, but that he would do so only ''as a last resort.''


Caci International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
38,380,627
33,655,433
Net inc
1,142,086
1,028,476
Share earns
.10
.09
6mo rev
73,903,367
67,726,674
Net inc
2,249,600
2,018,296
Share earns
.19
.17


Scott's Tests Negative
LEAD: Kidney tests performed on Byron Scott, a Los Angeles Lakers guard, were negative, but Scott will probably be sidelined until late next week.
Scott, 27 years old, underwent tests at Centinela Hospital Medical Center Thursday after experiencing blood in his urine for a few days. (AP)


Brintec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brintec Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
81,640,000
70,170,000
Net loss
1,154,000
b6,778,000
Share earns
.10
-
Yr rev
337,280,000
293,659,000
Net inc
5,673,000
b1,135,000
Share earns
.47
-


Ex-Beatle in Phone-In With Soviet Rock Fans
LEAD: Paul McCartney, the former Beatle, told young Soviet rock fans that he loved them ''madly'' and answered phone calls for 55 minutes from all parts of the Soviet Union in a live phone-in radio show Thursday on the BBC.


Atlantic Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b39,493,000
c8,598,000
Share earns
-
1.82
b-Included a $29.4 million special loan loss provision and an after-tax extraordinary gain of $647,000.
c-Net income and included a tax benefit of $4,285,000 and an extraordinary gain of $519,000.


Review/Music; The Yearning in Early Sibelius
LEAD: All-Sibelius programs are not a bad idea, for perhaps it takes the length of an entire evening to let the dark elements of this music settle fully around us.
Music cannot describe places, but knowing of the composer's Finnish origins and then hearing the New York Philharmonic with Itzhak Perlman play the ''Swan of Tuonela,'' the First Symphony and the Violin Concerto Thursday night at Avery Fisher


BRAND OR GENERIC?
LEAD: Brand-name prescription drugs can cost nearly twice as much as their equivalents, and about half of all brand-named drugs have generic equivalents.
Once a pharmaceutical company's patent for a drug has run out, competitors may seek approval for their own versions from the Food and Drug Administration.


The Drive for a Fire-Safe Cigarette
LEAD: The Surgeon General has estimated that smoking-related diseases kill 390,000 Americans a year.
But there is another way that cigarettes can kill - through the fires they start.
While overshadowed by the health issue, fire abatement is gaining new momentum, partly because of new findings that it is feasible to create a less fire-prone cigarette.


Qaddafi, in Interview, Urges Bush to Meet Him for Talks
LEAD: Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, said in a television interview broadcast yesterday that he wants to meet with President Bush and that he seeks a new and better relationship with an often hostile United States.


Hawaiian Concern Begins Buyback
LEAD: Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc. repurchased 4.4 million of its shares for $38 a share, or $168 million, from the Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Foundation Inc.
The foundation also entered into a standstill agreement that stipulates that Mr.
Weinberg's companies refrain for seven years from buying more A.&amp;B.


General Metal &amp; Abrasives reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Metal &amp; Abrasives
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
559,112
486,669
Net inc
32,351
b76,728
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Patents; Speeding the Process Of Making Jelly
LEAD: The General Foods Corporation won patent approval this week for a new form of pectin, the additive that puts the gel in jellies and jams.


W.A. Krueger Receives Offer
LEAD: The W. A. Krueger Company, a commercial printing concern based in Scottsdale, Ariz., said yesterday that it had received an offer of $10 a share, or a total of about $321 million, in cash from Ringier A.G. of Zurich.
The Swiss concern, which is also a printing company, has been involved in a joint venture with


IFR Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IFR Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
11,963,000
9,678,000
Net inc
1,735,000
1,561,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Shares outst
5,909,367
6,175,000
6mo sales
22,077,000
18,723,000
Net inc
3,290,000
3,067,000
Share earns
.54
.50
Shares outst
6,042,184
6,175,000


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 28, 1989
LEAD:  The Economy


Imtec Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imtec Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,118,025
858,000
Net inc
85,659
12,512
Share earns
.08
.01
6mo sales
2,004,415
1,503,262
Net inc
112,674
b78,376
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Whipped To a Froth
LEAD: Some people are born with silver spoons in their mouths; if nothing else that helps them stir things up a bit.
Not enough, perhaps, to properly mix the likes of protein, diet or nutritional drinks - and yes, why not, cocktails for one.


Robert B. Kelly, 75, Naval Officer Prominent in Storied PT Boat Unit
LEAD: Robert B. Kelly, a Navy PT boat commander whose exploits in World War II were chronicled in the best-selling book ''They Were Expendable'' and the film of the same name, died of pneumonia Monday at Howard County General Hospital in Columbia, Md.
He was 75 years old and lived in Columbia.


60's Jazz Innovator Returns From End of an Era
LEAD: The pianist Andrew Hill, who is playing tonight and tomorrow at the Knitting Factory, is an expert at vanishing.


Krueger W A Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Krueger W A Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
98,725,000
99,317,000
Net inc
1,850,000
4,162,000
Share earns
.06
.13
Yr sales
372,214,000
346,362,000
Net inc
b15,726,000
16,954,000
Share earns
.51
.54


Jury Chosen for Trial Of Murder Suspect
LEAD: The jury has been selected in the murder trial of Joseph Pikul, a Wall Street analyst who is charged with killing his wife and dumping her body along the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway in Orange County.


Apple, in Shift, Sees A Decline in Quarter
LEAD: In a striking reversal from what it said only last week, Apple Computer Inc. announced today that it would experience an unexpected drop in earnings in the current quarter.


ANSWERS TO QUIZ
LEAD: Questions appear on page 17.


Kaypro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaypro Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
9,300,000
22,500,000
Net inc
2,595,074
b615,677
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss  The latest first quarter included a gain of $3.5 million, or 9 cents a share, from a barter transaction involving the bulk sale of obsolete inventory which had been full reserved on the company's books.


U.S. Study Links Severity of Armenia Quake to Soil Condition
LEAD: An American team's survey of damage from the Armenian earthquake last month has found virtually none in a village only three miles from Leninakan, where the damage was catastrophic and as many as 25,000 may have died.


Giuliani Running Out of Time
LEAD: If Rudolph W. Giuliani wants to secure an indictment of Michael R. Milken, the head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s ''junk bond'' operations, it will have to come on Monday.


Patents; Computer Recognizes 5,000 Spoken Words
LEAD: Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Inc. of Waltham, Mass., won patent approval for a computer program that allows a desktop computer to recognize as many as 5,000 spoken words.
The computer can also be trained to recognize the pronunciation of a particular speaker.


Customary Law of Sea Allows a 12-Mile Limit; Objections to Treaty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seton Hall Alters Image, Aiming to Win Students
LEAD: This is Seton Hall's season in the sun.
Much to the surprise of just about everyone, the Catholic university's basketball team has a 17-2 record, second place in the Big East conference and a national ranking.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The savings and loan deposits are backed by the full faith and credit of the Government, and they are sound, dollar-good.'' - President Bush.  [ 6:1. ]


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Washington Talk page yesterday about the Army's effort to eliminate contract fraud described an out-of-court settlement with the N. W. Ayer advertising agency incorrectly.
In paying $700,000 to cover what the Army considered excessive labor costs, the agency admitted no wrongdoing.


Valentino Takes Paris by Storm, Softly
LEAD: Valentino, Rome's leading designer, showed his couture collection here for the first time on Thursday evening, and won the city over.
With his elegant, feminine clothes, he proved that the best Italian fashion can rival in sophistication the best of the French.


Pasteurizing Cheese
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wyse Technology Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyse Technology Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
65,496,000
128,135,000
Net loss
26,400,000
b7,447,000
Share earns
-
.49
9mo sales
347,049,000
314,883,000
Net loss
14,684,000
b20,240,000
Share earns
-
1.38


Betz Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Betz Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
115,149,612
99,732,602
Net inc
12,367,963
10,040,553
Share earns
.81
.65
Yr sales
447,580,310
385,868,031
Net inc
48,385,076
40,633,789
Share earns
3.15
2.59


Caray Named Winner Of Ford Frick Award
LEAD: Harry Caray, the broadcaster for the Chicago Cubs who has been describing major league baseball games since 1944, when he did his first play-by-play for the St.
Louis Cardinals, was named yesterday as the winner of the Ford Frick Award, presented annually by the Baseball Hall of Fame.
Caray, 68 years old, will be honored in July at the annual induction ceremonies at Cooperstown, N.Y., joining a dozen other broadcasters, including Mel Allen, Red Barber, Vin Scully and Curt Gowdy.


Dollar Spurts And Gold Plummets
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply yesterday, passing through the 1.85 level against the West German mark despite dollar-selling by the Federal Reserve and European central banks.


Sierra On-Line reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra On-Line (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,192,000
4,840,000
Net inc
b1,654,000
c1,178,000
Share earns
.46
.44
9mo rev
16,908,000
9,375,000
Net inc
b3,607,000
c2,243,000
Share earns
1.21
.84


Biogen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,385,000
2,936,000
Net inc
266,000
b3,391,000
Share earns
.01
-
Yr rev
30,231,000
12,508,000
Net loss
1,174,000
22,602,000
b-Net loss


Bush Isn't Entitled to a Honeymoon
LEAD: Every President, conventional wisdom holds, is entitled to a ''honeymoon'' period during which it is socially unacceptable to unsheathe one's knife, word processor or fax machine.
George Bush has been enjoying the fruits of a smiling opposition and a blunt-edged press for more than two months now.


Seamen's Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seamen's Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,681,000
3,477,000
Share earns
.10
.21
Yr net inc
b16,509,000
b18,330,000
Share earns
1.02
1.10
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $234,000 and $355,000 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


BRIDGE
LEAD: All bridge players eat, and some cook so that others may eat.
Good food and a good social bridge game complement each other, providing an evening of pleasure that would be incomplete if either element were missing.


Comptek Research Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptek Research Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,045,000
12,839,000
Net loss
183,000
b382,000
Share earns
-
.18
9mo sales
36,271,000
33,436,000
Net inc
325,000
c1,165,000
Share earns
.15
.54


U.N. WITHHOLDS AID IN SOMALIA DISPUTE
LEAD: United Nations officials are withholding food aid from Ethiopian refugees in Somalia because of what they say is Somalia's use of refugees for military activities.


Cenvill Development reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvill Development (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
55,945,000
54,540,000
Net inc
6,009,000
4,328,000
Share earns
.42
.30
Yr rev
179,306,000
202,837,000
Net inc
10,759,000
15,748,000
Share earns
.75
1.09


Texaco Is Silent On Holder Funds
LEAD: Texaco Inc. held a regularly scheduled board meeting yesterday but gave no word after a five-hour session how it would distribute $1.7 billion to be paid shareholders out of an estimated $6.8 billion that is being raised on the sale of company assets.
Speculation continued that Texaco would soon announce plans to buy back a substantial block of its stock or declare a special dividend.


American Indemnity Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Indemnity Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
643,668
b1,324,748
Share earns
.33
-
Yr net inc
2,943,107
b1,823,553
Share earns
1.53
-
b-Net loss and included an extraordinary loss of $111,254 for the quarter and an extraordinary gain of $1,688,746 for the year.


Gold and Silver Plummet; Refinery Strike Lifts Copper
LEAD: Gold futures prices plummeted yesterday on the New York Commodity Exchange, and silver prices followed suit.
Copper prices rallied.


Otter Tail Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Otter Tail Power Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
43,749,000
41,089,000
Net inc
5,680,000
5,088,000
Share earns
.43
.38
Yr rev
178,221,000
167,002,000
Net inc
25,317,000
21,566,000
Share earns
1.92
1.60


2 Admit Illicit Political Donations In Military Procurement Inquiry
LEAD: Two representatives of the Unisys Corporation pleaded guilty today to charges of providing illegal campaign contributions to members of Congress.


Ruddick Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ruddick Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
312,003,000
263,508,000
Net inc
3,900,000
3,900,000
Share earns
.40
.40


American Business Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
93,002,000
82,918,000
Net inc
3,790,000
b2,528,000
Share earns
.66
.44
Yr sales
358,242,000
325,768,000
Net inc
13,010,000
b9,371,000
Share earns
2.28
1.64


National-Standard Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National-Standard Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
70,392,000
68,948,000
Net inc
b185,000
b7,450,000
Share earns
.05
1.90
b-After tax credits of $45,000 for the latest first quarter and $2,845,000 for the year-ago period.


DUTCH FREE 2 NAZIS IN PRISON 43 YEARS
LEAD: The Dutch Parliament today pardoned two Nazi war criminals who spent 43 years in prison and sent them home to their families in West Germany.


Universal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
903,355,000
768,860,000
Net inc
25,792,000
24,511,000
Share earns
1.52
1.43
6mo rev
1,595,371,000
1,305,132,000
Net inc
39,804,000
38,030,000
Share earns
2.35
2.22


Sound Advice Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sound Advice Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
23,976,985
16,525,249
Net inc
1,210,556
876,438
Share earns
.40
.29
6mo sales
40,385,491
28,724,276
Net inc
1,765,567
1,328,978
Share earns
.58
.44


Transactions
LEAD:  THURSDAY  Baseball


Wheeling Chief Quits And Sells 34% Stake
LEAD: The chairman of the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corporation sold his 34 percent stake yesterday and resigned from the company, it said.
Wheeling, one of the nation's largest steelmakers, said that the chairman, Lloyd C. Lubensky, had given no reason for the actions.


Great American
LEAD: Great American Management and Investment Inc. said it had filed suit in Federal court in Indianapolis seeking to void the $163 million merger agreement between the Ransburg Corporation and Illinois Tool Works Inc.
Great American, a Chicago-based manufacturing and financial services concern, accused Ransburg's directors of violating their fiducicary responsibiliteis.


Florida Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Federal Savings &amp; Loan Association (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
10,829,000
11,621,000
6mo net loss
21,936,000
17,311,000


Niagara Mohawk Power Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Mohawk Power Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
678,858,000
653,906,000
Net loss
3,808,000
b32,649,000
Yr rev
2,800,453,000
2,623,430,000
Net inc
208,814,000
bc557,214,000
Share earns
1.21
-


Small Chicago Area, Big Voting Role
LEAD: With sandy beaches, trendy restaurants and stately high-rise buildings, the lakefront neighborhoods of Chicago have always received a lot more attention than the workaday wards of brick bungalows and old country roots that provide most of the muscle for this city.


Rough Road Out of Kabul for Soviets
LEAD: Less than three weeks remain for thousands of Soviet troops still in Afghanistan to withdraw through mountain passes dotted with hundreds of potential ambush sites, many of them occupied by thousands of Afghan guerrillas.


Claude Hudson, 102, N.A.A.C.P. Director
LEAD: Dr.
H.
Claude Hudson, a national director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a longtime civil rights advocate, died of pneumonia Thursday.
He was 102 years old.


Fabricland Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fabricland Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,418,000
17,986,000
Net inc
1,289,000
907,000
Share earns
.48
.34
6mo sales
37,598,000
31,171,000
Net inc
1,845,000
1,340,000
Share earns
.69
.50


John McCallum Jr., Musician, 36
LEAD: John McCallum Jr., a pianist and musical director for Off Off Broadway and touring theatrical productions, died of a heart attack Monday at his home.
He was 36 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Youth Held in School Shooting
LEAD: The police today arrested a teen-age suspect in the shooting of four students outside a high school here Thursday.
The suspect, Rodney Reardon, 18 years old, of Washington, was charged with assault with attempt to murder.
It was initially believed that the shooting, in which the victims were only slightly wounded, had been the work of one young gunman, accompanied by another youth.


Insurance Company Will Pay For Experimental AIDS Drug
LEAD: One of the nation's biggest private health insurers will offer coverage for an experimental drug treatment that is thought to prevent a deadly form of pneumonia in AIDS patients.


Vault Mark in Doubt
LEAD: The International Amateur Athletic Federation is awaiting documents from the Soviet Union to begin the process of officially recognizing a pole vault of 19 feet 8 1/4 inches by Rodion Gataullin, which would be a world indoor record.
Gataullin, a silver medalist at the Seoul Olympics last year, cleared the height at a meet in Leningrad, according to a report by Tass, the Soviet press agency, on Monday.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crawford &amp; Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,468,000
3,294,000
Share earns
.38
.29
Yr net inc
18,840,000
16,402,000
Share earns
1.61
1.41


At a Solidarity Meeting, The Call Is for Strength
LEAD: Andrzej Milczanowski took Solidarity's case for talks with the Government to the grass roots this week, and ran into a wall of suspicion and disbelief of the Government's intentions.


STRONGER DOLLAR HELPS STOCKS RISE
LEAD: Capping its best week in eight months, the stock market surged ahead yesterday on buying by American and foreign institutional investors.
Traders said buying was encouraged by a stronger dollar and by renewed indications that the Federal Reserve would not push up interest rates.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufman &amp; Broad Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
548,843,000
508,275,000
Net loss
8,469,000
bc19,242,000
Share earns
-
.60
Yr rev
2,050,301,000
1,524,232,000
Net inc
24,199,000
c57,345,000
Share earns
.76
1.83


Imperial Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Corp of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b15,606,000
cd13,788,000
Per share
-
.93
Yr net inc
b14,851,000
d51,346,000
Per share
1.03
3.46
b-After extraordinary credits of $1,294,000 for the quarter and $4,148,000 for the year.


Gander Mountain Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gander Mountain Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
40,287,000
31,974,000
Net inc
1,691,000
1,679,000
Share earns
.61
.61
6mo rev
69,469,000
52,682,000
Net sales
2,271,000
2,366,000
Share earns
.82
.86


Teacher Held in Sexual Abuse
LEAD: A New York City public school teacher was arrested yesterday on charges that he sexually molested two of his students, the police said.


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
370,810,000
340,336,000
Net inc
20,062,000
41,482,000
Share earns
.36
.74
Yr rev
1,519,721,000
1,448,193,000
Net loss
53,820,000
b171,206,000
Share earns
-
3.09


A. H. Robins Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A. H. Robins Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
240,874,000
234,814,000
Net inc
12,934,000
b1,692,753,000
Share earns
.54
-
Yr sales
933,766,000
855,836,000
Net inc
58,429,000
b1,632,435,000
Share earns
2.42
-


Review/Music; 3d Hearing for Tippett Work
LEAD: It is an axiom of music criticism, amounting to a cliche, that firm assessment of a new work is impossible at first hearing.
A common alternative approach of reviewers is bland approbation of everything new, since in that way they can be confident of not making a mistake that might reverberate down through the ages.


Cobe Laboratories Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobe Laboratories Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
59,352,000
54,883,000
Net inc
2,355,000
3,204,000
Share earns
.36
.49
Yr sales
226,562,000
194,108,000
Net inc
11,139,000
10,019,000
Share earns
1.70
1.49


BKW Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BKW Systems Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
428,000
419,000
Net inc
25,000
7,000
Share earns
.01
-


Washington Court to Inquire Into Grand Jury Disclosures
LEAD: A Federal appeals court here today ordered an investigation into whether prosecutors had disclosed details of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s appearance in 1984 before a Federal grand jury looking into city corruption.


Devils Lose 3-0 Lead And Game
LEAD: The Devils relinquished a three-goal lead and suffered an 8-6 defeat to the Hartford Whalers tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Word From Wilson
LEAD: Gary Burley, a former Cincinnati Bengals defensive lineman who has befriended Stanley Wilson, the suspended Bengals running back, said yesterday that Wilson was feeling better and was talking with Burley daily by telephone from his family home in Carson, Calif.
Wilson was declared ineligible for the Super Bowl after suffering a drug relapse in Miami.


Measures Suggested For Reducing Risks At 24 Atomic Plants
LEAD: The protective containment vessels on nearly one-quarter of the nation's commercial nuclear reactors should be modified to reduce the risk of rupture in a major accident, the staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said Thursday.


Stage Directions on How to Handle a Hot Potato


Saving Up Nickels and Dimes To Assist the Neediest Cases
LEAD: For over 10 years, the Roth family of Manhattan accumulated nickels and pennies, which grew to amount to $200.
Agreeing that their hoard should go to charity, they first thought about the earthquake victims in Armenia or about an international aid organization.


Silicon General Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon General Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Jan 2
1989
1988
Revenue
9,630,000
6,192,000
Net inc
453,000
b231,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
18,315,000
12,150,000
Net inc
679,000
b194,000
Share earns
.05
-
b


Belo, A H reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Belo, A H (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
105,625,000
102,082,000
Net inc
b2,468,000
c5,142,000
Share earns
.12
.25
Yr rev
385,412,000
381,776,000
Net inc
b10,092,000
c22,315,000
Share earns
.51
1.04


Correction
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch has proposed a new Police Academy and housing to help revitalize the South Bronx.
A map on Thursday gave an incorrect location for the academy and incorrect boundaries for the housing.


Essef Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Essef Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
21,061,000
32,589,000
Net loss
2,187,000
b1,109,000
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income  The company said the first quarter loss resulted from a sales decline of 65 percent in the contract manufacturing business machine and computer segment and from costs of an acquisition and start-up costs of a new west coast manufacturing facility.


Patents; A Crawling Machine, For Exercise
LEAD: Because of the interest in fitness, exercise buffs already have a wide range of machines that simulate running, rowing, bicycle riding and step-climbing.


Widespread Jazz
LEAD: The Widespread Jazz Orchestra is to play swing music for dancing in a program presented by the New York Swing Society tomorrow at the Cat Club, 76 East 13th Street (505-0090).
The doors open at 7 P.M. and music begins at 8; tickets are $8, $4 for the elderly.


Community Psychiatric Ceners reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric Ceners (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Revenue
93,497,000
74,144,000
Net inc
16,914,000
13,277,000
Share earns
.37
.29
Yr rev
355,568,000
295,579,000
Net inc
70,800,000
60,024,000
Share earns
1.54
1.32


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Thursday with an article about plans for a new Police Academy and new housing in the Bronx showed the locations incorrectly.
A corrected version appears today on page 31.


L.I. Businesses Feel the Toll Of Lilco's Uncertain Future
LEAD: The continuing uncertainty over Long Island's future electricity costs and supplies is taking a rising toll on businesses on the Island, economists and business leaders say.


G.N.P. Rate Up 2% in 4th Quarter
LEAD: The economy grew at an annual rate of 2 percent during the fourth quarter of 1988, held in check by the impact of the summer's drought, Commerce Department figures showed today.


Tower's Military Work Still at Issue
LEAD: Although John G. Tower sailed through the start of his confirmation hearing this week, several Senators expressed concern that his work as a military consultant could appear to be a conflict of interest, and the Secretary of Defense-designate is likely to face more questions on that score next week.


SPS Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPS Technologies Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
109,292,000
92,050,000
Net inc
b5,041,000
c1,822,000
Share earns
1.02
.37
Yr sales
427,372,000
375,943,000
Net inc
b11,975,000
c15,242,000
Share earns
2.42
3.10


O'Meara Leads Pro-Am by a Shot
LEAD: Mark O'Meara won the Bing Crosby National Pro-Am in 1985, the last year the tournament was officially known by that name.


Dolli Holland Weds
LEAD: Dolli Holland and Jerome Coe were married yesterday at the Plaza Athenee by Judge Carol H. Arber of the New York City Civil Court.
Mrs.
Coe is a consultant with Travel Horizons Unlimited, which specializes in travel for people with physical impairments.
Mr.
Coe is a vice president in the institutional-trading division of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


The Talent Bank Tale: Unfinished, Unfair
LEAD: Recent public hearings on patronage in the Koch administration were provocative, but seriously incomplete.
The State Commission on Government Integrity does itself and the public a disservice by leaving so many questions unanswered, so many accusations unresolved.


Fracas on Saul Place: Is One-Way the Way?
LEAD: Is tiny Saul Place about to become a one-way street to neighborhood ruin?


LAROUCHE RECEIVES 15-YEAR SENTENCE
LEAD: Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist who three times ran for President, was sentenced today to 15 years in prison for scheming to defraud the Internal Revenue Service and deliberately defaulting on more than $30 million in loans from his supporters.


Thomas Sopwith, Aircraft Pioneer In 2 World Wars, Is Dead at 101
LEAD: Sir Thomas Sopwith, whose companies built the British Sopwith Camel plane of World War I fame, died yesterday at his manor house outside Winchester in southern England.
He was 101 years old.
His son, Thomas, said he died of old age after a ''marvelous life.'' He was an aircraft designer, yachtsman and aviator as well as an airplane manufacturing executive.


Thon Sent to Phillies
LEAD: The San Diego Padres sold the contract of the shortstop Dickie Thon to the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday for an undisclosed amount of cash.
Thon, 30 years old, was signed by the Padres as a free agent last February and played in 95 games, hitting .264.
He would have become a free agent if the Padres had not completed a deal by March 15.(


International Container Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Container Sysems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,730,910
1,899,067
Net inc
342,579
143,488
Share earns
.12
.05
9mo sales
9,565,214
4,531,317
Net inc
1,219,936
178,378
Share earns
.42
.06


Drug Fight at Source Is Also Important, Bush Says
LEAD: President Bush said today that although he thought education was one of the best ways to fight America's drug problem, it would also be necessary to work at eliminating drugs at their source and stopping them at the nation's borders.


Patents; Carving a Line With an Electron Beam
LEAD: Alvin Marks, the founder of Phototherm Inc., in Amherst, N.H., has obtained patent approval for a new sub-micron beam writer, a device that carves lines far smaller than those in the circuitry of state-of-the-art computer chips.


Drugs Found on Jet in Miami
LEAD: About 47 pounds of cocaine was discovered Tuesday on an Eastern Airlines jet that had stopped at Miami International Airport on the way from Colombia to New York, officials said.
United States Customs officials are considering whether to impose fines against the airline, which was fined $1 million last fall after cocaine was discovered on two flights in a two-week span.


Knicks Fall With :03 Left; Jackson Signs 5-Year Pact
LEAD: Tom Chambers rebounded a missed free throw and hit a five-foot hook shot with three seconds remaining to lift the Phoenix Suns over the Knicks, 132-130, last night.


The Ramones
LEAD: The Ramones, a rock band, are to perform tonight at 12:30 A.M. at the Ritz, 119 East 11th Street (254-2800), on a bill that also includes Circus of Power at 11 P.M.
Tickets are $14.50.


Bond Prices Climb on G.N.P. Data
LEAD: Bond prices rallied yesterday on news that growth in the gross national product had slowed in the fourth quarter, a development that could reduce any pressures for an increase in interest rates to slow the economy.


Paxton (Frank) Co (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paxton (Frank) Co (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
25,812,942
24,612,994
Net inc
734,049
766,285
Share earns
.25
.26
9mo sales
81,920,756
77,544,230
Net inc
2,661,555
2,823,299
Share earns
.91
.95


Ryan, Beck &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan, Beck &amp; Co
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,187,000
5,517,000
Net inc
75,000
b539,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr rev
25,921,000
36,393,000
Net inc
3,693,000
4,694,000
Share earns
.51
.46
b-Net loss


There'll Always Be Bolsheviks
LEAD: It's hard being a czar in America.
A few days ago President Bush shook William Bennett's hand and said congratulations, you are the new drug czar.
A day or two later Bennett learned the country can't afford a czar right now.


Sherwin-Williams Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
444,586,000
410,084,000
Net inc
b18,714,000
c19,574,000
Share earns
.43
.44
Yr sales
1,950,474,000
1,800,580,000
Net inc
b101,080,000
c96,577,000
Share earns
2.30
2.15


Customary Law of Sea Allows a 12-Mile Limit; A Call for Diplomacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater; People Joined Together, Marriages Torn Asunder
LEAD: When J. B. Priestley's ''When We Are Married'' was revived in London in 1986, the production was a tribute to the eloquent art of English character acting.
Enlisting such expert farceurs as Prunella Scales and Bill Fraser, the director Ronald Eyre turned a period comedy into a blithe evening of turnabout fair play.


Timken Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Timken Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
409,142,000
334,124,000
Net inc
24,833,000
8,029,000
Share earns
.88
.30
Yr sales
1,554,143,000
1,230,258,000
Net inc
65,912,000
10,319,000
Share earns
2.34
.39


Tyler Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyler Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
167,745,000
157,455,000
Net inc
759,000
c157,000
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
21,710,000
17,486,000
Yr sales
664,645,000
624,117,000
Net inc
b20,988,000
c12,018,000
Share earns
1.11
.68
Shares outst
19,009,000
17,642,000


New England Business Servce reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Business Servce (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
57,819,000
53,091,000
Net inc
5,357,000
5,657,000
Share earns
.32
.33
6mo sales
119,092,000
105,400,000
Net inc
11,819,000
11,429,000
Share earns
.69
.66


Albany Takes 20 Drugstores Off Medicaid
LEAD: The New York State Department of Social Services expelled 25 physicians and 20 pharmacies from Medicaid yesterday, saying the doctors had routinely prescribed and the pharmacies routinely dispensed unnecessary prescription drugs to addicts and then billed the Government for them.


Dr. John French, 77, Neurosurgeon, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
John Douglas French, a neurosurgeon who helped found and for 20 years directed the U.C.L.A.
Brain Research Institute, died of Alzheimer's disease Wednesday.
He was 77 years old.


D. William Violi, 74; Issued Rare Recordings
LEAD: D. William Violi, a dealer in historical opera and vocal recordings, died of heart disease on Thursday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 74 years old.


Historical Society Opens Two Conservation Labs
LEAD: The New-York Historical Society, which was shaken last summer by disclosures that many of its paintings, manuscripts and other works had deteriorated in storage, has opened two laboratories for book and paper conservation.


Fair Compromise on the Indian Museum
LEAD: The collapse of last year's agreement on the Museum of the American Indian means that instead of a New York museum with a Washington satellite, it will become a Washington museum with a New York satellite.
That's a blow to New York pride.
But the collection finally will have a decent home and the proposed satellite will give New Yorkers access to twice as much of the museum's huge collection as they have now.


Ladd Furniture Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ladd Furniture Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
94,899,000
97,841,000
Net inc
5,189,000
6,804,000
Share earns
.28
.36
Yr sales
379,904,000
386,876,000
Net inc
24,605,000
27,634,000
Share earns
1.32
1.44


Silver Burdett Reports It Refused Bribe Offer
LEAD: Silver Burdett &amp; Ginn Inc., one of the largest publishers of elementary school textbooks in the country, said yesterday that it was solicited for a bribe last year, but refused to pay it.


Data Translation reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Translation (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
11,016,000
7,740,000
Net inc
1,027,000
702,000
Share earns
.33
.22
Yr sales
38,680,000
30,858,000
Net inc
2,662,000
2,904,000
Share earns
.86
.91


Bush Endorses Pay Rise, Heartening House
LEAD: President Bush endorsed the 50 percent Congressional pay increase today, which came as welcome news on Capitol Hill.
House leaders there are hustling to contain the political damage as the clock ticks closer to Feb. 8, when the raise automatically takes effect.


Ferro Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
260,782,000
232,915,000
Net inc
11,760,000
9,369,000
Share earns
.86
.68
Yr sales
1,008,990,000
871,088,000
Net inc
46,620,000
31,687,000
Share earns
3.40
2.30


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/ANIMALS
LEAD:  MOON-DARK  By Patricia Wrightson.
Illustrated by Noela Young.  169 pp.
New York:  Margaret K. McElderry Books. $13.95.  (Ages 9 to 12)


The Biggest Diplomatic Openings for Baker
LEAD: THE late President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt was fond of saying that the United States didn't hold just 90 percent of the cards in international affairs, it held 99 percent.
Mr.
Sadat's statement was an exaggeration, but it reflects a perception still widely shared around the globe.
So James A. Baker 3d began his first week as Secretary of State looking out on a world that is scrutinizing his every wink and nod for signs of how he intends to play his opening hand.


Corrections
LEAD: Two captions on page 27 of of the Arts and Leisure section today, with an article about movie music, are reversed in some copies.
The performer shown in dark glasses is Brian Eno; John Lurie is shown without glasses.
The caption on the same page about ''La Boheme'' misidentifies the male singer.
He is James Busterud.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:  Travel to Burma And North Korea Now Permitted


Hands Pose for Their Portraits
LEAD: THE HUMAN HAND HAS BEEN A recurring subject in photography - in part because, in an esthetic sense, photography renders the idea of ''the hand'' vestigial.
Unlike other methods of representation, including drawing and painting, photography cannot claim to be an art of line, stroke or touch.
To take a picture, all the hand need do is press the shutter button.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. At the end of last summer, I moved a small chest away from the wall and discovered a lot of mildew on the wall.
This is not an outside wall (the living room of another apartment is on the other side) and there are no water pipes inside the wall.
I no longer keep the chest flush against the wall and the mildew has not reappeared, although this part of the wall does look darker in some spots.


Do You Need More Space? Try Shrinking the Furniture
LEAD: With real estate prices soaring, many companies with bulging work forces are renovating their offices rather than relocating.
In squeezing more workers into a given amount of space, companies ''are packing more punch per square foot,'' said Paul Cornell, the psychologist at Steelcase, which is spending $10 million on a new research and develpment center expected to open in


Shoreham Evacuation: Like the Blizzard of '86?
LEAD: REMEMBER the first snowstorm of 1986?
The recent Shoreham news returns it poignantly to mind.
As recently as last week, many Long Islanders thought that Shoreham could be written off.
But with the distinct possibility that the monster could be resurrected (when did it ever go away?) and the reality that


Paris Again Embraces Mediocrity
LEAD: WHAT IS IT ABOUT PARIS AND MUSIC?
The apparent collapse - or at best crippling - of Daniel Barenboim's ambitious plan for the new Bastille Opera seems one more instance of the city's unwillingness to deal with musical performance on the highest level.
For a metropolis whose pedigree stretches back to Caesar and that for centuries has been regarded as the cultural capital of Europe, the ''City of


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Jan. 1 with an article about the paradors of Spain mislocated one establishment.
The Reyes Catolicos parador mentioned is in Santiago de Compostela, in northwest Spain, not the one on the Mediterranean coast.


An Inspired Lead Defeats a Slam
LEAD: IN the past decade computers have taken over the scoring procedures in virtually all American tournaments and in many clubs.
The result is an improvement in speed and accuracy, and one useful bonus: Organizers can offer a type of event that is tedious without the calculating prowess of the computer chip.


No Utopia, but to Workers It's a Job
LEAD: In the four years since a shuttered General Motors Corporation factory here re-opened as a joint venture with the Toyota Motors Corporation, the resurrected assembly plant has been hailed as proof that a labor and management utopia could be created in American heavy industry.


SIGMUND AND MINNA? THE BIOGRAPHER AS VOYEUR
LEAD: As every biographer of Freud must ruefully acknowledge, that great unriddler of mysteries left behind some tantalizing private mysteries of his own.
Probably the most titillating of these, which has been generating gossip for perhaps 75 years, is his relationship with his sister-in-law, Minna Bernays.


The Budget Law Does Its Work, Too
LEAD: BUSH Administration officials and Congressional leaders are not counting on the National Economic Commission to grease the way to a compromise on reducing the Federal budget deficit.
Rather, they are banking on the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law to bludgeon them into an agreement.


By the Bay, by the Beautiful Bay
LEAD: THROUGH the four-foot-high porthole windows of Port Washington's Bayview Restaurant, diners can see Manhasset Bay, dull and gray under lowering late-January skies.
But inside, it's springtime.


5 Indicted in Mustang Killings
LEAD: Five ranch workers have been indicted by a Federal grand jury here on charges of killing more than 40 wild horses and burros.
The indictments, handed up Tuesday, resulted from an investigation by the Bureau of Land Management into the killing of more than 500 mustangs since last August, most of them in Landeer and Pershing Counties.


Incident on a Train
LEAD:  THE TRIAL OF BERNHARD GOETZ  Starring Peter Crombie (in photo), Larry B. Scott, Richard Libertini, Andrew Robinson.
Directed by Harry Moses. 1988.
Today Home Entertainment.  135 minutes. $59.95.
Not rated.


THE GIFTED
LEAD: When my closest friend from college got married, the basement of her parents' home looked like Tiffany's storeroom the day after Christmas.
Long folding tables were piled with open pastel boxes of china, crystal and silver carefully nestled in wrinkled tissue paper and bubble wrap.
A neat row of file boxes sat at the head of the first table, containing a master guest list with notations and gift cards stapled next to each name.


Marjorie Schein To Marry in June
LEAD: Marjorie Laura Schein and Brian Alexander Weston, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vaughan H. Weston of West Lafayette, Ind., plan to marry in June.
Their engagement has been made known by the future bride's parents, Carol S. Gill of Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y., and David S. Schein of West Nyack, N.Y.


Blacks Battle Fellow Blacks in Natal
LEAD: The danger peaks around midnight, Xakile Duma said, when vigilantes stalk the streets of the black township of Imbali.


At National Steel
LEAD: To the Editor:


VINTAGE VOWS
LEAD: Say you plan to marry this year and are 28 years old.
Count your blessings, because you were born in one of the great vintage years of the century, 1961, and you might want to consider serving some 1961 wines at the reception.
Of course, it would help considerably if one of you comes to the union rather well-heeled; a case of 1961 Chateau Lafite


Sports of The Times; Tearing Up Canton's Sidetrack
LEAD: Even before Terry Bradshaw, Mel Blount, Art Shell and Willie Wood were announced as this year's inductees into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, some historians asked a valid question: why didn't Al Davis and Bud Grant, two of the candidates up for discussion, at least qualify for the final vote in the selection committee meeting?


Katherine L. Knowles To Wed C. A. Sadler
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Knowles of Upper Montclair, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Lunt Knowles, to Christopher A. Sadler, a son of Anne Forrest of Featherston, New Zealand, and Alan Sadler of Masterton, New Zealand.
The couple plan to marry in August.


Gimme a D-U-F and an F-E-L!
LEAD: NO one would ever mistake Fifth Avenue for the quad at old Ivy U., but a lot of people strolling up and down the avenue recently have had a certain collegiate air about them.
Could it be the words of the Great Philosophers one often hears quoted in passing conversations outside Trump Tower, Bergdorf Goodman and Tiffany's?


Another Opinion On Dining Out
LEAD: Re: Anne Semmes's harsh review of the Newarker, at the Vista Hotel near Newark Airport (Dec. 18): My wife and I recently dined at the Newarker on three consecutive Wednesday evenings and found total satisfaction each time; excellent menu and preparation, superb service, an ambiance of subdued elegance.


Ron Brown Declares Independence
LEAD: Ronald H. Brown, the Washington lawyer who will soon be elected chairman of the Democratic Party, professes not to think much about the history being made as his party begins to rally around him even here in the South.


Lahore as Kipling Knew It
LEAD: THOUGH Rudyard Kipling lived only five of his 70 years in Lahore, they were the most crucial years of his development as a writer.
This rich confection of a city, whose great Mogul buildings and street life evoke the deep hues and sensuality of a miniature painting, was where the teen-aged Kipling cut his teeth as a newspaperman.


Diagnosing Electrical Woes
LEAD: A VOLT-OHM meter is a battery-powered measuring device that is used to diagnose a wide range of household electrical problems.
With one, you can test batteries and switches, pinpoint causes of trouble in appliances and measure voltages at outlets.


Brightening Spirits and Releving Headaches With Light
LEAD: Last year, when the Quaker Oats Company moved its headquarters of 30 years from Chicago's Merchandise Mart to a new steel and glass building, it was determined to distribute natural light more equitably to its 2,000 employees.


A MURDER THAT DIDN'T ADD UP
LEAD:  BLIND FAITH  By Joe McGinniss.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
New York:  G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


High Jinks and Low Bogeys
LEAD: BOGEYS,'' CRIED A United States fighter pilot facing fast-closing Libyan jets, ''have jinked back at me again for the fifth time. . . .
Fox One!''


Price Marks Birthday By Gaining Tie for First
LEAD: Nick Price, who said he was ''confused'' over his failure to win in recent years, celebrated his 32d birthday today by charging from six shots behind to tie Mark O'Meara for the lead going into the final round of the A.T.&amp;.T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.


Computer Offers Car-Repair Information
LEAD: ''WHEN will my car be ready?'' is one of the most plaintive queries in the English language.
Trying to get information on the progress of an automobile repair has been known to send car owners around the bend and car dealers diving for cover.


Plant's Opponents Widen Their Goals
LEAD: SINCE a 28-inch-wide pipeline burst, spewing toxic substances into a residential neighborhood here in April 1984, residents' opposition to the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, which manufactures chemicals and plastics, has been unrelenting.


Packer Misses With Statistics
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Family Charged in Sex Attacks on Girl, 11
LEAD: A couple and their 14-year-old son have been charged in a series of sexual crimes involving the couple's 11-year-old daughter, the police said today.


Daughter Follows Mother's Footsteps
LEAD: I MISSED the sexual revolution.
I missed the feminist movement.
I was too busy diapering babies.
I missed the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s sit-ins.
I never got to march for anything.
I was too busy keeping the pace with carriages.


The Bold are Stuided For Alcoholism Risk
LEAD: SO far, none of his subjects have tried rappelling down the building when they leave or taken any other similarly bizarre risks, but Victor M. Hesselbrock admits he has his hands full with his latest research project.


Buying Cable Does Not Pay
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Trooper Is Held in Rape Case
LEAD: A state trooper will face a Saratoga County grand jury Tuesday after he was arrested on seven counts stemming from the rape and sodomy of a 29-year-old woman last fall, the police said today.
Robert O. Bennett Jr., 35 years old, of Clifton Park, was arrested Friday, a state police spokesman said.
Mr.


An April Bridal For Julia Forbes
LEAD: The engagement of Julia Barrington Forbes and Matthew Scott Burnett has been announced by the parents of the bride-to-be, Mrs.
Eric K. Lindquist of Sarasota, Fla., and John B. Forbes of New York.
Mr.
Burnett is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bradley Burnett, also of Sarasota.
An April wedding is planned.


STRETCHING THE RULES
LEAD: Not too long ago, a young man slipped an engagement ring on a young woman's finger, and in an instant she was poring over a guide to proper wedding etiquette.
She dutifully followed the book.
She wore a white wedding dress with a ''conservative neckline, and sleeves preferably long'' (''The Amy Vanderbilt Complete Book of Etiquette,'' revised and expanded by Letitia Baldrige).


Planned For Flowers
LEAD: WHAT could be simpler than a planting plan for a flower garden that can be grown from seed?
Planting diagrams for two of them are shown here.


Cooperate? Co-opt?
LEAD: To the Editor:


How Madeline Kahn Works for Laughs
LEAD: ANGEL-FACED MADELINE KAHN frowns. ''Laughter is a strange response,'' she says. ''I mean, what is it?
It's a spasm of some kind!
Is that always joy?
It's very often discomfort.
It's some sort of explosive reaction.'' She flashes a devilish smile and then adds musically: ''It's very complex.'' And you laugh.


Florida Condos
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the article ''Condo Spoken Here'' and the subsequent letters:


DIPLOMATS AND BUREAUCRATS: A PROPOSAL
LEAD:  PREVENTING WORLD WAR III  A Realistic Grand Strategy.
By David M. Abshire.  331 pp.
New York:  A Cornelia &amp; Michael Bessie Book/  Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Miss Schafer Engaged To Todd M. Foreman
LEAD: The engagement of Tracy Ellen Schafer to Todd Matthew Foreman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Spencer Foreman of Scarsdale, N.Y., has been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour J. Schafer of Pittsburgh.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Memorial for the Crew of the Challenger


FICTION
LEAD:  LUCID STARS.
By Andrea Barrett. (Delta, Paper, $7.95.) In her first novel, Andrea Barrett enlists the whole empyrean - Orion through Libra through Pegasus - to serve as a backdrop for and sad commentary on a dissolving family.
Her story opens on a Vermont mountaintop in 1955 when 19-year-old Penny Webb succumbs to the charms of a ski bum named Benjamin Day.


Which Hospital?
LEAD: The public might be less concerned over the participation of interns and resident physicians in their care if Dr.
Konner had mentioned that morbidity and mortality rates have been shown to be significantly lower in teaching hospitals.
This is underscored by the mortality rates for Medicare patients in New York-area hospitals, which were published in The New York Times in December.


Residential Resales
LEAD:  Closings in the week ending Jan. 14  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $202,000  100 Bank Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; windowed dining el, two exposures; maintenance $410, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Greenwich Village


Ground Broken for Memorial For '70 Kent State Shooting
LEAD: Officials at Kent State University have broken ground for a scaled-down memorial to the four students killed by Ohio National Guardsmen in 1970.


Lyres, Lions and Things Neo-Classical
LEAD: OVER THE CENTURIES, the Americans, French, English, Russians and even the Chinese have borrowed freely from the ancient Greeks and Romans in devising variations on classical themes, all of which have gained in popularity over the last decade.
The Neo-Classical vocabulary of ornament - lyres, swans, columns, urns, eagles, griffins, lions, mythological creatures, gods and goddesses - dominates the imagery seen throughout the Winter Antiques Show, which ends its nine-day run today at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th


Daring On Great Lakes
LEAD: LAST summer, Thomas Mazuzan became the first man to cross Lake Ontario and Lake Erie alone in a canoe.
Now he is mapping out plans for solo crossings of Lake Michigan and Lake Huron this summer and Lake Superior in 1990.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/ANIMALS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


E.M.S. Sees Computer Easing Crisis
LEAD: In the low light of the Emergency Medical Service headquarters in Maspeth, Queens, a score of uniformed technicians labor over the computer terminals that screen the city's 2,300 calls each day for emergency medical assistance.


Back on Stage, Challenges for Mr. Guinness
LEAD: It WAS 90 MINUTES TO CURTAIN TIME the other evening in the stately 104-year-old Comedy Theater on Panton Street, where Lee Blessing's two-character drama, ''A Walk in the Woods,'' has been playing since the first week in November.
Here, the cast is Anglo-American.
Early last year the play had modest success with an all-American cast on Broadway at the Booth Theater.


NONFICTION
LEAD:  WALT FRAZIER: One Magic Season and a Basketball Life.
By Walt Frazier with Neil Offen. (Times Books, $17.95.) Although there have been memorable basketball teams led by greater individuals, there may have been no more remarkable combination of players than the 1970 National Basketball Association champions, the New York Knicks, led by their buttery-smooth point guard, Walt Frazier.


Anti-Semitic Incidents in 1988 Put at 5-Year High
LEAD: Anti-Semitic incidents in the United States rose to a five-year high in 1988, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith reports.


Corrections
LEAD: A report last Sunday about the marriage of Barbara Ethel Otten and Bruce Edward Hood misstated the bridegroom's occupation.
He is a partner, not an associate, in the New York law firm of Sann &amp; Howe.


Unreliable Cretans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Powerful Quake in Aleutians
LEAD: A powerful earthquake, measured at 6.3 on the Richter scale, shook the remote Komandorsky Islands west of Alaska on Friday, the National Earthquake Information Center here reported.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/ANIMALS
LEAD: TAIL TOES EYES EARS NOSE  Written and illustrated by  Marilee Robin Burton.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $11.95. (Ages 3 to 6)


Abortion, Intolerance and Mr. Bush
LEAD: George Bush once said that he wanted to be President of ''all the people'' of the United States.
Since this is a country with a remarkably, and often unnervingly, diverse citizenry, that's a tall order but an indispensable duty.


Besides Blood, Hospitals Test the Patience of Patients
LEAD: THE young nurse had just finished taking my blood pressure - the only steady numbers my body gives off - and she turned her attention to my pulse.
Her tiny fingers gently pinched my wrist searching for the radial artery.
I remained quietly seated on the hospital bed as she stared at the simple gold chain bracelet on her otherwise naked wrist.


Call for Inquiry
LEAD: The president of the North Carolina university system has asked four prominent citizens to investigate charges of wrongdoing in the North Carolina State basketball program.


Hungary, in Turnabout, Declares '56 Rebellion a Popular Uprising
LEAD: Contradicting the official view of history held for more than 30 years, a member of the ruling Politburo has declared that Hungary's 1956 rebellion was a popular uprising rather than a foreign-instigated attempt at counterrevolution.


Eighth Avenue Goes From Grit to Glitter
LEAD: ''WHENEVER someone asks me about success in real estate, I tell them to plan to live a long time,'' said Ian Woodner, a builder of office and residential projects in New York and Washington. ''If you live long enough, everything you own will end up being worth something to you.''


THE NOBEL PAIR
LEAD: GERTRUDE BELLE Elion was the only female recipient on the stage at last month's Nobel Prize ceremonies in Stockholm.
Dressed in royal blue chiffon, she was a flash of brilliance among the starched white evening shirts and formal black suits of the others.
George Herbert Hitchings, too, stood apart, at 83 the oldest new recipient by a good many years.


The Pyramids of New York
LEAD: It's a stunning sight up here atop an abandoned brick apartment house in the Bronx, a sight that offers a glimpse into one of the great construction projects in the history of cities.


Records Awe Molloy Star
LEAD: When the season began it was reasonable to expect that Kenny Anderson would break the New York City and State high school career scoring records if he had a good year.


THE DEATH OF THE SIX-HOUR DAY
LEAD:  WORK WITHOUT END  Abandoning Shorter Hours for the Right to Work.
By Benjamin Kline Hunnicutt.
Illustrated. 404 pp.
Philadelphia:  Temple University Press.


State Cautions Diners On Menu Half-Truths
LEAD: WHEN the State Department of Consumer Protection tells Connecticut restaurants ''no substitutions, please,'' it means no fake crabmeat, no jumbo shrimp that is not really jumbo shrimp, and no other half-truths on the menu.


Banned for Fighting
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons' Bill Laimbeer and Brad Daugherty of the Cleveland Cavaliers were each suspended without pay for one game by the National Basketball Association yesterday.


Many Say It's All but Certain: Dinkins Will Run
LEAD: Manhattan Borough President David N. Dinkins will almost certainly run for mayor, say aides, politicians close to him and even potential opponents who have met with him.


FOCUS: Montreal; Old City Being Revitalized for Anniversary
LEAD: THE district known as Vieux Montreal (Old Montreal or Old City) is being targeted for a major revitalization in time for the city's 350th anniversary in 1992.


Joy C. Schaefer and Gregory Teal Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Joy Challenor Schaefer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Moran Schaefer of Loudonville, N.Y., New York City, Vero Beach, Fla., and Nantucket, Mass., to Gregory Edward Teal, a son of Mrs.
Carl Ernst of Menands, N.Y., and Edward A. Teal of Fremont, Calif., took place yesterday in Albany.


Perceptions of the Problem
LEAD: Do you personally see homeless people around your community or on your way to work, or is the problem only something you have seen on television or have read about?
January
January
1986
1989
See the homeless first hand
36%
51%
Know about them only from watching TV


Reviews/Music; Night of the Fortepianos
LEAD: Malcolm Bilson's ''On Original Instruments'' series at Merkin Concert Hall has normally offered recital or chamber fare.
Wednesday night, it worked itself up to chamber-orchestra proportions, mustering 22 musicians in all for an evening of Haydn and Mozart.


NEW YORKERS, Etc.
LEAD: PAT BUCKLEY, one of the major players in Manhattan's social swim and charity benefit circuit, is photographed constantly, with varying results.
She has now reached the point where she couldn't care less if the picture is unflattering.
With one exception.


LEVERAGED BUYOUTS: AMERICAN PAYS THE PRICE
LEAD: When the capital development of a country becomes a byproduct of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.
The measure of success attained by Wall Street . . . cannot be claimed as one of the outstanding triumphs of laissez-faire capitalism. - John Maynard Keynes, ''The General Theory of Employment, Interest and


Art Brut
LEAD: To the Editor: When reading Allen S. Weiss's article ''In Europe, Tracing the Art of the Outsider'' (Travel, Nov. 20), I was reminded of an example of U.S.
Art Brut (Raw Art) - the Watts Towers in Los Angeles.


25 Anti-Abortion Protestors Arrested at a Clinic in Jersey
LEAD: Eight anti-abortion protestors who were chained together by their necks and legs inside a women's clinic today resisted efforts by local authorities to remove them for nearly 12 hours, before they were dragged from the building by the police, who brought special equipment to break the shackles.
At least 17 other protestors who were without chains inside the Medical Care Center were arrested and were to be charged with defiant trespassing for not obeying an order to leave the grounds, said Lieut.


Abuse on TV: Enough Is Enough
LEAD: COME on.
Now it's getting silly.
Early on, it really was educational.
People who grew up with the dirty secret of abusive or alcoholic parents found out there were others like them.
Women who were raped by dates and who always felt it must be their own fault, found out it wasn't their fault, and they were not alone.


Review/Jazz; A Patchwork On the Piano
LEAD: Compositions seem to crumble under Andrew Hill's hands.
His piano style is a patchwork of approaches -ringing chords and quick jabs and stride piano oom-pahs, skittering runs and skewed be-bop lines, melodies fractured by pauses and asides - cobbled together in asymmetrical fits and starts.
His own themes are just as eccentric, barely announcing themselves as ballads or hard-bop before veering away.


Islanders Are Taken Out of It Early
LEAD: It wasn't the early hour, nor was it the inhospitality the Flyers routinely extend toward their opponents, particularly division rivals intent on taking away their playoff spot.


Diagnosing Electrical Woes
LEAD: A VOLT-OHM meter is a battery-powered measuring device that is used to diagnose a wide range of household electrical problems.
With one, you can test batteries and switches, pinpoint causes of trouble in appliances and measure voltages at outlets.


Wide Graft Reported in Indian Programs
LEAD: A special Senate investigating committee has uncovered evidence of widespread corruption among some American Indian leaders and Federal officials who oversee Government programs on Indian reservations, lawmakers say.


R. S. Auchincloss Jr. Wed to Mary Rogers
LEAD: Mary Rogers and Richard Saltonstall Auchincloss Jr. were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Sharline Fulton performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Rudolph Moore.


Soviet Minister Ends Kabul Talks
LEAD: Defense Minister Dmitri T. Yazov of the Soviet Union ended two days of talks with President Najibullah today as convoys carrying food and other vital supplies arrived in the Afghan capital.


Cynthia R. Stone To Wed in March
LEAD: Cynthia Rogers Stone and John Joseph Phelan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Phelan of Southbury, Conn., plan to marry in March, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Wadsworth S. Stone of Wellesley Hills, Mass., have announced.


Don't Blame Professors if Adjuncts Are Serfs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Discovering Old Germany In Bamberg
LEAD: A MEANDERING river, lined with old houses; a tall, four-towered cathedral on the hill, and next to it a great Baroque palace: today Bamberg still looks like a late 18th-century engraving of one of those little German towns that time had apparently forgotten.
The texture of life - except for the inconveniently numerous cars - still belongs to an easier, sleepier time; from the dark, wood-paneled taverns serving the local white wine, beer and sausages to the impressive antique shops, all here speaks of the past.


No Big Changes in '89 Federal Arts Budget
LEAD: Government officials and lobbyists expect the Bush Administration's forthcoming culture budget to be virtually identical to the levels of arts and humanities spending proposed by the Reagan Administration.


A Death at Sea Brings Disbelief Vast as an Ocean
LEAD: ''THE ship's gone down,'' he muttered with the icy calm of stupefied disbelief. ''Vinnie is among the missing - lost at sea.''


The Homeless at the Heart Of Poverty and Policy
LEAD: IN the 1930's, ''poverty'' was the unemployment line, it was a nation down on its luck.
In the 1960's and 1970's it was the crumbling ghetto, a separate place that a Great Society thought it could reach out and repair.
Now, homelessness has crossed one of those invisible lines of American politics.


Truth - And Its Consequences
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE NATION: Justices' Ruling; Why Minority Contractors See 'a Giant Step Backward'
LEAD: WHILE affirmative action programs in education and employment have been subject to frequent, sometimes heated debate in recent years, another kind of race-based remedy for discrimination - public spending set-asides - have operated with relatively little dispute over the last 20 years.


WHICH HOSPITAL?
LEAD: Melvin Konner writes that in a teaching hospital the hand that performs the surgery may belong, not to the famed senior physician, but to the young surgeon standing on the other side of the table (Body and Mind: ''Which Hospital?'' by Melvin Konner, Dec. 18).
And that's O.K., says Dr.
Konner, because ''it is not the hands, in most surgery, but the mind that matters.


Anne L. Taylor Wed To Robert S. Hendry
LEAD: At Morningside Presbyterian Church in Atlanta, Anne Lucile Taylor, the daughter of Virginia Smith Taylor and Thomas E. Taylor, both of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Robert Steven Hendry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Hendry of Tampa, Fla.
The Rev.
Elinor Daniel performed the ceremony.


BEST SELLERS: January 29, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $19.95.) Four nuns become pawns in a struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.
2
2
26
THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy.


GIVING IT THE OLD COLLEGE TRY
LEAD: The college game has come to pro basketball.
It arrived in New York by way of Providence College when Rick Pitino became the Knicks' coach July 13, 1987.
And it came with all the trimmings: the 3-point basket, an uptempo offense, the full-court trap, and pressure defenses that slice seconds off a team's ability to run their offense.


Graf Captures Title In Australian Open
LEAD: Can Steffi Graf sweep the Grand Slam events again?


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL/3-15  Iran has secretly enlisted companies from Germany, Asia and the United States to expand its limited stockpile of the chemicals needed to make poison gas, Federal court records and officials say.
Page 1


UConn Ends Jinx Against St. John's
LEAD: For the Huskies of Connecticut, the frustration of eight years of losses to St.
John's was reduced to a footnote today.


DIPLOMATS AND BUREAUCRATS: ... AND A FAREWELL
LEAD:  WAR AND PEACE IN CENTRAL AMERICA  By Frank McNeil.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $19.95.


The Perfect Baby?
LEAD: SHAKESPEARE, ALLOWING RICHARD III to explain the origins of his villainy, had him announce that he had been ''Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time/ Into this breathing world scarce half made up'' (Act I, Scene 1).
What could be worse than a birth defect, what tragedy greater than a baby born abnormal?


DATA UPDATE: January 29, 1989
LEAD:
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Dec. 88
Dec. 87
Change
New York
484.4
393.8
23%
New Jersey
314.8
439.1
-28%
Connecticut
125.6
161.6
-22%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
In percent
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.27
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.73
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.28
Bank Rate Monitor
Home Mortgage
10.59
Federal Home Loan Bank, national average
Unsecured Personal Loans
Minimum fixed rate, 3-year maturity
Chase Manhattan, New York
16.90
Continental Illinois, Chicago
17.25
Bank of America, San Francisco
21.25


'Lawrence' Seen Whole
LEAD: FIRST LOVE BETWEEN A PERSON and a film can be as intoxicating as first love between two people.
It can mean just as much crazy behavior, just as many sleepless nights.
As a young adolescent, I became so desperately obsessed with a certain film that I saw it over and over, spent years studying the life of its hero, regarded him as a kind of role model and even dragged my family on a long, dusty pilgrimage to a place where he had lived.


Adapting an Opening to Meet the Player's Needs
LEAD: WHICH counts for more, the player or the opening?


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''It may very well be that the net effect of L.B.O.'s is a financial snipe hunt, where all the long-term investors, flashlight in hand, are left holding the bag.'' - Nicholas F. Brady, Treasury Secretary, on leveraged buyouts.


'Home Fires Burning': Integrity Amid Substance
LEAD: ''HALLMARK HALL OF FAME'' comes up with its 160th presentation tonight at 9 on CBS.
Starring Barnard Hughes, Sada Thompson and Robert Prosky, ''Home Fires Burning'' is one more example of why American television should cherish this distinguished series. ''Home Fires Burning'' is not great drama.
In fact, it has some nagging flaws.


Florida Condos
LEAD: To the Editor: As a former year-round condo resident in south Florida (for nine years), I found many chuckles in Carol Cott Gross's article and the cartoons accompanying it.


OF GODS, RICE AND WOODY ALLEN
LEAD:  OTHER PEOPLES' MYTHS  The Cave of Echoes.
By Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty.  225 pp.
New York:  Macmillan Publishing Company. $19.95


Claire Noumair, A Schoolteacher, To Wed in July
LEAD: The engagement of Claire Margaret Noumair to Gerald D. Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Smith of San Jose, Calif., has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Noumair of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and Deal, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.


Woman Unharmed In Subway Attack, But Suspect Escapes
LEAD: A 38-year-old woman escaped yesterday morning from the grasp of a man who had grabbed her and exposed himself on a lonely subway platform in lower Manhattan.
She hit the man with a tote bag and was able to break free, the police said.


In County's Music World, Two Siblings Stand Out
LEAD: ''GET the Brookses!'' people used to say, when it was music recital time in Port Chester.
Norman Brooks and his little sister, Lorraine - known then and now as ''Rainie'' - could always be counted on to perform for their school or community: he to play the piano, she to play the piano or sing.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:  CELEBRATING JOYCE James Joyce's 107th birthday on Thursday will be celebrated at Paperback Alley in South Windsor with the showing of two Joycean films and the serving of Irish tea, soda bread and a large birthday cake with the first page of Joyce's ''Ulysses'' written in chocolate icing.


College's Aims Are Misguided
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Directions
LEAD: To the Editor: Mr.
Kunstler's article will invite diverse interpretation, as we discovered while driving south from Fort Collins to Stapelton International Airport in Denver.
With more than three hours to spare, we hastily calculated what we thought would be an easy detour west, promising much local color and scenery.


Kirk A. Ruebenson Is Wed To Dr. Elizabeth A. Rudey
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth Ann Rudey, a professor of ceramic arts at Long Island University, and Kirk Arthur Ruebenson, a graphic arts cameraman for Quad Rite in New York, were married yesterday at the Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated.


GOING ON IN THE NORTHEAST
LEAD:  CANDLELIGHT CONCERT


FICTION
LEAD:  ALL OUR GAMES.
By Erika Mitterer. (Camden House, $24.95.) In the Austria of the Anschluss, 16-year-old Helga Wegscheider zealously embraces Hitler's message, convinced of the justice of his design for Europe.
Like her fiance, an SS soldier, she devotes herself passionately to the Nazi cause.
But at home something else is taking shape, outside the scope of Helga's bedazzled vision: her brothers hold secretive Bible-group meetings, her parents' conversation is sprinkled with cryptic remarks.


The Case for Takeovers
LEAD: THE TAKEOVER BOOM IS A treatment for a disease that is destroying American productivity: gross and widespread incompetent management.
Takeovers are part of a free-market response, working to unseat corporate bureaucracies, control runaway costs and make America competitive again.


Martin Popper, 79, Lawyer in Leftist Causes
LEAD: Martin Popper, a lawyer who was active in left-wing causes in the years after World War II and who was executive secretary of the National Lawyers Guild, died of cancer of the prostate Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old.


Smoked Foods Offer a 'Haunting Edge'
LEAD: SMOKING as a habit may be on the decline but as a flavoring it is more popular than ever.
Restaurant chefs are using smoked foods - meats, poultry, seafood, vegetables and cheeses - in a variety of dishes.
Many of the chefs are doing their own smoking with simple, improvised equipment.


'We Have Tremendous Brain Power'
LEAD: THE Governor's choice to be the state's new Economic Development Commissioner is Stephen Heintz.
The Commissioner is responsible for attracting and retaining business in the state, and he and and a staff of 100 employees also coordinate business education and development programs.
The department has a budget of $8.5 million.


Called Shot Is Not a Myth
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Medical Ethics Panel Sought
LEAD: A man who fought in court successfully to let his comatose wife die proposed legislation today to create a state medical ethics commission to make such judgments.
In November, the man, H. Glenn Gray, obtained a Federal court order to remove the feeding tube of his wife, Marcia V. Gray, 49 years old, who went into a coma in January 1986 after a blood vessel burst in her brain.


Jean Alice Brashear Is Wed in Pittsburgh
LEAD: Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Jean Alice Brashear, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Oscar Brashear of Glenshaw, Pa., to Christopher Donald Bayer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Bayer of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Mark Glasko, a Roman


From Cabinet To Disbarment
LEAD: ROBERT B. ANDERSON, Treasury Secretary in the second Eisenhower Administration, pleaded guilty in 1987 in Federal District Court in Manhattan to evading income taxes and operating an illegal offshore bank in the British West Indies.
Judge Edmund Palmieri sentenced Mr.
Anderson to a month in prison, five months' house arrest and five years on probation.


Megabuck Jackpots For Slots Considered
LEAD: SOME casinos here may band together soon in a program that would make millionaires of some slot-machine players.


White House Says Option of Fee For Savings Accounts Is Still Alive
LEAD: The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that imposing a fee on savings accounts is still an option to help resolve a crisis in the nation's savings and loan institutions.


A Return to Pakistan
LEAD: WHEN British India shuddered on the faultline of religion and split apart at independence in 1947, a new nation for Muslims, which they called Pakistan, was born.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. At the end of last summer, I moved a small chest away from the wall and discovered a lot of mildew on the wall.
This is not an outside wall (the living room of another apartment is on the other side) and there are no water pipes inside the wall.
I no longer keep the chest flush against the wall and the mildew has not reappeared, although this part of the wall does look darker in some spots.


An Office With All the Comforts of Home - Even a Fireplace
LEAD: Some offices today are becoming homier.
Credenzas are replacing metal filing cabinets, round meeting tables are replacing square ones, and sofas and coffee tables are preferred to clusters of chairs.
Some offices even have fireplaces.


Map Said to Show 1777 Encampment
LEAD: HARRY KELS SWAN delicately removed a brown paper bag from a vault in the visitors' center at Washington Crossing State Park.
He put the bag on his desk and extracted an acetate-covered parchment from within. ''I've been looking at these things since I was a kid,'' the 60-year-old historian said, ''but I never actually held one in my hands before.


Rangers Unhappy With Tie
LEAD: It was difficult to tell whether the Rangers were too exhausted to celebrate or too ambivalent about all that had just taken place.
But at least one thing was certain: The road trip was over - not gloriously, not painlessly, but not embarrassingly either.


Diamonds Are Forever
LEAD:  BULL DURHAM  Starring Kevin Costner and Susan Sarandon (in photo), Tim Robbins, Trey Wilson, Robert Wuhl.
Directed by Ron Shelton. 1988.
Orion Home Video.  108 minutes. $89.98.
Closed captioned.
Rated R.


Lobby Extends a Hand To Children in Trouble
LEAD: When an 11-year-old boy was charged with killing his baby sitter by setting his house ablaze here in early January, some Maine residents decided it was time to stop studying the problems of seriously troubled children and start helping them.


2 Brothers, One With a Gun, Held in a Queens School Assault
LEAD: Two brothers have been charged with invading a Queens schoolyard, one wielding a loaded semiautomatic gun that had been modified to resemble an Uzi, the Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, said Friday.


Amy Rappeport, Publisher, Weds Thomas Teicholz
LEAD: Amy Louise Rappeport, the publisher of New York Woman magazine, and Thomas David Teicholz, a writer and lawyer, were married yesterday at the Loft in New York by Rabbi Rolando Matalon.


Bank Board Sues The Accountants
LEAD: Accountants faced lawsuits and heavy criticism as the savings and loan industry's dire condition received considerable attention in Washington.
M.
Danny Wall, head of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, said his agency was suing three accounting firms and expected to eventually sue most of the profession's Big Eight firms.


Tap-Dancing Teachers Are People Too
LEAD: Regarding Nora Polinsky's letter ''Tap-Dancing Teachers: This Is Education?'' (Jan. 8).


Scottish Treasures: Antique Buckles From Gilt to Glass
LEAD: A FLORIDLY engraved Victorian silver buckle, large in size and mounted as a brooch, originally belonging to my mother's mother and passed on to me when I was in college, began my fascination with British buckles.
Among my most treasured possessions, a symmetrical pair of delicate Art Nouveau traceries, from the days when Liberty of London engaged England's leading designers for their silver, now clasps a suede belt.


Music for Movies: Trickier Than It Looks
LEAD: COMPOSERS HAVE LONG ENJOYED an uneasy, if lucrative, relationship with film.
From such early idealists as Sergei Prokofiev to the populist experiments of the 1930's (Aaron Copland, Virgil Thomson et al.), serious composers have been attracted to the film medium.


On the Privilege of Using Signatures
LEAD: BUYERS who get used to using credit cards also get used to just signing for their purchases.
Then the bills come.


DATABANK: January 29, 1989
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'88
III Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,029.2
$4,009.4
$3,870.0
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
2.0
2.5
4.2
Corporate After-Tax Profits
III Q'88
II Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
169.1
$162.7
$149.5


DIPLOMATS AND BUREAUCRATS: ... A PROTEST ...
LEAD:  INSIDE THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  The True Story of the Making  and Unmaking of Reagan's Foreign Policy.
By Constantine C. Menges.  418 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Honed Hyperbole
LEAD: 'Higher income taxes are a razor guillotine, poised to descend on the bare neck of prosperity.' - Gov.
Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey, proposing a budget that he described as ''bordering on the austere.''


SECURITY BEGINS AT HOME
LEAD:  THE FATE OF NATIONS  The Search for National Security  in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries.
By Michael Mandelbaum.  416 pp.
New York:  Cambridge University Press.
Cloth, $39.50.
Paper, $13.95.


EXTREMIST GAINS SEEN IN SALVADOR
LEAD: Eight years after the United States began to pour money into El Salvador to fight Marxist-led guerrillas, American officials say that the war is deadlocked, that extremist forces are gaining strength and that the issue is coming back to the forefront of political debate in this country.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This isn't the first thing I've done that was previously for whites only.''  - Ronald H. Brown,  on his prospects  to become chairman  of the Democratic Party.  [ 24:1. ]


Max Ernst's Adventures in Collage
LEAD: THE PERFECT COLLAGE, LIKE the perfect crime, is the one that goes undetected.
Almost anyone who takes a little trouble can put two unrelated images together with an effect that is amusing or disturbing (or both).
It is the privilege of genius to suggest - as Max Ernst was able to do over a period of more than 50 years - that the wildest of incongruities can bespeak both a higher logic and a successful reordering of the experiences of every day.


Low-Fare Hunt Via London
LEAD: IF you want to do some traveling in Europe - for warmth or for more intense winter - and can move fast, you can get some excellent air-fare buys right now.
Early in January, Pan American started selling a deeply discounted ticket to London from New York for $298 round trip.
British Airways and Trans World Airlines matched it, and Delta, flying out of


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. At the end of last summer, I moved a small chest away from the wall and discovered a lot of mildew on the wall.
This is not an outside wall (the living room of another apartment is on the other side) and there are no water pipes inside the wall.
I no longer keep the chest flush against the wall and the mildew has not reappeared, although this part of the wall does look darker in some spots.


Redecorating for the Computer Generation
LEAD: Companies are sparing no expense to dress up their offices.
This year, factory sales of office furniture are expected to rise to $8.4 billion, double the $4.1 billion in revenues posted in 1982, the Business and Institutional Furniture Manufacturing Association, an industry trade group, reported.


Even Now, Hong Kong Is Unpracticed In Democracy
LEAD: ON almost every distant rock of empire - in India, in Africa, in the Caribbean - Britain tried as it withdrew from its possessions to leave a democratic system as its legacy.
But in Hong Kong, which is to be handed over to China in 1997, the British Government is critical of a democratic movement that has sprung up on its own, and it seems determined not to introduce a fully democratic system in the remaining years of its rule.


WHY CAN'T A ROBOT BE MORE LIKE A MAN?
LEAD: James Gleick's article ''Why Can't a Robot Be More Like a Man?'' (Dec.11), exhibited a fine touch of realism, technological insight and humor.


A Salvaged Coin From the Colonies
LEAD: ON Feb. 7, Christie's will auction a New England shilling, one of the many coins from the salvaged ship H.M.S.
Feversham lost in 1711.
One of the rarest coins of the auction, the plain New England shilling is also one of the first coins minted in the English American colonies.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 29, 1989
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, by Tom Wolfe. (Bantam, $5.95.) A bond trader caught in the jungles of New York.
2
6
ROCK STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $4.95.) Three performers in tinselly southern California.


The Sweet Prosciutto Of San Danieli, Italy
LEAD: AL VECIO MULIN (the old mill) in Gradisca d'Isonzo, about six miles from the Italian-Yugoslav border, is always crowded with local residents who stop in to share a bottle of wine and some typical Friuli fare.
The owner, Bruno Spessot, who turned the 200-year-old mill into an informal inn 25 years ago, offers top-quality hams, sausages and other cold cuts along with the local Montasio cheese and, from the nearby Collio wine region, tocai, pinot grigio and merlot.


New York's Planned Parenthood Chief Is to Retire
LEAD: When the United States Supreme Court issued its landmark 1973 ruling that women have a Constitutional right to abortion, Alfred F. Moran, executive director of Planned Parenthood of New York City, concluded that the battle had been won - for good.


Even Without Barkley, 76ers Overpower Nets
LEAD: When the Nets arrived at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight, they couldn't have asked for a better situation.


Ms. McCormick Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, Conn., Kathleen Ellen McCormick, the daughter of Nancy McCormick Rance of Huntsville, Ala., and the late Cyrus Ross McCormick of Albany, Ore., was married yesterday to John Franklin Rhodes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Rhodes of Westport.
The Rev.


Evidence Fails to Show Psychological Harm From Abortions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Dance; A Troupe's German Roots
LEAD: The Zeromoving Dance Company from Philadelphia is a group with a difference.
The second program of its New York engagement, which ends tonight, explained why the troupe attracts the curious and viewers interested in plain good dancing.


Q and A
LEAD:  Oxygen Aloft


Two Initiatives Under Way on Drugs and Alcohol
LEAD: THE concept of selling is so pervasive today - from toothpaste to political candidates - that it seems natural that the idea would be among the first things the leaders of two new alcohol- and drug-abuse prevention groups in Pleasantville would think of when considering programs to help them reach their objectives.


In a Burmese Town, a Voice of Fear
LEAD: The civil servant, surprised and tentative, invited his visitors to come in.
He said he would not speak of politics, because as a Government employee he was not supposed to take part in political activities.


Designs on A Landmark
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; Modern Works Inspired by the Past
LEAD: Mark Franko has often choreographed in Renaissance and Baroque styles.
But on Thursday night at the Washington Square Methodist Church, his company, Novantiqua, performed works by him to recorded music by Webern and Messiaen as well as Bach and Vivaldi and the program was essentially a modern-dance concert.


Steinberg Jury Asks Judge to Define Lesser Charge
LEAD: The jury in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg asked the presiding judge yesterday to define the elements of first-degree manslaughter, one of the lesser charges Mr.
Steinberg faces in the death of Lisa Steinberg.


Few Show Up For Workfare Jobs
LEAD: THREE weeks after introducing a ''workfare'' program that links welfare benefits to supervised work, county officials are finding that relatively few recipients are showing up for the program, despite the risk of losing their assistance.


Allison Shemitz Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvan R. Shemitz of Woodbridge, Conn., have made known the engagement of their daughter Allison Kate Shemitz to David Rounds Schieffelin, a son of G. Richard Schieffelin of New Haven and Billings, Mont., and the late Anne Rounds.
A September wedding is planned.


Alaska Cold Wave Is Endangering Life and Limbs
LEAD: For more than two weeks, Alaska has been gripped by a cold wave that has turned a shared adventure into a test of endurance.


Exhibition of Puppets Is Coming to Columbia
LEAD: An exhibition of puppets and masks from the Brander Matthews Dramatic Museum is to be on display in the Low Library Rotunda at Columbia University, 116th Street and Broadway, from Wednesday through Feb. 21.
The show, sponsored by the Oscar Hammerstein 2d Center for Theater Studies, includes Noh masks, dance masks from Java and Thailand, carnival masks from Latin America, French marionettes and shadow figures from several countries.


Soviet Openness Brings Poverty Out of the Shadows
LEAD: Valeriya Ionava struggles privately in her Moscow apartment to live on a monthly pension of less than $60.
Yelena Smolnikova has to skip meals so that her meager income can be stretched to buy warm clothes for her children.


Barbara Scanlan Wed To James B. Stevenson
LEAD: Barbara Leslie Scanlan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Scanlan of Fair Haven, N.J., was married in Rumson, N.J., yesterday to James Buery Stevenson, a son of Mrs.
Kenneth H. Stevenson of Rumson and the late Mr.
Stevenson.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal


Group Honoring Stalin Victims Seeks Legal Status
LEAD: A group dedicated to exposing Stalin's crimes, honoring his victims and eradicating lingering Stalinist practices moved today to legalize its standing and establish itself as a significant political force.


Carnegie Hall to Chinatown
LEAD:  Mixed Concert


Vermonters Fight to Save Battlefields
LEAD: They would seem to have nothing in common.
Pvt.
Elba Jillson fought for the Union in the Civil War.
Richard Henry Brooks, a Virginia slave, briefly served a Confederate officer in the field.


Venice
LEAD: To the Editor: My wife and I were recently in Venice, and although we had been forewarned, we found the high prices staggering.
After spending over $100 each for a few dinners and even lunches, we discovered Do Mori, a charming restaurant on the Giudecca owned and operated by two ex-waiters from Harry's Bar.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  Speed Skating  Jansen Takes 500-Meter Race: Dan Jansen of the United States won the 500-meter World Cup race yesterday and finished second to Uwe Jens Mey of East Germany in the 1,000-meter event at Miola di Pine, Italy.


'Billy Bishop' Musical: The Reality of Heroism
LEAD: IN June 1915, a 21-year-old Canadian named Billy Bishop set sail for England and for war.
He carried with him every young man's fantasy of romance and adventure.


New Curb on Ozone Pollution
LEAD: The Department of Environmental Protection today lowered the limit on vapor-producing ingredients in gasoline sold in New Jersey between May 1 and Sept. 15 to control worsening ozone pollution.
The new order limits volatility - a measure of gasoline's polluting potency - to nine pounds per square inch, compared to the 11.5 the state has averaged in recent summers, the department said.


The Cuckoos: The Bards of Avians
LEAD: THEIR repertory is musically varied but subject specific.
Their audiences are few but select.
Their name says all.
They are the Six Cuckoos.


Chinese to Eat In or Take Out
LEAD: THE trend toward ethnic take-out food continues unabated, attesting to our national hunger for dining diversity and for decent food that is reasonably priced and quickly prepared - by someone else.


Yanks List Tryouts
LEAD: As a result of the Yankees' determination to enter the 1989 season with the best possible pitching staff, seven pitchers, including some whose careers had seemed all but over, are getting a new chance to make their mark on the majors.
They have been invited to try out at the Yankees' major league training camp even though the team has 17 pitchers on the roster.


Support Groups Are Offering Embrace to Cocaine's Victims
LEAD: The tale that Martha told tumbled out in pieces, bits of a life breaking under an unbearable strain.
Her 31-year-old daughter, a crack user and a dropout from a local drug rehabilitation program, had moved her four children into Martha's apartment and resumed her old ways - sudden disappearances, long absences, stealing clothes, appliances, even her own children's pocket money.


PERSPECTIVES: Midtown Development; No Man's Land Breached on 45th Street
LEAD: THE past and the future are colliding on Broadway this year, and nowhere so dramatically as on West 45th Street.
As the construction of hotels, office buildings and retail space sets the stage for the new Times Square that will greet the 21st century, a close-up look at the projects in construction along a single street shows how the crosscurrents of law, business and public policy shape the growth of the city.


When Parrents Suffer the Adult Children
LEAD: RECENTLY, I read an article discussing how adolescence takes longer to go through these days.
According to the researchers, not until children reach their mid-20's are they able to properly separate from their parents and accept them as human beings.
Since our children range in age from 25 to 33, we know something about this phenomenon.


Filling a Void
LEAD: When Clemson takes on Duke in Durham, N.C., today, don't be surprised if Dennis Hopf is wearing the cleanest Tiger uniform.
Until yesterday, the 6-foot sophomore was the Clemson manager.
He was pressed into service for today's game to help fill the void created by the surprise suspension of seven Clemson players, including two starters, apparently for skipping study hall.


No Headline
LEAD: Members of the staff of the United States Embassy in Beirut locked Ambassador John McCarthy in his office for three hours today to press their demands for higher salaries.
A State Department spokeswoman, Nancy Beck, said Lebanese guards had carried out a ''work action,'' but declined to give details.


POSTINGS: Facelift on Lex; Gold That Faded
LEAD: The ugly duckling of Lexington Avenue, the 36-story office tower with the esthetics that everyone on the East Side loves to hate, is going to be given an $18 million facelift.
The building, at 575 Lexington at 51st Street, was erected in 1958 by Sam Minskoff &amp; Sons and faced with gold-colored aluminum to commemorate the company's 50th anniversary in the building business.


66 Appointed to Pulitzer Prize Journalism Jury
LEAD: Columbia University has named 66 newspaper editors, executives and others for the jury to nominate entries for the 1989 Pulitzer Prizes in journalism.


U Yan Naing, Burmese Dissident, 71
LEAD: U Yan Naing, one of Burma's ''Thirty Comrades'' who rebelled against British rule in World War II and led the country to independence, died today of a heart ailment.
He was 71 years old.


Evidence Fails to Show Psychological Harm From Abortions; History Misread Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


Research Looks Away From Laboratory Animals
LEAD: BENETTON, the Italian clothing chain, announces that it will no longer perform safety tests for new cosmetics and toiletries on animals.
A Cornell Medical College researcher gives up a $600,000 Federal grant for a study of barbiturate addiction that uses cats.
Noxell Corporation, the maker of Noxzema skin products and Cover


HOME VIDEO/NEW RELEASES
LEAD:  Die Hard  Starring Bruce Willis, Bonnie Bedelia, Clarence Gilyard Jr., Alexander Godunov, Alan Rickman.
Directed by John McTiernan. 1988.
CBS/Fox Video.  131 minutes. $89.98.
Closed captioned.
Rated R.


Anita A. Wager To Have a Bridal
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Wager of Pittsburgh of the engagement of their daughter, Anita Andrews Wager, to George Oliver Richardson 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richardson Jr. of Darien, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.


THE WORLD: Moscow Revisited; Back in the U.S.S.R., the New Ideas Are Visionary, but Not Very Visible
LEAD: THE Soviet Union is not the same place it was when I left in 1980.


Colder Than Brrrrrrrrr


Running in Place?
LEAD: If the political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. mounts a fourth campaign for the Presidency in 1992, it will probably involve very little travel.
Mr.
LaRouche was sentenced last week to 15 years in prison for his conviction last month on charges of scheming to defraud the Internal Revenue Service and deliberately defaulting on more than $30 million in loans from his supporters.


FICTION
LEAD:  HEART SONGS: And Other Stories.
By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $16.95.) The men in E. Annie Proulx's nine stories, who have come to northern New England to seek self-renewal by grouse hunting, trout fishing or folk singing, are as harried by misery as the people who live there.
Cut off from their spouses or harassed by their mothers and sisters, they are shy, battered, depleted men.


Guess Who'll Bail Out the Thrifts?
LEAD: Who is going to pay for the savings and loan fiasco - taxpayers or the banking industry?


Soviets Say Nuclear Warheads Were Deployed in Cuba in '62
LEAD: Soviet officials disclosed today for the first time that in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, Soviet nuclear warheads had already been deployed in Cuba and could have been launched at American cities within a few hours.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Jan. 1 with an article about Egypt identified a tomb incompletely and misstated its location.
It is that of Sennedjem, a necropolis worker, and is near the Valley of the Kings.
A map of Cairo with the article omitted the site of the newly opened opera house.
It is on the island of Gezira.


Jewish Institute to Aid South African Blacks
LEAD: A Jewish institute devoted to strengthening ties between black and Jewish Americans plans to present Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu with a $100,000 grant for training black South African medical workers.


Recasting The Mold In Theater
LEAD: BOSTON, Jan. 24 - As a boy, Daniel Kim dreamed of becoming an actor but was afraid his Asian background would bar him from many of the parts to which he aspired.


Prospects; Affirmative Action's Future
LEAD: Last Monday the Supreme Court made a ruling that invalidated a law in Richmond setting aside 30 percent of all municipal contracts for minority-owned companies.
The ruling by the Court cast doubt on other minority set-aside programs in more than 200 municipalities around the country.
Four experts look at the implications of the Court's decision for minority-owned businesses.


A SEASON OF INCONSISTENCY
LEAD: There is a large bulletin board in the rear of the Nets' locker room.
The coaching staff uses it to keep track of the National Basketball Association standing.


Question Of the Week; Is the Big East The Best Conference?
LEAD: Last year the Big East sent six teams to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, two others, UConn and Boston College, played in the National Invitation Tournament final, and only Providence (a Final Four team in 1987) sat home.
This year is no different.
All nine teams have overall winning records, and nationally ranked Syracuse already has three conference losses.


Panel Will Examine Land Use in Adirondack Park
LEAD: The president of the National Audubon Society, Peter A. A. Berle, will head a new state commission to plan the future of the Adirondack Park, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced today.


Outdoors; New Edition of Book on Tuna
LEAD: Whether you are a big-game angler, a student of fishes or simply one who is curious about the natural world, the recently published fourth edition of ''Tuna And Billfish'' by James Joseph, Witold Klawe and Pat Murphy will both delight and inform you.


A Barber's View On Licensing
LEAD: I enjoyed the Jan. 8 article ''Barbers Say 1984 Law Makes It Difficult to Do Their Business.'' I believe there are facets of this issue that should be brought to light.


STREETSCAPES: The Union Square Theater; The Ghost Behind a Huge Sign
LEAD: NOW covered by a huge McDonald's sign, the old Union Square Theater at 58 East 14th Street - usually described as the oldest such surviving structure in New York City - apparently had an intact Victorian theater interior walled off in 1936, when stores were inserted in the ground floor.
Now the owner, Philips International


A Fire Unit Counsels Troubled Young Arsonists
LEAD: Rupert Callender leaned over a small table in his makeshift trailer home, explaining to a visiting fire marshal why he thought his 8-year-old son Danny had burned down their ramshackle house in Little Neck, Queens, last month.


When Big-City Politics Shakes Up the Suburbs
LEAD: THE Democrats who became Republicans after they moved from New York City to the suburbs have found that their havens are suffering from many of the same problems they thought they had left behind.


Caveat Emptor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cornell Will Continue Selling Stock With South Africa Ties
LEAD: Cornell University trustees have voted to continue their three-year-old policy of selling off selected holdings in companies doing business in South Africa because of racial discrimination there.


A Debt to Pay at Fort Corchaug
LEAD: ON the afternoon of a chilly but pristine fall day, our caravan of government and private cars pulled up alongside a wide, peaceful creek on the North Fork.
We climbed out of our modern, climate-controlled cocoons for a moment to gaze through the almost golden vegetation, across the water to the place, ''the principal place'' as its people knew it hundreds of years ago.


Yes, There Is No Free Lunch
LEAD: I HAD heard all the stories: A friend whose purse was grabbed in Paris, a man who lost his wallet in London, another who had paid an exorbitant fare for a dizzying ride around the Etoile.
Thus alerted, I determined that none of the above would happen to me on my first trip abroad.


Tito's Retreat Goes Public
LEAD: ONE shouldn't really blame Comrade Tito too much.
Brioni, the cluster of small and verdant islands off the coast of Istria at the head of the Adriatic, is irresistibly beautiful.
And he was deserving of the Yugoslav nation's gratitude for having led its gallant struggle to throw off German occupation and Soviet dominance.


Smoked Foods Offer a 'Haunting Edge'
LEAD: SMOKING as a habit may be on the decline but as a flavoring it is more popular than ever.
Restaurant chefs are using smoked foods - meats, poultry, seafood, vegetables and cheeses - in a variety of dishes.
Many of the chefs are doing their own smoking with simple, improvised equipment.


Kabul's Long, Suspenseful Goodbye
LEAD: When night falls over this capital, Afghan soldiers, shabbily dressed, but armed with Russian-made Kalashnikov rifles, stop automobiles at every city block.


'The Romantic'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thrown for a Loss by Gift
LEAD: The man who gave the University of Notre Dame a sweater worn by the football legend George Gipp says he is stunned the university gave it away - even to Ronald Reagan.


Tower Is Initiated Into NATO Wrangling
LEAD: John G. Tower, the Secretary of Defense-designate, got a taste today of what his new job entails as defense experts and officials from across NATO wrangled at a seminar here over the future of an alliance increasingly at odds over the peace signals from the Eastern bloc.


Clone It
LEAD: To the Editor:


C.I.A. Investigating Contras' Use of Money
LEAD: In a move that appears to have been prompted by internal friction among Nicaraguan contra leaders, the Central Intelligence Agency has begun an audit of the rebels' use of money provided by the agency, Government officials said today.


Robert Duvall: The Actor As Chameleon
LEAD: ''MYSTERY - THAT'S THE key word about Bobby.
One thing he never talks about is his craft.
He never does - that one area is a closed door.'' That is the director Simon Wincer, speaking by phone from his cattle ranch in Mooroolbark, Australia, half a world away, about the American actor Robert Duvall.


Richmond
LEAD: To the Editor: In Joe Mysak's story on the Richmond building that served as the Confederate States' executive mansion (''Where Davis Led the Confederacy,'' Travel, Dec. 4) a guide explained that one of two Confederate banners decorating a mantel included so much white that it was redesigned so as not to be taken as a flag of surrender.


Japan Joins the Superconductor Fray
LEAD: Near rusting railroad yards and blackened smokestacks in this industrial town, Dr.
Akinobu Kasami and a team of 50 researchers are working to transform the theory of high-temperature superconductivity into the business of practical electronic products.


POSTINGS: Go West, Bargain Hunter; Discount District
LEAD: The success of warehouse outlet stores in the New Jersey Meadowlands about a mile west of the Lincoln Tunnel is leading to yet another one, on a three-acre site at the intersection of County Avenue and Metro Way in Secaucus.
The proposed warehouse would adjoin the Hartz Mountain Industries Harmon Cove development, one of several that together house more than 100 retail outlets selling clothing and housewares at better than bargain-basement discounts (60 percent below ordinary retail prices is not unusual).


Shh! Can You Hear The Crackle?
LEAD: WHEN Kellogg's created its hugely successful ad campaign that turned a whole generation of breakfast eaters on to the ''Snap, Crackle and Pop'' of Rice Krispies, it must have been a quieter time.
Morning munchers had to be able to hear not only one another talking, but also their cereal.
I think things have changed, and I don't think for the better.


At a Posh Club, Privilege of Membership Is Weighed Against the Real Life
LEAD: THE ball sailed slowly through the air on a high arc as it passed over 150 yards of water on its way to the green.
When I first hit the ball I simply wished it success in traversing the hazard.
However, as the shot unfolded my expectations soared as I realized that this single effort had the possibility of immortal greatness.


Question Of the Week; Is the Big East The Best Conference?
LEAD: According to a recent poll by The Associated Press, the Big East had four teams in the Top 20.
Only the Big Ten had more.
The four ranked teams from the Big East were Georgetown, Syracuse, Seton Hall and Providence.
Together, those teams lost only eight games, all to other Big East teams.
Outside the Big East, the combined record of these teams was 46-0.


California Bill Would Curb Cutting of Redwoods
LEAD: Citing accelerated cutting of redwoods by a lumber company, State Assemblyman Byron Sher says he will introduce legislation Monday to outlaw the practice of cutting down entire stands of ancient redwoods and impose civil fines of up to $50,000 for violations.


The Legacy of Revolution
LEAD: The French have launched a yearlong celebration of their Revolution's bicentennial.
It comes when the worth of revolution was never more in question.
In 1789 and after, they gave at least as many examples of the lasting damage and distress it causes as of the flowering of ideals it can release.


MONSTER OF ALL HE SURVEYED
LEAD:  SECRET AND SACRED  The Diaries of James Henry Hammond,  a Southern Slaveholder.
Edited by Carol Bleser.  342 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $22.95.


Improvisatitonal Games And Skills in New Haven
LEAD: AN improvisational revue, the theatrical equivalent of potluck, usually appears more useful as an exercise for actors than as an entertainment for audiences.
On the evidence of last Saturday night's performance, ''TBA: On Demand,'' the Ensemble Theater Company's evening of games and on-the-spot skits and scenarios, is no exception.


Movie Theaters Finding There is Safety in Numbers
LEAD: A FEW old-timers in Stamford have fond memories of the night of June 2, 1927, when the Palace Theater on Atlantic Street opened with ''Rookies'' starring Karl Dane, George K. Arthur and Marceline Day.
There was also a vaudeville show that included Dave Kramer and Jack Boyle, the ''Happy Go Lucky Boys,'' and the ''acrobatic sensations'' Janowski &amp; Company.


Review/Opera; 'Il Trovatore' Cast Changes
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera has packed up the immense pillars and omnipresent steps of its ''Trovatore,'' and sent it safely into storage.
At the final performance of the season, on Tuesday evening, there were three newcomers to the cast.


Christina Fiore Plans to Marry
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Fiore of New York of the engagement of their daughter, Christina Barbara Fiore, to Philip Van Munching, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Van Munching Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The couple plan to marry in October.


NORTHEAST JOURNAL
LEAD:  Former First Lady Stymied on Dunes


Truth - And Packaging
LEAD: To the Editor:


Summer Wedding For Patricia Dovi
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Sebastian F. Dovi Jr. of Moorestown, N.J., have made known the engagement of their daughter Patricia Anne Dovi to Harlan McBrier Kent, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Kent of Redrock, Pa., and Washington.
The couple plan to marry in August.


&gt;Comforting Young Victims Of AIDS
LEAD: A 14-month-old baby who looks half his age plays with a toy in a hospital bed while a nurse, Bessie Bryant, strokes his head.
The child's physical development has been impaired by the AIDS virus.


Whipping Post Is Proposed for Drug Dealing
LEAD: A bill introduced in the State Senate on Thursday would bring back public whipping as punishment for people convicted of dealing in hard drugs.


MAGICAL MYSTERY PILRIMAGE
LEAD:  THE SATANIC VERSES  By Salman Rushdie.  547 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Linda Black Is Married
LEAD: Linda Cabot Black, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Dudley Cabot of Weston, Mass., and Roger E. Clapp, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Furbush Clapp of Cleveland, were married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass.
The Revs.
Max Gaebler and Carl Scovel, Unitarian ministers, performed the ceremony at Cabot House at Harvard


UNDER THE SHADOW OF CANCER
LEAD: Eleanor Bergholz's article on breast cancer was honest and moving, but the story is incomplete.


FICTION
LEAD:  BLUE HEAVEN.
By Joe Keenan. (Penguin, Paper, $7.95.) Gilbert Selwyn is a broke, gay author with a heart of gold who is too lazy even to have writer's block.
Moira Finch is a broke, straight social climber with a heart of unalloyed steel who has a penchant for disastrous investments. ''Blue Heaven'' is their nuptial adventure story, following them as they embark on a marriage designed to swindle their rich but parsimonious families out of a fortune in wedding gifts.


CATERING TO THE BRIDE AND GROOM
LEAD: When a chef asks his sous chef for her hand in marriage, wedding plans become menus and grocery lists and recipes.
That's what happened when Ali Barker, then chef at the Union Square Cafe in New York, became engaged to Marcie Smith, his sous chef.
Of course, they would make all the food for the reception, not to mention the rehearsal dinner.


Conservationist's View on Ducks
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Laurels Reward Innovative Loudspeakers
LEAD: ONCE AGAIN, AS IN NINE previous years, the Grands Prix for audio have been announced.
Under the aegis of Audio-Video International, a leading trade journal, a jury of technical experts chose outstanding audio components of 1988 from a list of nominations submitted through a nationwide poll of audio dealers.


THE 99-YEAR ITCH
LEAD:  HONG KONG  By Jan Morris.  Illustrated. 359 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.


A Custom Dance Company With Genuine Swiss Parts
LEAD: FROZEN UNDER A BLANKET OF fresh snow, with its old town of pastel 16th-century houses nestled along the Rhine, Basel seems more like a sleepy Swiss town of Advent cards, where each window reveals a warm domestic scene, than a city where the arts are knit together in a powerful coalition that has made it a creative force in


The Bush View on AIDS: Money Will Tell Much
LEAD: AS he prepares his own battle plan for the war on AIDS, President Bush will be pulled in opposite directions.
Advocates for victims of the epidemic see a larger AIDS budget as a logical extension of the President's recent signals that he will pursue a gentler brand of Reaganism.
At the same time, some conservatives argue that the epidemic is being used to promote a liberal agenda that includes sex education, contraception, free needles for addicts and more rights for homosexuals.


Egypt
LEAD: To the Editor: I had an interesting experience discovering the Temple of Ptah at Karnak, mentioned by Paula Weideger (''Coping With Egypt on Your Own,'' Travel, Jan. 1).
After exploring Karnak for hours, long after the early morning throngs of guided tours had departed the heat of an October day, I was sitting in the cool shadows of the gigantic columns.


Sports of The Times; Three Cheers for the 3-Point Rule
LEAD: It was only a few years ago that the world fretted because professional basketball seemed to have gotten too big - not too big for its britches but too big for the court.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:  COE HALL CONCERTS  After some time off for holidaying, Friends of the Arts today continues Concerts at Coe Hall, its Sunday chamber-music series.
On hand to do the honors at 2:30 P.M. is Music Amici, an ensemble of strings, winds and piano.


Walesa Wants Talks to End Power Monopoly
LEAD: Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader, took the offensive against the Government today, pledging that his goal in coming talks with the authorities would be to dismantle their monopoly of economic and political power in Poland.


TALKING: Tie-In Mortgages; Broker Conflict At Issue
LEAD: A long-brewing controversy over whether brokers should place mortgages for home buyers may now be up to the incoming Congress to resolve.
Earlier this month, the Department of Housing and Urban Development decided not to issue new regulations to govern the practice and left the problem to be settled by legislation.


Montreal Revitalizing Old City for 350th Anniversary
LEAD: The district known as Vieux Montreal (Old Montreal or Old City) is being targeted for a major revitalization in time for the city's 350th anniversary in 1992.


Ruling Against T.W.A. In Suit by Ex-Workers
LEAD: Trans World Airlines is liable for civil damages to 3,000 former flight attendants who were replaced when they went on strike in 1986, a Federal district judge has ruled.


Don't Report On Steinbrenner
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Party of the First
LEAD: Ronald H. Brown, a former aide of Senator Edward M. Kennedy and, briefly, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, says he has enough votes to be elected chairman of the Democratic Party when it meets Feb. 10.
If so, the 47-year-old partner in a major Washington law firm will be the first black to lead a major American political party.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Boonton  $425,000  259 Rockaway Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 87-year-old Victorian; new kitchen, fireplace, patio, greenhouse; taxes $4,599.
Hawthorne  $214,900  32 North 19 Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; finished basement, hardwood floors, family room; taxes $2,652.


The Legacy Of Nikos
LEAD: EARLY IN MY 20-YEAR CAREER at the Williamstown Theater Festival, I was taking notes at a rehearsal of the balcony scene from ''Cyrano de Bergerac.'' The director turned away briefly from a spirited dialogue with Cyrano, Christian and Roxanne, steered me into a corner and whispered: ''O.K., Stephen - get rid of that person.


John Tower and The Revolving Door
LEAD: In hearings last week on his confirmation as Secretary of Defense, John G. Tower provided a glimpse of the lucrative world of consulting which many Government officials enter when they leave public life.
Mr.
Tower, who retired from the Senate in 1984, founded Tower &amp; Associates in 1986 and has since earned more than $750,000 in consulting fees from military contractors.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Vienna
LEAD: In front of the 840-year-old Cathedral of St.
Stephen, Vienna's geographic and historic center, a bulging structure of concrete, glass and bright metal is nearing completion amid a fierce debate.
Designed by the leading architect Hans Hollein, the new eight-story building, in bold contrast to the ancient church's Gothic lacework, will house 16 ground-floor stores, a gourmet market, offices and - what else ?


IRAN IS EXPANDING CHEMICAL STOCKS USED IN POISON GAS
LEAD: Working through its embassy in West Germany, Iran has secretly enlisted companies from Germany, Asia and the United States to expand its limited stockpile of the chemicals needed to make poison gas, according to Federal court records and American officials.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:  Literary Impact When Malcolm Cowley impulsively punched a Parisian cafe owner in the jaw, the effect on his French acquaintances was surprising.
He describes this in ''Exile's Return: A Literary Odyssey of the 1920s'' (Penguin).


Asbestos
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stone Carver's Magnificent Obsession
LEAD: In a cathedral with shrines to such eclectic groups as New York City firefighters and AIDS victims, a memorial exhibit has been opened to honor a homegrown artisan whose fluid stone carvings of demons, lion heads and African masks adorn the building's unfinished bell tower.


Mill Foresaw Results Of a Ban on Smoking
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Somers Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Emannuel M. Somers of Sands Point, L.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter Angela Jennifer Somers to Thomas Lawrence DiGaloma, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence R. DiGaloma of San Francisco.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Jill A. Siskind Is Married
LEAD: Jill Allison Siskind, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Siskind of Roslyn, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla., was married last night to Jeffrey Alan Marks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Marks of Searingtown, L.I., and Wilmington, Vt.
Rabbi Arnold Marans, assisted by Cantor Richard Berman, officiated at the Sephardic Temple of Cedarhurst, L.I.


Review of Bush's Opening Week: a Few 'Ripples' but No Bursting Bubbles
LEAD: George Bush ended his first week as President by having some friends over to the family quarters of the White House on Friday night for beef pie and a screening of the movie ''Working Girl.'' He warned his guests, a mix of prominent Democrats and Republicans, that he had heard that the film about a Wall Street


22 Assists for Douglas
LEAD: Sherman Douglas tied a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I record with 22 assists and Stephen Thompson scored a career-high 29 points tonight as 14th-ranked Syracuse rallied to beat No. 20 Providence, 100-96, in a Big East Conference game.


Alysheba Is Voted Top Horse of 1988
LEAD: Alysheba, who won major races from coast to coast last year and become the richest race horse ever, today was named thoroughbred racing's Horse of the Year for 1988.


Don't Blame Professors if Adjuncts Are Serfs; Administrations at Fault
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marilyn Forman to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Forman of Merrick, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marilyn Forman to Glenn R. Jacobowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Jacobowitz of Convent Station, N.J.
Ms.
Forman and her fiance, both fourth-year medical students at New York University, plan to marry in June.


Undercover in Corporate America
LEAD: At his last four jobs, the 27-year-old blue-collar worker quickly made friends with a crowd that liked to snort cocaine or smoke marijuana on lunch hours and coffee breaks.


Smoked Foods Offer a 'Haunting Edge'
LEAD: SMOKING as a habit may be on the decline but as a flavoring it is more popular than ever.
Restaurant chefs are using smoked foods - meats, poultry, seafood, vegetables and cheeses - in a variety of dishes.
Many of the chefs are doing their own smoking with simple, improvised equipment.


A Skewering of Reagan In a Surprising Forum
LEAD: Bucknell University is the kind of place that would put a twinkle in Ronald Reagan's eye.


Crunch Time
LEAD: ON SEPT. 20, 1985, AGENTS FROM the United States Customs Service and the Secret Service seized more than 25,000 imported, counterfeit watches from illicit distributors in South Florida.
Twenty-six people were subsequently arrested and convicted of trafficking in counterfeit merchandise.
However, it was more than three years before the case, known as Operation Stopwatch, wound down.


Getting a Handle on the New Mac
LEAD: When Apple Computer Inc. introduced a powerful version of the Mac II last year, it simply added an ''x'' to the name.
Hence the Mac IIx.
When Apple introduced a powerful version of the Mac SE at the Macworld exposition in San Francisco last week, it decided not to call it the SEx and settled on SE/30.


Some Sarcasm For Thompson
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Body on Subway Tracks
LEAD: The body of a Queens man was found yesterday on subway tracks near Grand Central Terminal, disrupting service on the Times Square Shuttle in both directions from 1 P.M. until about 2:45 P.M., a Transit Authority spokesman said.
The man was identified as Da-Ning Wang of 5112 Skillman Avenue.
His age was not available.


About Cars; A Multi-purpose Way to Harmony
LEAD: ''Here is the multi-faceted versatility of a van.
The seven-passenger room of a station wagon.
But here also are sporty handling and performance that come as a surprise in a vehicle as practical as this . . .
If you feel a special kind of harmony between man and machine at the wheel - it's no coincidence.


'Broadway Bound'
LEAD: ''BROADWAY BOUND'' is about a young comedy writer who gets the first big break that puts him on the road to becoming Neil Simon.
It is also about his restrictive family in Brighton Beach in the late 1940's, but mostly it turns out to be about his repressed mother who, in a revelatory mid-second-act monologue, recounts her moment in the spotlight: the night she danced with George


Israeli Army Lawyer Defends Use of Plastic Bullets
LEAD: The Israeli Army's chief attorney said today that the new orders for opening fire against Palestinians were not only ''manifestly legal'' but under the circumstances just and fair as well.


Correction
LEAD: The Personal Finance column on Jan. 8 described decreasing term life insurance incorrectly.
Benefits payable under this type of policy shrink each year; premiums remain the same.


Medicare Act: Expand Access
LEAD: Pat Costello Smith's article (''New Medicare Act Benefits the Aged, but They'll Foot the Bill,'' Jan. 15) was an excellent presentation of a complex and disturbing phenomenon.


Stockton Assists In Rise Of Jazz
LEAD: The last time the Utah Jazz saw the Knicks was on Dec. 15 at Madison Square Garden.


Tipping
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the response to a question on tipping (Q &amp; A, Jan. 1):


Mayflower Replica Repaired
LEAD: After a month of refurbishing, the Mayflower II is back in its berth at Plimoth Plantation. ''It came back yesterday, and it looks absolutely gorgeous,'' Troy Creane, a spokeswoman for the plantation, said Wednesday.
The replica of the Pilgrims' ship, visited by about 300,000 people a year, undergoes major repairs about every two years.


For American Technology, It's a Job Just to Keep Within Sight of the Japanese
LEAD: IF someone picked a single spot on the globe to mark the retreat of American high technology, it might be near this town on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, amid some flooded rice paddies.


'90 Census Will Count the Homeless
LEAD: ON a night in March 1990, scores of census takers will fan out, checking shelters, parks, bridges and abandoned cars.
They workers will be trying to obtain a count of the homeless population.


Celebrating Black History Month
LEAD: BLACKS of the past and present, famous and everyday, will be the focus in February at Connecticut libraries, colleges and cultural centers - as well as on television - as the state celebrates Black History Month.


UNDER THE SHADOW OF CANCER
LEAD: Eleanor Bergholz's grim story of psychological despair while ''under the shadow of cancer'' describes in detail her unusual, one-year siege of toxicity from the relatively mild CMF regimen for breast cancer.
Less than 20 percent of patients receiving CMF suffer the intense toxicity she describes.
Her negative attitude is evident in the use of the term ''poisons'' for chemicals that are, indeed, lifesaving.


The High Cost Of Scorecards
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


&gt;New Jersey Q &amp; A: Keith Ferris; Putting the Brush to Air History
LEAD: SOME artists believe in painting what they see, but that isn't good enough for Keith Ferris.
Mr.
Ferris, a 59-year-old aviation artist, seeks out an experience as well, and admirers say it is that attitude that helps to distinguish him from others in the field.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:  WIDOWS, by Ariel Dorfman.
Translated by Stephen Kessler. (Penguin, $7.95.) In a land resembling both contemporary Chile and ancient Greece, the unrecognizable bodies of the ''disappeared'' begin washing ashore, tormenting the living with memories of the terror of the secret police. ''The plot resounds with the moral thunder of classic drama, specifically that of 'Antigone' and 'The Trojan Women,' '' Alan Cheuse said here in 1983.


Jane Billington Wed To Johnson Flucker
LEAD: Jane Billington, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Billington of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Johnson Flucker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald L. Flucker of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Edward Prevost performed the Episcopal ceremony in the Princeton University Chapel.


Florida Condos
LEAD: To the Editor: Carol Cott Gross must have been in shock when she saw the response (Letters on Travel, Nov. 20) to her light article on condo living in Florida (Travel, Oct. 16).
She should be reassured that there are lots of Florida folks who do have a sense of humor.
I immediately clipped the piece to show to my dad.


With Concert Disks, Is It Live or Memories?
LEAD: IT WAS A BRIGHT, MUGGY day on July 12, 1987 when 71,597 other people and I crowded into Giants Stadium to hear Bob Dylan and the Grateful Dead.
There were clean-cut teen-agers in simulated 1960's tie-dyed shirts next to balding, long-term Dead Heads; from the first song, flailing dancers made the aisles impassible.


Inquiries Conclude 'Sex Club' at Children's Center Was Aberration
LEAD: The existence of a ''sex club'' among children at a New York State psychiatric center near Buffalo, a group that operated with the knowledge of the center's management, appears to have been an ''aberration'' limited to that institution.


Question Of the Week; Is the Big East The Best Conference?
LEAD: An argument could be made that the Big East is not only the best conference teamwise, but also coachwise.
Every season, Jim Boeheim, John Thompson, Rollie Massimino, and Lou Carnesecca field teams that have the potential to do anything.
With the emergence of Seton Hall, it seems that P. J. Carlesimo will soon join the elite.


Wave of Immigrant Children Strains Schools and Housing
LEAD: The latest wave of Latin American immigrants now flooding Texas, California and Florida includes an increasing proportion of women and children, a phenomenon that is already beginning to strain housing, education and social services in some cities.


Illinois Rallies in Second Half To Turn Back Indiana, 75-65
LEAD: Kenny Battle scored 22 points and led a second-half rally tonight as top-ranked Illinois beat No. 16 Indiana, 75-65, in a Big Ten Conference game.


UNDER THE SHADOW OF CANCER
LEAD: As the spouse of a cancer victim, I found Eleanor Bergholz's article very informative.
I had many questions about what my wife was experiencing.
She withdrew from me, keeping her pain and depression to herself, just as Ms.
Bergholz did.
I believe she thought she was saving me from suffering.
After reading this article, I was better able to understand what my wife was going through.


Only the Profile Is High
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New 'Boheme' Puts Spotlight On Americans
LEAD: DEUTSCHE GRAMMOPHON'S RECENT ''Boheme'' (423 601), recorded by Leonard Bernstein in Rome with a cast of young Americans, comes introduced in the program booklet by one of its producers with an oddly faint vote of confidence in the singers. ''Why an American cast for an Italian opera set in Paris?'' asks Hanno Rinke in an essay titled ''Bernstein's 'Boheme.


Remaking Kidder in G.E.'s Image
LEAD: The halls at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's oldest and most prestigious firms, are quiet.
Rows of darkened offices overlook New York Harbor and cardboard boxes are stacked on desks where secretaries once worked.
Where there was once the chaotic bustle of young men and women rushing around with papers in hand, there is now eerie stillness.


Jackson Leaves for Moscow; Hopes to Aid Armenia Victims
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson left for Moscow from New York yesterday to raise aid for Armenian earthquake victims and to assess Soviet human rights.


Pirates Soothe Coach's Anger
LEAD: Boston College provided little resistance against Seton Hall this afternoon.


REVERBERATIONS OF DALLAS
LEAD:  FINAL DISCLOSURE  The Full Truth About  the Assassination of President Kennedy.
By David W. Belin.
Illustrated. 249 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $19.95.
MAFIA KINGFISH  Carlos Marcello and the  Assassination of John F. Kennedy.
By John H. Davis.
Illustrated. 580 pp.


POSTINGS: Bedford Tradeoff; Higher Density for Affordable Rents
LEAD: An age-restricted garden apartment-town house complex is rising in Westchester's Bedford Hills as a result of a cooperative effort between officials of the Town of Bedford and a private developer.
Named Bedford Lake, the 140 units include 112 one- and two-bedroom condominiums ranging in price from $138,500 to $200,000 to be sold to people 62 years of age or older.


Rights Group Reports Continued Abuses in Cuba
LEAD: A human rights organization based in New York said today that while Cuba has improved its prisons and permitted some dissident groups to form, it continues to commit ''serious violations of human rights that victimize the whole Cuban population.''


Ms. Rommelsbacher to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rommelsbacher of North Bellmore, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Diane Gerette Rommelsbacher, to Timothy Joseph Frost, a son of Duaine Frost of Portland, Ore., and the late Vickie Frost.
Ms.
Rommelsbacher is the manager of mortgage-backed securities for DRI/McGraw Hill in New York..


Kathleen T. Milton Married To Lyndon Abell in Capital
LEAD: The marriage of Kathleen Therese Milton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Milton of Cheshire, Conn., to Lyndon Abell took place yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Tyler Abell of Washington.
The Rev.
Sanford Garner Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Dentist With a Heart SOME give candy for Valentine's Day, others flowers.
Fred Danziger, a dentist practicing in Long Beach, believes in giving a more substantial gift. ''I like to give health,'' he said.
And so on Valentine's Day, as on the past two Valentine's Days, Dr.
Danziger will offer free dentistry.


David C. Hutton Wed To Amanda T. Erskine
LEAD: The marriage of Amanda Tompkins Erskine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard W. Erskine of New York, to David Charles Hutton, a son of William Hutton of Dallas and the late Sandra Van Buskirk Hutton, took place yesterday at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.


Africa Must Control Population Explosion
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Synagogue's Wall Collapses
LEAD: The front wall of the Morgan Abraham Congregation's synagogue on the Lower East Side of Manhattan collapsed on Friday, causing no injuries but forcing the city to declare the building unsafe, the police said.
The exterior wall of the building, at 89 Attorney Street, fell at 5:10 P.M., the police said.The synagogue's Torah scrolls were being kept by the 7th Precinct.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/ANIMALS
LEAD:  A CARIBOU ALPHABET  Written and illustrated by Mary Beth Owens.
With a compendium by Mark McCollough.
Unpaged.
Brunswick, Me.:  The Dog Ear Press. $13.95. (All ages)  WILD ANIMALS OF AMERICA ABC  Written and with photographs by Hope Ryden.
Unpaged.
New York: Lodestar Books/  E.P.
Dutton.


German Concern Said to Aid Pakistan A-Weapons
LEAD: Pakistan has acquired from a West German company a plant for purifying a gas than can be used in nuclear weapons, a German prosecutor says.


Cooperate? Co-opt?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diagnosing Electrical Woes
LEAD: A VOLT-OHM meter is a battery-powered measuring device that is used to diagnose a wide range of household electrical problems.
With one, you can test batteries and switches, pinpoint causes of trouble in appliances and measure voltages at outlets.


St. James Enhances Its Series
LEAD: ST.
JAMES Episcopal Church, a small (capacity 150), steepled white frame building in North Salem, carries with it some 125 years of history; the parish it serves is one of the oldest in the country, predating the American Revolution by nearly a decade.
Two years ago, the church installed a 100-year-old pipe organ and decided to celebrate the new acquisition by beginning an annual chamber series.


Minority Works Challenge Boundaries
LEAD: THE setting is Snug Harbor's Newhouse Center for Contemporary Art, on Staten Island; the action is provided by the 14 artists contributing to ''Bridges and Boundaries.''


For Blacks, Slavery Cut the Branches of the Family Tree
LEAD: MY grandfather died several weeks ago in Mississippi.
When he was laid to rest, there were no heads of states or 21-gun salutes, for he was not a great man in the ubiquitous sense in which we judge greatness.


SMALL TOTS, BIG BIZ
LEAD: IN MAPLE HEIGHTS, OHIO, JUST OFF THE highway that leads to downtown Cleveland, at the building with the big red bell tower in front, a steady stream of traffic comes through every weekday morning from 6:30 to 9.
Mothers and fathers drive up, unbuckle the baby seats, lift their children out and take them inside to one or another of the long, open, bright rooms.


Picking the Right Guide for Tax Time
LEAD: The flurry of W-2 forms arriving in the mail ushers in that time of year when tax guides start to supplant other, more pleasurable, forms of leisure reading.
While nothing can make brushing up on the fine points of the tax law exactly fun, some guides can make it easier than others to wend your way through the maze of legislation, Internal Revenue Service rulings and court decisions.


Panel Seeking Accountability in Koch Talent Bank
LEAD: The New York State commission that spotlighted City Hall patronage two weeks ago is now trying to determine who was responsible for turning an agency with the announced purpose of providing jobs for women and minority-group members into a political job-placement operation.


Debate on Officer's Statuette
LEAD: A nine-inch statuette of the Virgin Mary that a police official put on his desk led to a dispute that has spiraled into a debate on the division between church and state.
The debate is being waged in an arbitration case.


Fending Off The Bats
LEAD: WHEN bats moved into Lorraine Disburger's house in New London, N.Y., last summer, she moved out.
The normally nocturnal bats were everywhere, even at midday: between the walls, beneath the floorboards, behind the curtains, scratching and wheezing and squeaking and swarming. ''It was like that movie 'The Birds,' '' she said at the time.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:  JERSEY CITY JAZZ  Noel Pointer, that charming master of the electronic violin, will join Lonnie Liston Smith, a keyboard musician, Saturday evening for a jazz concert at Jersey City State College.


Vail Attracts World Meet
LEAD: For the first time since 1950, the world Alpine ski championships, the ski-racing equivalent of the Super Bowl, will be held in the United States.


Smoked Foods Offer a 'Haunting Edge'
LEAD: SMOKING as a habit may be on the decline but as a flavoring it is more popular than ever.
Restaurant chefs are using smoked foods - meats, poultry, seafood, vegetables and cheeses - in a variety of dishes.
Many of the chefs are doing their own smoking with simple, improvised equipment.


Los Angeles Mayor, Once Challenged, Regains Stride
LEAD: As New York and Chicago enter heated and racially charged mayoral campaigns, a tall, mild-mannered man who just turned 71 is headed for easy re-election to a fifth term as Mayor of Los Angeles.
A black man who leads a city that is less than 20 percent black, he has no significant opposition in the


The Emperor's Umbrella
LEAD: John Tower, the Defense Secretary-designate, acknowledges what most strategic and scientific experts have long understood: President Reagan's Star Wars scheme for defending the American population from a nuclear attack cannot work.
Mr.
Tower, who as a Senator was a proponent of just such a defense, last week told a Senate committee, ''I think that's just unrealistic.


Plaza Theater
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I. Power Authority To Weigh Lilco Bankruptcy
LEAD: The nine directors of the Long Island Power Authority agreed today to investigate the effect of a possible Lilco bankruptcy on the company's one million customers.


POSTINGS: Land for Wildlife; Friends in Deed
LEAD: Before Roy and Marjorie Parsell died two years ago within a few months of each other, the couple - both were in their 90's and childless - wanted to make a donation to their adopted town of Madison, Conn.
They had moved there in 1972 after Mr.
Parsell retired as a patent attorney at the old Winchester Arms plant in New


Reporter's Notebook; In Jersey, Two Weeks of Woe Hound Russo
LEAD: Things might have gone worse for the President of the New Jersey Senate over the past two weeks, but it's hard to imagine how.


Don't Blame Professors if Adjuncts Are Serfs; Cry Out Against It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance; The Very Essence of Divertissement
LEAD: The New York City Ballet presented an evening of mostly happy, giddy fare on Tuesday at the New York State Theater.
There was Balanchine's delectably mad ''Donizetti Variations'' to begin and ''The Concert,'' Jerome Robbins's comic view of a concert audience's fantasies and manners, to bring the program to a spirited close.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: 'Speciesism' Explored; But Are Some More Equal Than Others?
LEAD: FOR months, supporters of animal rights picketed, telephoned and wrote letters excoriating the experiments of Dr.
Michiko Okamoto, a scientist at Cornell Medical College.
When she gave up the experiments, which used cats to study drug addiction, the protests stopped.


Approaching Kennan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Congress Says: A Commission Made Us Do It
LEAD: IT may not be the noblest form of democracy, but government by commission does offer certain advantages.
In the last month, independent commissions, set up by Congress or at its direction, have taken care of several thorny tasks that seemed impervious to conventional politics.


Sculptural Links in the Chain of Urban Events
LEAD: FEW THINGS ARE AS DESIRABLE to integrate with cities as sculpture, and as difficult.
All too often public sculpture seems an afterthought, a punctuation mark added, like an exclamation point, at the last minute for extra pizazz.
Who could not say this of even the best of Alexander Calder's stabiles, like the one in Chicago that sits in front of the great Federal Center by Mies van der Rohe, or of works like Dubuffet's ''Four Trees'' in front of 1 Chase Manhattan Plaza in lower


Joy and Pain
LEAD: In a church where bishops are considered the successors to the apostles of Christ, and where some members are still unreconciled to the 1976 decision to ordain women as priests, naming a woman as bishop was not done lightly.
But last week, after months of debate that sometimes verged on schism, the Episcopal Church approved the consecration of the Rev.


Polly Egan Wroe To Wed in June
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Patricia Pettigrew Wroe of Weston, Conn., of the engagement of her daughter, Polly Egan Wroe, to John H. Knowles Jr., the son of Edith LaCroix Dabney of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Dr.
Knowles.
The couple plan to marry June 3.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester; Trolley Barn Switches to Another Track
LEAD: IN 1866, the Norwalk Horse Railway Company was established in a new downtown brick terminal and storage barn.
Through its arched bays passed a fleet of red plush-seated trolley cars and the horses that drew them.


A Public-TV Station Spins a Comeback Story
LEAD: FOR A PUBLIC-TELEVISION station that was almost bankrupt seven years ago, KCET is celebrating its 25th anniversary in style.
From ''Secret Intelligence'' - its current four-hour series on the underbelly of American espionage that documents United States attempts to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro - to a new production of ''A Raisin in the Sun,'' KCET is flaunting its resurrection.


IN THE REGION: Long Island; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Bayport  $110,000  405 Middle Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining area, sun porch, partial basement; taxes $2,700.
Massapequa  $385,000  10 Canal Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old waterfront brick ranch; fireplace, 110 feet of bulkheading, 2-car garage; taxes $8,500.


Pas de Deux
LEAD: To the Editor: Nothing reminds me more of the old Alphonse and Gaston routine than the Whitney's duo of Breuer and Graves  [ ''The Whitney Paradox: To Add Is To Subtract,'' Jan. 8 ] .
The two Frenchmen of old, simultaneously gesturing grandly in order to allow the other to pass first, always wound up slamming into one another as they both conveyed false gestures of yielding while truly feeling entitled to enter a room before the other.


Mementos to Preserve The Record of Anguish
LEAD: The threadbare woolen jacket that William Luksenburg wore as a prisoner in a Nazi concentration camp has been hanging in the back of a closet in his home for 40 years.
This month, Mr.
Luksenburg took the jacket out and brought it to the new Holocaust museum being built here on the National Mall.


TROUBLE IN THE FORM OF A REDHEAD
LEAD:  HOW I GOT HIM BACK  Or, Under the Cold Moon's Shine.
By Valerie Sayers.  300 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $17.95.


A CHINOPHILE AMID THE LEISURE SLACKS
LEAD:  HOLIDAYS IN HELL  By P. J. O'Rourke.  257 pp.
New York: A Morgan Entrekin Book/  The Atlantic Monthly Press. $16.95.


BROWN-BAGGING IT TO BUCKINGHAM
LEAD: Russell Baker's article ''Brown-Bagging It to Buckingham'' (Jan. 1), prodded my memory to relive the jubilation of Coronation Day, 1953.


Teamsters Said to Reject Offer in Takeover Suit
LEAD: Leaders of the teamsters union today rejected a Government proposal to settle a racketeering suit that contends there is mob-sponsored corruption in the nation's largest union and that seeks to oust its top officials, union sources said.


Police Officers' Own Rights Are Not So Easy to Define
LEAD: THE question of whether the public weal outweighs the rights of public workers has been aboil for some years, drawing fresh fuel from the Reagan Administration's recurrent proposals to require polygraphs and random drug tests for Federal employees.


Of Art, Commerce And Mayors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week; Is the Big East The Best Conference?
LEAD: Ever since the Big East put three of four teams in the Final Four, the conference has been the class of all conferences.
The competition level from top to bottom is pure entertainment, evidenced this year with unranked teams now in the Top 20 - Seton Hall and Providence - while the other powers are among the best.


Many Memorial Gifts Sent to Neediest Cases
LEAD: On the national day marking the Rev.
Martin Luther King's 60th birthday earlier this month, Margaret Lalor of Glens Falls, N.Y., sent her first gift to The New York Times Neediest Cases.


Help Wanted: Male Dancers From America
LEAD: LOOK AT THE PHOTOGRAPH ON THIS page and you might muse upon the fact that all three men, still in their 20's, were trained in Europe, while the women are American.
Yet, all eight dancers are performing in an American company, the New York City Ballet.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the Los Angeles TV station KCET gives an outdated identification for Bruce L. Christensen; he is president of the Public Broadcasting Service.
The article and a caption give an incorrect day for the American Playhouse presentation of ''A Raisin in the Sun''; it will be shown at 9 P.M.


Suspected Mugger Is Beaten by Crowd of Hasidim
LEAD: A group of Hasidic Jews last week severely beat a homeless man suspected of robbing a Hasidic man in a Brooklyn housing project, the police said yesterday.


Sound Cleanup Cost: Billions, Not Millions
LEAD: It will not cost ''millions'' of dollars to clean up Long Island Sound, as Elex Ingersoll says in an appeal for public support for the task  [ Opinion, ''Resolutions: For 1989, Clean Up Long Island Sound,'' Jan. 15 ] .
According to Congressman George J. Hochbrueckner, the total cost, including upgrading old sewage plants and building new ones on both sides of the Sound, will be 10 to 15 billion dollars.


BUSH IS BEGINNING TO SET OWN COURSE
LEAD: President Bush is publicly and quite consciously distancing his week-old Administration from that of his predecessor, senior politicians of both parties have concluded, even though Ronald Reagan left town with his remarkable popularity intact after eight years in office.


POST-MORTEM POSSIBILITIES
LEAD:  FIVE SEASONS  By A. B. Yehoshua.
Translated by Hillel Halkin.  359 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $19.95.


Value of Foreign Disaster Relief Is Questioned
LEAD: Despite worldwide eagerness to provide medical aid to victims of natural catastrophes, assistance flown in from far away has generally proved of little value, according to reports presented this week to a workshop at the United Nations.


Why Trade Remains a Jumble
LEAD: Early this month the Customs Service issued a ruling to increase tariffs tenfold on imported vans and sports-utility vehicles.
The decision, which would give added protection to American manufacturers, was chiefly designed to end a tariff classification ambiguity and harmonize American procedures with those of other countries.


Some Basic Facts On the Use of Flash
LEAD: THOSE of us who watched the Super Bowl on television last Sunday were witness to several special photographic effects.
For starters, thousands of fans in the stands fired their flashes into the air at the opening kickoff.
I presume this was pre-arranged by the broadcasting powers-that-be to provide a nice glitter around the players, since none of the exposures has a chance of turning out.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Breaking Barriers Again


Tit for Tat
LEAD: Things have a way of happening to people who offend John Gotti, who is reputed to be head of the nation's largest organized crime group.
So when a restaurant run by a colleague of Mr.
Gotti's was vandalized in 1986 after the owner declined to pay a bribe demanded, authorities said, by an official of the carpenters' union, there was immediate speculation that the labor leader, John F.


Contemporary American Works and Salvador Dali
LEAD: IN 1963, Larry Aldrich put up for auction paintings and drawings that he had been amassing since 1937.
Most were European - Picassos, Miros, Vuillards, Dubuffets, a Monet ''Water Lillies'' and an early Matisse landscape - but there were exceptions, like the circa 1949 de Kooning of two women.


Bush Finds Social Issues Can Shorten A Honeymoon
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH's first week in office was supposed to highlight ethics in government, good will in Congress, congratulations from abroad and a feeling of national cheerfulness.
But a shower of social and economic debates dampened the careful programming, demonstrating that deep disagreements over domestic priorities can be set aside only briefly for initiation rituals like the Democratic leaders' bearing gifts of pork rinds and hot sauce to the new


Directions
LEAD: To the Editor: While I couldn't find my way around upstate New York from the position of the sun, as James Howard Kunstler claims he can (''Finding Your Routes,'' Travel, Jan. 8), I can find my way around a stage.
Stage right and left are not, as he maintains, referred to from the audience's point of view but from the actor's.


THE REGION: Promises, Promises; When Koch Campaigns, The Possibilities Are Elastic
LEAD: THIS year's campaign for Mayor of New York may well turn on issues at once daunting and inescapable: drugs, homelessness, the sorry state of the schools and, perhaps foremost, the persona of the three-term incumbent, Edward I. Koch.


Special Prosecutor Is Sought In Shooting by Police Officer
LEAD: A group of elected officials and clergy in Brooklyn has called for a special prosecutor in the fatal shooting of a black man by a white off-duty police officer in a dispute over a double-parked car.


UNDER THE SHADOW OF CANCER
LEAD: Cancer treatment is not in what Eleanor Bergholz calls ''a sorry state.'' It saves the lives of about 40 percent of those who have the disease.


For Big Crowd, a Big Upset By L.S.U.
LEAD: Before Louisiana State's game with Georgetown today, there were suspicions that Chris Jackson, the Tigers' outstanding freshman guard, was a regional phenomenon at best, more hype than substance.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Wilmington, Del.; At 25 Stories, It's the Tallest
LEAD: ATER being vacant for four years, one of Wilmington's premier pieces of commercial real estate is about to be developed with a $70 million high-rise thrift headquarters.


Review/Opera; At the Met, 'Don Carlo,' Verdi's Study of Conflict
LEAD: ''Don Carlo,'' in many ways the most dramatically challenging of Verdi's operas, can also be the most rewarding when everything meshes.
The work, a dark study in insoluble conflicts - church versus state, friendship versus duty, love versus jealousy - returned to the Metropolitan Opera repertory on Friday evening in John


Africa Must Control Population Explosion Reaction to Slavers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lucinda Jenney, Actress in 'Rain Man,' Is Married to John Henry Swanger 3d
LEAD: Lucinda Kingsbury Jenney, the daughter of Judy Atterbury-Jenney of New Canaan, Conn., and La Madera, N.M., and Ralph Royal Jenney of McLean, Va., and Edgartown, Mass., was married yesterday to John Henry Swanger 3d, a son of Julianne Clarke of Chester Springs, Pa., and Mr.
Swanger Jr. of Lancaster, Pa.


Reviews/Music; 20th-Century Piano Music
LEAD: Tuija Hakkila, a pianist from Finland, offered a well-chosen and persuasively played program of 20th-century music in her New York debut recital Thursday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.


Carl Furillo, 1922-1989
LEAD: Gil Hodges was the first to go.
Then Jackie Robinson.
Next after our brief remission from death, Billy Cox.
And suddenly there stood a journalist asking Pee Wee Reese, ''How does it feel to be the last person alive from the great Brooklyn Dodger infield?''


Colleges Widen Their Job Choices
LEAD: FOR thousands of people, college does not mean four or more years of classroom study to obtain a bachelor's degree in English or a master's in engineering.
It means investing six months, a year or, tops, two years to learn a trade.


AN ARDOR TO MATCH DIXIE'S
LEAD:  ''A PEOPLE'S CONTEST''  The Union and Civil War, 1861-1865.
By Phillip Shaw Paludan.
Illustrated. 486 pp.
New York: Harper &amp; Row. $27.95.


Q and A
LEAD:  Renting in a Co-op


Once More, the Old South in All Its Glory
LEAD: IN 1939, IT WAS THE MOST TECHNICALLY sophisticated color film ever made, but by 1987 ''Gone With the Wind'' looked more like ''Confederates From Mars.'' Scarlett and Rhett had grown green and blue, a result of unstable film stocks and generations of badly duplicated prints.
Hair styles and costumes, once marvels of spectral subtlety, looked as though captured in Crayola, not


LET THE WORLD SAY 'AMEN'
LEAD:  MANY MANSIONS  A Christian's Encounter With Other Faiths.
By Harvey Cox.  216 pp.
Boston:  Beacon Press. $18.95.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Lease Feuds; Renovation Often Leads to Tenant-Owner Disputes
LEAD: WHEN a commercial tenant watches his landlord disregard the spirit or the letter of their lease agreement, rancor builds quickly.
And any landlord becomes equally upset when a tenant tries to withhold rent or sidestep restrictions incorporated into a lease.


Midlife Exhilaration
LEAD: IN TRADITIONAL CULTURES, some women benefit from aging.
According to the anthropologist Judith K. Brown, they acquire the authority and control and freedom they haven't had before.
But just when I was launching into my own cross-cultural comparisons, wondering, ''Us, too?'' Dr.
Brown goes on to say in her book, ''In Her Prime,'' that ''Although American women (in their middle years) are not as sinister or pitiable as they have been portrayed, they do not share all the advantages enjoyed by matrons in nonindustrialized societies.


Making Pianistic History With Prokofiev
LEAD: AT FIRST IT SOUNDS slightly peculiar to hear Barbara Nissman proselytize for Prokofiev's piano music as if the Russian composer were a new discovery.
Prokofiev is hardly unknown - ''Peter and Wolf,'' the ''Classical'' Symphony and ''Lieutenant Kije'' Suite are among the most often played of all 20th-century classics.


UNDER THE SHADOW OF CANCER
LEAD: Eleanor Bergholz's article ''Under the Shadow of Cancer'' (Dec. 11), said so much so well.
To a person who has been there, it all struck home.
I want to tell Ms.
Bergholz that some of the pain, the sensitivities about and toward others, will fade -though no feelings ever leave completely.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
LEAD:  Branford, Conn.  $225,000  99 Windmill Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 48-year-old colonial; skylights, family room in basement, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,728.
East Hartford, Conn.  $128,000  63 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; new kitchen, enclosed porch, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,266.


A Bit of Slinky
LEAD: Sling-back pumps by Valentino establish the delicate, sexy look of his spring-summer couture collection, shown in Paris this week.


Mixed Verdict Is Given In S. Carolina Slaying
LEAD: Noah Robinson, a Chicago millionaire, was sentenced to the maximum 10 years in prison today after being found guilty of a felony in connection with the attempted murder of a woman who witnessed a killing.


Reliable Sources For Quality Seeds
LEAD: THIS is a good month to schedule commercial tree work: arborists can prune to shape overgrown trees or cut down unwanted specimens that are crowding the landscape; use deciduous tree logs for firewood, but caution on using conifer logs in the fireplace or woodstove.
Indoors start seed of impatiens, snapdragons, petunias, fibrous begonias, calendula and geraniums.


Israel Reviews Military Tactics, and Sees Only Defiance
LEAD: AFTER 408 days, 6,000 arrests, at least 361 deaths and many thousands of injuries, the Palestinian uprising still rumbles steadily along, barely deterred by Israel's ever-changing tactics for suppressing it.
But now for the first time, Israeli Army officers as well as other leading officials are acknowledging with frustration and despair that nothing they can do will end it.


Eleanor B. Smith To Wed in June
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Philip B. Smith of Darien, Conn., of the engagement of their daughter Eleanor Batterman Smith to Kenneth Alden Southworth 4th, the son of Mrs.
Morgan Kiker Jr. of Andover, Mass., and Mr.
Southworth 3d of Edgartown, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.


Back to Basics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cambodian War Seen Through Cambodian Eyes
LEAD: JUST 30 FEET AWAY, IN THE SUN-FLECKED shadows of the Cambodian jungle, was the sight that locals and visitors most dread: crouched, aiming his rifle, a teen-ager in dirty black pajamas and a red-checked scarf; nearby were four other Khmer Rouge guerrillas, in black with checked scarves, darting and dodging behind trees, guns pointed.


MURDER IN BELLEVUE
LEAD:  PRIMAL SCENE  By Yale Kramer.  381 pp. New York:  Arbor House/  William Morrow.


Opera as an Adventure
LEAD: FOR NEW YORK - A CITY notably more conservative in operatic matters than comparable musical capitals around the world - Thursday night will represent a triple-barreled opera adventure.
The always adventurous Brooklyn Academy of Music opens its first BAM Opera season with the Welsh National Opera, one of the most advenTurous repertory opera companies in the world, in its new production of Verdi's ''Falstaff'' overseen by one of Europe's leading directors, Peter Stein, who until a few years ago headed one of


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. At the end of last summer, I moved a small chest away from the wall and discovered a lot of mildew on the wall.
This is not an outside wall (the living room of another apartment is on the other side) and there are no water pipes inside the wall.
I no longer keep the chest flush against the wall and the mildew has not reappeared, although this part of the wall does look darker in some spots.


Carey Schach Plans to Wed
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
William O. Schach of Pittsburgh of the engagement of their daughter, Carrington Coburn Schach, to Daniel Covington North, a son of Judge and Mrs.
John C. North 2d of St.
Michaels, Md.
The couple plan to marry in May.


SALMAN RUSHDIE: FICTION'S EMBATTLED INFIDEL
LEAD: BRICK LANE, IN LONDON'S EAST END, IS A neighborhood peopled by those whom the city never expected to accommodate.
It is a neighborhood of Asians - as they are called by the English, who are comfortable still with the old colonial term that did not distinguish among the many peoples east of Europe.


The End of Ideology
LEAD: Nearly 30 years ago, in ''The End of Ideology,'' Daniel Bell wrote that the universalist political ideas of the 19th century were exhausted.
Marxism in particular.
Its premises about the crisis of capitalism and the superiority of socialist organization had simply not squared with reality.


Museums That Span Mexico's History
LEAD: WHEN Mexico City had money, about a century ago under the brief rule of Maximilian and later under President Porfirio Diaz, it was spent on luxurious parks, vast esplanades and a grand avenue designed to rival the Champs-Elysees.
Today these remnants of elegance remain in the city's center, and it is here that three museums of exceptional quality - the Templo Mayor (Great Temple) Museum, the Franz Mayer Museum and the Centro Cultural - have recently opened.


Sherrill Paid Player
LEAD: A university investigation has confirmed that Jackie Sherrill, who resigned as the Texas A&amp;M football coach last month, gave $1,500 to a former player, but the investigators said they found no evidence that the payments had been hush money.


Bill to Arm Guards at Malls Is Debated
LEAD: CRIME is on the rise at shopping malls throughout the state, law-enforcement officials say.
But they say that coping with the increase can be better accomplished by improved training of security guards, not by arming them.


Adult Braces for the Future
LEAD: AS a child, nothing caused me to tremble more than the pronouncement that it was time for my regular visit to the family dentist.


Chamber and Orchestral at Yale
LEAD: YALE UNIVERSITY will provide a bountiful array this week, starting Tuesday at 8 P.M.
The trio of David Golub, pianist; Mark Kaplan, violinist, and Colin Carr, cellist, will play Beethoven, Brahms and Schubert at Sprague Hall (432-4158).
On Wednesday at 12:30 P.M., the Essex String Quartet, who hold fellowships, will give a short and free lunchtime concert at the Center for British Art.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week; What Do The Mets Need to Add For 1989?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:  SPORTING SCENE  The first of what is expected to be a yearly Sportsmen's Exposition is to be held at the County Center in White Plains Thursday through next Sunday.
More than 175 booths will display fishing tackle, hunting gear and guns, all-terrain vehicles, trailers, four-wheel-drive vehicles, camping equipment, white-water rafting boats and other types of recreational craft and log homes.


Cancer: Trying to Get An Honest Answer
LEAD: A FEW months ago I had a mastectomy, but three weeks after that I celebrated. ''No chemotherapy needed,'' said my doctor, the department head of breast surgery at one of New York's major hospitals. ''No lymph nodes were involved, according to pathology, so you're home free on that score.''


Diagnosing Electrical Woes
LEAD: A VOLT-OHM meter is a battery-powered measuring device that is used to diagnose a wide range of household electrical problems.
With one, you can test batteries and switches, pinpoint causes of trouble in appliances and measure voltages at outlets.


Review/Ballet; Multifaceted 'Interplay'
LEAD: By JACK ANDERSON


The End of RICO
LEAD: Back in 1969, when law 'n' order was a sexy issue, we all had this great idea: Congress would pass and the President would sign a law making it a crime for mobsters to take over legitimate businesses.
That new legal weapon would make it possible, we told each other, for crusading prosecutors to break the back of organized crime.


Books of The Times; 10 Heeders of the Call to Make It New
LEAD:  The Modern World  Ten Great Writers  By Malcolm Bradbury  Illustrated. 294 pages.
Viking. $18.95.


Bonn Vows Inquiry on Charges Involving Iran Gas
LEAD: A West German Foreign Ministry official said today that the Government would thoroughly investigate assertions that Iran had used its embassy in Bonn to arrange supplies for the production of poison gas.


U.S. Rules on Japanese 'Dumping'
LEAD: The Commerce Department ruled on Thursday that Japanese all-terrain vehicles were being sold in the United States at less than their fair value and proposed that anti-dumping duties be imposed to eliminate the price advantage.


'62 MISSILE CRISIS YIELDS NEW PUZZLE
LEAD: Leading figures in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis ended an unusual meeting here this weekend having resolved some of the mysteries about that autumn of nuclear brinksmanship, but having added at least one puzzle: Did Fidel Castro urge Nikita S. Khrushchev to fire nuclear weapons at the United States?


Butter: To Tibetans, An Ancient Art Form


Bhutto's Party Suffers Blow in Key Elections
LEAD: The political opposition in Pakistan made a strong showing this weekend in the first test of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's leadership since national elections in November.


Legality and Morality of Patronage Are Both Open to Question
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bank Closings Discriminate, Report Asserts
LEAD: Commercial bank-branch closings in the New York metropolitan region over the last three years have made it more difficult for blacks and other minorities to gain access to banking services, according to a study released yesterday.


9 Canadians Die in Plane Crash
LEAD: A military transport carrying 18 Canadian Forces soldiers to the United States Army's ''Brim Frost'' exercises crashed late today at Fort Wainwright, killing at least nine aboard, the authorities said.


For Insider Dinner, Bush, Well Done
LEAD: It is an elite Washington club open to men only and with a number of political heavyweights as members, a tradition of tongue-in-cheek humor and a motto that in Latin translates roughly, ''He who picks up the check is blessed.''


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Wednesday misidentified the headquarters city of the Irwin Company, a consulting concern.
It is Los Angeles.


R. L. Knudsen Dies; Photographer Was 61
LEAD: Robert LeRoy Knudsen, a White House photographer from 1946 until 1974, died of a heart attack Friday at the Bethesda Naval Hospital in Maryland.
He was 61 years old and lived in Annandale, Va.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article Saturday about President Bush's endorsement of a Congressional pay raise misattributed a remark defending the Speaker of the House, Jim Wright.
It was another Democratic leadership aide, not Mr.
Wright's press secretary, who said it was unfair that ''people have been laying it all at the foot of the Speaker.


Tax Watch; C.P.A. Calculates 13 Brackets Now
LEAD: WHEN the Tax Reform Act of 1986 was still on the Congressional drawing boards, proponents discussed simplification of individual returns as a major goal.
But as soon as it was passed, tax professionals were quick to contend that it was really tax complication.
Now, Joel S. Isaacson, a certified public accountant who is in charge of personal financial planning for Weber, Lipshie &amp;


Woman and Boy Die In a Fire at a House
LEAD: An 11-year-old boy and a 24-year-old woman died of smoke inhalation yesterday morning in a small fire at their house in Brooklyn, the police said, but they were not discovered until family members went upstairs to awaken them for church.


Urge to Help Neediest Cases Spans Several Generations
LEAD: Following in her father's footsteps, a daughter of the actor Paul Newman, who did not want to be named, sent a contribution of $2,000 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
A similar gift of $2,000 came from Timothy Hotchner, 17 years old, son of A. E. Hotchner, the writer and a neighbor of the Newmans in Westport,


Market Place; Replacing Shares In Index Funds
LEAD: RUNNING an index fund would seem to be a dull way to make a living.
But appearances can be deceiving, and last week index fund managers made big decisions that may have played a significant role in sending blue-chip stock prices up sharply.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Cincinati's Super Bowl
LEAD: GEORGE BLAKE, the editor of The Cincinnati Enquirer, does not usually count himself among the bettors on major sporting events, but recently he wagered $3,740 that the Cincinnati Bengals would make the Super Bowl in Miami.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 29, 1989:  MONDAY  Boeing Co  Consol Freightways  Foster Wheeler  Kentucky Utils Co  TUESDAY  Airborne Fght Corp  Duke Pwr Co  McDonald &amp; Co Invts Inc  Philadelphia Subn Cor  UGI Corp  USX Corp  Weis Mkts Inc


Israel Releases a Major Palestinian From Detention in the West Bank
LEAD: The army released a leading Palestine Liberation Organization figure from prison today in an apparent attempt to promote the growth of a local Palestinian leadership that might one day enter negotiations with Israel.


Spanish Banks Are Bracing for 1992
LEAD: A year ago executives at Spain's top seven banks had one concern: that merger fever could make them all takeover targets.


Sports World Specials; Hidden Talent
LEAD: When National Basketball Association scouts scour college campuses in search of a center or power forward, their stops usually include Chapel Hill, N.C., Ann Arbor, Mich., and Lexington, Ky.


Guard and Cleaner Are Suspended In Sexual Assault Case at Hospital
LEAD: A security guard and a cleaning aide at the Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan were suspended without pay last week after a psychiatric patient there said they had sexually assaulted her, a spokeswoman for the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday.


A New Ski Binding
LEAD: rrA new ski binding designed with a sliding heel is in the wings for the downhill ski market next season.


O'Meara Wins With Birdie at 18
LEAD: Mark O'Meara, who had not won on the PGA Tour since having consecutive triumphs at the 1985 Bing Crosby Pro-Am and Hawaiian Open, rolled a 10-foot birdie putt right into the center of the 18th cup today to beat Tom Kite by a stroke in the current version of the old Bing Crosby: the $1 million A.T.&amp;T.


Review/Theater; Right-Thinking Ingenuousness Cleans Up a Nation
LEAD: Theatergoers who were born yesterday can only speculate about why Garson Kanin's ''Born Yesterday'' caused a sensation on Broadway in 1946.
The play's flat new revival at the 46th Street Theater, enlivened solely by Madeline Kahn's game stab at the heroine, Billie Dawn, refuses to yield many clues.


Remeber, Carnivores, One Man's Meat Is Another Man's Poison; Low-Cholesterol Tips
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rod Serling's Hometown Likes to Bask in His 'Twilight'
LEAD: You're traveling through another dimension, a dimension not only of sight and sound but of mind.
Next stop, the town where Rod Serling grew up.


Moran in Pact With Moore
LEAD: J. T. Moran &amp; Company said Friday that it had reached a tentative agreement to buy control of Moore &amp; Schley, Cameron &amp; Company.


California Dreams Of a Derby Prospect
LEAD: In each of the last three years, Californians swore that they did not have a potential Kentucky Derby winner wintering in their midst.
Most Eastern handicappers agreed with them.
Then, of course, Ferdinand, Alysheba and Winning Colors all came out of California to win the last three Derbies.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Veteran Campaign
LEAD: Remember the 38th parallel?
The New York Korean Veterans Memorial Commission has decided not too many people do, so it is releasing a jolting ad campaign, created as a pro bono gesture by Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising.
Included will be two television spots and six newspaper ads.
The commission plans to build a memorial in Battery Park City to the 53,000 Americans killed in the war.


Incinerators Creating New Landfill Woes
LEAD: Fifteen years ago, with empty land for garbage dumps disappearing, Connecticut became one of the first states to look to large incinerators as a way to dispose of trash.
Today, the state is struggling to deal with the consequences of its own foresight.


Outdoors: Finding Solitude on Snowshoes in the Woods
LEAD: ALTHOUGH they are far outnumbered by cross-country skiers, there are many who favor snowshoes for wandering in the winter woods.


Terrorism Attacked at Mass For Pam Am Bomb Victims
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor offered solace to about 600 friends and relatives of victims of Pan American World Airways Flight 103 and denounced terrorism during a Mass of remembrance yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


The Panchen Lama Is Dead at 50; Key Figure in China's Tibet Policy
LEAD: The Panchen Lama, Tibet's most important spiritual leader after the Dalai Lama and a crucial figure in China's policy toward the region, died Saturday night during a visit to Tibet, China announced today.
He was 50 years old.
The official news organizations reported that he had died of a heart attack in his residence in Shigatse, now usually spelled Xigaze, the largest city in Tibet outside the capital, Lhasa.


Rangers' Travels Prove Prosperous
LEAD: Tony Granato awoke this morning in a hospital room, his head throbbing mildly, his recollection of the events that landed him here rather incomplete.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the last great players to survive from the early days of the game is Lee Hazen of Manhattan.
At age 83, he continues to pursue a busy legal practice, and he was recently named an Honor Member of the International Bridge Press Association, in recognition of his many services to the game.
His latest brainstorm is the establishment of a Bridge Hall of


Concern on Canada's Merger Wave
LEAD: The last two weeks have been unsettling for the millions of Canadians who fly on the country's airlines or buy beer, paper products or gasoline.
A spate of billion-dollar takeovers and mergers has swept these four important industries, threatening thousands of jobs and reviving concerns about the concentration of economic power.


Question Box
LEAD:  QUESTION: With Tommy John released by the Yankees and seemingly out of baseball, is Nolan Ryan the last player in the major leagues who played in the 1960's and has a chance to play in the 1990's?


Lebanon's Multiplying Rivalries Move Nation Closer to Breakup
LEAD: Lebanon is sinking ever closer to disintegration in the worst crisis of its 14 years of civil war.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Living Section on Wednesday about beans described their cholesterol-lowering properties incorrectly.
It is the soluble fiber, not the insoluble fiber, that reduces cholesterol in the blood.


Time Inc.'s Grand Plan Leaves Room for Books
LEAD: As Time Inc. positions itself to compete in the 1990's with communications empires like those of Rupert Murdoch and Robert Maxwell, books are playing an increasingly important role.


Sports World Specials; Fighting the Yips
LEAD: In an era when performance-enhancing drugs are used by too many athletes, golf has come out almost squeaky clean compared with football and track.
But golf has not been completely free of experimentation with such drugs, according to a study reported in the February issue of Neurology, the publication of the American Academy of Neurology.


Texas Eastern Rejects Offer From Coastal
LEAD: The Texas Eastern Corporation said today that its board had rejected the Coastal Corporation's $42-a-share tender offer as inadequate and recommended that Texas Eastern shareholders not tender their shares.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Inquiry on Film And Cigarettes
LEAD: Representative Thomas A. Luken, Democrat of Ohio, who has helped lead the legislative battle against cigarette advertising, has announced an investigation of tobacco product placements in Hollywood movies.


King's 38 Lead Bullets
LEAD: Bernard King scored 38 points, his highest total since a serious knee injury nearly four years ago, as the Washington Bullets overcame a 20-point deficit to beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 122-117, in overtime today.


Man Is Charged In Wife's Slaying
LEAD: A 33-year-old man has been charged with murder in the stabbing death of his wife, the New Britain police said yesterday.


48 on Bus Die in Ivory Coast
LEAD: A bus packed with schoolchildren toppled into a culvert during a thunderstorm on Saturday, and news reports said today that 48 passengers were killed and 75 injured.
The storm had filled the culvert with water and many of the victims drowned, reports said.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Thursday about an exhibition of art by the designer Ivan Chermayeff at Cooper Union in New York misattributed the design of corporate logos for Mobil, Chase Manhattan Bank and Lincoln Center.
They were produced by the firm of Chermayeff &amp; Geismar Associates and were designed by Mr.
Chermayeff's associate, Thomas H.


School Basketball; Anderson Scores 39 but Molloy Loses
LEAD: Christ the King won the King of Bluegrass tournament in Louisville, Ky., over the Christmas Holidays and the Tournament of Champions in Springfield, Mo., earlier this month.
But the team scored one of its biggest victories of the season yesterday by routing Archbishop Molloy, 79-61, in a game carried nationally over the SportsChannel America cable network.


Third Parties in U.S. Have Fared Poorly
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:  Texaco Feud Resolved  Texaco and Carl C. Icahn, its largest shareholder, reached a compromise in a bitter struggle over the company's future that had lasted for more than a year.
Page D1.
For Sale: Spy Photos  American experts think close-up photographs of the earth now being marketed commercially by the Soviet Union were taken by Soviet reconnaissance satellites.


Jail for Denying Medical Aid
LEAD: A member of a small Amish community who has refused to allow his 6-year-old son to be treated for cancer was sent to jail Friday on a contempt of court charge.
The man, Danny Mast, argued that chemotherapy was not helping his son, Amos, who has abdominal cancer, and that the boy has done much better on the ''natural medicine'' like herbs and vitamins that the father learned at a clinic in Mexico.


Justice Dept. Will Drop Suit Against Two Who Quit Union
LEAD: Two teamsters' union leaders who resigned this weekend will be dropped as defendants in a Government suit charging racketeering, a spokeswoman for the United States Attorney in New York said today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  The Economy


Networks Plan More Series Efforts
LEAD: ''Moonlighting,'' the ABC television show, has always tried to be a little different from other television shows by combining action, mystery, romance and comedy.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alltel Corp., Hudson, Ohio, a provider of local telephone service, elected John T. Dunbar senior vice president, nonregulated operations.


Medicare Pay Questioned for Mechanized Chairs
LEAD: Medicare is paying an average of about $60 million a year for mechanized lounge chairs that have questionable medical value, a draft report by the Department of Health and Human Services says.


'Working Girl' Receives 4 Golden Globe Awards
LEAD: ''Working Girl,'' a corporate Cinderella story, won four Golden Globe awards including the one for best comedy film, and ''Rain Man'' won two, including best dramatic film, to emerge as favorites in the race for Oscar nominations.


A Departing Envoy's Grim Afghan View
LEAD: The United States cannot prevent the Afghan rebels from accelerating their onslaught against the Soviet-backed Government in Kabul once Moscow completes its expected troop withdrawal next month, says Richard W. Murphy, the State Department's senior Middle East policy maker during much of the Reagan


Tool Orders Rose 13.4% In December
LEAD: Orders for American-made machine tools, bolstered by continuing strength in foreign demand, rose 13.4 percent in December, to $316.4 million, according to a report to be released today by the industry's trade association.


A Novelist Focuses On a Common Fact of Life: Its Ending
LEAD: A. B. Yehoshua's new novel, ''Five Seasons,'' begins at 4 o'clock one autumn morning in the bedroom of an apartment in Haifa, Israel, as a middle-aged Israeli named Molkho watches his wife die after a seven-year struggle with cancer.
The book, which has been a best seller in Israel and has recently been published to critical praise in the United States, follows


U.S. Seeks Compromise For Development Bank
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady is trying to resolve a two-year-old dispute between the United States and one of the largest suppliers of capital to Latin America as part of a Bush Administration strategy for tackling the debt crisis.


Don't Humiliate Gorbachev
LEAD: As President Bush's aides begin their study of East-West policy options, they can safely dismiss two scenarios for the Soviet side of Europe in this century.


BUSH IS CRITICIZED FOR NOT DROPPING SAVINGS-FEE PLAN
LEAD: Bankers and members of Congress criticized the Bush Administration today for insisting that a fee on deposits remains an option to rescue the savings and loan industry.


From Bad to Worse on S &amp; L's
LEAD: The Bush Administration, barely a week old, has already managed to throw more confusion into the savings and loan crisis.
Incredibly, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady has floated the notion of a ''user fee'' on bank and savings accounts to pay for insolvent savings and loan institutions.
Predictably, he scared anxious S &amp; L depositors, who started pulling their money out, and angered depositors everywhere.


Two Officers Killed In Thruway Crash
LEAD: Two auxiliary police sergeants were killed yesterday on the New England Thruway in the Bronx when a motorist crashed into an abandoned car they were inspecting, the police said.


Dean Witter Restructures
LEAD: Dean Witter Financial Services Group said last week that it was restructuring its businesses to create separate divisions for sales and product development.


Publisher of Classes Looks to Masses
LEAD: In the search for new ideas in publishing, Burke's Peerage Ltd., the 163-year-old chronicler of British nobility, with its hoary gaze on a gilded past, would appear to be the last place to look.
But try this one from Harold Brooks-Baker, publishing director of Burke's: books peppered with advertisements.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Account
LEAD: *
Everex, Fremont, Calif., a maker of personal computers and peripherals, to Tycer Fultz Bellack, Palo Alto, Calif., with a budget of roughly $5 million.


Old Rail Line To Be Turned Into Parkland
LEAD: An abandoned rail line here in the Harlem Valley will be converted into a public park under a complicated plan approved this week by New York State, Dutchess County and the private owner of the railroad right of way.


Remember, Carnivores, One Man's Meat Is Another Man's Poison
LEAD: To the Editor:


Texaco And Icahn End Feud
LEAD: Texaco Inc. and Carl C. Icahn, its largest shareholder, ended a feud yesterday that had left the company's future uncertain for more than a year.


Sports world Specials; Air Apparent
LEAD: For someone who has set 79 ballooning records, Julian Nott is having a hard time securing No. 80.
That's because the 44-year-old British adventurer has an ambitious goal.
He wants to become the first person to fly a balloon nonstop around the world.


Money Bush Wants for Drug War Is Less Than Sought by Congress
LEAD: President Bush will seek only a small increase in money for drug enforcement over Ronald Reagan's final budget, a rise that would fall short of the amount being sought in Congress, Administration officials said today.


The News From Liberated Grenada Looks Grim
LEAD: To the Editor:


Energy vs. Environment: Clash on Carolina Coast
LEAD: For 150 years, visitors have been drawn to the turbulent ocean waters and alluring beaches of the Outer Banks, the slivers of land along the North Carolina coast.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Cable Guide Magazine On Video
LEAD: THE CABLE GUIDE, the monthly road map offered to cable-television subscribers by their cable operators, is going on the air - or more accurately, on the cable.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday


Soviet Photos of U.S. Were for Spying
LEAD: Government and private experts who analyzed close-up photographs of the earth sold by the Soviet Union have concluded they were taken by satellites placed in orbit for military spying rather than scientific research.


Sports of The Times; The Scoop On Embry's Hands
LEAD: I HAVEN'T checked it out completely, but if the Cleveland Cavaliers, who currently sport the best record in the National Basketball Association, go on to win the league title, then Wayne Embry will hold a singular distinction.


Owners Set on Free Agency
LEAD: Unless United States District Judge David Doty grants an injunction to stop them, the National Football League's owners plan to institute a new policy on free agency Wednesday.


Natural Gas May Hold Key in Global-Warming Era
LEAD: To the Editor:


Agency to Vote on Capping A.T.&amp;T. Rates
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission is expected to vote today on a proposal that would place a cap on the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's long-distance rates but would allow A.T.&amp;T. to earn greater profits if it can cut its operating costs.


Black History Month
LEAD: In observance of Black History Month, the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street, is to present in February a series of programs on the cultural diversity of Africans and their descendants in the United States and the Caribbean.
The series is to begin with ''Jazz Celebration,'' a concert by the Composers Workshop Ensemble, on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.


Rights Group Reports 1,000 Iran Executions
LEAD: Amnesty International said today that more than 1,000 political prisoners had been shot or hanged in Iran over the past six months in the biggest wave of executions there since the early 1980's.


Jay Rosenblum, Painter, 55
LEAD: Jay Rosenblum, an abstract painter, died Friday in St.
Vincent's Hospital after suffering massive injuries in an accident with a bus while he was bicycling.
He was 55 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Needle Plan Fails to Attract Drug Addicts, So It's Revised
LEAD: Confined to a former X-ray clinic hardly larger than a one-car garage, New York City drug counselors wait, sometimes all day, for intravenous drug addicts who come to get clean needles.


Robert William Haymes, Composer, 65
LEAD: Robert William Haymes, a composer and broadcast producer, died of Lou Gehrig's disease Saturday at his home in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
He was 65 years old and also had a home in Greenville, S.C.


Discussion Closed
LEAD: There are more than 100 choice parking places in the quadrangle bounded by Pennsylvania Avenue, Constitution Avenue, 15th Street and 17th Street, and most of them are reserved for people who work at the White House and the Old Executive Office Building.
The parking places are divided into categories: choice spots within the White House gates, less choice spots in the immediate vicinity on State Place and spots around the


Suspect Held in 5 L.I. Sniper Attacks That Left One Man Dead
LEAD: A 20-year-old man was charged today in five sniper attacks on eastern Long Island that left one man dead and three other people wounded, and created fear among residents of two towns, the Suffolk County police said.


After Months of Legal Skirmishing, Trial of North Is Only a Day Away
LEAD: After 10 months of pretrial legal battles, Oliver L. North, the former marine who helped finance a guerrilla war in Nicaragua through arms sales to Iran, is scheduled to go on trial Tuesday on 12 criminal charges stemming from his activities.


Howard R. Silberthau And Dr. Mandel Wed
LEAD: The wedding of Dr.
Susan Jennifer Mandel, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Mandel of Tenafly, N.J., to Howard Robert Silberthau, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Silberthau of Tenafly, took place yesterday in Hackensack, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad and Cantor Kurt Silbermann performed the ceremony at the Stony Hill


Lesbian Partners Find The Means to Be Parents
LEAD: In a baby boom of unusual complexity, thousands of lesbians around the country are having children.


Britain Narrows Trade Gap
LEAD: Britain's merchandise trade deficit narrowed in December to $:1.66 billion, or about $2.92 billion, the Government said Friday.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  General Assembly  AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE DRAFTING OF AN INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION AGAINST RECRUITMENT, USE FINANCING AND TRAINING OF MERCENARIES - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council  COMMITTEE ON NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


4 Bronx Slayings Called Drug-Related
LEAD: A Lehman College freshman and three other people were shot and their throats were slit in a quadruple murder in a grocery store in the northeastern section of the Bronx early yesterday morning, the police said.


Delaware Adds to Court
LEAD: A rising tide of corporate takeover battles has prompted Delaware to enlarge its Chancery Court, one of the nation's most important arbiters of corporate takeovers.


Review/Dance; With Humor, a World From Ghana
LEAD: The thicket of microphones was off-putting at first, and the gold-and-silver costumes looked a little garish.
The atmosphere on stage seemed placid to the point of noninvolvement with the audience and the material.
But Odadaa, a company of 11 musicians, dancers and singers from Ghana, soon proved irresistible and its performance on Saturday night at Symphony Space was far too short a visit to New York City.


F.B.I. Commodities 'Sting': Fast Money, Secret Lives
LEAD: Few people at the Chicago Board of Trade took notice in December 1986 when a stocky man, who combed strands of hair over his head to conceal a bald spot, began working on the trading floor as a telephone clerk.


Optimism Abounds in Calgary
LEAD: LAST spring, a melancholy feeling swept over this city like an unexpected, stubborn chinook.
The Olympics had packed up and gone, leaving a lot of suddenly vacant hotels and a generally empty atmosphere of anticlimax.
Worse, the Flames had been routed from the National Hockey League playoffs by their deeply resented rivals to the north, the Edmonton


Weary Knicks Return Home
LEAD: When their jet touched down at Kennedy International Airport late yesterday afternoon, most of the Knicks, who had experienced the rigors of a long National Basketball Association road trip for the first time this season, felt relief.


Whales on Tape
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution, which has spread learning through books, records and television, has now gone into videotape production.
Its first effort is a one-hour video, ''The Magnificent Whales,'' which features dolphins, seals, sea lions and sea otters as well as the top-billed species.


Clemson Comes Up Short
LEAD: Clemson, without six players who had been suspended, gave Duke trouble for much of the first half today before crumbling.
Danny Ferry and Quin Snyder led a 32-5 spurt as the eighth-ranked Blue Devils broke a three-game losing streak with a 92-62 victory.


In Radio, an Expensive Battle at Sunrise
LEAD: Radio station owners are increasingly turning to well-paid personalities to host shows in the morning in a growing recognition of the time slot's importance to overall ratings.


Soviet Craft Orbits Mars on Way to Moon Phobos
LEAD: The Soviet spacecraft Phobos 2 today entered into orbit around Mars, bringing it closer to landing on the Martian moon Phobos.
The mission is the first in the Soviet Union's program to land a man on Mars in the next 25 years.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's like saying that a patient who died on the operating table is expected to fully recover.''  - Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, on Administration proposal for a fee on savings and loan deposits.  [ A1:6. ]


Hydrogen Fuel Line Repaired On Space Shuttle Discovery
LEAD: Engineers have fixed a leak in a hydrogen fuel line on the space shuttle Discovery.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the earnings of regional telephone companies misidentified the one that provides local service in Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas.
It is the Southwestern Bell Corporation.


Steinberg Jury Asks Judge to Define 'Intent'
LEAD: The judge in the murder trial of Joel B. Steinberg redefined the main element of one of the charges against the defendant yesterday as the jury deliberated for the seventh day.


Carlucci Takes Job at Carlyle Group
LEAD: Gradually the former top officials of the Reagan Administration are taking jobs elsewhere.
Late last week the Carlyle Group, a merchant bank based in Washington, said the former Secretary of Defense, Frank C. Carlucci, had been named a vice chairman.


Reviews/Music; For the Cleveland, Audience Divided
LEAD: There seemed to be two partisan groups at Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening, when the Cleveland Orchestra played the last of its three concerts there.
One group came to hear the soprano Kathleen Battle sing, after which they cheered long and loud, then left the hall in order to avoid hearing the work the second group came for, Edgar Varese's ''Ameriques.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-9  The political forces in Chile that led the successful campaign against Gen.
Augusto Pinochet are feuding over whom to nominate for President, with the main opposition party torn in factions.
Page A1


New York City Ballet To Offer Seminar Series
LEAD: The New York City Ballet is presenting ''The N.Y.C.B. at 40,'' a series of seminars this month and in February, on aspects of the creative process.
Robert Gottlieb, editor of The New Yorker, will serve as moderator this evening for ''Muscles and Memory.''


Louisville Loses In Bid for Top Spot
LEAD: Jay Burson scored 29 points and 17th-ranked Ohio State rallied today for an 85-79 victory over No. 3 Louisville.


Bush Urged to Appoint Judge As Lawyer to Supreme Court
LEAD: The Justice Department has asked President Bush to name a Federal appeals court judge as the agency's solicitor general, the Government's main legal representative before the Supreme Court, an Administration official said tonight.


Review/Art; Early Cezanne: Toward His Own Vision
LEAD: Finally we have arrived at the beginning of Cezanne.
For years his restlessly still Midi landscapes from the 1870's and 80's have been celebrated for their serenity and resolution.
In 1977 the Museum of Modern Art in New York devoted a landmark exhibition exclusively to the late Cezanne, whose broken, translucent planes seemed to open directly into


In Test of Talent, L.S.U. Freshman Has Right Answers
LEAD: ABOUT 20 minutes after his team defeated Georgetown, 82-80, in the Superdome, Chris Jackson sat in a crowded room answering questions about his 26-point performance and L.S.U.'s exhilarating upset victory.


ON YOUR OWN: Fitness
LEAD: GOING for a walk is an easy way for a sedentary person to start a fitness routine, but sooner or later it will be raining or snowing, or it will be too hot or too cold, or there will be too much traffic.
Any excuse not to go out will suffice.


Rising Stocks May Bolster Bonds
LEAD: The stock market, which has tended to take its cue from interest rates since the 1987 crash, may now be a major source of strength for the credit markets, some analysts contend.


COALITION PARTIES SET BACK IN BERLIN
LEAD: Municipal elections in West Berlin today dealt a blow to the governing center-right coalition, while a small extreme-right party led by a former SS officer made an unexpectedly strong showing to gain its first parliamentary seats.


Results Plus
LEAD:  N.F.L.
N.F.C. 34, A.F.C. 3: Herschel Walker ran for a pair of touchdowns and Randall Cunningham directed three scoring drives yesterday, leading the National Football Conference to a 34-3 victory over the American Conference in the Pro Bowl at Honolulu.
Walker, the Dallas Cowboys' running back, scored on runs of 4 yards and 7 yards as the N.F.C.


TV Notes
LEAD:  Classroom Commercials


Chicago Journal; For Men Who Do Time, Eternal Love Is Message
LEAD: Just before lockup at the Cook County Jail, the 54 men in Cell Block J2 - convicted murderers, rapists, drug dealers and thieves - got down on their knees, huddled around a tiny woman in minister's robes and repeated after her: ''Our Father who art in heaven . . . . ''


Miss Miller Is Married To Robert Zalaznick
LEAD: Kathryn Ann Miller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis A. Miller of Darien, Conn., and Robert Samuel Zalaznick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abner Zalaznick of Great Neck, L.I., were married yesterday at the Landmark Club in Stamford, Conn., by Rabbi Deborah Hirsch.


Being Senior Judge Pays For Former Chief Justice
LEAD: Warren E. Burger, who stepped down as Chief Justice of the United States in 1986 and has not heard a case since, stands to receive a $60,000-a-year raise because he chose to become a senior judge when he retired.


Jill H. Pace Is the Bride Of Dr. Albert Harris Teich
LEAD: At the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Washington, Jill H. Pace, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Pace of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Albert Harris Teich, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Teich of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Gerald Serotta officiated.


A Mugging and a Mob Evoke Debate in Brooklyn
LEAD: There is a tradition in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, a tradition almost as old as the sidecurls, beards and broad-brimmed hats that the Hasidic men who live there wear.
The tradition is that when someone cries ''Chaptzum'' - the Yiddish equivalent of ''Grab him!'' - everyone obeys.


U.S. to Press Monitoring of Cuba
LEAD: At the annual meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission opening in Geneva on Monday, the Bush Administration will urge the panel to continue public monitoring of Cuba's human rights record for another year, American officials say.


As Soviets Leave Afghanistan, Fear of New Civil War


Big Victory for a Little Horse
LEAD: After a two-year fight to evict Ragtime, a 27-inch-high miniature horse that has the run of its owner's home here, the City Council of this Los Angeles suburb has voted to give up. ''From New York to Nova Scotia, people are telling us to stop picking on the horse,'' Mayor Larry Horner said Wednesday.


British Lawyers Jolted by Thatcher Plan
LEAD: In the last decade, occupations ranging from steelworker to stockbroker have been transformed by the relentless application of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's free-market principles.
But few of the changes have been so sweeping or created such an uproar as the Government's proposals last week to overhaul the legal profession.


Serb-Croat Rivalry Is Again Shaking Yugoslavia
LEAD: Yugoslavia's oldest and most divisive problem, almost dormant for nearly two decades, is vibrating once again.
Croats are expressing fears about Serbian strivings for dominance.


'Art of Passover'
LEAD: An exhibition titled ''From Seder to Stella: The Art of Passover in the Collections of the Jewish Museum'' is to open next Monday at the museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street.
The exhibition, which is to run through Oct. 19, includes ceremonial objects used in the observance of Passover and examples of work by 20th-century artists that was inspired by the Passover theme.


Panchen Lama Dies


Tennis; Lendl Takes Title and No. 1
LEAD: Ivan Lendl had two New Year's resolutions: to win the Australian Open and to win Wimbledon.
Now he has one.
Lendl beat ninth-seeded Miloslav Mecir of Czechoslovakia, 6-2, 6-2, 6-2, today for his first Australian Open title and regained the No. 1 ranking in men's tennis.


Remeber, Carnivores, One Man's Meat Is Another Man's Poison; Plenty Is All Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills.


Dead Children and Civic Duty
LEAD: In New York City last year, 127 children died of abuse or neglect, the second-highest total in the 80's.
Mayor Edward Koch insists that the city cannot prevent all child abuse deaths.
But what about the recent deaths of Jessica Cortez and Michael Anthony Baker?


Review/Television; Right and Wrong, in Our Time
LEAD: The talking head has received its share of knocks over the years from television producers and reviewers who hold that programs relying on people talking to the audience or to other people on screen are not making the most of the medium's potential.
For these critics, the pictures are the thing; lectures, debates, conversations are throwbacks to radio.


Modest Insider-Trading Stir Is a Huge Scandal in France
LEAD: The insider-trading accusations surrounding Pechiney's acquisition of Triangle Industries are modest by American standards, but in France they have ballooned into a huge scandal that is shaking the Government and that is likely to lead to significant changes in how France regulates its financial markets.


FOES OF PINOCHET FEUDING OVER VOTE
LEAD: Four months after Gen.
Augusto Pinochet lost a bid to extend his presidency by eight years, the political forces that led the campaign against him are themselves divided and feuding over whom to nominate for president.


Study Says Toxic Waste Plan Uses Private Sector Too Much
LEAD: The Government program to clean up toxic wastes relies too much on outside contractors, many of whom are making hefty profits while Government supervisors remain underpaid, understaffed and underqualified, a Congressional study says.


Tokyo Stocks Set Record; Dollar Rises
LEAD: The dollar gained against the Japanese yen in morning trading today, while share prices reached a new high on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Reviews/Music; Enveloped in Busoni
LEAD: Liszt taught us that virtuosity could be a purely musical tool.
To its virtues, Busoni added excess.
As a compositional device, excess upends our musical values, and indeed Busoni's music leaves us unprepared and threatened, like passengers who have unwittingly chosen a rowboat in which to face a tidal wave.


RICO: Assault With a Deadly Weapon?
LEAD: Wall Street is not a racketeering enterprise, say brokers and financiers; then why are they being treated like mobsters?
Prosecutors and civil litigants who once were content to file stock fraud charges now invoke the law known as RICO, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act passed by Congress in 1970.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 20 about racial discrimination in the Navy erroneously characterized, in some copies, the jobs open 30 years ago to minority sailors.
They served in a variety of jobs, not solely as mess stewards.


Moscow Journal; The Stalin Generation, Where Nostalgia Dies Hard
LEAD: He was 3 years old when his family was driven from its village near Kursk in 1929, during Stalin's campaign against the more prosperous peasants known as kulaks.
His infant brother died in the exile.


Auto Racing; Grand Prix Moves to Phoenix
LEAD: The United States Grand Prixfollowed the St.
Louis Cardinals football team last week and moved from the Midwest to Phoenix.


Co-presidents Named At Foxmoor Specialty
LEAD: The Foxmoor Specialty Stores Corporation, which operates 603 young women's apparel stores in the United States, will have two presidents starting Wednesday.


Metro Matters; The Homeless: A Problem Koch Wants to Lose
LEAD: Among the many applause lines in Mayor Edward I. Koch's State of the City Message last week was this: ''No one should turn away from the plight of the homeless.
But neither should the homeless turn public streets, parks and buildings into de facto shelters.
Under such a system no one is helped, nothing improves.


Koch's Preliminary Plan Envisions 1,200 Layoffs
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch said yesterday that his preliminary spending plan for the coming fiscal year calls for the layoff of 1,200 municipal employees and significant attrition in New York City's uniform services.


Separate Shootings Claim Two Victims
LEAD: The police yesterday said they were investigating two unrelated murders in the borough.


Old Hand on Capitol Hill Is Creating a New Voice in Cabinet
LEAD: Back on the South Side of Chicago, where Edward J. Derwinski's political career first flourished, veterans' organizations were threaded through the community fabric.


Fairchild's Deal With Soros Group
LEAD: Fairchild Industries strengthened its hand against a takeover bid by announcing it had agreed to buy its securities back from the Soros Group for about $75 million in cash.
The deal includes about 1.6 million shares that Fairchild said it would sell to its employee stock ownership plan, a move that would raise the plan's stake to 19 percent of the voting stock.


Pope Urges Catholics To Be More Active In and Out of Church
LEAD: Pope John Paul II appealed today to Roman Catholics to become more active participants in church and social matters, but he urged greater caution in allowing lay people to perform duties that have generally been carried out by priests.


Defiance Precision Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Defiance Precision Products Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
14,208,000
14,425,000
Net inc
222,000
b1,144,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
28,484,000
26,556,000
Net inc
623,000
b3,156,000
Share earns
.13
-


Morton Da Costa, 74, Director
LEAD: Morton Da Costa, a director who had four Broadway hits in three years during the mid-1950's, died Sunday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 74 years old and lived in West Redding, Conn.


Houston Has Owner Riding High
LEAD: D. Wayne Lukas spent much of his childhood buying cheap ponies, cleaning them up, and selling them at a profit the next afternoon.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerbank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,604,000
2,881,000
Per share
.13
.24
Yr net inc
10,582,000
13,082,000
Per share
.87
1.07


Financial Corp of Santa Barara reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Corp of Santa Barara (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b9,528,000
c414,000
Share earns
-
.05
Yr net loss
b7,113,000
c2,700,000
Share earns
-
.39
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $1,031,000 for the quarter and $2,686,000 for the year, and a loss on disposal of discontinued operations of $2,740,000 and an extraordinary loss of $2,428,000 for both the quarter and year.


Tandycrafts Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandycrafts Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
33,164,000
28,950,000
Net inc
1,861,000
1,310,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Shares outst
2,808,000
2,218,000
6mo sales
57,012,000
51,356,000
Net inc
1,982,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.71
.62
Shares outst
2,802,000
2,261,000


Bridge
LEAD: Diplomats must have determination and stamina.
Exemplifying this in the World Team Olympiad last October in Venice was Alberto Calvo, Panama's Ambassador to Japan.
He played every one of the 540 deals in the qualifying stage, at a steady rate of 60 a day.
Two of his teammates, Jeff Hand and John Maduro, were put to the same test, and a fourth, Gerry Cooklin, played 520.


OPEC Meeting Sought
LEAD: The OPEC Secretary General, Subroto, said Sunday that he would propose an early meeting of key oil ministers of OPEC and non-OPEC producers, possibly in March.
Dr.
Subroto made the remarks upon arriving for talks with several OPEC ministers who are expected to attend the inauguration of Venezuela's President-elect, Carlos Andres Perez.


Merrimack Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimack Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
891,000
527,000
Per share
.23
.12
Shares outst
3,886,788
4,391,667
Yr net inc
4,207,000
3,020,000
Per share
1.05
.66
Shares outst
4,005,142
4,574,062


Baker Plans Solo
LEAD: James A. Baker 3d will make his first solo trip abroad as Secretary of State to meet with his fellow foreign ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in mid-February, a Bush Administration official said yesterday.


Archer-Daniels to Lift Illinois Central Stake
LEAD: The Archer-Daniels-Midland Company said today that it had reached an agreement to buy a million additional shares of the Illinois Central Transportation Company's stock for $13.50 a share, bringing its total holdings in the railroad company to 14.6 percent.


Showscan Film reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Showscan Film (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
636,000
19,000
Net loss
1,458,000
1,327,000
9mo rev
4,266,000
1,351,000
Net loss
3,331,000
3,316,000
The company said its latest-quarter revenue was primarily derived from a major design project.


Soviet Ballet Troupe To Perform at the Lyric
LEAD: ''Stars of the Russian Ballet,'' a Soviet ballet troupe with several dancers who toured the United States in the Moscow Ballet in 1987, is to perform at the Lyric Opera House in Baltimore this weekend.


Medical Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Devices
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,512,000
1,402,000
Net inc
116,000
87,000
Share earns
.05
.04
6mo sales
2,976,000
2,272,000
Net inc
256,000
160,000
Share earns
.12
.08


Review/Dance; Ballets Born of Anecdotes and Innocence
LEAD: Ernesta Corvino is a performer with an engaging quality of innocent merriment.
There was a degree of wit to the tableaux in ''The Gallery,'' on a program of Ms.
Corvino's dances presented Friday night at the Nikolais/ Louis Choreospace.
But her choreography suggests that she has spent a good deal more time in the studio than observing what has been going on in dance in recent years.


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,400,000
4,300,000
Per share
.86
1.10
Yr net inc
16,300,000
20,200,000
Per share
4.16
5.16


Adding Tools to the Kit
LEAD: ONE of the most intriguing products at the recent Macworld exposition in San Francisco was Supercard, a prototype program from Silicon Beach Software that allows Apple Macintosh users to construct customized software.
The company calls it a second-generation personal software tool kit.


Dawson Geophysical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dawson Geophysical (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,370,000
2,027,000
Net loss
215,000
1,796,000


Santa Fe Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Energy Partners (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
28,500,000
33,900,000
Net loss
b21,400,000
7,100,000
Yr rev
126,700,000
131,200,000
Net loss
b29,900,000
13,900,000
b-Included $14,500,000 special charges from the scheduled sale of marginal properties and a $1,900,000 charge relating to the relocation of administrative activities from Amarillo, Texas, to Houston.


F.C.C. Delays New Rules For A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: Bowing to Congressional pressure, the Federal Communications Commission today postponed a decision on a proposal to overhaul its regulation of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's long-distance business.


Acme Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
22,794,000
21,216,000
Net inc
752,000
555,000
Share earns
.16
.12
6mo sales
43,586,000
42,294,000
Net inc
b1,900,000
1,294,000
Share earns
.42
.29


Japanese Dancers Are Dominant In Prix de Lausanne
LEAD: Young Japanese dancers dominated the Prix de Lausanne ballet competition that ended here Sunday, taking more than a third of the prizes in the contest, which was held in Asia for the first time in its 17-year history.


City Begins Reconstruction of Landmark Bridge


RJR Nabisco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RJR Nabisco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,718,000,000
4,419,000,000
Net inc
411,000,000
370,000,000
Share earns
1.78
1.46
Yr sales
16,956,000,000
15,766,000,000
Net inc
1,393,000,000
b1,209,000,000
Share earns
5.92
4.70
Shares outst
232,587,000
250,612,000


Koch Warns of Sharp Reductions In Workers if Cuomo Plan Stands
LEAD: Mayor Edward I. Koch, pursuing a strategy to place the blame for New York City's budget troubles on Albany, said yesterday that he would have to cut 12,000 jobs from the municipal payroll, severely affecting many city agencies, if Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed state budget was not changed.


Professional Care reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Professional Care (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
6,708,000
8,316,000
Net inc
349,000
b365,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


How Japanese Respond To a Cancer Diagnosis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scourge of Stalinism
LEAD: Ordinarily, there might be little to remark about the 65th birthday of a valued anti-Communist publication, The New Leader.
But the anniversary fell last week as party faithful all over the world were arguing about truths revealed in the magazine's pages decades ago - that one-party power corrupts, that Stalin's purges claimed millions of innocent victims, that the fruit of


Allegheny Ludlum Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1989
1988
Sales
294,279,000
234,586,000
Net inc
23,587,000
10,698,000
Share earns
1.05
.47
Yr sales
1,207,512,000
866,609,000
Net inc
108,619,000
46,214,000
Share earns
4.81
2.27
Shares outst
22,575,000
20,358,693


Leslie Halliwell, 59; Wrote Guides to Film
LEAD: Leslie Halliwell, the author of several encyclopedic guides to film, died of cancer on Jan. 21 at the Princess Alice Hospice in Surrey, England.
He was 59 years old.


No Special Treatment For Student Athletes
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Brands to Sell Southland Life Division
LEAD: American Brands Inc. said today that its Franklin Life Insurance subsidiary had agreed to sell one of its units to the GeorgiaUS Corporation for about $440 million in cash.


London Journal; 'Pygmalion' Updated: Henry Higgins Was Right
LEAD: John Honey is a kind of real-life, latter-day Henry Higgins, urging his countrymen to acknowledge that speech accents are lethal weapons in the English class war and to strike a blow for social equality by teaching everyone to speak the Queen's English.


Corrections
LEAD: A graph on Thursday depicting rainfall trends in the United States, with an article about climate trends over the last century, appeared with a section omitted and a repetition in its place.
A correct version of the graph is printed today on page C4.


Agency Seeks Wide Changes In Zoning Plan
LEAD: The City Planning Department yesterday proposed sweeping zoning changes intended to preserve the shape, size and nature of housing in that half of New York City where one- and two-family homes, two or three stories high, now predominate.


Lectec Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lectec Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,707,000
1,474,000
Net inc
222,000
210,000
Share earns
.07
.07
6mo rev
3,230,000
2,852,000
Net inc
407,000
404,000
Share earns
.13
.13


Idaho Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Idaho Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
99,425,882
96,280,247
Net inc
19,399,687
7,970,530
Share earns
.54
.20
Yr net inc
49,080,113
59,520,480
Share earns
1.32
1.63
The earnings for 1987 have been restated to reflect an accounting change.


Man Slain in Parking Dispute Is Buried


Rally in Dollar Subsides; Gold Ends Lower on Comex
LEAD: The dollar slipped yesterday, giving up part of the gains achieved in Friday's powerful rally in spite of bullish economic news.
Gold prices edged down after Friday's plunge.


Bond Industry Trade Group To Study Widening Access
LEAD: The Public Securities Association, a bond industry trade group, yesterday announced the formation of a study group to consider expanding access to price information in the secondary market for Government securities.


Redmen Squander a 2d Chance
LEAD: For nearly 30 minutes last night, St.
John's seemed on the verge of pulling out of a two-game tailspin that had broken the team's momentum.


2 Savings Units Closed
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board today closed two insolvent savings institutions: Carver Savings and Loan Association of Escondido, Calif., and First Financial Savings and Loan Association of New Albany, Miss.
The board said Calfed Inc. had acquired the deposits from Carver's Escondido office and New West Federal Savings and Loan Association had acquired Carver's San Diego deposits.


Trans Financial Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Financial Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
793,000
267,000
Per share
.55
.19
Yr net inc
2,027,000
1,619,000
Per share
1.45
1.29
The per share earnings are fully diluted and adjusted for the 3-for-2 stock split payable Feb.


'Hatred of God' Is Curse Of Russia, Quayle Says
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that a ''hatred of God'' lies at the root of the Soviet Union's domestic problems and that the Communist Party's rejection of religion had caused party leaders to mistakenly cling to faith in their own ''omniscience.''


EAST BLOC GIVES FIRST ARMS TALLY
LEAD: The Warsaw Pact today published its first detailed breakdown of troops and weapons in Europe, intending to show that while each side has its advantages, East and West are about evenly matched in overall military strength.


Hytek Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hytek Microsystems
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
5,243,000
7,144,000
Net loss
215,000
bc563,000
Share earns
-
.20
Yr sales
23,216,000
22,681,000
Net inc
518,000
c451,000
Share earns
.18
.16
b-Net income


Bush Likely to Ask Lower Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: President Bush will almost certainly ask Congress next week to adopt a lower capital gains tax rate and a variety of other tax incentives he advocated during his election campaign, Administration officials said today.


Cameras in the Courts: A Test in Steinberg Case
LEAD: Whatever disagreements remain about the trial of Joel B. Steinberg, on one point there seems to be general accord: Once Hedda Nussbaum's mashed-in face appeared on the screen during her days of testimony in December, viewers could not turn away.


To Treat the Attack of Acid Rain, Add Limestone to Water and Wait
LEAD: IN a nascent counterattack on the effects of acid rain, American scientists and wildlife experts are increasingly bringing dead lakes and streams back to life by using the simple technique of adding limestone to the water.


Permian Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Permian Partners LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
493,852,000
660,520,000
Net inc
368,000
b5,488,000
Share earns
.11
-
Yr rev
2,288,685,000
-
Net loss
14,657,000
-
b-Net loss  Comparable prior-year results were not applicable.


Trojan Horse, Anyone?
LEAD: The debate over a Federal raise has focused on members of Congress and whether they deserve a pay increase to $135,000 from $89,500.


Prices of Orange Juice Rise On Cold-Weather Concerns
LEAD: Fear of frost in Florida helped touch off a rally of futures prices for frozen concentrated orange juice on the Cotton Exchange in New York yesterday.


Cadmus Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadmus Communications (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,644,000
36,711,000
Net inc
820,000
742,000
Share earns
.13
.12
6mo sales
78,238,000
71,857,000
Net inc
2,062,000
2,065,000
Share earns
.34
.34


Rabin Alters Demand on Halt To Uprising in the Territories
LEAD: Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that he no longer demands an end to the Palestinian uprising as a condition for peace talks with residents of the occupied territories.


Congress Still Purring as Bush Applies the Right Strokes
LEAD: He returns their phone calls.
He drops by their offices.
He tells them to just call him ''George.'' He does not bash them in his speeches, as Ronald Reagan did for eight whole years and Jimmy Carter did before that.
He remembers their names.
He even remembers their jokes.


First Bank System Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
b427,400,000
c36,300,000
Per share
-
.58
Yr net loss
b310,000,000
c23,600,000
Per share
-
.29
b-Included losses on investment security transactions of $501.9 million for the quarter and $497.4 million for the year.


Ancient Irish Tomb Found Aligned With Sun
LEAD: AN Irish tomb, built centuries before Stonehenge or the Pyramids of Egypt, appears to be the oldest known structure with an astronomical function, according to an analysis published last week in the British journal Nature.


The Times Names 3 Senior Editors
LEAD: The New York Times announced three appointments yesterday to newly created positions as senior editor and also named a group of newsroom department heads.
The appointments, effective in the coming weeks, were announced by Max Frankel, the executive editor.


Consolidated Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
717,454,000
618,393,000
Net inc
40,312,000
20,559,000
Share earns
1.07
.53
Yr rev
2,689,075,000
2,296,911,000
Net inc
113,153,000
74,570,000
Share earns
3.00
1.93


Review/Music; By Opera Ebony
LEAD: Opera Ebony offered slightly more than a double bill on Sunday afternoon in Aaron Davis Hall at the City College of New York.
The principal draw, for listeners interested in unusual music, was the American premiere of ''The Misunderstood Policeman,'' a one-act play by Jean Cocteau with an incidental score by Francis Poulenc.


WRIGHT ASKS VIEWS OF HOUSE ON RAISE
LEAD: The fate of the 50 percent Congressional pay increase may be decided in an anonymous survey of the 435 members of the House of Representatives.


Telxon Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telxon Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
39,400,000
31,000,000
Net inc
3,800,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.29
.27
9mo rev
111,900,000
85,600,000
Net inc
11,000,000
9,900,000
Share earns
.84
.73


Indian Leader Charges 'Rampant Graft'
LEAD: One of the nation's best-known Indian leaders, Russell C. Means, told Congress today that there was ''rampant graft and corruption'' among tribal governments and in Federal programs intended to assist American Indians.


Cable Plan For Merger Is Called Off
LEAD: The United Cable Television Corporation and United Artists Communications Inc. said yesterday that they had called off their merger but would seek to negotiate a new deal.


United Water Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Water Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
29,700,000
35,100,000
Net inc
2,900,000
6,600,000
Share earns
.17
.40
Yr rev
124,700,000
127,700,000
Net inc
18,000,000
21,200,000
Share earns
1.08
1.28


First National Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,252,000
193,000
Per share
.46
.07
Yr net inc
3,269,000
1,833,000
Per share
1.22
.72


Careers: An Unusual Technology Program
LEAD: COURSES in telecommunications and computer science are readily available, but master's programs that combine the two often-overlapping areas are few, says Dr.
Ivan T. Frisch of the Center for Advanced Technology in Telecommunications at Polytechnic University.


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
9,125,000
cd3,920,000
Per share
-
.48
Yr net inc
b533,000
d19,577,000
Per share
.07
2.42
b-After a tax benefit of $251,000.
c-Net income and after a tax benefit of $508,000.


James Madison Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* James Madison Ltd (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
240,000
b349,000
Share earns
-
.04
Yr net inc
1,200,000
2,800,000
Share earns
.12
.28
b-Net income


Whittaker Sees Criminal Charges
LEAD: The Whittaker Corporation, a specialty chemical and technology concern, said it expected a Justice Department investigation to result in criminal charges against the company or one of its susidiaries.
Whittaker said Justice Department lawyers had presented it with evidence suggesting that employees of a Whittaker unit had illegally paid money to a


Valley Industries reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Industries (NYSE)
Year to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
97,271,000
81,642,000
Net inc
601,000
193,000
Share earns
.07
.02


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:  THE ECONOMY  President Bush will be urged to approve an increase in Federal deposit insurance premiums paid by banks and other lending institutions as a means to rescue troubled savings and loan institutions, Administration officials said.
They backed away from a proposal for a fee on deposits.


Oliver North: Patriot or Felon?
LEAD: To Ronald Reagan, Oliver North is a national hero.
George Bush has praised him, too.
Thus it's a tribute to the American rule of law that, starting this morning, the former White House aide will be called to account in court, charged with lying to Congress, fraudulently funneling funds to the Nicaraguan rebels and destroying documents in the


Andover Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,955,000
1,918,000
Share earns
.41
.39
Yr net inc
7,848,000
9,922,000
Share earns
1.59
1.98


Brandywine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brandywine Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
b506,852
380,364
Per share
.40
.30
6mo net inc
837,543
746,988
Per share
.65
.59
b-Included income of $336,170 from petitions for refunds filed with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.


Baseball; Mets Sign Darling To Contract For 3 Years
LEAD: The Mets resolved one of their thorny negotiating problems yesterday by reaching agreement with Ron Darling on a three-year, $5.3 million contract.


FASHION: By Design; Pins and More Pins
LEAD: One is not enough. Two will do, but five or more are better.


Amoskeag Bank Shares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoskeag Bank Shares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,703,000
b16,141,000
Per share
.25
-
Yr net inc
14,047,000
1,088,000
Per share
1.28
.10
b-Net loss and included a $20 million after-tax writedown of the company's equity portfolio.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
141,869,000
133,286,000
Net inc
27,515,000
17,558,000
Share earns
1.58
1.01
Yr rev
557,770,000
478,836,000
Net inc
103,288,000
55,536,000
Share earns
5.93
3.34


Wyoming National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyoming National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,057,000
287,000
Per share
.53
.24
Yr net inc
3,493,000
b867,000
Per share
2.08
-
b-Net loss


Abercrombie &amp; Fitch Chief Sees Growth Opportunities
LEAD: Sally Frame-Kasaks yesterday was named the president and chief executive of Abercrombie &amp; Fitch, the fashion and sports apparel chain owned by the Limited Inc.
Mrs.
Kasaks, 44, was previously the president of Talbots Inc., the classic New England apparel retailer, and before that the president of the Ann Taylor Inc.


Pegeen Fitzgerald, 78, Radio Host Of Family-Style Talk Show, Dies
LEAD: Pegeen Fitzgerald, who, with her husband, Edward, conducted a radio talk show for 42 years and pioneered the at-home radio format, died of breast cancer Monday at her Manhattan home.
She stated her age as 78 and also had a home in Kent, Conn.


Afghan Factions Squabble in Rebel-Held City
LEAD: In the main square of this town of about 10,000, the shopkeepers hawk oranges, old clothes and Russian-printed cloth.
Afghan men sit in an open-air tea shop, their Kalashnikovs at their sides.


Barenboim to Follow Solti At Chicago Symphony
LEAD: The Chicago Symphony Orchestra yesterday announced the appointment of Daniel Barenboim as the orchestra's next music director.
Mr.
Barenboim, who has often appeared as a guest conductor in Chicago, will succeed Sir Georg Solti beginning with the 1991-92 season.
Sir Georg has led the orchestra since 1969; he will become conductor laureate when Mr.


Italy Embarks on Bold Effort To Save Fabled City of Venice From Threatening Tides
LEAD: IN the Bible, Moses parted the waters.
In Venice, Moses intends to stop them cold.


RJR Nabisco Stock Surges On U.S. Move
LEAD: The stock of RJR Nabisco Inc. rose sharply yesterday after Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company announced an agreement with the staff of the Federal Trade Commission on the buyout firm's acquisition of RJR.


L. H. Chamberlain, 82, Columbia Dean and Vice President
LEAD: Dr.
Lawrence Henry Chamberlain, a former dean of Columbia College and a retired vice president of Columbia University, died of a stroke Sunday at the Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula in Monterey, Calif.
He was 82 years old and lived in Pacific Grove.


What U.S. Said in Affirmative Action Suit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beatrice B. Gould, Ex-Editor, Is Dead at 90
LEAD: Beatrice Blackmar Gould, co-editor with her husband, Bruce, of the Ladies' Home Journal from 1935 until their retirement in 1967, died of Alzheimer's disease yesterday at their home in Hopewell, N.J.
She was 90 years old.


After 8 Soldiers Die in Crash, Canada Pulls Out of Exercises
LEAD: Canada pulled out of joint cold-weather military exercises with the United States today, the morning after eight of its soldiers were killed in the crash of a Canadian transport plane trying to land in icy fog at 50 degrees below zero.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing in Business Day on Friday, about the Grumman Corporation, misstated the size of its work force reduction.
The company will cut 3,100 jobs.


U.S. Closes Afghan Embassy


Empire of America Federal Savngs Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire of America Federal Savngs Bank (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
17,417,000
700,000
Yr net loss
57,294,000
b11,457,000
Per share
-
.38
b-Net income  A sharp increase in the provision for possible loan losses ($78.6 million in 1988, compared with $30.8 million in 1987) was the principal reason for the reversal of the bank's earnings.


Let Magnetic Levitation Trains Help Cure U.S. Economic Blues; Technically Practical
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday about the pianist Barbara Nissman named the concert hall incorrectly for her recital tomorrow at 8 P.M.
She is to perform at Alice Tully Hall, not Merkin Hall.


American Brands Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,000,200,000
2,717,000,000
Net inc
b128,000,000
c155,700,000
Share earns
1.34
1.38
Shares outst
93,317,247
110,330,263
Yr rev
11,980,000,000
10,076,600,000
Net inc
b580,000,000
c521,800,000
Share earns
5.84
4.60
Shares outst
96,708,760
110,154,491


200 Tickets for a Broadway Show Sell for a Song
LEAD: ''Don Giovanni'' came to Broadway yesterday -and so did''Aida,'' ''La Boheme,'' ''Faust,'' ''Tosca,'' ''Rigoletto,'' ''Tannhauser'' and ''Gianni Schicchi.'' And so did ''Gilligan's Island.''


Aceto Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aceto Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,850,000
21,952,000
Net inc
895,000
873,000
Share earns
.24
.23
Shares outst
3,656,294
3,700,160
6mo sales
43,557,000
42,192,000
Net inc
1,493,000
1,462,000
Share earns
.40
.38
Shares outst
3,654,956
3,807,621


New Robot Holds Key To Repair Of Reactors
LEAD: IN an exacting applications of remote-control technology, engineers at the Government's Savannah River nuclear weapons plant have fabricated a computer-guided robot to detect cracks in the walls of nuclear reactors.


Nalco Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nalco Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
261,951,000
230,689,000
Net inc
28,094,000
22,046,000
Share earns
.72
.56
Yr sales
994,150,000
841,876,000
Net inc
105,971,000
80,254,000
Share earns
2.70
2.03


Public Service Co of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co of Colorado (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
413,932,000
420,200,000
Net inc
50,444,000
35,217,000
Share earns
.90
.61
Yr rev
1,685,290,000
1,657,435,000
Net inc
125,019,000
b173,268,000
Share earns
2.14
3.05


Review/Music; Pianist's Cage and Ives
LEAD: Stephen Drury's piano recital last Tuesday night at Merkin Concert Hall led off with thunderous virtuoso showpieces and then turned after the intermission to rarer American experimental music by two of this country's best-known composers, Charles Ives and John Cage.


Jefferson National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson National Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
472,000
284,000
Per share
.20
.12
Yr net inc
1,912,000
1,691,000
Per share
.82
.72


Saztec International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Saztec International
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
4,690,000
1,560,000
Net inc
146,143
b588,449
Share earns
.04
-
6mo rev
8,700,000
3,120,000
Net inc
300,232
b1,070,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Net loss


Unocal and Phillips Nets Up
LEAD: Two large oil companies, the Unocal Corporation and the Phillips Petroleum Corporation, yesterday reported strong increases in fourth-quarter earnings.


Sffed reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sffed (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,479,000
c835,000
Share earns
.45
-
Yr net inc
b19,252,000
16,379,000
Share earns
2.48
2.14
b-Included a $6,500,000 gain from an accounting change.
c-Net loss


Germans Buy Joseph &amp; Feiss
LEAD: Hugo Boss A.G., a West German clothing producer, said Friday that it had acquired the Joseph &amp; Feiss Company, the oldest American tailored clothing producer, and its TJFC Retail Group, consisting of 46 apparel specialty stores around the country.


In New York, School Deficits Called Routine
LEAD: An increasing number of New York City's local school districts have regularly overspent their budgets and the central Board of Education has shown a ''disturbing lack of effectiveness'' in curbing the excessive spending, said a report by the State Comptroller's office.


Group Sues to Block Gene-Transfer Study
LEAD: A group critical of genetic research filed suit today to block the first federally approved attempt to transfer foreign genes into humans.


Copperweld Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Copperweld Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
74,337,000
59,396,000
Net inc
6,088,000
2,699,000
Share earns
.62
.24
Shares outst
8,781,623
8,731,411
Yr sales
294,251,000
224,115,000
Net inc
21,151,000
10,037,000
Share earns
2.13
.87
Shares outst
8,762,683
8,667,761


Sizeler Property Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sizeler Property Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
965,000
1,064,000
Share earns
.26
.29
Yr net inc
3,785,000
3,926,000
Share earns
1.01
1.15





Richard D. Crinkley Dies at 49; Former Beaumont Theater Chief
LEAD: Richmond Crinkley, who became the focus of intense controversy during his five years as executive director of the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center in the early 1980's, died of cancer Sunday at the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, Va.
He was 49 years old.


Dow Chemical Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemical Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,299,000,000
3,597,000,000
Net inc
635,000,000
c352,000,000
Share earns
3.44
1.85
Yr sales
16,682,000,000
13,377,000,000
Net inc
b2,398,000,000
c1,240,000,000
Share earns
12.76
6.47


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Smith Out 6 Days
LEAD: The Sacramento guard Derek Smith was suspended for six days yesterday following what Kings officials described as a ''verbal confrontation'' with Coach Jerry Reynolds.
Bill Stevens, the Kings' assistant director of publicity, said that Smith's confrontation with Reynolds took place during a team meeting yesterday in Milwaukee.


Accord for Darling


S.A.S. Increases Texas Air Holdings
LEAD: Scandinavian Airlines System has increased its stake in the Texas Air Corporation to 7.9 percent from 6.33 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Stockholm-based airline said that it had bought an additional 624,500 Texas Air shares on the open market for prices ranging from $13.87 to $14.87 a share.


Northland Cranberries Inc reports earnings for
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northland Cranberries Inc
(
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,327,000
3,888,000
Net inc
1,372,000
932,000
Share earns
.57
.38
Yr rev
6,792,000
-
Net inc
722,000
-
Share earns
.30
-
The comparable 1987 full year results are unavailable as the company began operations on Aug.


Keystone Financial Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,711,000
5,926,000
Per share
.14
.49
Yr net inc
17,236,000
24,348,000
Per share
1.42
2.00
Additions to the bank's contingency reserve negatively impacted the latest periods' earnings by 30 cents a share for the quarter and 55 cents a share for the year.


Cuomo Might Waive Lilco Pact Condition
LEAD: In a move that could clear the way for a Shoreham settlement, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is considering dropping his insistence that the State Legislature ratify a key provision of the plan.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:  Economic and Social Council GANIZATIONS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


McClatchy Newspapers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McClatchy Newspapers Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
94,559,000
88,272,000
Net inc
9,530,000
b20,549,000
Share earns
.33
.78
Shares outst
28,474,000
26,187,000
Yr rev
355,833,000
331,674,000
Net inc
28,756,000
b37,984,000
Share earns
1.02
1.45
Shares outst
28,238,000
26,187,000


Metro Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,513,000
1,317,000
The per share figures were not applicable; bank converted to stock form on Nov. 10, 1988.


Great American First Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great American First Savings Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
20,114,000
13,071,000
Per share
.84
.54
Yr net inc
50,289,000
88,125,000
Per share
2.08
3.68
The latest periods' results included pre-tax gains of $77.7 million for the quarter and $99 million for the year from the sale of Great American's holdings in Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Britain to Gradually Remove One-Third of Gibraltar Force
LEAD: Britain will withdraw most or all of the infantry battalion stationed in Gibraltar ''in due course,'' Defense Secretary George Younger told Parliament today, reducing the 1,800-member garrison there by as many as 600 soldiers.


Evoking the 30's With a Genteel Air
LEAD: ''Pretty'' was the operative word in the Paris spring and summer couture collections which ended Thursday.
Struggling to regain their lost position as pace setters to the world of fashion, couturiers ignored the exotic, the strange and the revolutionary.


Altus Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altus Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,308,000
b6,722,000
Yr net loss
22,902,000
c776,000
Per share
-
.16
b-After an extraordinary charge of $659,000.
c-Net income and after a tax credit of $682,000.


Ponce Federal Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ponce Federal Bank FSB (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,338,313
b1,882,910
Per share
-
.35
Yr net inc
1,641,158
11,102,840
Per share
.33
2.05
Shares outst
4,952,794
5,418,948
b-Net income


New Theater League Head
LEAD: Cy Feuer has been named president of the League of American Theaters and Producers, the trade association of Broadway producers, theater owners and presenters.
Mr.
Feuer, who has been the league's executive vice president, succeeds Richard Barr, who died Jan. 8.


Miles to Go Before N.B.A. Players Sleep
LEAD: Players and coaches come and go, franchises are bought and sold, but tales of the hardships of the National Basketball Association on the road are never ending.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Combating Global Warming  Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d urged an international effort to counter the threat of global warming caused by pollution.
Page C7.
Prison for Ex-Olympian  Bruce Kimball, an Olympic silver medalist in diving in 1984, was sentenced to 17 years for drunken driving that killed two teen-agers and injured three others.


General Dynamics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Dynamics Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,490,200,000
2,452,900,000
Net inc
b110,200,000
c95,300,000
Share earns
2.64
2.27
Yr sales
9,551,000,000
9,412,100,000
Net inc
b379,000,000
c437,300,000
Share earns
9.03
10.26


Review/Piano; Beethoven by Feltsman
LEAD: Sunday afternoon's piano recital at Avery Fisher Hall was the latest leg in Vladimir Feltsman's quest for the good life in the West.
Slowly and with evident intelligence, this highly publicized, immensely talented emigre from the Soviet Union is making his way from the glare of international politics to a more strictly musical prominence.


Medicare-Glaser Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicare-Glaser Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
31,017,000
28,754,000
Net inc
181,000
194,000
Share earns
.06
.06
9mo sales
88,284,000
80,284,000
Net inc
210,000
b417,000
Share earns
.07
.13


Vision Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vision Sciences
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,300,000
-
Net loss
554,000
-
Yr rev
2,300,000
503,000
Net loss
1,800,000
2,100,000


U.S. Companies Tied to Chemical Sales
LEAD: American and foreign businessmen shipped large quantities of chemicals needed to make poison gas to Jordan, Federal officials said today, broadening an investigation into the illegal shipment of chemicals to the Middle East.
The officials said they believed that the chemicals were ultimately delivered to


Looking at America
LEAD: To go upstairs to a smallish room in the Museum of Modern Art in New York City is to see America hanging on the walls.


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of East Tennessee
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,741,000
b61,000
Per share
-
.04
Yr net loss
2,731,000
b193,000
Per share
-
.14
b-Net income


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1988
From '87
Allegheny Ludlum Corp.
$ 23,600,000
+ 120.6
American Brands Inc.
128,000,000
- 17.8
C. R. Bard Inc.
20,700,000
+ 25.5
Black &amp; Decker Corp.
38,400,000
+ 23.5
Boeing Co.
174,000,000
+ 23.4
Consolidated Freightways
40,300,000
+ 95.6
Dow Chemical Co.


Nicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
463,900,000
427,600,000
Net inc
37,500,000
35,200,000
Share earns
1.24
1.16
Yr rev
1,500,000,000
1,400,000,000
Net inc
106,100,000
83,700,000
Share earns
3.48
2.69


Unocal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unocal Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,653,000,000
2,333,000,000
Net inc
b141,000,000
29,000,000
Share earns
1.21
.26
Yr rev
10,085,000,000
9,393,000,000
Net inc
b480,000,000
181,000,000
Share earns
4.12
1.56


Central Louisiana Electric Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Louisiana Electric Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
68,476,000
65,084,000
Net inc
6,168,000
7,041,000
Share earns
.48
.53
Yr rev
301,091,000
304,409,000
Net inc
43,117,000
44,952,000
Share earns
3.59
3.52


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: American Maize-Products Co., Stamford, Conn., appointed Edmond G. Herve controller.
He succeeds Edward P. Norris, who continues as chief financial officer.


Grenada Sunburst System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grenada Sunburst System (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
3,100,000
2,700,000
Per share
.35
.30
Yr net inc
12,300,000
11,500,000
Per share
1.39
1.30


Seoul Acts On Imports
LEAD: South Korea's top trade official today announced a comprehensive import-liberalization program intended to tackle its surging current account surplus.


The Force of the Fatal Blows Persuaded Jurors of 'Intent'
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg was acquitted of second-degree murder, the most serious charge he faced, because several jurors had doubts about a key element of the count - that he acted with ''depraved indifference'' by failing to get medical help for Lisa Steinberg, jurors said last night.


Technology Research reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Research
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,696,982
1,799,444
Net loss
83,694
244,967
9mo rev
6,022,327
5,339,858
Net inc
54,146
b334,072
b-Net loss  Latest 9-month share net was less than one cent.


Market Place; Tax Angle Is Key To Texaco Accord
LEAD: A BASIC rule of investing is that a dollar now is better than a dollar later.
But Texaco Inc.'s settlement with Carl C. Icahn specifies delayed payouts in a way that will benefit some stockholders - Mr.
Icahn in particular - while doing little to aid either individual or institutional investors.


Boeing Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boeing Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
4,872,000,000
4,639,000,000
Net inc
174,000,000
141,000,000
Share earns
1.14
.92
Yr sales
16,962,000,000
15,505,000,000
Net inc
614,000,000
480,000,000
Share earns
4.02
3.10


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
8.75
DISCOUNT RATE


Unhappy Berry Is Waived By nets
LEAD: When Walter Berry joined the Nets this season, it was supposed to be a happy marriage.
Instead, the relationship ended because of irreconcilable differences.


University National Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University National Bank &amp; Trust
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
819,345
654,987
Per share
1.46
1.26
Yr net inc
2,715,833
1,752,873
Per share
4.84
3.36


Reign Of the 'Terror Bird'


Kimball Gets 7 Years In Accident That Killed 2
LEAD: Bruce Kimball, the former Olympic diver, was sentenced today to 17 years in prison for the deaths of two teen-agers and injuries to three others in a high-speed drunken driving accident last summer.


Rewarding The Muggers
LEAD: It looks as if the Reagan-Shultz diplomatic team didn't move out a day too soon.
They were beginning to tear the plumbing out.
First, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and President Reagan shoved through that historic decision to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization in an almost comically frenzied political fandango with Yasir


First Federal Savings of Monana reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings of Monana (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
378,268
356,677
Per share
.30
.28
6mo net inc
893,459
739,112
Per share
.70
.59


Mexico Is Said to Seek Drug-Corruption Data
LEAD: Mexico has asked Washington for files linking top Mexican law-enforcement officials to the narcotics trade, and former Secretary of State George P. Shultz responded by asking other Government departments to cooperate with the request, American officials said today.


A 2d Polish Priest Is Found Dead
LEAD: A pro-Solidarity priest in northeast Poland was found dead today, evidently of asphyxiation after a fire broke out in his room.


University Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Bank (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
49,000
462,000
Per share
-
.12
Yr net inc
1,650,000
2,065,000
Per share
.29
.56
Shares outst
5,713,000
3,713,000


MPSI Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MPSI Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
12,851,000
7,139,000
Net loss
380,000
b42,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income  The company said the increase in revenue was due mainly to the revenue of Execucom Sytems Corp., acquired in June 1988.


Ronald S. Lauder Enters Mayoral Race


Gorbachev Plans a Visit to Bonn
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, will make his first visit to West Germany in June, the West German Government announced today.


Northwest Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Natural Gas (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
79,416,000
95,963,000
Net inc
8,388,000
10,716,000
Share earns
.72
.99
Yr rev
281,424,000
308,983,000
Net inc
23,720,000
b24,716,000
Share earns
2.00
2.21


New World Seeks a Backer
LEAD: New World Entertainment Ltd., one of a number of Hollywood studios to encounter financial difficulties in recent years, said today that it had hired investment bankers to find a backer for its troubled motion picture business.


Heartland Express reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartland Express
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,430,100
9,145,971
Net inc
751,570
1,223,699
Share earns
.15
.25
Yr rev
26,018,278
34,571,199
Net inc
3,507,304
5,034,295
Share earns
.70
1.01


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press on Saturday about the sentencing of Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist, characterized the charges incorrectly.
They included conspiracy to commit mail fraud involving more than $30 million in defaulted loans, and 11 counts of actual mail fraud involving $294,000 in defaulted loans.


Broadway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broadway Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
950,000
b1,000
Per share
.56
-
Yr net inc
3,262,000
2,024,000
Per share
1.94
1.25
b-Net loss


Oil Rig Count Climbs
LEAD: The number of working rotary oil rigs in the United States rose by eight, to a total of 797, in the week ended last Friday, Baker Hughes Inc., a Houston based oil services company, said yesterday.
The rig count reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil, not the number producing oil.
A year ago there were 964 active rigs.


Review/Music; Baroque by Stravaganza
LEAD: La Stravaganza, a Baroque chamber orchestra led by Dongsok Shin, a harpsichordist, devoted its Sunday afternoon concert at Holy Trinity Church to music of the English Baroque.
The program was dominated, as was the era in question, by a transplanted German, George Frideric Handel.
There was also music by William Boyce and Thomas


Review/Television; CBS's 'Dream Breakers'
LEAD: Remember ''Angels With Dirty Faces,'' the gritty 1938 movie about a couple of pals, one who becomes a crook (James Cagney) and one who becomes a priest (Pat O'Brien)?
Well, Stuart Millar, producer, director and co-writer with Victor Levin of ''Dream Breakers,'' seems to have remembered - but not well enough.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:  INTERNATIONAL A2-12  A severe Nicaraguan austerity plan that cuts the national budget by almost half, was announced by President Ortega in an dramatic move to shore up the nation's rapidly deteriorating economy.
Page A1


Firstbank of Illinois Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstbank of Illinois Co
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,382,000
c1,757,000
Per share
.44
.33
Yr net inc
b5,430,000
c7,477,000
Per share
1.02
1.42
b-After a loss of $1,329,000 from discontinued operations and a loss of $1,739,000 on the sale of Firstbank Mortgage Co.


Soup Stir
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company boasts in an ad that its soups could ''reduce the risk of heart disease.'' It neglects to mention that the soups' high sodium content could also increase that same risk.
Last week, the Federal Trade Commission rightly cited Campbell's for making misleading health claims.


L.I. Suspect Sought in Five Midwest Shootings
LEAD: People here who know Yusef Abdullah Rahman, the 20-year-old man charged Sunday in five sniper attacks in two eastern Long Island towns, describe him as a quiet, playful man who was devoutly religious.
But to the police in the Middle West, Mr.
Rahman was known as a devious, methodical killer.


Alliance Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alliance Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
9,200
b571,000
Per share
-
.52
Yr net inc
1,812,000
2,614,000
Per share
1.65
2.35
b-Net income


Gains at U-Haul Dampened By Feud in Owning Family
LEAD: The family that controls 90 percent of U-Haul International Inc. is feuding, even as the truck-rental company enjoys a turnaround.


Guardsman Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardsman Products Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,955,000
32,811,000
Net inc
1,463,000
1,244,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Yr sales
145,087,000
127,559,000
Net inc
6,484,000
5,210,000
Share earns
1.19
.96


Goldman Cuts Bond-Unit Jobs
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company yesterday joined the ranks of investment banks that have announced job cutbacks, disclosing the elimination of about 65 jobs in its fixed-income department.


Kaman Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
191,723,000
188,837,000
Net inc
4,875,000
6,434,000
Share earns
.27
.36
Yr rev
767,851,000
707,539,000
Net inc
25,299,000
24,140,000
Share earns
1.42
1.37


Commonwealth Energy Sysem reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Energy Sysem (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
180,764,000
172,893,000
Net inc
13,105,000
9,755,000
Share earns
1.33
.99
Yr rev
676,988,000
660,443,000
Net inc
34,959,000
32,354,000
Share earns
3.50
3.20


A Correction
LEAD: Following is a corrected version of a graph that appeared incorrectly on Thursday, Jan. 26, with an article on climate in the United States.


Cuts at Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc., which said Friday that its profits had risen 4.7 percent in the fourth quarter, announced a voluntary program to trim its payroll.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Rice Seeks Attention But Softens Remarks
LEAD: Jerry Rice, voted the most valuable player in the Super Bowl after his 11 pass receptions for 215 yards and one touchdown helped the San Francisco 49ers to a 20-16 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals, yesterday received the booty that goes with the award, a 1989 Subaru XT6 and the m.v.p. trophy.
Then the wide receiver protested at a news conference that his complaints last week about not receiving proper recognition from the news media were ''blown out of proportion.


Hanna, M A Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna, M A Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
250,264,000
230,481,000
Net inc
13,081,000
9,734,000
Share earns
.51
.37
Shares outst
21,550,806
20,456,327
Yr rev
1,084,940,000
496,724,000
Net inc
b83,223,000
36,281,000
Share earns
3.48
1.65
Shares outst
21,501,609
17,838,026


Chess
LEAD: After Game 6 of the quarterfinal world championship candidates match in Quebec between the Canadian grandmaster Kevin Spraggett and the Soviet grandmaster Artur Yusupov was drawn in Quebec on Sunday, the series was deadlocked at 3-3.
The players will now commence two tiebreak games with Yusupov having White today and Spraggett


Jackson's Half Brother Is Guilty in a Stabbing
LEAD: A mistrial was declared Saturday on murder and conspiracy charges against Noah Robinson, a Chicago businessman and a half brother of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, after a jury convicted him of being an accessory in the stabbing of a gangland murder witness.


TSI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSI Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,631,000
7,475,000
Net inc
545,000
325,000
Share earns
.22
.13
9mo rev
24,277,000
21,828,000
Net inc
991,000
869,000
Share earns
.40
.35


Attacker of a Bronx Teacher Is Sentenced to 5-15 Years
LEAD: A man who used a baseball bat to beat a Bronx gym teacher, blinding him in one eye and permanently damaging his hearing, was sentenced yesterday to 5 to 15 years in prison.


United New Mexico Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United New Mexico Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,585,000
972,000
Share earns
.38
.25
Yr net inc
4,054,000
3,616,000
Share earns
.97
.92


First Ohio Bancshares Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Ohio Bancshares Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,706,418
2,863,751
Per share
.61
.64
Yr net inc
b7,585,069
8,029,488
Per share
1.70
1.78
b-After income of $2.4 million, or 54 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for federal income taxes.


Powerful New Ataris
LEAD: NEIL Harris, for years an executive of the Atari Corporation, likes to say that the Atari and the Amiga live in the ''ghetto'' of personal computing.
Users in the mainstream - that is, users of I.B.M.-compatible and Macintosh computers - prefer to pretend that Atari and Amiga do not exist, even though the machines are better in some ways, and are more cost-effective for many users.


Gibson Greetings Head Will Retire on Feb. 28
LEAD: Thomas M. Cooney, who built Gibson Greetings Inc. into a major player and kept his job through several changes of ownership, plans to retire as chairman on Feb. 28.


Sports People: FIGURE SKATING; Kadavy Still Injured
LEAD: Caryn Kadavy, who dropped out of the 1988 Olympic figure skating competition because of the flu, has withdrawn from the national championships, scheduled to begin next week in Baltimore.
Kadavy, who was regarded as a co-favorite with Jill Trenary, has been suffering from a stress fracture in one ankle and a pinched nerve in the other.


A Lesson Of Crisis
LEAD: It all seems a bit ridiculous now, rather like looking back on a childhood squabble in the schoolyard in which both sides engaged in bluff and threat rather than real fighting.


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Power &amp; Light Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
561,319,000
507,008,000
Net inc
43,723,000
68,034,000
Share earns
.44
.74
Yr rev
2,273,362,000
2,081,385,000
Net inc
196,813,000
348,925,000
Share earns
2.04
3.09


Doctors Are Urged to Donate More Medical Care to the Poor
LEAD: MEDICAL leaders are urging doctors to renew their ancient traditions and donate more care to the poor.


Base Ten Systems reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Base Ten Systems (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1988
1987
Revenue
36,678,000
33,325,000
Net loss
b2,948,000
c1,274,000
Share earns
-
.36
b-Included a provision of $2,524,000 to cover expected losses during the disposal period of BT Telecom Inc.


U.S. Wants Help on Imbalances in Trade
LEAD: The Bush Administration will take steps to cut the United States trade and budget deficits, David C. Mulford, Under Secretary of the Treasury, said at a conference here today.


Trustcorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustcorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
141,270,000
135,603,000
Net loss
14,570,000
b13,872,000
Share earns
-
.87
Yr rev
569,810,000
510,127,000
Net inc
24,944,000
47,832,000
Share earns
1.44
2.91


Molson in U.S. Goes to Lintas
LEAD: The Martlet Importing Company in North Hills, L.I., has tapped Lintas:New York, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to create advertising for Molson beer in the United States.
The budget is in the $10 million to $12 million range.
After a monthlong competition, the agency bested two other New York-based agencies, Wells, Rich, Greene and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, the incumbent, which had handled the account for four years.


Steinberg Is Guilty of First-Degree Manslaughter
LEAD: Joel B. Steinberg was convicted of first-degree manslaughter last night in the death of Lisa Steinberg, the 6-year-old child he and Hedda Nussbaum raised in their Greenwich Village apartment.


ISI Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ISI Systems Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
10,699,000
9,001,000
Net inc
1,847,000
1,263,000
Share earns
.28
.19
6mo rev
21,753,000
17,452,000
Net inc
3,667,000
2,476,000
Share earns
.55
.37


Office Club Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Club Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
19,419,000
5,502,000
Net loss
949,000
946,000
Yr sales
52,090,000
10,939,000
Net loss
3,232,000
2,280,000


SAY Packaging Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SAY Packaging Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
5,022,200
4,205,307
Net loss
95,535
b69,080
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
9,243,181
8,950,153
Net loss
340,242
b312,004
Share earns
-
.07
b-Net income


Priam Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Priam Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
32,040,000
34,661,000
Net loss
4,785,000
b417,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
66,035,000
65,801,000
Net loss
4,635,000
2,054,000
b-Net income


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Canon Inc. is issuing $600 million of 4 1/8 percent four-year bonds in the Euromarket with equity purchase warrants at a price of 101 1/8 through Yamaichi International.
The company is also issuing $400 million of a similar bond in an Asian financing through Nomura International.


Greenwich Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenwich Financial Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
637,000
472,000
Per share
.24
-
The year-ago first quarter per share figure was not applicable because the company went public in April 1988.


Mysterious Radiation
LEAD: Radiation from the core of the Milky Way that mysteriously ceased after 1980, has resumed, according to data obtained from two high-flying balloons over Australia.


Scientific-Atlanta Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific-Atlanta Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
128,501,000
123,956,000
Net inc
9,186,000
7,890,000
Share earns
.38
.33
6mo sales
253,445,000
252,231,000
Net inc
15,918,000
13,775,000
Share earns
.66
.58


Firm to Acquire Crosby Associates
LEAD: Alexander Proudfoot P.L.C., a British management-consulting firm, said it would acquire an American counterpart, Philip Crosby Associates Inc., for $9.50 a share, or $67 million.
Crosby's shares soared $1.75 today, to $9.375, on the American Stock Exchange, where its 23 percent gain was the second largest of the day.





LCS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LCS Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,593,064
9,302,872
Net inc
b80,096
29,241
Share earns
.05
.02
b-After a tax credit of $24,000.


First Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
436,000
285,000
Per share
.56
.37
Yr net inc
1,725,000
821,000
Per share
2.23
-
The company went public in April 1987.


Schering-Plough Drug Is Approved
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said it had approved the use of a hormone-blocking drug made by the Schering-Plough Corporation to help slow the progress of prostate cancer.
The drug, flutamide, is to be sold under the name Eulexin.
The F.D.A. said a National Cancer Institute study found that patients taking flutamide in combination with leuprolide - a drug already on the United States market - survived an average of 34.9 months, or nearly 25 percent longer than patients taking leuprolide alone.


Curt George Segeler, Scoutmaster, 88
LEAD: Curt George Segeler, a retired chemical engineer and a Boy Scout leader for almost 66 years, died of cancer on Jan. 22.
He was 88 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Robert Knudsen Dies; Photographer Was 61
LEAD: Robert LeRoy Knudsen, a White House photographer from 1946 until 1974, died of a heart attack Friday at the Bethesda Naval Hospital in Maryland.
He was 61 years old and lived in Annandale, Va.


BRIEFS
LEAD: A. M. E. Inc., Burbank, Calif., said its employee stock ownership plan was considering making an offer to buy the company, which earlier agreed to be acquired for $13.75 a share by AOAG Inc.


Many Donors to Neediest Cases Earmark Gifts
LEAD: To help an older person remain at home, June Bruce of Great Neck, L.I., sent $100 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
She requested, as she has for the last 24 years, that her contribution be directed to the Community Service Society of New York.


U.S. Shuts Kabul Offices But Storm Prevents Exit
LEAD: The United States formally closed its embassy in Kabul today amid fears of a breakdown of law and order in the Afghan capital.


Another Hershiser Shutout
LEAD: Holding a microphone in front of the dais at the New York Baseball Writers dinner, Pat Cooper was working the room.
With a glance at Dallas Green, the comedian wondered how long the Yankees' new manager would last in the dugout.


Hartford Court Upholds Removal of Life Support
LEAD: Connecticut's highest court, taking up the first major challenge to the state's right-to-die law, ruled today that the family of a comatose accident victim may legally remove the feeding tube keeping her alive.


Brown's Path Clear For Leader of Party As Contender Quits
LEAD: Former Representative James Jones withdrew today from the race for chairman of the Democratic National Committee, leaving Ronald H. Brown the only candidate and a certain winner.


Atwood Oceanics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atwood Oceanics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
7,148,000
3,048,000
Net loss
480,000
3,369,000


Tyson Presents Settlement Offer
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the heavyweight champion, has signed a second settlement agreement in hopes that Robin Givens will sign it and allow divorce proceedings to continue, the fighter's attorney said today.


BankWorcester Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankWorcester Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
4,020,000
2,628,000
Per share
.55
.32
Shares outst
7,344,000
8,160,000
Yr net inc
11,036,000
9,954,000
Per share
1.45
1.22
Shares outst
7,604,000
8,160,000


Importer of Yugo Seeks Protection
LEAD: Global Motors Inc., the American importer of the Yugo, filed for protection under Federal bankruptcy law yesterday, and the car's Yugoslav manufacturer petitioned the court for permission to operate Global while it is being reorganized.


Seahawks Lose General Manager
LEAD: Mike McCormack, the Seattle Seahawks' president and general manager for the past six years, is leaving the team, the new owner, Ken Behring, announced tonight.


Control Data's Quest For a Transformation
LEAD: In the three years since he took the helm of the Control Data Corporation, Robert M. Price has pursued a wide-ranging restructuring of the company, once one of the world's most innovative computer makers.


Read This and Win $10 Million!!
LEAD: Later today, David C. Sayer will trot out his annual imitation of Michael Anthony, the dispenser of million-dollar checks on the old television show ''The Millionaire.'' Unlike his role model, however, Mr.
Sayer is quite real.
And with both the economy and customer expectations inflated, the check he will award is part of a $10 million prize.


U.S. Would Limit Doctor 'Kickbacks'
LEAD: The Government has called for public comment on regulations intended to crack down on physicians who make large profits by referring patients to laboratories or clinics in which the doctors have a financial stake.


Polifly Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polifly Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,136,000
904,000
Share earns
.52
-
6mo net inc
2,428,000
2,087,000
Share earns
1.11
-
Year-ago share earnings were not available because the company was not publicly held a year ago.


V.A. Penalties In Gift Inquiry
LEAD: The Veterans Administration said it had disciplined 32 employees for conflicts of interest in accepting gifts and fees from drug companies.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
1,589,813,000
1,403,257,000
Net inc
41,131,000
b56,780,000
Share earns
.61
.93
Yr rev
5,932,079,000
5,376,504,000
Net inc
222,124,000
b251,168,000
Share earns
3.51
4.14


Treasury Notes and Bonds Ease By KENNETH N. GILPIN
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell in very sluggish trading yesterday, as market participants took profits following last week's strong rally and assumed a defensive stance in advance of a slew of upcoming economic and political developments later in the week.


Finally, a Sound Plan for the Schools
LEAD: Despite the extraordinary good will that surrounded his arrival last March, New York City's Schools Chancellor, Richard Green, has yet to mobilize widespread discontent with the school system into a force for bold reform.
But after nearly a full year in office, he at last offers New Yorkers a clear picture of his hopes and dreams for the nation's largest school system.


New Hampshire Savings Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Hampshire Savings Bank Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
1,182,000
b2,433,000
Per share
-
.39
Yr net inc
3,155,000
9,177,000
Per share
.51
1.48
b-Net income  The latest fourth quarter and year included an after-tax charge of $3,960,000 from an addition to loan loss reserves; the year also included an after-tax charge of $3,011,000 from merger and reorganization expenses.


Ortega Unveils Austerity Plan For Nicaragua
LEAD: Taking dramatic steps to shore up Nicaragua's rapidly deteriorating economy, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra announced a tough austerity program today.
Officials said the program would slash the national budget by nearly half, requiring the discharge of up to 35,000 public employees and military personnel.


Ying-Ying Is Dead
LEAD: Ying-Ying, believed to be the world's most prolific panda in captivity outside China, has died, apparently after a bout of depression over the death of her mate.
Ying-Ying died Sunday, a zoo official said, after her lifelong mate, Pe-Pe, died in October.


New G.M. Van
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation is developing an extended version of its Chevrolet passenger van that could be used for commercial hauling, an executive vice president, Lloyd Reuss, said.
But Mr.
Reuss refused to comment on a report that the longer van would be introduced in the fall.
Metalworking News also reported that the van would seat 17 people -two more than can be seated by the longest Ford van on the market.


Salomon Suffers 'Junk Bond' Defections
LEAD: Salomon Brothers Inc. suffered another round of defections yesterday when four members of the ''junk bond'' department, including the head trader, resigned from the firm.


Ruin vs. Renewal: When $56,000 Houses Go Begging
LEAD: Thomas and Paula Pilkington won a lottery.
Their prize was their dream: the chance to buy a new, three-bedroom house for $56,000, one-third the average price of a house on Long Island.
They turned it down.


Cytogen Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cytogen Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
851,000
2,486,000
Net loss
b6,911,000
2,339,000
Yr rev
5,905,000
11,423,000
Net loss
b17,821,000
4,193,000
b-Included pre-tax writeoffs of $2,885,000 for the quarter and $3,452,000 for the year.


Books of The Times; Ordinariness of Love and Loss
LEAD:  Equal Affections  By David Leavitt  268 pages.
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. $18.95.


First Union Real Estate Equity &amp; Mortgage Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Real Estate Equity &amp; Mortgage Investments (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
18,910,000
18,927,000
Net inc
b5,450,000
c5,992,000
Share earns
.31
.33
Yr rev
73,390,000
73,892,000
Net inc
c23,398,000
c26,016,000
Share earns
1.30
1.43


Lesco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lesco Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1988
1987
Sales
34,335,000
31,820,000
Net inc
1,760,000
1,537,000
Share earns
.43
.38
Yr sales
100,288,000
88,759,000
Net inc
2,727,000
2,126,000
Share earns
.67
.52


Hercules Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hercules Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
749,000,000
678,000,000
Net inc
b6,500,000
38,000,000
Share earns
.15
.73
Yr sales
2,802,000,000
2,693,000,000
Net inc
b120,400,000
c820,700,000
Share earns
2.55
14.74


Our Towns; After Therapy, Child of Privilege Spurns Drugs
LEAD: John Pierce had a privileged upbringing.
As a boy he went to private schools and for three years was a regular on ''Sesame Street.'' A lot was expected.
His grandfather, Ralph Bunche, the United Nations leader, was the first black to win the Nobel Prize.
His father, Burton, held a high-ranking job in the Lindsay administration.


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,007,000
1,415,000
Per share
.30
.38
Yr net inc
3,417,000
5,114,000
Per share
.94
1.37
The 1987 earnings were enhanced by a gain of $533,000 in the fourth quarter on a joint venture investment.


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tolland Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
319,000
297,000
Per share
.28
.25
Yr net inc
1,077,000
1,151,000
Per share
.93
.99


Xicor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xicor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
27,738,000
23,152,000
Net inc
3,314,000
3,257,000
Share earns
.18
.21
Shares outst
18,361,000
7,737,000
Yr rev
90,138,000
64,688,000
Net inc
13,999,000
7,737,000
Share earns
.79
.53
Shares outst
17,828,000
14,631,000


G.M. Saturn Dealers
LEAD: A group of 26 men Sunday became the first franchised dealers for the General Motors Corporation's Saturn subsidiary.
The 26 dealers, based in large automobile-selling markets in 11 states, are the first of about 90 dealers who will begin selling Saturn cars in the fall of 1990, said Donald Hudler, Saturn's vice president for sales, service and marketing.


Fulton Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fulton Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
106,000
116,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Yr net inc
b3,022,000
c514,000
Share earns
.72
.12
b-Included a $4,800,000 gain on sales of loans and mortgage-backed securities, property and equipment, and investment securities, as well as $2,400,000 in gains from the sale of an interest rate swap in conjunction with the refinancing of certain short-term borrowings into five-year, fixed-rate borrowings.


Schools Can Nip Criminal Careers in the Bud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Banks of Iowa Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
7,738,513
4,038,000
Per share
2.05
.97
Yr net inc
21,186,000
13,657,000
Per share
5.34
3.52


Detroit Papers' Merger Set; Opponents to Continue Fight
LEAD: The owners of Detroit's two daily newspapers said yesterday that they would merge the business operations of their publications Monday as a result of a court decision last week that approved a waiver of antitrust law.


Sports People: FOOTBALL; Wilson Is Sentenced
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the Cincinnati Bengals running back who was banned from playing in the Super Bowl for violating the National Football League's substance abuse policy, appeared in court in Newport, Ky., yesterday and received an unspecified sentence on an unrelated charge of disorderly conduct.
The charge related to his urinating on the sidewalk outside a northern Kentucky nightclub Jan.


Backing Seen For Globex
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which polices futures exchanges, is expected to vote Thursday to approve a proposal by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange to begin the first computerized network available to futures traders around the world.


Let Magnetic Levitation Trains Help Cure U.S. Economic Blues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Scott Paper Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
1,285,000,000
1,101,000,000
Net inc
80,900,000
67,500,000
Share earns
1.05
.88
Yr sales
4,726,400,000
4,122,000,000
Net inc
400,900,000
233,800,000
Share earns
5.23
3.05


Pricor Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pricor Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
3,966,292
1,954,658
Net loss
60,913
359,523
9mo rev
10,401,582
6,570,490
Net loss
428,879
1,037,923


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This jury has overcome incredible odds.
We were almost hopelessly divided.
It was clear from the beginning that the only way to arrive at a verdict was to keep talking.
It's not always easy to do.
In the final analysis, everything we accomplished was due to a sense of humor and willingness to work together.


Sandwich Chef reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandwich Chef
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
8,103,700
7,761,800
Net loss
94,700
74,500
6mo rev
16,634,700
15,637,000
Net inc
27,500
2,300
Share earns
.03
-


Wesbanco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesbanco Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,069,000
1,461,000
Per share
.94
.67
Yr net inc
7,578,000
6,143,000
Per share
3.46
2.76


Mylan Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mylan Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
22,228,000
22,674,000
Net inc
3,758,000
5,248,000
Share earns
.10
.15
9mo sales
66,352,000
69,279,000
Net inc
14,510,000
17,529,000
Share earns
.40
.49


Private Panel Backs Health Care for All
LEAD: All Americans would be guaranteed basic medical services and all but the poorest citizens would be required to help share the costs under a national health care system proposed today by a private commission.


BUSH STAFF BACKS RISE IN PREMIUMS PAID BY BANKERS
LEAD: Senior Administration officials said today that they would urge President Bush to approve an increase in Federal deposit insurance premiums paid by banks and other lending institutions to rescue troubled savings and loan institutions and to back away from a proposal for a fee on savings deposits.


NEW RULES ISSUED ON PATIENTS' CARE IN NURSING HOMES
LEAD: Nursing homes will be required to inform patients of their rights and to take specific steps to improve care under long-delayed regulations issued today by the Department of Health and Human Services.


NASA to Begin Drug Tests
LEAD: Random drug testing for key personnel, including astronauts, will start in March at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the chief of the agency has announced.


U.S. Incomes After Taxes 3.8% Higher
LEAD: Americans' after-tax incomes increased 3.8 percent last year, with some of the extra money going to raise the nation's personal savings rate from the 40-year low of a year before.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:  GOLF  Mochrie Wins Playoff: Dottie Moch-rie sank a 2-foot putt for par on the fifth extra hole of the L.P.G.A.
Oldsmobile Classic yesterday in Boca Raton, Fla., ending a sudden-death playoff with Beth Daniel, whose last shot lipped the cup and failed to fall.
Mochrie and Daniel, both former Furman University students who starred at the school in different decades, played four holes of the playoff before officials suspended play because of darkness Sunday night at Stonebridge Golf and Country Club.


Cityfed May Face A Proxy Fight
LEAD: The Lehigh Financial Corporation, a Union, N.J., mortgage company, said it might start a proxy fight for a seat on the board of the Cityfed Financial Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Lehigh said it ''has become unsatisfied with the performance of Cityfed'' since it bought its 7.3 percent stake in the Palm Beach,


Terminal Data Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terminal Data Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1988
1987
Sales
5,567,000
6,673,000
Net inc
79,000
b187,000
Share earns
.02
.04
b-Included a $144,000 tax benefit.


Inquiry on Commodities Is Defended by Officials
LEAD: Federal officials said today that top officials of the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation knew of the huge undercover investigation of the commodities markets from the start and had approved of the investigators' techniques.


Auto Dealers' President Sets Stage for Change
LEAD: Big Three automobile executives are bracing for what may well be a year of discord with the influential organization that represents their franchise dealers.


2 Warring Shiite Muslim Militias Sign Truce Agreement in Lebanon
LEAD: Leaders of Lebanon's rival Shiite Muslim militias signed a peace agreement today that they said would end a year of bitter fighting.


LA Gear Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LA Gear Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
63,861,000
22,550,000
Net inc
6,244,000
1,218,000
Share earns
.72
.15
Yr sales
223,700,000
70,575,000
Net inc
22,030,000
4,371,000
Share earns
2.58
.54


57th St. Loc., 2 TVs/Rm., $400 a Night
LEAD: Reflecting the voracious appetite of foreign investors for Manhattan real estate, developers backed by $300 million from Japan are planning a new East 57th Street hotel that will vie for the distinction of being New York's most luxurious, and will charge more than $400 a night for a single room.


Mosinee Paper Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
52,819,000
56,301,000
Net inc
3,583,000
1,550,000
Share earns
.48
.20
Yr sales
231,947,000
215,982,000
Net inc
9,477,000
5,714,000
Share earns
1.24
.73


Volunteer Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volunteer Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
817,000
691,000
Per share
.37
.31
Yr net inc
3,015,000
2,550,000
Per share
1.37
1.39
Shares outst
2,206,677
1,839,363


New Technology From Du Pont
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said it had developed proprietary technology for compounds that in some cases can replace fully halogenated chlorofluorocarbons, which are used to service refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment.
Du Pont said the three-component blends have an ozone-depletion potential about 97 percent less than that of chlorofluorocarbon-12, one of the products suspected of depleting the earth's ozone layer.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
544,400,000
514,300,000
Net inc
50,600,000
52,600,000
Share earns
.71
.71
Shares outst
71,700,000
74,200,000
Yr rev
2,272,400,000
2,147,100,000
Net inc
296,300,000
302,100,000
Share earns
4.09
4.06
Shares outst
72,400,000
74,400,000


Bard, C R Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bard, C R Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
191,900,000
167,600,000
Net inc
20,700,000
16,500,000
Share earns
.37
.29
Yr sales
757,500,000
641,300,000
Net inc
78,700,000
62,300,000
Share earns
1.38
1.07


Bush, but Not Reagan, Is Out of North Trial
LEAD: President Bush will not testify at the criminal trial of Oliver L. North, but former President Reagan may be asked to appear and parts of his personal diary could be used as evidence, the Federal judge in the case ruled today.


Sanford Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanford Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
30,740,000
22,901,000
Net inc
5,379,000
4,594,000
Share earns
.54
.45
Yr sales
102,376,000
83,796,000
Net inc
17,642,000
13,092,000
Share earns
1.77
1.28


Andal Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andal Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
24,799,000
24,255,000
Net loss
225,000
388,000


Perkins Family Restaurants LP reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkins Family Restaurants LP (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
39,071,000
33,917,000
Net inc
1,761,000
1,156,000
Share earns
.17
.12
Yr rev
150,002,000
134,840,000
Net inc
9,710,000
8,011,000
Share earns
.95
.79


Sports People: BASKETBALL; Ellison Recovering
LEAD: An examination of Pervis Ellison's injured left knee yesterday revealed that the University of Louisville basketball star had suffered no serious damage.
Dr.
Rudy Ellis, the team's physician, said a special X-ray machine that can see through the knee confirmed that Ellison sprained the medial collateral ligament.


USA Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USA Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
530,000
320,000
Per share
.21
.13
Yr net inc
2,549,000
2,175,000
Per share
1.01
.86


First National Bank of Michigan Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bank of Michigan Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
487,000
155,000
Per share
.45
.14
Yr net inc
2,448,000
2,214,000
Per share
2.23
2.12


Tall Task for 7-6 Draft Pick
LEAD: For Jorge Gonzalez, it is a short distance to the rim of a basket, but it will be a long trip to the National Basketball Association.


Black &amp; Decker Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black &amp; Decker Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 25
1988
1987
Sales
705,500,000
612,300,000
Net inc
38,400,000
31,100,000
Share earns
.65
.53
Latest quarter included a tax credit of $6.3 million, or 11 cents a share.


Phillips Petroleum Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
2,860,000,000
2,932,000,000
Net inc
135,000,000
33,000,000
Share earns
.55
.12
Shares outst
243,297,000
228,344,000
Yr rev
11,490,000,000
10,917,000,000
Net inc
650,000,000
35,000,000
Share earns
2.72
.06
Shares outst
234,984,000
228,326,000


President to Succeed Roderick in USX Job
LEAD: The USX Corporation said yesterday that Charles A. Corry, its president, would succeed David M. Roderick as chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Roderick retires on May 31 at age 65.


Columbia First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia First Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
909,000
557,000
Share earns
.35
.23


Q&amp;A
LEAD:  Q.Where does the air supply come from for extended space missions?
A.
On past space flights, the components of breathable air, oxygen and nitrogen, were brought up in canisters.


Smithsonian Votes Plan for an American Indian Museum
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution today approved a plan to build a major museum of the American Indian on the Mall in Washington and to place a substantial adjunct to it in the Custom House in lower Manhattan.


Reign of the Feather
LEAD: Feathers are flying - out of the stores, that is.
Ostrich plumes, at $75 a dozen, in black or ivory, are blowing out of the OMO Norma Kamali store in SoHo.
Garment-district trim suppliers have had a flurry of sales of feathers as a fashion accessory and as an exotic alternative to fur.


Talking Business with Cornstein of Finlay Enterprises; A Bright Outlook For Retail Jewelry
LEAD: Jewelry retailing is undergoing a round of restructuring and consolidation.
A good example was the recent management buyout of Finlay Fine Jewelry, a New York-based operator of leased jewelry concessions in department stores, by an investor group led by Harold S. Geneen, the former chairman of the ITT Corporation.


FAR-RIGHT INROADS UNNERVE BERLINERS
LEAD: A surprisingly strong electoral showing by a far-right party in West Berlin sent shock waves through the city and across West Germany today.


Devon Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devon Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
39,299,000
32,299,000
Net inc
2,390,000
1,979,000
Share earns
.23
.18
9mo sales
125,092,000
107,973,000
Net inc
9,938,000
9,246,000
Share earns
.95
.82


Mutual Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mutual Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
461,000
522,000
Per share
.58
-
The company went public in April 1988.


Heritage Financial Services Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Services Inc
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,787,000
1,486,000
Per share
.56
.45
Yr net inc
6,457,000
6,137,000
Per share
2.01
1.83


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
1,544,025
2,148,060
Per share
.24
.31
Yr net inc
6,887,104
10,923,349
Per share
1.03
1.55


Some 'Lexus' Use Allowed
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation may keep using the Lexus name for its forthcoming line of luxury cars except in national advertising until a decision is handed down in a trademark-infringement case, a Federal appeals court said yesterday.


For the 15th Year, Ballet in the Hands And Heart of Eliot Feld
LEAD: Eliot Feld was ballet's favorite young upstart in 1969 when he founded his first dance company - a troupe of mostly gawky yet gifted youngsters who had gone from advanced ballet training straight into what one critic likened to the children's crusades.


Corrections
LEAD: The Economic Scene column in Business Day on Jan. 18 misidentified the organization with which David Goldstein is affiliated.
He studied the energy efficiency of large appliances for the Natural Resources Defense Council.


U.S. Attorney in Massachusetts Quits Amid Inquiry
LEAD: Faced with a Federal investigation of his conduct and overt hostility from his staff, the United States Attorney in Massachusetts, Frank L. McNamara Jr., resigned today, saying, ''The work of this office is far too important to be sidetracked by any controversy.''


Olympic Champion Finds Races Yet to Be Won
LEAD: ''She just hates my airport workouts,'' Bob Kersee said yesterday, nodding toward his wife, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, whose wince seemed to prove her husband right.
Once, at San Francisco International with time to kill before a flight, Bob set up five garbage cans for a hurdle drill.
He wanted Jackie to practice getting her trail leg higher.


Koch's Plan for Staff Cuts Is Assailed
LEAD: Officials said yesterday that New Yorkers would see fewer police officers and firefighters on the city's streets - streets that would be dirtier - if the city imposed the stringent financial plan envisioned by Mayor Edward I. Koch.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
2,521,830
1,866,866
Per share
1.05
.78
Yr net inc
9,323,433
8,672,361
Per share
3.87
3.60
The latest periods' results included a gain of $436,946, or 18 cents a share, on the termination of the bank's pension plan.


Houston Journal; In the Dollar Dances, Sadness Leads
LEAD: Jessica is 21 years old and lives with her 5-year-old daughter on the east side of downtown, in a neighborhood where life is lived in Spanish.


Yugoslav Military Warns Feuding Politicians
LEAD: The military issued a stern warning today to politicians who ''are pushing our Yugoslav ship toward the rocks of catastrophe.''


Three Elected To Football Hall
LEAD: Matt Hazeltine, once a star linebacker for the San Francisco 49ers; Jack Green, the captain of Army's 1945 team, and Joe Aillet, a longtime coach at Louisiana Tech, were elected posthumously yesterday to the National Football Foundation's College Football Hall of Fame.


John N. Gentry, 58, a Labor Aide to Carter
LEAD: John Newton Gentry, a lawyer and labor arbitrator who served as Under Secretary of Labor in the Carter Administration, died of cancer Friday at Washington Hospital Center in Washington.
He was 58 years old and lived in Reston, Va.


Koss Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Koss Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
7,131,043
8,616,867
Net inc
b530,756
c998,357
Share earns
.14
.22
6mo sales
14,681,355
15,537,710
Net inc
b1,193,734
c1,743,109
Share earns
.30
.38
b-After tax credits of $37,000 for the quarter and $90,000 for the 6 months.


Clues to Allergy Emerge From New Cell Studies
LEAD: BUOYED by a rush of research findings about the development of allergic reactions at the molecular level, scientists are now attempting to devise new ways to block allergies before they can even begin.


Chinese-Soviet Detente: Not to Be Feared
LEAD: The visit of the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, to Beijing this Thursday will mark another milestone in a Chinese-Soviet rapprochement that is unfolding with little fanfare and insufficient scrutiny - even as it redraws the political landscape of Asia.


Transactions
LEAD:  Baseball
HOUSTON (NL) - Agreed to terms with Juan Agosto and Jim Deshaies, pitchers, and Billy Hatcher, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
MILWAUKEE (AL) - Agreed to terms with Juan Nieves, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA (NL) - Signed Bruce Ruffin and Larry McWilliams, pitchers, to one-year contracts.


Mergers Set Record in '88
LEAD: Corporate takeover activity reached a record $311.4 billion last year and Wall Street firms earned a record $1.28 billion in fees from the deals, IDD Information Services reported yesterday.


Regional Bancorp Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Bancorp Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
954,000
1,065,000
Per share
.34
.30
Shares outst
2,845,293
3,493,775
Yr net inc
4,196,000
6,491,000
Per share
1.33
1.77
Shares outst
3,164,171
3,671,789


Review/Recital; Diverse Array of Songs
LEAD: It was toward the end of Mary Ann Hart's program of songs Friday evening at Weill Recital Hall that one began to see clearly what makes Ms.
Hart a special singer.
In two groups of American songs - several comic, some sentimental, some bold and nostalgic, one new and Manhattan-in-the-80's neurotic - she proved herself a master of timing, diction and interplay with the audience.


Farley May Seek A Loan Change
LEAD: Farley Industries said it might try to refinance or modify its bank credit agreements so that it would not have to sell some assets of West Point-Pepperell Inc. if it acquired the company.


CSC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSC Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
55,636,000
53,888,000
Net inc
1,304,000
b14,247,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
233,328,000
191,445,000
Net inc
3,176,000
b7,908,000
Share earns
.37
-


Fossil 'Terror Bird' Offers Clues to Evolution
LEAD: The discovery in Antarctica of the fossil beak of a giant carnivorous ''terror bird,'' taller than a human being, is casting additional light on the role of that continent, now largely buried in ice, in the evolution and worldwide spread of species.


Joint Effort Urged to Guard Climate
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d called today for international political action to counter the threat of global warming caused by pollutants.


Robinson Nugent Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robinson Nugent Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
12,360,000
12,698,000
Net inc
280,000
685,000
Share earns
.05
.10
6mo sales
25,124,000
24,598,000
Net inc
751,000
b1,443,000
Share earns
.12
.21


Nevada Goldfields reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nevada Goldfields
Qtr to Dec 10
1988
1987
Sales
3,708,226
4,526,830
Net loss
480,123
b300,704
Share earns
-
.03
6mo sales
8,893,817
9,480,328
Net loss
100,382
b1,968,844
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income


Rangers Thwart Islanders at Garden Again
LEAD: One of the blissful realizations that descends upon a first-place team is that it can control what happens to it on any given night.


Chicago Picks Barenboim


People
LEAD: * Gavin Scotti has been appointed president of Klemtner Advertising.


Hickam, Dow B Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam, Dow B Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
2,955,000
2,950,000
Net inc
244,000
164,000
Share earns
.09
.05
Yr sales
11,641,000
11,834,000
Net inc
1,012,000
1,151,000
Share earns
.46
.52


Central Illinois Public Service Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
142,692,000
138,184,000
Net inc
11,322,000
11,541,000
Share earns
.29
.29
Yr rev
616,188,000
590,846,000
Net inc
86,244,000
70,296,000
Share earns
2.35
1.88


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day on Wednesday about the news agency Wordservice International characterized it incorrectly.


Scribe Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scribe Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1988
1987
Revenue
1,293,782
1,050,846
Net loss
1,387,508
c275,782
6mo rev
3,197,254
1,061,932
Net loss
b2,729,369
c140,509
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $244,707.


Florida Progress Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Progress Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Revenue
472,800,000
480,800,000
Net inc
34,300,000
29,500,000
Share earns
.67
.58
Yr rev
2,002,000,000
1,957,600,000
Net inc
179,800,000
187,800,000
Share earns
3.52
3.74


Lexington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexington Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
270,000
559,000
Per share
.12
.24
Yr net inc
1,172,000
2,300,000
Per share
.51
1.00


Newell Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
253,689,000
260,126,000
Net inc
21,211,000
13,460,000
Share earns
.78
.47
Yr sales
988,177,000
719,687,000
Net inc
61,421,000
37,222,000
Share earns
2.18
1.37


'African-American' Favored By Many of America's Blacks
LEAD: A movement led by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to call blacks African-Americans has met with both rousing approval and deep-seated skepticism in a debate that is coming to symbolize the role and history of blacks in this country.


F.C.C. Licensing Plan
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission today proposed putting into place a lottery system to award licenses for new AM and FM radio stations and for television stations.
The system would replace its comparative hearings, in which applicants argue their qualifications.
The commission said that the hearing process was too long, complex and expensive and that it had been a drain on the agency's administrative resources.


Germania Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germania Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net inc
904,000
b9,062,000
Per share
.46
-
Yr net inc
1,854,000
b7,931,000
Per share
.94
-
b-Net loss


Iran Petrochemical Unit
LEAD: Iran is determined to complete the petrochemical plant at Bandar Khomeini despite the disruption of construction during the Persian Gulf war.
Ahmad Rahgozar, managing director of Iran's National Petrochemical Company, quoted by the Iranian press agency, said the plant could be completed for a fraction of the cost of building a new one.


Eagle Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Net loss
120,000
b320,000
Per share
-
.19
9mo net inc
378,000
1,049,000
Per share
.23
.65
b-Net income


New York City Needs a Drug Czar of Its Own
LEAD: To the Editor:


Four Charges Considered
LEAD: In convicting Joel B. Steinberg of first-degree manslaughter in the death of his adopted daughter, Lisa Steinberg, the jury in State Supreme Court last night found him guilty of the second most serious of four homicide charges they had considered.


Armstrong World Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armstrong World Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1988
1987
Sales
706,900,000
605,000,000
Net inc
34,600,000
b33,500,000
Share earns
.74
.72
Yr sales
2,680,300,000
2,365,000,000
Net inc
162,700,000
150,400,000
Share earns
3.51
3.18


