India Bars Filming of a Documentary on Calcutta
LEAD: The Indian Government has withdrawn permission for the filming of the book ''The City of Joy'' on the ground that it would show Calcutta in too negative a light.


A New Star For Studios Is Mexico
LEAD: Hollywood's big names and big studios are increasingly being drawn to Mexico to make feature films and television movies.


The Freeze In Florida Aids Brazil
LEAD: The icicles dripping off frozen Florida oranges on Christmas weekend warmed hearts in Brazil, the world's largest producer of frozen orange juice.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
Brazil's orange producers stand to profit handsomely from frost damage in Florida.
Bolstered by a record crop, 1990 exports are expected to surge by as much as 36 percent, to a record $1.5 billion.
To Brazilians, the orange has become a symbol of easy wealth; a popular soap opera centers on the industry.


1989 Postcards Range From Tragic to Bizarre
LEAD: BETWEEN a riot and an earthquake, death and scandal, the games seemed a bit anticlimactic this year.
But for one wandering sports columnist, 1989 did have its moments, from datelines as diverse as Trinidad and Paris.


Crew Safe as Greek Freighter Sinks 800 Miles From Hawaii
LEAD: A 600-foot Greek freighter loaded with scrap metal sank in the Pacific early today after her 28 crewmen gave up a two-day fight to pump seawater out of the hold, and abandoned ship, the Coast Guard said.


Against Heavy Odds, Treasury Secretary Makes Achievements: Nicholas F. Brady, Treasury Department
LEAD: Nicholas F. Brady, a diffident, modest, well-born Wall Streeter of whom not much was expected when President Reagan made him Treasury Secretary in November 1988, tackled some of the most difficult problems of the American and world economy in 1989 and, against heavy odds, actually achieved some success.


Ruling in Lincoln Savings Lawsuit
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Arizona granted a Government motion on Friday to dismiss three counts in a lawsuit related to the Government's seizure of the insolvent Lincoln Savings and Loan Association in California.


An Israeli Paper Says Jews Were Released And Ceausescu Paid
LEAD: Israel paid thousands of dollars in cash to Nicolae Ceausescu for every Rumanian Jew he allowed to emigrate for two decades, an Israeli newspaper reported.


Students Must Get to School and Back Safely
LEAD: To the Editor:


In a Land Without Abundance, Joy in the New Year Has Limits
LEAD: The Soviet nation bid an ambivalent adieu to 1989 in midnight revels, joining President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in expressing regret over the ''bitterness'' of the withered economy while hailing the ''waves of revolutionary renewal'' that have tattered the Kremlin's Eastern European bloc.


Jill Armel Marries Ens. Evan Dash
LEAD: Jill Lynne Armel and Ens.
Evan Dayan Dash were married yesterday at the Inter-Continental Hotel in New York by Rabbi Thomas Weiner.
Mrs.
Dash is the daughter of Marilyn W. Armel and Paul H. Armel, both of New York.
Ensign Dash is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Dash of New York.


A Proud Beginning to 1990
LEAD: A new year, a new decade and, in New York, a new era begin today, with the swearing in of David N. Dinkins as New York's Mayor.
The moment recalls a line from the old Christmas carol about ''the hopes and fears of all the years . . .''


William Scott, 76, a British Artist Devoted to Still Lifes and Figures
LEAD: William Scott, a British artist acclaimed for his still life paintings and drawings, died of Alzheimer's disease on Thursday at his home outside Bath in Somerset, England.
He was 76 years old.


Praying In The Year In Japan
LEAD: A few seconds before midnight, the chief priest of a small hilltop sanctuary known as Sengen Shrine fidgeted in his scarlet robes and looked nervously at his watch while listening to the radio for the electronic beep signaling the arrival of the Year of the Horse.


Wheels On Cutting Edge
LEAD: A new wheel for cyclists has bypassed conventional spoked designs in favor of aerodynamic blades.


Morocco Pleads for Aid as Oil From Huge Spill Nears Coast
LEAD: Morocco appealed for help today in its struggle to keep a 230-square-mile oil slick away from its coastline and to halt the spill that began when an Iranian tanker was damaged in an explosion nearly two weeks ago.


Ruth Messinger, New Borough Chief, Weds Andrew Lachman, Schools Aide
LEAD: Ruth W. Messinger, who is to be sworn in today as Manhattan Borough President, was married yesterday to Andrew Lachman, the special assistant to the superintendent of Community School District 2 in Manhattan.
Rabbi Allan Miller officiated at the New York home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Wilfred Wyler, who also have a home in Westport,


Scott Burton, Sculptor Whose Art Verged on Furniture, Is Dead at 50
LEAD: Scott Burton, an American sculptor whose work balanced stubbornly and elegantly between art and furniture while evolving into a new kind of public sculpture, died of AIDS on Friday at Cabrini Medical Center in New York City.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Booksellers Rank the Best Markets
LEAD: With retail book sales of more than $283 million a year, the New York metropolitan area remains the nation's largest book market.


Mindless Macho in Panama
LEAD: The Administration was right to apologize after American troops broke into the Nicaraguan Ambassador's residence in Panama.
But President Bush is much too cavalier when he dismisses Friday's raid as a mere ''screw-up.'' Nor can the raid be pardoned, as he implies, just because the troops found a cache of weapons.


A Passion in the Desert
LEAD: Alcide Chaisson, who is 69 years old and lives in a trailer near Crystalaire Airport, a small field northeast of Los Angeles, was charged Friday with obstructing a flight path.
He said small planes buzzing his desert home drowned out his radio and he fought back by flashing sun into pilots' eyes with a 4-foot-square mirror.


President Quits At Midway Air
LEAD: Midway Airlines Inc. announced Friday that Jeffrey H. Erickson had resigned as president and chief operating officer to pursue personal business.


Calm Sought in Argentina
LEAD: The Minister of Economy, Antonio Erman Gonzalez, tried Saturday to calm fears concerning a new economic policy to be announced this week as prices surged and Argentines faced the threat of hyperinflation.


Therapy for Child Molesters: Many Doubt That It Works
LEAD: When Westley Allan Dodd was arrested in November and charged with killing three young boys in this Columbia River community, his case provided critics of the legal system with a tragic demonstration of their argument that the law has failed to protect society from sex offenders.


Prayer and Praise Honor New Mayor
LEAD: In a soaring service of prayer and song, David N. Dinkins yesterday heard Archibishop Desmond M. Tutu, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and more than 1,000 New Yorkers wish him godspeed as he assumes the New York City mayoralty today.


Literary Critics Find Politics Everywhere
LEAD: The questions seemed so simple and yet so all-encompassing that they defied any easy answers: ''Who's laughing now?
Laughing at what?
Who's laughing last?'' The question, the questioner continued, ''which was always a question of power,'' is: ''Why should we be laughing at all?''


Satellites of Two Nations Sent Up In a Long-Delayed Titan Launch
LEAD: A Titan 3 rocket carrying British and Japanese communications satellites roared into space tonight after nine postponements as the Martin Marietta Corporation entered the commercial launching business.


Holiday Box
LEAD: Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.


Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Is Seeking A Safe Path Through a Time of Change: LEONID ABALKIN, Soviet Adviser
LEAD: In the rapidly changing world of perestroika, Leonid Abalkin is not the only economist of influence.
But he is apparently highly valued for his political flexibility and grace under pressure.


Exchange Chairman Aims to Polish Image Of Futures Industry: LEO MELAMED, Chicago Merc
LEAD: In the world of commodity futures trading, Leo Melamed is widely considered to be the chief lobbyist, spokesman and public relations man - and an adept one at that.
In 1990, Mr.
Melamed, the chairman of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's executive committee, will need all those qualities and others to restore his industry's tarnished image.


Economists Take Up The World's Problems
LEAD: An ancient economics scoring rule is that a session is a failure when the size of the panel exceeds the size of the audience; by that measure, most of the sessions at the annual convention of the American Economic Association here were a success.


Together Separately for the Two Germanys
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bushes Will Attend Funeral Of Brother-in-Law in Boston
LEAD: President Bush and his wife, Barbara, will go to Boston on Tuesday for the funeral of their brother-in-law Alexander Ellis 2d, the White House said today.


A Year of Surprises Benefits European Stocks
LEAD: In the world's stock markets, 1989 was a year of the unexpected.


Gifts to Neediest for Those Without Options
LEAD: It is not necessary to visit New York City to evoke images of the deprivation in which so many live.
Letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund draw a vivid portrait.


Metro Matters;   Decade's Misery And Strengths Greet the Mayor
LEAD: What a difference a decade makes.


All Agree on Failure Of Our Drug Strategy
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Colorado, Passer Grows Up on the Move
LEAD: HE tugged at the Los Angeles Raiders cap snug atop his head and his eyes shifted as if he were anticipating a blitzing linebacker.
Darian Hagan, a teen-ager laden with adult-like responsibility, was explaining in his own way how he became a man so hurriedly, so unexpectedly.


CAMBODIA ASSERTS U.S. GUERRILLA TIES
LEAD: Prime Minister Hun Sen expressed concern today that Khmer Rouge forces were coordinating military operations and strategy with non-Communist guerrilla armies supported by the United States, and he said the Khmer Rouge had obtained weapons from the non-Communist factions.


Nancy Bauer Weds Michael Cooper
LEAD: Nancy Fay Bauer and Michael Anthony Cooper, both candidates for Ph.D. degrees at Harvard University, she in philosophy and he in English, were married yesterday at the Memorial Church at Harvard by the Rev.
Arthur O. F. Bauer, the bride's father, a Lutheran minister.


Rams Upset Eagles, 21-7; Giants Next
LEAD: The Los Angeles Rams made big pass plays today, two of them for touchdowns.
They ran for 144 yards, including a 54-yard sprint by Greg Bell, which set up the clinching touchdown.
Their offensive line and defensive gimmicks also contibuted mightily as they upset the Philadelphia Eagles, 21-7.


He Has Tyson On His Mind
LEAD: THOSE on Donovan Ruddock's Christmas-card list got a personalized card this year.


Angry Words Spark Kansas
LEAD: An angry rebuke from Coach Roy Williams was all Kansas needed Saturday night to pull away from previously unbeaten Stanford and post an 83-61 victory in the final of the BMA Holiday Classic.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Passing Ships Romps: Racing over a fog-enshrouded track that obscured the running of the Aqueduct feature, Passing Ships romped to a 17 1/2-length victory yesterday in the $85,650 Display Handicap for 3-year-olds and up.
Passing Ships, the odds-on choice, covered two and a quarter miles on the good track in 3:55 3/5 to earn $51,390 for Gold'N-Oats Stable with his fifth consecutive victory and his sixth in 13 starts in 1989.


Testimony of Former South Korean Leader Is Cut Short by Melee


Bridge
LEAD: One of the many sad bridge stories of 1989 concerns the final of the Australian National Team Championship, played in Canberra, the capital, in February.
It attracted an entry of 178 teams, far more than an equivalent American event would do, and there were players from New Zealand, Japan and the United


Firm's Chief Hopes Troubles Remain Behind: FREDERICK H. JOSEPH, Drexel Burnham
LEAD: With Drexel Burnham Lambert's ''junk bond'' money machine sputtering, Frederick H. Joseph now faces the challenge of navigating the firm through what may be its toughest time in the market.


Chief Justice Makes Plea for More Federal Judgeships to Help in Fight Against Drugs
LEAD: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, in a year-end plea to Congress and the White House for additional Federal judgeships, warned yesterday that ''the war on drugs will fail if the judiciary is not given the judgeships necessary to do the job.''


European Leader Watches a Vision Transform Into Reality: JACQUES DELORS, European Commission
LEAD: There is still a lot of the professor in Jacques Delors, the 64-year-old president of the European Commission, the European Community's excutive branch.
But unlike most professors, Mr.
Delors, who used to teach at France's elite Ecole Nationale d'Administration, has the opportunity so see much of his vision transformed into reality.


America West Jetliner Runs Off Tucson Runway
LEAD: An America West jetliner skidded off the end of the runway at Tucson International Airport on Saturday night, and three of 127 people aboard were injured, one seriously, the authorities said.
The Boeing 737, Flight 450 from Phoenix, apparently lost hydraulic pressure while landing. (AP)


Washington Talk;   For Bush in 1989, the Focus Was Foreign Policy
LEAD: His friends always said George Bush would be a foreign-policy President, but even they didn't expect this.


Shamir Dismisses Weizman From Israel's Government
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today dismissed Science Minister Ezer Weizman from the Israeli Cabinet, saying the influential Labor Party minister had met with leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization and given them advice on how to thwart a Government peace initiative.


Business Scene;   Stock Buybacks Vs. Risky Outlays
LEAD: FOR six years, American corporations have been buying their own stock in a big way.
The original idea was to help protect the company from a takeover.
But now the takeover threat is waning while the buybacks are as strong as ever.
Clearly, they have taken on a life of their own, with important consequences for


Mental Health Group Can't Buy Network Ads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Town in Bulgaria Defies Order to Give Muslims Full Rights
LEAD: Local Communist authorities in the Bulgarian town of Kardzhali have defied party orders to restore full civil rights to the Turkish minority, jeopardizing Government efforts to reassure the Muslim population.


Poll Voters Won't Matter If Colorado Wins Tonight
LEAD: The old, worn wooden stands that surrounded Bill Coleman did not appear as they will Monday night, when the painted faces arrive, the lights go on, the bands begin to play, the Orange Bowl comes alive, and a lifetime of memories, joyous or painful, will be compressed into 60 minutes of football.


Mixed Reviews for Hong Kong's Cultural Center
LEAD: The new Hong Kong Cultural Center stands on one of Hong Kong's finest waterfront sites, looking out over Victoria Harbor with its quaint wooden fishing junks and busy passenger ferries parading past the colony's glistening glass and metal skyscrapers.
But the $77 million center, designed by a committee of government architects, has no windows.


Spain and Its Writers Celebrate A Long-Awaited Renaissance
LEAD: The Nobel Prize in Literature that Camilo Jose Cela received this year has come at a time when the Spanish literary world is astir with what is being called ''the new Spanish narrative.''


For Dinkins, Pomp, Ceremony, Triumph And a Dream Realized
LEAD: The walls of David N. Dinkins's borough president's office, once covered with photographs recounting his political career, are bare except for dozens of nails from which the pictures hung.
They have been packed away until his new office at City Hall is prepared.


Nicaragua Devaluation
LEAD: The Government has devalued Nicaragua's currency for the 40th time this year and raised the price of gasoline and public transportation.
The move by the Nicaraguan central bank brought the official exchange rate to 38,150 cordobas to a dollar.
The previous rate was 36,330 cordobas.
Friday's action raised urban and inter-city bus fares by 30 percent.


Steinberg Interviews Perles
LEAD: George Perles, a controversial but successful coach on three levels, yesterday became the first of half a dozen finalists to be interviewed for the Jets' head-coaching job.


Nunn Says U.S. Should Negotiate Deeper Cuts on Troops in Europe
LEAD: Senator Sam Nunn, the leading Democratic figure on military issues on Capitol Hill, says the United States should seek deeper cuts in American and Soviet troop strength in Europe than the Bush Administration has proposed in arms negotiations.


The Opposition Stirs
LEAD: ''For myself, as a Democrat, respectfully,'' quietly begins the best public speaker in American politics today, ''I think we have given an appropriate period of deference to the newly victorious President.''


Battle Against Cocaine Traffic Is Languishing in South America
LEAD: Despite some seemingly spectacular successes, the drug war in South America is not going well.
Critics say the American military attack on Panama, justified in part as an anti-drug initiative, has only fragmented what is already a largely ineffective effort.


Books of The Times;   A Man of Bitter Prejudices, A Writer With Agile Wit
LEAD: The Diary of H. L. Mencken
Edited by Charles A. Fecher
Illustrated. 476 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Some Lincoln Investors Escape Loss in Collapse
LEAD: The collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association produced an array of victims, from retired California investors who bought unsecured bonds to American taxpayers.
But it also turns out that not all the investors in the failed institution were losers.


Correction
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about economists' views of changes in Eastern Europe misidentified a Princeton University professor.
He is Alan Blinder.


Times Square Ushers in the 90's


Poet Who Jousted Soviets Loses to Burglars
LEAD: A noted Ukrainian poet who has jousted with pre-glasnost Soviet officialdom at home ran into New York's criminal element Saturday night when a sheaf of her hand-written notes and poetry disappeared from the trunk of a parked car, the police said yesterday.


Ortega Says Search Made U.S. Relations The Worst in Years
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today that the ransacking of the Nicaraguan Ambassador's residence in Panama by American troops on Friday has brought Nicaraguan-American relations to their deepest crisis in 10 years.


American Journal;   '89 Glimpses: Cubs Fall, Mighty Oak Still Stands
LEAD: It has been a year of hurricanes and housing scandals, but also of quieter tales of American people and places.
Here are the last, or at least the latest, chapters from the journals of 1989:


Blazing a Trail
LEAD: IN the past few years - and increasingly so now that the Iron Curtain is being torn apart - East European athletes have streamed from their homelands for the West.


Review/Television;   The Birth Rate Is Rising Sharply As Networks Court Baby Boomers
LEAD: Know any unemployed adorable babies?
Rush them over to central casting.
Prime-time television has become obsessed with pregnant women and childbirth scenarios.
In recent months, the phenomenon has been prominent on ABC's ''Thirtysomething,'' NBC's ''L.A.
Law'' and ''Cheers,'' and CBS's ''Beauty and the Beast,'' in which, heaven help us, Mom was killed in the delivery room and the newborn was kidnapped.


ISRAELI OR DRIVER? HOW SIGNALS CROSS
LEAD: United States officials in Panama who thought they had captured Mike Harari, an Israeli identified as a close associate of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, may have mistaken the Israeli's driver for Mr.
Harari, Administration officials said today.


OFFICERS SAY PARTY IN RUMANIA PLANS TO DISSOLVE ITSELF
LEAD: Confronted by growing demands that the Communist Party dissolve itself, top officials of this country's old order say they will call a special congress to dismantle the disgraced party even before free elections are held in April.


Knicks May Win Honor for Coach
LEAD: With a third of the National Basketball Association season completed, the Knicks' 20-7 record is tops in the Eastern Conference and second-best over all in the 27-team league after the Los Angeles Lakers' 21-6.


Officer's Body Found; Husband Is Charged
LEAD: A 26-year-old police officer was found dead in a ditch near the Long Island Expressway yesterday, the police said.
The officer was found two hours after detectives arrested her husband in the shooting of a man he had found with her in a parked car, and the husband was also charged with killing her.


A Legion of Volunteers Helps Elderly Keep Fit
LEAD: As older Americans strive for healthier, more active lives, New York City is offering to help, by sharing its innovative fitness regimen tailored for men and women over age 60.


Question Box
LEAD:
Bear and Big Bowls
Q.
How many times did Bear Bryant coach Alabama in the four major bowls and how did his teams do?
A.
In an Alabama coaching career of 25 years from 1958 through 1982, in which his Crimson Tide appeared in bowl games all but the first of those years, Bryant had a 10-7 record in major bowls: Cotton, Orange and Sugar.


New Year, New Mayor and New Hopes
LEAD: ''Personally I'm optimistic on everything,'' said 10-year-old Chris Park, pausing to contemplate the minting of a crisp new decade and a historic changeover at City Hall -New York's first new Mayor in his lifetime.


INSIDE
LEAD:
In Japan, Year of the Horse
Japanese observed a national New Year's ritual combining a Times Square-like countdown and Eastern mysticism.
Page 3.
Worry Over Khmer Rouge
Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia said the Khmer Rouge had obtained American arms from non-Communist guerrilla factions.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
2-9
The Communist Party in Rumania will dismantle itself during a special congress that top officials of the ousted Government will call before free elections are held in April.
Page 1
Helicopter pilot describes Ceausescu's escape attempt
6


Steelers Top Oilers With 50-Yard Field Goal
LEAD: Gary Anderson is the third-most accurate kicker in National Football League history.
Today, he was No. 1 for the Pittsburgh Steelers.


TV Ads Are Spreading To Subways and Malls
LEAD: There seems to be no escaping the long arm of Madison Avenue.
Advertisers have now found a way to intrude electronically into people's lives while they browse in shopping malls or wait for buses or trains.


Longer Lives for Aging Cargo Ships
LEAD: With demand outstripping capacity and freight rates rising, the new year might seem ripe for a flood of orders for new bulk-cargo ships - a flood reminiscent of those in the early 1970's and the early 1980's.
But that will not be the case this time, many people in the industry say.


Spurrier Takes Florida Job
LEAD: Steve Spurrier, who won the Heisman Trophy in 1966 as quarterback at the University of Florida, today returned to the school as head football coach after a scandal-plagued decade for the Gators that resulted in the ouster of his two predecessors.


Tokyo Market: Now a Leader
LEAD: At a time when bankers and economists speak of a global financial village, with the world's centers of finance closely linked and interdependent, the Tokyo stock market is increasingly going its own stable and buoyant way.


Warm-Weather Sissies?
LEAD: HURRYING through the tunnel at Veterans Stadium, the Los Angeles Rams' left guard, Tom Newberry, yelled, ''Warm-weather California sissies, huh?'' With a grin he disappeared into the locker room to calmly celebrate a 21-7 wild-card victory over the Philadelphia Eagles in a cold raw rain, which qualified the Rams to go against the Giants next Sunday at Giants Stadium in the Super Bowl XX


Brother of Ceausescu Was Suspected as Spy
LEAD: Nicolae Ceausescu's eldest brother, Marin, found hanged in a Viennese cellar on Thursday, may have played a role in espionage in Western Europe, Austria's Interior Minister has asserted.


Jackson Says Panama Took Focus Off China
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson said yesterday that the attack on Panama had allowed the Bush Administration to deflect criticism of its secret diplomatic missions to China after the crackdown on demonstrations there.


Army Doesn't Have to Compete With Marines
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Rewire America
LEAD: Dial a number and the video screen in your wall becomes a window into the place you are calling.
You can see and converse with people on the other side, even slide documents through the window, via fax machine.
All this could be possible once the country is wired with fiber-optic cable.
But that will cost some $250 billion and won't happen for decades unless Washington decides it should be done sooner.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's nice to have a black Mayor, and it'd be even better if he could really do something about the crime and about the homeless.
The best thing about New York is when people really want to get together and do something, people really do get together.''
-Michael Kanatous, of Brooklyn. [30:1.


Joyce Dinkins, a Quiet Lady Who Is No Longer a Private Person
LEAD: Shortly before her 59th birthday last month, Joyce Dinkins found herself at the center of an outpouring of affection.


Review/Pop;   A Certain Brand of Lambada
LEAD: Anybody looking to decipher the Brazilian term lambada, which applies to a dance, music, cross-cultural sensibility and product of marketing hucksters, would have left Margareth Menezes's show at S.O.B.'s on Saturday night no more insightful than when he came in.
Miss Menezes, who recently performed with David Byrne, the fan of third world music and singer, is being promoted as a lambada singer; in truth, she is a decent singer familiar with Afro-Brazilian music.


How Ancients Improved On Their Natural Good Looks
LEAD: The Israel Museum has opened an exhibition on a part of ancient life that is not often presented today - cosmetics and toiletries in use from ancient Egyptian times through the Roman Empire.


Clemson Coasts
LEAD: Clemson's defense became West Virginia's nightmare in the Gator Bowl on Saturday night.


Aquino Reorganizes Her Cabinet
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino announced changes in her Cabinet today in the aftermath of the military mutiny against her Government earlier this month.


Parking Rules for Holidays in 1990
LEAD: The New York City Transportation Department has issued its parking-rule changes for 1990.
ALTERNATE-SIDE RULES SUSPENDED
Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday Jan. 15
Lincoln's Birthday Feb. 12
Washington's Birthday Feb. 19
Good Friday April 13
Passover (first two days) April 10,11
Passover (7th and 8th days) April 16, 17
Ascension Day May 24
Shabuoth May 30, 31
Feast of Assumption Aug.


90's, in Poll: A Good Life Amid Old Ills
LEAD: As Americans look to the year 2000, most of them anticipate a better life for themselves, but at the same time they foresee a worsening of many of the nation's social and economic problems, according to a new Gallup Poll.


Do Special Sections Overwhelm Readers?
LEAD: AT a number of American newspapers, it has become almost a fad to publish pullout news sections focused on a single topic.


Review/Dance;   An Ugly Duckling Parable In a Setting of Urban Frenzy
LEAD: Loco 7 is the name of a train that journeys through time in New York City, into the 21st century.
It is also the name of an ambitious multi-media piece by Federico Restrepo, a Colombian dancer and director now working in New York, which was performed by Mr.
Restrepo's Puppets and Drummers company on Saturday night at La Mama Annex.


No Ranger in Box Leads to Loss
LEAD: The gaffe was monstrous, the price paid for it enormous.
Afterward, Coach Roger Neilson's mistake, the one that made Pittsburgh's tying goal possible and its subsequent 5-4 victory almost inevitable, was explained, analyzed and rehashed again and again.


Sizing Up Cuts to the Military Budget
LEAD: The debate over how to cut the military budget has been complicated by a confusing array of numbers and budgetary terms.


Display of Japanese Art
LEAD: Fourteen pieces of Japanese artwork from the collection of the late John D. Rockefeller 3d, including paintings, screens and poem scrolls, will be on view for seven months beginning Jan. 18 at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
A major part of the show is a pair of folding screens in gold leaf, recently acquired by the museum, that date from the Edo Period (1615-1868).


Devaluation In Poland
LEAD: The National Bank of Poland is devaluing the Polish zloty by 32 percent, Polish media reported today.


Returning Legislators Face Tough Demands in Albany
LEAD: After a six-month break, their longest in 19 years, New York State lawmakers will gather here Wednesday to begin a new session.
But, pressed with demands for greater spending and hemmed in by what appears to be a near-chronic budget deficit, few legislators seem particularly eager to return.


Bronx Man Killed on Subway As He Tries to Stop Robbery
LEAD: A Bronx man was fatally shot Saturday night on the subway after trying to stop a man who had stolen a portable cassette player from his friend, the police said yesterday.


Pilot of Helicopter Describes Ceausescu's Escape Attempt
LEAD: Nicolae Ceausescu's brief and vain attempt to escape capture was described today by his helicopter pilot as a scrambled flight in which crew members were held at gunpoint and one of them sat in the Rumanian dictator's lap.


Markets Closed
LEAD: All financial markets in the United States and most world markets will be closed today because of New Year's Day.


From Miami to New York, Sharing Power in Schools
LEAD: The school system here has been experimenting with democracy, shattering the wall between principals and teachers and allowing both to share power in running their schools.


Kinnock to Meet Gorbachev
LEAD: Neil Kinnock, leader of the opposition Labor Party, will meet with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Moscow on Jan. 16, a party spokesman said today.
No details of the visit were available, the spokesman said.


Review/Music;   Amato 'Barber' Mixes Tongues and Time Frames
LEAD: The feisty Amato Opera, as intimate as the Metropolitan is grandiose, revels endearingly in the contrast.
After its two little chandeliers rise to the ceiling before the current production of ''The Barber of Seville,'' a recording of the opera's overture is played on an antiquated sound system that, in the concluding crescendo, produces a thunderous roar of audio distortion.


Victor G. Trapasso, Real Estate Executive, 54
LEAD: Victor G. Trapasso, the president and chief executive officer of the GT Realty and Management Company of Herndon, Va., died of cancer on Thursday at Alexandria Hospital in Alexandria, Va., where he lived.
He was 54 years old.


In Poland, Capitalism Brings Hope Tempered With Worry
LEAD: At the stroke of midnight, Poland becomes the first Eastern European country to leap into the capitalist era.


Some of the Casualties Meet Their Commander
LEAD: Gregory Johnson's Purple Heart was pinned to his pillow, and a three-foot-high inflatable Santa stood near his bed.


Industry Group Formed to Exploit Technology Developed by Military
LEAD: American industry, battered by years of stiff foreign competition, has found a new ally in the technology wars: the multibillion-dollar military research program at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.


Army Doesn't Have to Compete With Marines;   Why We Need a Navy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Islanders Win, 4-2
LEAD: Pat LaFontaine scored three times, extending his goal-scoring streak to seven games, to lead the New York Islanders to a 4-2 victory over the Buffalo Sabres tonight.


Soweto Journal;   To Be Black and a Police Officer: Perils and Pride
LEAD: Fanyana Zwane was watching television with two of his sons one evening last August when two Soviet-made hand grenades smashed a window and exploded in their living room, seriously wounding 12-year-old Gabriel.
The neighborhood in the black township of Soweto, where the Zwanes live, was shocked but not surprised.


A Melee Interrupts Testimony by Chun
LEAD: Former President Chun Doo Hwan testified for the first time today about his repressive eight-year martial rule over South Korea, but he was cut short as a melee broke out in the National Assembly and walked out amid screams, curses and shoving.


CNN Lawsuit On Vietnam
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System Inc. is suing the Bush Administration to be allowed to provide its Cable News Network to Vietnam.


Deal for Hawaiian Airlines
LEAD: A group headed by Peter V. Ueberroth, the former commissioner of baseball, and Thomas Talbot, a California entrepreneur, has bought control of Hawaiian Airlines for $37 million.


Wings' Late Burst Sinks Devils, 6-4
LEAD: The Devils led, 3-0, midway through the game tonight but sagged badly in the second half as they lost to the Detroit Red Wings, 6-4.


Holiday Today
LEAD: Today is New Year's Day. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Federal and state offices closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Only the main office, at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, will be open.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Sunday rules in effect.


INQUIRY ON PRICES OF OIL HEAT URGED
LEAD: As New England's coldest December on record shivered to a close, lawmakers and consumer advocates called for an investigation into heating-oil prices that have shot up with the mercury's fall.


Lisa Kuvin and Benjamin Schreier Wed
LEAD: Lisa Rose Kuvin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford Kuvin of Palm Beach, Fla., and Jerusalem, was married yesterday at her parents' home in Palm Beach to Benjamin Myer Schreier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Schreier of Birmingham, Mich.
Rabbi Leonid Feldman performed the ceremony.


DEALS
LEAD:
FOOTBALL
PHILADELPHIA (NFC) - Released Carlos Carson, wide receiver.
Activated Greg Garrity, wide receiver, from injured reserve.
HOCKEY
RANGERS (NHL) - Recalled Mike Richter, goaltender, from Flint of the International Hockey League.
COLLEGES
DUKE - Appointed Barry Wilson head football coach.


PANAMA OFFICIALS SPLIT ON NORIEGA
LEAD: With the impasse over the fate of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega entering its second week, the new President of Panama and his Attorney General disagreed today over whether to file charges against the deposed strongman or leave the question of his prosecution to the United States.


Together Separately for the Two Germanys;   'Deutschlandlied'
LEAD: To the Editor:


For the Elderly, a New Way to ''Stay Well''


Outdoors: Of Muzzleloaders and Mergansers
LEAD: NOT long ago in Massachusetts, the beginning of a three-day primitive-firearms hunt for deer and the start of the second half of the state's waterfowl season coincided, plunging me into indecision.


Gas Explosion Shakes Downtown San Francisco


Shots in Air, Death on the Ground
LEAD: The blare of New Year's Eve party horns and the bark of champagne corks were punctuated in Chicago, Los Angeles and other cities by shots fired into the air.
Police officers shot and killed a man in Chicago shortly after midnight when he pointed a gun in their direction.


Designers Unite to Indulge Every Fashion Whim
LEAD: At the dawn of a new season it is apparent that fashion choices have probably never been more diversified.
From classic calm tailored clothes to frivolous glittery ones, the vast range of styles for spring offers something for every woman's taste.
Fashion has been globalized to the point where identical trends turn up in all the major fashion centers, a sign not necessarily of designers' copying one another but of their being on the same wavelength, no matter where they live and work.


DeRose Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DeRose Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,670,000
5,055,000
Net inc
101,000
b628,000
Share earns
.03
-
Yr sales
18,829,000
19,956,000
Net inc
53,000
b2,118,000
Share earns
.02
-
b


Wendy Anne Buynak Weds Stuart J. Frank
LEAD: Wendy Anne Buynak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Joseph Buynak of Bayville, L.I., was married yesterday to Stuart Jeffrey Frank, a son of Nina Frank of Brookville, L.I., and Benjamin Frank of Stowe, Vt.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Russian Tea Room in New


Jordan to Restore Libya Ties, Official Says
LEAD: Jordan will soon restore full diplomatic relations with Libya, a senior official said Sunday.


To Make the Big Time of Science, Better Take Your Show on the Road
LEAD: AT precisely 7:30 one evening, Dr.
Stanley J. Opella sauntered into a packed lecture room at Memorial Union, a large, red stone building on the banks of Lake Mendota at the University of Wisconsin in Madison.
The chemists and physicists who had gathered for a five-day meeting filled every chair and lined the sides and back of the room, pushing closer together as more and more scientists came in through a side door.


Soviets Beat Rangers In Exhibition Contest
LEAD: Their credentials were not exactly breathtaking: The Soviet Wings had finished fifth over the first half of their season in the Soviet National League.
They had, on top of that, not won at all in their three previous exhibition games during their current tour of the National Hockey League.


Football As First Fiddle
LEAD: ''The trouble is,'' the college president says, cracking open a bag of walnuts with the telephone, ''we're neglecting football for education.''


Computertime Network reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computertime Network
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,189,000
1,866,000
Net inc
30,000
146,000
Share earns
.01
.02
Results are in Canadian funds.


Our Towns;   Where Changes In the U.S.S.R. Resonate Loudly
LEAD: When he was a youngster growing up in Philadelphia, Roman Mirchuk listened intently as his father, Petro, almost every evening after dinner talked of the four bitter years he spent in Auschwitz.


New Decade, New World, New Strategy
LEAD: Americans well understand what the historic changes in the Soviet bloc are doing to the Soviet Union's influence in the world.
But do we understand the impact of this on America's influence?
Unless we are prepared to develop and implement a new American strategy in international politics, we could well see our own influence decline in parallel with the Soviet


10,000 in Hong Kong Rally for a Free China
LEAD: About 10,000 people staged a noisy but peaceful demonstration today in support of democracy in China.


After Long Wait, Help for Cleaning a Toxic Dump
LEAD: Eight years after the Federal Government designated a mobile home park here for cleanup of toxic wastes, three companies and the town of Springfield have begun buying the mobile homes so their residents can relocate.


Racing Against Time To Save Recordings Of Toscanini's Work
LEAD: In a cluttered corner of the basement of the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center, Seth B. Winner, an audio engineer, threaded a reel of film through what is believed to be the world's only extant selenophone.


Takeover Stocks Fade As Top Money Makers
LEAD: Speculative fervor about possible growth in overseas companies helped make several ''country funds'' the biggest winners on the New York Stock Exchange in 1989.


In Health Care, a Question of Quality: Cost-Control Efforts Raise Concerns
LEAD: HAVE Government measures to control health care costs reduced the quality of care and increased death rates among the elderly?


Business and Health;   Time to Confront Health-Care Issue
LEAD: ADMINISTRATION officials, members of Congress and executives who buy or provide health care are girding for a broad debate on the future of the troubled medical system.


Royal Family's Seal of Approval: Instant Status, but Boasting Is Prohibited
LEAD: In Britain, pork sausage, fertilizer, shoes and other everyday goods can break into the rarefied realm of royalty.
Part of the trick is getting noticed by the right people.


2 Inquiries on Dinkins Are Still Unresolved
LEAD: Two investigations into Mayor David N. Dinkins's account of his dealings in the stock of the Inner City Broadcasting Corporation were pending yesterday as the Dinkins administration took office.


Bridge
LEAD: A large number of players, including numerous experts, missed a chance for brilliant declarer play in six spades on the diagramed deal played in October in the Regional Championships in Stamford, Conn.
It was reported by Allan Stauber of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., who had earlier won the Men's Pair title.


Role of Nuclear Power Is Disputed Despite Looming Energy Shortage
LEAD: As the 1990's begin, the nuclear power industry and its most vocal critics agree that the United States faces a new energy shortage, but they remain at odds over the role that nuclear power should play in averting a crisis.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Jumping Beans
Q. What makes Mexican jumping beans jump?
A.
Mexican jumping beans, actually seeds of plants in the Croton family, are invaded by larvae of a moth, Cydia saltitans, and it is the larvae that make the beans move, said Dave Mills, an entomologist with the Arizona Commission of Agriculture and Horticulture.


I.M.F. and World Bank Face New Task in Eastern Europe
LEAD: The lamps were burning late in the afternoon of Christmas Day in the office of Eugenio F. Lari, director of East European operations for the World Bank, as he completed a report on a project to modernize the Hungarian banking system.


Perles Reveals Little on Talk With the Jets
LEAD: George Perles, Michigan State's head football coach, who was interviewed Sunday for the Jets' head coaching job, yesterday described the talks as ''informative.''


A Mosaic of Humanity Gathers Near City Hall
LEAD: DeVore Van, an inauguration committee volunteer, walked into the Blue Room at City Hall yesterday and announced in a voice as strong as the Hudson River and filled as deep with pride: ''Clear a path.
The Mayor is coming in.''


Volcanic Harbinger?
LEAD: Subtle shifts in gravity at the Poas volcano in Costa Rica preceded the eruptions of ash clouds last April and May, suggesting that such changes could predict volcanic activity, scientists from the Open University in England have reported.


Reason and Law Reject Our Panama Invasion;   Light From Europe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Snapple Drink Account Has Moved Once Again
LEAD: The fast-moving Snapple Natural Beverage Company account has landed with Buckley/DeCerchio.
Last at Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company, since 1986 the account has also been held by Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss and Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, as well as by a defunct media buying service.


Upheaval in the East: The Dossier;   Rumanian Finds His File: 12 Years of Being Watched
LEAD: When Doru Pavaloiae, an economist, met an old classmate on Lipscani Street here at a time when Nicolae Ceausescu was still in power in Rumania, the two men talked, and in the conversation he let slip that he would like to leave the country.


U.S. Approves Banknote Deal
LEAD: The Justice Department said Friday that it had advised the International Banknote Company, the United States Banknote Company and Francois Charles Oberthur Group of Paris that it would not challenge a proposed three-way transaction among them.
Under the proposal, United


The New 'Sooners'
LEAD: Seers and prognosticators of all varieties are taking loose advantage of the calendar to proclaim that a ''new decade'' is ushering in a ''new world'' that will follow upon the deflation of Communist pretensions and the end of the Soviet empire.


Patrick Kelly Dies; Made Name in Paris With Witty Fashion
LEAD: Patrick Kelly, the American designer whose sexy, witty clothes attracted attention in Paris, died yesterday at the Hotel Dieu, a hospital near the Cathedral of Notre-Dame.
The cause of death was bone marrow disease, Bjorn Amelan, his business partner, said.


Technology Companies Dominate Active List
LEAD: The Nasdaq over-the-counter market registered a healthy advance over the last year despite weakening in the fourth quarter.


Gasoline Spill in Monongahela
LEAD: A barge loaded with 100,000 gallons of gasoline hit a bridge and ruptured today, spilling about 10,000 gallons in the ice-choked Monongahela River.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 1, 1990:
MONDAY
None
TUESDAY
Nevada Pwr Co
WEDNESDAY
Central Vt Pub Svc Corp
Houston Inds Inc
THURSDAY
Ornge &amp; Rocklnd Utils Inc
Rite Aid Corp
Sun Inc
FRIDAY


In New Haven And Yonkers, 2 New Leaders
LEAD: The first black mayor of New Haven and a Yonkers official who came to represent defiance of court-ordered housing were sworn in as chief executives of their cities yesterday.


Powell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Powell Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,616,000
24,730,000
Net inc
b1,441,000
c2,723,000
Share earns
.14
.27
Shares outst
10,254,482
10,204,482
Yr rev
92,767,000
75,466,000
Net inc
b2,189,000
c3,044,000
Share earns
.21
.30
Shares outst
10,216,982
10,204,482


Guest Supply Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guest Supply Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
19,182,000
17,601,000
Net loss
b937,000
74,000
Shares outst
3,791,000
3,767,000
Yr sales
69,879,000
63,853,000
Net loss
b1,861,000
3,326,000
Shares outst
3,779,000
3,754,000


DC-10 Bound for New York Makes Emergency Landing
LEAD: An American Airlines DC-10 bound for New York City with 257 people aboard made an emergency landing early today at Baltimore-Washington International Airport after the pilot reported smoke in the cockpit, an airline spokeswoman said.
Several passengers suffered scrapes or bruises using emergency chutes, but no serious injuries were reported.


'Between the Years,' Religious Group Takes Time to Pray
LEAD: There is a point between the end of the old year and the beginning of the new, when, in effect, time must stand still so that man can look back at what he has done and look ahead to what he must do.


Lackluster Colorado Leveled by Notre Dame
LEAD: Less than six weeks after their collective sense of confidence appeared as damaged as their chance to win a second consecutive unofficial college football championship, the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame tonight ended Colorado's undefeated, untied season and may have produced a perfect ending of their own.


The Editorial Notebook;   Checking Out the 1990's
LEAD: Programmed dreams.
Individual flight platforms.
Human hibernation.
These are some of the innovations cited by Herman Kahn and Anthony Wiener as likely to occur before the year 2000.
Their predictions, offered in 1967, were not at all bad.
But even with 10 years to run they veer toward excessive optimism about technology and its blessings.


End the Abuse of Legal Services
LEAD: Unable to persuade Congress to kill the Legal Services Corporation, President Reagan called for its ''reform'' - meaning the correction of alleged abuses by lawyers representing the poor.
He found people who agreed with him and made them directors of the corporation, which administers $300 million in grants to poverty law offices across the country.


Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,163,000
9,588,000
Net inc
300,000
b1,431,000
Share earns
.05
.23
Yr rev
36,559,000
33,542,000
Net inc
1,795,000
b3,284,500
Share earns
.28
.56


Vols' Victim No. 600 Is Arkansas, by 31-27
LEAD: Chuck Webb put Tennessee into the 600-victory club today as the Volunteers defeated the Arkansas Razorbacks in the Cotton Bowl, 31-27.


Market-Value Index Set Record During Year
LEAD: With economic conditions becoming more treacherous and takeovers less trendy, the companies that simply did what they said they were going to do walked away last year as the big winners on the American Stock Exchange.


Books of The Times;   Poet, Businessman, Mystic, Senator, Irishman
LEAD:
W. B. Yeats
A New Biography
By A. Norman Jeffares
374 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $30.


Upheaval in the East: Security Police;   RUMANIA DISBANDS REBELLIOUS FORCE
LEAD: The Securitate, Rumania's feared internal police force under Nicolae Ceausescu, has been disbanded, and its former chief was placed under arrest Sunday after his loyalty to the new revolutionary Government came under question.


A Keyboard With a Difference
LEAD: COMPUTER users rarely give much thought to their keyboards, yet they spend far more time in contact with the keys than with any other peripheral, with the possible exception of time spent making eye contact with the monitor.


Scientists Dismiss Finding of 'Maleness' Gene
LEAD: TWO years ago scientists thought they had found the gene that specifies that an embryo will develop into a male.
But it now turns out to be a case of mistaken identity.


For Actress in 'The Merchant,' Hatred of Portia Turns to Love
LEAD: ''Portia had never been an attractive character to me,'' Geraldine James says. ''I didn't like her.
I found her rather insufferable.
I'd played Jessica, Shylock's daughter, about 10 years ago, and I thought the play was fairly horrible.
So when Peter Hall first asked me if I was interested in playing Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice' with Dustin Hoffman as Shylock, I truly said, 'No.


Eight Hours of Bloodshed: New York Records 13 Slain
LEAD: In less than eight hours Sunday night and early yesterday, 13 people were slain in New York City, the police said, as one year of bloodshed and homicide gave way to another with the blare of noisemakers and the crackle of gunfire.


3 Jazz Musicians Given U.S. Arts Fellowships
LEAD: Three jazz musicians and composers - George Russell, Cecil Taylor and Gerald Wilson - have been awarded fellowships by the National Endowment for the Arts.
The fellowships, worth $20,000 each, have been awarded annually since 1982 for ''exceptional artistic merit in the field of jazz.'' A panel of jazz musicians and composers chose the winners.


Pittston and Miners in Accord To Resolve Bitter Coal Strike
LEAD: With what a mediator called a ''win-win'' accord, the Pittston Company and leaders of its coal miners said today that they had resolved their brutal, nine-month strike in the hills of Appalachia.


Careers;   'Open Door' For Women Managers
LEAD: WOMEN have had a harder time moving higher in management than men, but there is now a growing trend toward an ''open door'' policy to help them.
The open doors are provided by older women who already have arrived in senior management and are willing to offer advice.


Into the Fire: How Past Mayors Started Their Administrations
LEAD: Former New York City mayors tend to see the problems they confronted as worse than any other mayor's.
But at least one, Abraham D. Beame, believes that David N. Dinkins faces the most serious problems.


Lilly Dache, 97, Creator of Hats For the Fashion Set of Yesteryear
LEAD: Lilly Dache, the milliner who flourished in this country in the decades when women selected their new hats before they chose their new clothes, died Sunday at a nursing home in Louvecienne, France.
She was 97 years old.


Billy Crystal to Be Host Of Oscar Ceremonies
LEAD: Billy Crystal will be the sole host of the 1990 Academy Awards telecast, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has announced.


From Letter Writer to Starting Forward
LEAD: In an era of high-powered recruiting that now encompasses the world, Nadav Henefeld of Israel took an unusual approach: he tried to sell himself as a prospective American college basketball player by writing letters and sending his statistics to a number of big-time schools.


Bioanalogics Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bioanalogics Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,176,161
2,624,104
Net loss
3,469,651
1,411,323
Shares outst
3,533,001
1,928,140


Phyllis Raphael, A Writer, Weds
LEAD: Phyllis Raphael, a writer, and Dr.
Robert Langs, a psychoanalyst, were married yesterday at their home in Manhattan by Rabbi Deborah antor.


Prospects In Britain
LEAD: The Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, said today that the outlook for Britain's overheated economy was good if high wage increases did not cripple the Government's anti-inflation strategy.


Computer Aid Is Sought for Pilots on Takeoffs
LEAD: RESEARCHERS at the space agency are working on a new computer system that monitors airplane performance on takeoff, displaying the point at which an airplane will lift off and other crucial information that they hope could prevent a number of takeoff accidents.


Editor's Note;   Outcry Erupts at The Jerusalem Post Over New Publisher's Editorial Bent
LEAD: Journalists at The Jerusalem Post, Israel's only English-language newspaper, have mounted a drive to oust the paper's publisher of eight months, saying he is trying to turn the liberal daily into a platform for right-wing views.


Census in the Age of Information Grows to Fill a Hunger It Created
LEAD: The Federal Census Bureau, conceived 200 years ago as a national adding machine, has in the last decade evolved into something more: the engine of the multimillion-dollar information industry that is battling for the hearts and modems of American business.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I stand before you today as the elected leader of the greatest city of a great nation, to which my ancestors were brought, chained and whipped in the hold of a slave ship.
We have not finished the journey toward liberty and justice, but surely we have come a long way.''
-Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York City.


Comterm Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comterm Inc
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,742,000
7,977,000
Net loss
b1,463,000
2,060,000
9mo rev
26,751,000
28,467,000
Net loss
b1,767,000
2,592,000
b-After an extraordinary loss of $855,000 for the quarter and 9 months.


Burping Through the 80's
LEAD: To look back on this decade is to see the chimichanga, the burrito and the empanada.
It is to see beef satays and salmon tartare and blackened redfish and Yukon gold potatoes and farm-grown mussels and sushi and free-range chickens.
It is to see a nation with a fork in its mouth.


Medical Examiners Are Vital to Control of AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bond's Move on Breweries
LEAD: Bell Resources Ltd. said today that it had priority over a banking syndicate to claim the assets of the Australian breweries of the Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd.


Dinkins Party: Populist Gala and Diversified Feast
LEAD: At 2:10 P.M. a drumroll and the first tentative wheeze from the bagpipe band of Local 3 of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers announced the arrival of Mayor David N. Dinkins and his wife, Joyce B. Dinkins, at the inaugural reception yesterday.


Counterattack Planned By Lawyers for Lincoln
LEAD: Lawyers for Charles H. Keating Jr., who headed the bankrupt Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, plan to attack the Government's seizure of the institution.


Fischbach Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fischbach Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
190,224,000
232,701,000
Net loss
b26,887,000
10,554,000
Yr rev
757,008,000
930,000,000
Net loss
53,753,000
c3,397,000
b-Included a $14 million charge relating to contract claims and legal actions.


Upheaval in the East;   Castro Remains Adamant
LEAD: Fidel Castro said today that nothing would divert Cuba from socialism, indicating once again that his Government would not be swayed by the reforms sweeping Eastern Europe, the official Cuban press agency said. ''I am sure that we have all the political and moral factors to confront any type of problem and that nothing and no one will make our nation backtrack on the road of socialism,'' Mr.


Florida State's Passing Thwarts Nebraska, 41-17
LEAD: Peter Tom Willis threw for 422 yards and 5 touchdowns as Florida State routed Nebraska in the Fiesta Bowl today, 41-17.
The 422 yards and 5 touchdowns were both Fiesta Bowl records.


Corneliu Bogdan, Leading Figure In Rumanian Uprising, Dies at 68
LEAD: Corneliu Bogdan, the longtime Rumanian envoy to Washington who broke with the Ceausescu dictatorship and took a prominent place in the new revolutionary Government, died of a stroke yesterday in Bucharest, his family said.
He was 68 years old.


Temco Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temco Service Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
26,070,479
25,078,452
Net inc
272,684
140,153
Share earns
.50
.25
Shares outst
543,637
559,552
Yr rev
104,716,985
107,740,000
Net inc
97,605
564,107
Share earns
.18
.98
Shares outst
545,830
574,562


Upheaval in the East: Bucharest;   NEW RULING GROUP IN RUMANIA TO VIE IN APRIL ELECTIONS
LEAD: A leader of Rumania's provisional Government said today that the ruling group would put forward its own candidates in the free elections promised for April.


Loan Pact Seen For Hungary
LEAD: Hungary expects to complete a deal with the International Monetary Fund by mid-month that will unlock more than $1 billion of credit for the heavily indebted country, the official press agency said Friday.


Sock Shop Negotiations
LEAD: Sock Shop International P.L.C. is negotiating with a potential partner to try to reopen its outlets in the United Staes, The Financial Times reported Friday.
Sock Shop closed its 17 stores in New York last week, citing rent and security problems.
Peter Moss, a director of the company, was quoted as saying the New York clothing market had slowed since the stores opened two years ago.


Reporter's Notebook;   Bush's New Winning Combination
LEAD: Do you want to hear something really disgusting about the President of the United States?


Giants Wary but Confident as Playoffs Near
LEAD: The Giants gave their verdict today on the Los Angeles Rams, the team they will play Sunday at Giants Stadium in their first game in the National Football League playoffs.


Markets Closed
LEAD: All financial markets in the United States and most world markets were closed yesterday because of New Year's Day.


Reason and Law Reject Our Panama Invasion;   'Gringo Imperialism'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corporate Underwriting At Record Level in 1989
LEAD: Corporate America sought a record amount of cash from the public markets in 1989, but the large underwritings brought little joy to Wall Street.
A decline in new issues of common stock and troubles in the high-yield ''junk bond'' market had a devastating effect on two of the most profitable businesses for investment banks.


Beijing Journal;   On the Stifled Campuses, Faint Echoes of Dissent
LEAD: At one of Beijing's elite universities not long ago, students were subjected to another of a series of propaganda films intended to insure the reindoctrination of China's future leaders along the correct Communist road.


A Tumultuous Year for 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: The turmoil in the ''junk bond'' market that began in the middle of last year shows no sign of easing soon.


Quake Near Palm Springs
LEAD: A small earthquake was felt near this desert resort early today, but there were no reports of damage or injury.
The quake, measuring 3.1 on the Richter scale of ground motion, came at 4:54 A.M.
Sunday in a remote area 24 miles southwest of here, said Bob Finn of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Tuesday
Purchasing Managers' Index
Dec.
Automobile Sales
Mid.-Dec.
Construction Spending
Nov.
Wednesday
Factory Orders
Nov.
New-Home Sales
Nov.
Thursday


Reason and Law Reject Our Panama Invasion;   What of El Salvador?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East: A Nation's Treasures;   Caught in the Cross-Fire, a Bucharest Museum Counts Its Casualties
LEAD: The mythical hero Hercules grimaces in agony, a bullet hole through his heart, as he wrestles with a centaur in a 17th-century painting at the National Museum of Art.


Crews Fight Oil Spill Off Morocco
LEAD: Cleanup experts tried today to patch a crippled Iranian supertanker and protect the Moroccan coastline from 37 million gallons of spilled crude oil that formed a 108-square-mile slick on the Atlantic Ocean.


Off-Balance Virginia Loses to Illinois
LEAD: John Mackovic said the difference was rhythm.


Conair Head Planning Strategy for Cuisinarts
LEAD: Lee Rizzuto, the chairman of the Conair Corporation, has had his eye on Cuisinarts Inc., the famed maker of food processors, since 1986.
But sales were booming, and Cuisinarts rejected Mr.
Rizzuto's bid.
Frustrated, Mr.
Rizzuto started a subsidiary to make Conair kitchen appliances to extend his company's line of personal care products.


Miami Puts Away Alabama Easily
LEAD: Miami trounced Alabama tonight in the USF&amp;G Sugar Bowl, and afterward, the winning coach, Dennis Erickson, put in a claim on college football's national championship for his team.


Light Schedule Of New Issues
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues in this holiday-shortened week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Wall Street Outlook
For many people, investing in 1989 was like having a miserable time at what should have been a great party.
Whether 1990 is any better may depend on whether interest rates fall fast enough to offset declining profits.
Last year, the popular market indexes posted their second best gain of the decade, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 27 percent.


Old Fashion Foods Inc reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Fashion Foods Inc (OTC)
13wks to Nov 25
1989
1988
Revenue
4,953,000
5,070,000
Net loss
22,000
b85,000
Share earns
-
.07
26wk rev
9,903,000
9,980,000
Net loss
103,000
b142,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
1,177,845
1,197,745


MSI Electronics Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MSI Electronics Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,666,150
1,418,303
Net loss
840
214,612
Shares outst
1,275,388
1,314,390


In Final Minutes, U.S.C. Scores Touchdown To Win, 17-10, Spoiling Schembechler's Exit
LEAD: In his final game, Bo Schembechler refused to fade quietly into the landscape of old college football coaches.
He joked and laughed tonight when the Rose Bowl was over, and then he walked away with a casual wave.
But deep inside, where no one could see, there must have been a seeping anger.


Steel Problems in China
LEAD: Some Chinese companies have asked to cancel orders for imported steel products since a 21 percent devaluation of the currency this month, the China Daily said Saturday.
But it quoted Zhu Desheng, director of the metals and materials department of the Ministry of Materials and Equipment, as saying the ministry would ''persuade'' importers not to cancel orders.


Open Housing Is Mired in Lawsuits Again
LEAD: After 18 years of litigation and two landmark court rulings, New Jersey's Mount Laurel open-housing doctrine is embroiled in lawsuits again, this time over a law that allows suburbs to transfer their affordable-housing obligations to cities.


Upheaval in the East;   No Change in Albania, Party Leader Declares
LEAD: Albania's leader, Ramiz Alia, said today that the uprisings that had ended Communist control in most of Eastern Europe would not affect his country, the region's last hard-line Communist state.


U.S. Vehicle Output Off
LEAD: Domestic auto makers built 10,843,657 cars and light trucks in 1989, down 3.2 percent from 1988's output of 11,197,335, Ward's Automotive Reports said last week.
Production last week was zero, with all domestic car plants closed for the holidays.


Defying Fear, Group Marks the End of Slavery
LEAD: With police standing guard outside, about 200 people at an annual celebration of the end of slavery in the South, today offered prayer, song and humor in the face of a rash of threats and mail bombs.


Bitter Ending for Oilers As Steelers Move On
LEAD: Coach Jerry Glanville invoked Abraham Lincoln to fire up his Oilers on Sunday, but Honest Abe never had to debate the Steelers' Chuck Noll in a playoff contest.


Success for Wisconsin
LEAD: Barry Alvarez, the assistant head coach at Notre Dame, has tentatively agreed to become football coach at Wisconsin.
After a 75-minute meeting with members of the Wisconsin Athletic Board yesterday, Pat Richter, the Badgers' athletic director, said he would leave immediately for Miami to meet with the 42-year-old


Seoul to Allow Du Pont Plant
LEAD: E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company will be allowed to build a titanium dioxide plant in South Korea, ending a four-year dispute over pollution, Finance Ministry officials said Friday.
They said Deputy Prime


Account
LEAD: *
Nature Organics Inc., to Rutkin Costello McCullam Whitley, with a budget of $1.2 million.


Market Place;   Why '89 Party Had So Few Winners
LEAD: For many an investor, living through 1989 was like having a miserable time at what should have been a great party.
Whether 1990 is any better may depend on whether interest rates fall fast enough to offset declining profits.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a front-page article in some copies yesterday about the treatment of child molesters omitted several words in a sentence about an approach to treatment used in many states.
The passage should have read: The other approach tries to change behavior by shock therapy, drugs, hormone injections or, in extreme cases, chemical castration.


A Classic Mac's Many Possibilities
LEAD: THE Christmas fruit basket last week contained an apple, or, rather, Apple.
A Macintosh SE/30, to be exact.


The Pride Decade
LEAD: The 90's now, and before they are over we will know whether the United States will recover its pride in itself.


Ethel F. Donaghue, 93, A Real-Estate Lawyer
LEAD: Ethel F. Donaghue, one of the first women to practice law in Connecticut, died in her sleep Saturday at her home in West Hartford.
She was 93 years old.


For the Retarded, Independence in Real Jobs
LEAD: Matthew R. Starr washes pots and pans in the Marriott Hotel here.
For $3.60 an hour, 40 hours a week, he presides over three arm-deep steel sinks, one for washing, one for a regular rinse and one for an extra sanitizing rinse.


Review/Television;   Asian Troupers of the 40's Recall a West Coast Club
LEAD: Home-grown exotica is on tonight's bill of ''The American Experience.'' ''Forbidden City, U.S.A.'' celebrates a Chinese-American nightclub that thrived in San Francisco during World War II.
American servicemen jammed the place to watch Oriental dancers and singers doing the Occidental.


A Way Out of Welfare Via Foster-Mother Role
LEAD: Fourteen mothers who were once on welfare have found $21,000-a-year jobs - as mothers.
They are serving as foster parents to disabled children under a state program.


Defective Offspring Of 'Alcoholic' Rats
LEAD: MALE rats that consumed large amounts of alcohol before breeding sired male offspring that suffered from learning disabilities and low levels of the male sex hormone testosterone, scientists have reported.


White House Says First Troops, 141 Soldiers, Have Left Panama
LEAD: The White House announced today that the first United States combat troops sent for last month's invasion had left Panama.
It expressed the hope that the remaining forces would leave ''as soon as possible,'' but offered no time frame.


A.&amp;P. Invitation
LEAD: The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, whose advertising agency review was announced on Thursday, has invited J. Walter Thompson and Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson to compete for its account, advertising executives said.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles/New York, the grocery chain's agency since 1986, resigned the account after the review was initiated.


Chess
LEAD: Most chess openings that are put away on the shelf deserve their fate.
They cannot spoil or get musty or deteriorate beyond the original failure that got them there.
They are the well-forgotten mistakes.


Helen Adams Masten, Librarian, 94
LEAD: Helen Adams Masten, who read to children at the New York Public Library for nearly 38 years, died of congestive heart failure Sunday at Devon Manor, a retirement home in Devon, Pa.
She was 94 years old and had lived in Pelham, N.Y., until two years ago.


Upheaval in the East: Prague;   Havel Tells Festive Czechoslovaks That Honesty Is Key to Recovery
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel told the citizens of Czechoslovakia today that their Communist leaders had lied to them for 40 years, that their country was in a serious economic and environmental crisis, and that only a return to the values of honesty, decency and mutual respect could lead to recovery.


Innovations Help the Neediest
LEAD: For most contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, making a donation simply entails writing a check.
But some people and business enterprises come up with inventive ways of collecting funds.
This year, selling teddy bears was one of them.


Panama's Predicament: Sorting Out the Military
LEAD: The newly appointed military commander of Los Santos province had just been sworn in after promising loyalty to the new President, Guillermo Endara, and the civil authorities under him.


For Many On Wall St., A Post-80's Hangover
LEAD: For years Wall Street has been a beacon of wealth and glamour for talented young people willing to work punishing hours for mind-boggling pay.
Today, as Wall Street shrinks back to life-size proportions, the game has shifted to making a living, not a killing.


BEI Holdings Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Holdings Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,573,000
6,789,000
Net loss
2,009,000
2,807,000
Yr rev
25,391,000
37,231,000
Net loss
b6,785,000
c3,715,000
Share earns
-
.41
b-After income of $224,000, or 2 cents a share, from discontinued operations.


Fatah Celebrates Its Anniversary


By Design;   Standbys, Old and New
LEAD: Fashions come and fashions go.
But some styles never fail.
What would a woman do, for instance, without her pearls, her black cashmere sweater and a pair of well-tailored black pants?
For that matter, how can a wardrobe work without a good white shirt, jeans, a batch of T-shirts and a trench coat, too?


Ms. Meisel Weds Charles Heming
LEAD: Barbara Krueger Meisel, an assistant manager for personal financial services at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company in New York, and Charles E. Heming of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Fayston, Vt., a partner in the New York law firm of Wormser, Kiely, Galef &amp; Jacobs, were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed by Elizabeth Hyde, a justice of the peace, at her home in Waitsfield,


David Dinkins and His Friends
LEAD: David Dinkins took office just the way he ran for it - politely, quietly, and with a generosity of spirit. ''I intend to be the Mayor of all the people of New York,'' he said at his inauguration yesterday, standing on the steps of City Hall in the winter chill.
The city's first black mayor offered no flashy promises or grandiose oratory.


Upheaval in the East: Havel's Vision;   Excerpts From Speech By the Czech President
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Vaclav Havel's New Year's Day address, as translated by The New York Times:
The Truth, Unvarnished


Upheaval in the East;   Bulgarian Communists Promise a Freer 1990
LEAD: Bulgaria's Communist leaders pledged today that Bulgarians would ''taste the fruits of freedom'' this year.


Democracy Means Staten Island Could Pull Out of New York City;   Americana at Its Best
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transit Lines Brace for Test Of $1.15 Fare
LEAD: Fares in New York City increased to $1.15 yesterday for bus and subway riders, many of whom New Year's morning caught rumpled and bleary eyed, fumbling for the extra nickel and dime to get them home.


Argentina's Military Chiefs Warn of Anarchy
LEAD: With Argentina tumbling again into a frenzy of runaway prices, shortages and general economic confusion, military leaders have warned that the country is approaching anarchy and admonished people to close ranks behind their democratic Government.


Marine Sues Navy Over a Demotion
LEAD: A former Marine sergeant who lost her assignment as a drill instructor after testifying that a lesbian colleague ''did a fine job'' has asked the Navy to award her back pay and to restore her good-service record.


Oliver Stone Is Ready to Move On From Vietnam
LEAD: Oliver Stone's eyes were puffy from sleeplessness, and when he smiled, as he did frequently, his lips drooped with exhaustion.
He had just stepped off ''the tube,'' as he called it - the Concorde from Paris, where he had visited the grave of Jim Morrison of the Doors and scouted locations for his next film, a celebration of the rock icon.


Three Names for S.E.C.
LEAD: Three names, including that of Vince Dooley, the former Georgia football coach, keep surfacing as the search for a Southeastern Conference commissioner enters its final stages.
The New Orleans Times-Picayune reported Sunday that Roy Kramer, the director of athletics at Vanderbilt; C. W. Ingram, the athletic director at Alabama, and Dooley,


Mayor Dinkins;   Dinkins Sworn In; Stresses Aid to Youth
LEAD: Pledging to be ''the Mayor of all the people,'' David Norman Dinkins, a barber's son who built a political triumph, took the oath of office yesterday as the 106th Mayor of New York City in a simple and solemn ceremony on the steps of City Hall.


Democracy Means Staten Island Could Pull Out of New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Back on the Ice
LEAD: The Tri-City Americans of the Western Hockey League returned to the ice Sunday night after a one-game strike against the team's management, defeating the Portland (Ore.) Winter Hawks, 8-4, with five goals in the third period.


Manila Views Coup's Impact
LEAD: The recent unsuccessful coup attempt in the Philippines is likely to worsen inflation, put pressure on the currency and dampen foreign investment in the first half of 1990, Vicente Jayme, the Finance Secretary, said Friday.


In 1989, Wall Street Was Not Easy Street
LEAD: For many investors, living through 1989 was like having a rotten time at what should have been a great party.


Irvine Sensors Corp reports earnings for 12mo to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irvine Sensors Corp (OTC)
12mo to Oct 1
1989
1988
Revenue
3,023,000
2,971,600
Net loss
833,100
937,800
Shares outst
8,595,600
8,094,400


'Pumped Up' Auburn Stops Ohio State
LEAD: Reggie Slack shrugged off a slow start to throw for three touchdowns and run for a fourth as Auburn held the Big Ten's top offense to 81 yards in the second half en route to a 31-14 victory today in the Hall of Fame Bowl.


Warring Shiite Rivals in Lebanon Accuse Each Other of Israeli Ties
LEAD: Warring Shiite Muslim factions that are engaged in bitter clashes in southern Lebanon have accused each other of collaborating with a common enemy, Israel.


Upheaval in the East: At the Wall;   100 Injured as Video Screen Falls On Revelers at Brandenburg Gate
LEAD: A giant video screen collapsed onto a crowd early this morning and injured more than 100 people during wild New Year celebrations at the Berlin wall, the police said.


Oncogene Science Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oncogene Science Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,268,922
1,456,514
Net loss
643,675
280,422
Yr rev
4,789,010
6,013,411
Net loss
2,395,406
888,380


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Gretzky Shines as Kings Rally
Wayne Gretzky had two goals and an assist in the third period yesterday, carrying the visiting Los Angeles Kings back from a 4-1 deficit to a 7-4 victory over the Washington Capitals.(AP)
HORSE RACING
Ahead All the Way
Feel the Beat led wire to wire to win the $112,300 Interborough Breeders' Cup Handicap at Aqueduct by two lengths yesterday.


19 Expelled U.S. Diplomats Leave Nicaragua for Miami
LEAD: Nineteen of the 20 American diplomats who were ordered to leave Nicaragua in a reprisal for a military raid on the Nicaraguan Ambassador's residence in Panama departed today for Miami.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Let Me See. $3.45 From $10.... Are You in a Hurry?
Subway fares went to $1.15, and calculators were distributed to token booth clerks, many of whom have never had to make change in coins.


Upheaval in the East;   For First Time Since 1917, the Bells Peal at St. Basil's


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13
Rumania's provisional Government will put forward its own candidates in free elections promised for April.
It was the clearest indication that the transitional leadership hopes to continue in power.
Page A1


Jane Dauber Wed To M. L. Lewittes
LEAD: Jane Dauber, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard G. Dauber of New York, was married yesterday at the Tavern on the Green to Michael Louis Lewittes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Lewittes of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi Israel Silverstein, a grandfather of the bride, performed the ceremony.


New Deal for Ryan?
LEAD: Buddy Ryan, the Philadelphia Eagles' coach, said yesterday that he expected to get a contract extension from the club owner, Norman Braman, and doubted that he would return without one.


Upheaval in the East: Warsaw;   Poland Raising Basic Prices Sharply
LEAD: The Government deflated some of the nation's New Year gaiety today by announcing a series of hefty price increases on basic goods and services, a move that is part of a crash program to give Poland a more market-oriented economy.


Analysts See Lower Rates In First Half
LEAD: Most credit market analysts predict that the gradual decline in interest rates that began last spring is likely to continue well into the first half of 1990.
By summer or early fall, however, the bottom will have been reached and a firming trend will emerge, they say.


Patterns
LEAD: The 80's: Good Times


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Central Paper Co., Newark, named David H. Berkowitz president and chief operating officer.


Sanford Journal;   Death at 35 Breaks A Loving Silence
LEAD: It was not until the eulogy by his sister Karen Coleman that the conspiracy of silence about the cause of Thomas E. Whigham's death from AIDS was broken.
Family members had feared rejection and perhaps violence if his illness became known.


Atlantic Express Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Express Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,179,545
9,959,889
Net loss
b1,606,512
b1,064,430
Shares outst
5,373,659
5,409,066
b-After income tax benefits of $756,000 for the latest first quarter and $478,222 for year-ago period.


APL Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* APL Corp
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
228,705,000
273,420,000
Net loss
13,209,000
c11,750,000
Yr rev
910,665,000
1,104,970,000
Net loss
b42,662,000
c31,465,000
b-Included net from discontinued operations of $1,674,000, or 45 cents a share.


Many Florida Bathers Stung By Portuguese Men-of-War
LEAD: Portuguese men-of-war have stung hundreds of beachgoers in recent days, from Palm Beach south to Miami Beach and Key Biscayne.


Reason and Law Reject Our Panama Invasion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Text of Dinkins Speech: 'We Are All Foot Soldiers on the March to Freedom'
LEAD: Following is a transcript of Mayor David N. Dinkins's inaugural address yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times.


Israelis Deadlocked Over the Dismissal of Weizman
LEAD: The Israeli Government remained in a deadlock today over Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's dismissal of the Labor Party's outspoken Cabinet Minister, Ezer Weizman, on Sunday.


After 37 Years, a Split
LEAD: After 37 years together, the Leo Burnett Company and Harris Trust and Savings Bank have agreed to split up.
Burnett and Harris Bank executives said that leaving the Chicago bank, whose billings are believed to be about $1 million, would enable Burnett to pursue larger financial services accounts.


8 Works by Matisse Are Stolen in France
LEAD: A burglar stole eight works by Henri Matisse valued at an estimated $12.5 million from the Matisse home on the Riviera, the police said today.


Canon Settles U.S. Claim
LEAD: Canon U.S.A.
Inc. has agreed to pay $2.5 million to settle claims that it overcharged the Federal Government for copiers, the Justice Department said Friday.


Winter Wheat Farmers Fear Second Year's Crop Failure
LEAD: When Lawrence Weber looked out of his pickup truck over his wheat fields at just the right angle, he could see a delicate fuzz of green bristling up out of the black earth.
And what he saw was reason enough for the frown that flashed across his countenance.


Proclaiming A Decade Of Decency
LEAD: GOOD Housekeeping, the magazine that declared that the liberated woman had been succeeded by the ''new traditionalist,'' is risking another look into the future, contending that the 1990's will be the ''decency decade.''


Continents In Motion: Patchwork Process
LEAD: A REVOLUTION is taking place in attempts to understand how the continents were born and grew.
Geologists once drew a simple picture of a single great land mass, assembled from earlier fragments, breaking into pieces 150 million years ago to form the continents of today.
Now they say the process was much more complicated.


John Frank Wood, Lawyer, 81
LEAD: John Frank Wood, a retired partner in the Manhattan law firm of Thacher Proffitt &amp; Wood, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Buck Hill Falls, Pa.
He also lived in Manhattan and was 81 years old.


G. Douglas Hofe, 59, New Jersey Prosecutor
LEAD: G. Douglas Hofe Jr., a former Deputy State Attorney General for New Jersey, died of cancer yesterday at his home in Morris Township, N.J.
He was 59 years old and also lived in Orleans, Mass.


Vast Cheating Forces Many in India to Retake Scholastic Test
LEAD: Thousands of Indian students hoping to enter American colleges will have to retake the Graduate Record Examinations and English-language proficiency tests in January, because copies of the tests were widely sold before the tests were taken.


Let Marketplace Repair Our Crumbling Nation
LEAD: To the Editor:


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


For Judaism's Remnant, Coup Is Mixed Blessing
LEAD: For Rumania's fast-disappearing Jewish minority, the overthrow of Nicolae Ceausescu represents something of a mixed blessing.


Sinking Barge Salvaged on the Monongahela


Fare Rises But Riders Keep Cool
LEAD: On the first working day of the new year yesterday, most New Yorkers appeared to greet the transit fare increase with resignation, indifference and pockets filled with tokens bought at the old price.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Predicting The Trends Of the 1990's
LEAD: IF the 1980's witnessed the transformation of advertising agencies into diversified marketing/communications conglomerates, the 1990's will mark the continuing evolution in the advertising images that Americans will see and in the companies that will provide them.


MacLeod Hopeful
LEAD: John MacLeod, former coach of the Dallas Mavericks, said yesterday in Dallas that he was ''just waiting'' to hear back from the Sacramento Kings, who have reportedly narrowed their search for a new head coach to MacLeod and two others.


Rebels Report Gain in Ethiopia
LEAD: Ethiopian rebels said today that they seized a third town in central Ethiopia in their drive southward toward Addis Ababa, the capital.


New Wisconsin Coach
LEAD: Barry Alvarez, an assistant for Notre Dame the last three seasons, took over yesterday as the head coach for Wisconsin.


Final Call in the Polls Is Clear: Miami Is No. 1
LEAD: At the corner of San Amaro and Corniche, at the edge of the University of Miami campus, several hundred noisy people dressed in orange and green gathered this afternoon to surround a crystal football that rested behind the glass of a circular 7-foot case.


New Weapon in War on Insects: Hot Air
LEAD: rrSeeking to avoid the use of toxic chemicals in eliminating indoor insect infestations, two California scientists have developed a method that relies solely on hot air.


Royal Palm Beach Colony L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Palm Beach Colony L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,271,000
2,715,000
Net inc
2,805,000
907,000
Share earns
.62
.20
Yr rev
14,221,000
12,541,000
Net inc
7,140,000
4,717,000
Share earns
1.59
1.05
Shares outst
4,485,000
4,485,000


Fannie Mae Debentures
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, plans to price $1.4 billion in debentures today equally divided between four-year and 10-year maturities.


Dow Soars To 2,810.15, New Peak
LEAD: Investors greeted the new year yesterday with a burst of enthusiam that catapulted the Dow Jones industrial average beyond 2,800 to its highest level ever.


Vincent T. Malone, Stockbroker, 64
LEAD: Vincent T. Malone, a retired senior vice president of the Manhattan stockbrokerage firm of Pershing &amp; Company, died of cancer on Friday at his home in Monmouth Beach, N.J.
He was 64 years old.


Bank of Boston Acts to Offset Bad Property Loans
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation yesterday announced additional losses from its real estate lending but said it expected to break even in the fourth quarter as the losses were offset by profits from selling most of its credit card business to the Chase Manhattan Corporation and the restructuring of its pension fund.


For Bavaro, Season Ends and Surgery Looms
LEAD: When Mark Bavaro is healthy, he is probably the best tight end in pro football.
But he is far from healthy now, and today Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants said Bavaro would be unable to play for the rest of the season.


20 Quit at The Jerusalem Post
LEAD: The new publisher of The Jerusalem Post accepted the resignations today of 20 senior editors and longtime reporters who objected to what they called the publisher's moves to turn the liberal daily into a platform for right-wing views.


Kawaguchi Journal;   Fellow Asians, Yes, but Where's the Fellowship?
LEAD: The Mayor of this drab factory town north of Tokyo is upset that some people viewed recent statements of his as racist, especially his comment that with so many dark-skinned foreigners in town, Japanese were having trouble seeing them at night.


Rights of the Turks Protested
LEAD: Angry Bulgarians chanting anti-Turkish songs dating back to Ottoman rule demonstrated in this southern town today against a decision to grant religious rights to local Bulgarian Turks.


St. John's Trounces Connecticut by 93-62
LEAD: There was enough highlight material in the 40 minutes of basketball that St.
John's played last night against Connecticut to show that the Redmen will be a team to reckon with during the Big East season.


Celebrating 2 Ex-Knicks
LEAD: As part of the celebration of the 20th anniversary of the first of the franchise's two National Basketball Association championships, the Knicks will retire Dick Barnett's number and honor Red Holzman, the coach of that team.
The ceremonies will take place during halftime of the March 10 game against the Nets at Madison Square


Burke Stands Out as Devils Get Back to Winning
LEAD: The Devils rebounded from a loss to one of the worst teams in the National Hockey League with a victory tonight over the team with the best record in the league.


About New York;   Hey, Come On In, The Polar Bears Are Just Fiii-ine!
LEAD: Approaching a wintry Coney Island by elevated subway, you are struck by a motionless Wonder Wheel, a lifeless Cyclone roller coaster.
Alighting, you see boarded-up arcades, kiddie rides guarded by razor ribbon, frozen hints of faraway summer.
It's 30 degrees and a bitter wind chews at the cheeks.
What to do but go swimming?


EATING WELL
LEAD: BABY BOOMERS brought up on a steady diet of children's cereals in the 1960's and 70's must be struck by the commercials for adult cereals over the last two or three years.
Unlike the commercials of their youth, which emphasized fun and tie-ins with television characters, adult cereals trumpet their fiber and dried fruits.


H. E. Kershner, 98, A Longtime Worker In Children's Causes
LEAD: Howard E. Kershner, a businessman and an outspoken conservative about politics and economics who retired 50 years ago to devote himself to relief causes for children, died of a pulmonary ailment on Monday at the Southland Lutheran Home in Norwalk, Calif.
He was 98 years old and had lived for several years in La Jolla,


Suns Snap the Knicks' Two Winning Streaks
LEAD: The scoring, the shooting and the assists were down and the defense was spotty in the last four games for the Knicks, indications that their home-court supremacy and winning streak were in jeopardy.


For Dinkins and Fernandez, First Day on Job Is Brisk;   Chancellor Pays Visit To School That Uses Some Power Sharing
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez took over as chancellor of New York City's schools yesterday with gestures that swiftly underscored his intention to reshape the troubled system: he visited a school in Brooklyn where teachers share leadership with the principal and he brought the president of the teachers union along for the tour.


Advice on Negotiating Legal Thickets of the Wine Business
LEAD: WANT to open a winery in New York State?
Want to teach or learn about New York wines?
The New York Wine and Grape Foundation, expecting a burst of winery openings in the 1990's, has begun a publishing program designed to meet such information needs.


Murdoch Hires Outsider To Run British Papers
LEAD: To hear Rupert Murdoch tell it, the British portion of his publishing and television empire is consuming too much of his time, and Andrew Knight is just the man to do something about it.


Calculators Cleared For Students Taking Regents Math Tests
LEAD: For the first time, students in New York State will be allowed to use calculators next year on their mathematics Regents examinations, a State Education Department official said today.


Couple Enter Not Guilty Pleas To Missouri Murder Charges
LEAD: A farm couple pleaded not guilty Tuesday to charges of slaying five transient workers to cover up a cattle-theft scheme in northwestern Missouri.


Anti-Bias Classes in Georgia
LEAD: From racial strife to vandalism at religious schools to the exclusionary traditions of private social clubs, issues of bigotry are coming to Georgia's classrooms under a new education project.


Land Deal Is Described at Lincoln Hearing
LEAD: A Tucson, Ariz., mortgage broker told a Federal District Court examining the Government takeover of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association today that he had legally bought a parcel of land for $14 million, as a favor to an associate of Charles H. Keating Jr., even though he had no intention of taking possession of the property.


Earth Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Earth Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 24
1989
1988
Revenue
8,824,000
8,645,000
Net inc
509,000
295,000
Share earns
.17
.10
Shares outst
3,008,694
2,865,034


Tale of Two Dictators
LEAD: An American invasion finally dumped Gen.
Manuel Noriega of Panama.
Popular fury rid Rumania of the Ceausescus.
Various means reach the end.


CUOMO TO REQUEST $1.9 BILLION BOND TO BUY OPEN LAND
LEAD: Moving to preserve New York's remaining open spaces, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will propose the largest environmental bond issue in state history, totaling $1.9 billion, officials here said today.


Rams Are Refusing to Be Left in the Cold
LEAD: When John Robinson came in from the cold to lunch with local reporters today, he looked like a man braced for a rare but occasional afternoon chill.
In a city of short sleeves and sunglasses, he wore a light sweater.


Image Bank Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Image Bank Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,250,000
8,444,000
Net loss
b62,000
c574,000
Share earns
-
.26
Yr rev
36,496,000
28,198,000
Net inc
b344,000
1,341,000
Share earns
.14
.60


Chiron-Ortho Pact For Du Pont Unit
LEAD: The Chiron Corporation and Ortho Diagnostic Systems Inc., a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson, said they had an agreement to buy most of the AIDS and hepatitis blood-screening business of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.
The companies, which said last week that they were discussing the acquisition, did not disclose terms.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Life Offers Discount For Running Old Ads
LEAD: In its latest effort to tap the nostalgia boom, Life magazine is offering a discount to advertisers who run old ads next to new ones.
Advertisers who pay the current price for a full-page ad get the adjacent page for an old ad at the rate in effect when the ad first ran.
The vintage ad must be at least 10 years old, and advertisers are promised at least a 24.1 percent discount over a standard two-page spread.


Treasury Securities Down Slightly
LEAD: The credit markets opened the new year on a somewhat sour note yesterday, as prices of Treasury securities dipped slightly in light trading.


A Deficit of $65 Million Is Seen in Connecticut
LEAD: Budget officials said today that falling sales-tax revenues and rising welfare costs will leave Connecticut with a budget deficit of $65 million for the fiscal year ending June 30.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
Hal Riney &amp; Partners has moved its New York office to 100 East 42d Street, Manhattan.


C.D.'s, Bank Funds Steady
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mostly unchanged for the week ended yesterday.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: EVERYONE in the food industry is talking about a return to homey cooking in the 1990's - call it bistro, traditional American, unfussy Italian, whatever - which started me thinking about offal, something I associate with home cooking in France.
Offal, or variety meats, includes liver, kidney, tripe, tongue, brain, sweetbreads and other internal organs.


30,123 Entries On Sale List
LEAD: Savings institution regulators today printed what amounts to one of the largest real estate listings ever published.


2 Campeau Units Win Delay In Default on Bank Loans
LEAD: The two American retail subsidiaries of the Campeau Corporation said yesterday that they had received a two-week reprieve from a threat by their bank lenders to declare $2.34 billion loans in default.


Worker Survives 150-Foot Fall
LEAD: A 23-year-old construction worker survived a fall of 150 feet from the Queensboro Bridge yesterday, landing in a pile of soft rubbish, the police said.
Kenneth Wolf, an ironworker from Patchogue, L.I., was in critical condition last night at the City Hospital Center in Elmhurst, with two broken legs, broken ankles and hip injuries, the police said.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Microsystems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Sales
13,642,000
13,132,000
Net inc
60,000
814,000
Share earns
.02
.25
Shares outst
3,044,000
3,196,000
9mo sales
40,798,000
37,996,000
Net inc
752,000
2,091,000
Share earns
.24
.66
Shares outst
3,093,000
3,190,000


Chrysler Shows Van Concept
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation today introduced a futuristic concept vehicle that combines a compact car and a mini-van.


Hurricanes Produce Convincing Victory
LEAD: At halftime in the Sugar Bowl game here Monday night, the University of Miami, in a battle with the Crimson Tide of Alabama, was still No. 2 in the country.
But as the second half wore down, the Hurricanes had become No. 1, especially in the hearts and minds of their fans at the Superdome.


Poland's Brave Plunge
LEAD: The Polish celebration of the new year has already ended.
The crash program to propel the economy into capitalism has gone abruptly into effect, and that means pain.
The price of heating fuel may jump by seven times.
Other necessities will also cost much more.
And hundreds of thousands of workers will soon be unemployed.


Rude, Rash, Effective, Act-Up Shifts AIDS Policy
LEAD: To many parishioners, the recent invasion of St.
Patrick's Cathedral by dozens of angry AIDS protesters was an act of desecration.
But to Christopher Hennelly, a former seminarian among those arrested inside the church, it was a prayer for self-preservation.


Exxon Pipeline Spills Oil Into the Arthur Kill
LEAD: A ruptured pipe from an Exxon refinery in Linden, N .J., leaked 5,000 gallons of heating oil into the Arthur Kill between Staten Island and New Jersey yesterday morning, the Coast Guard said.


Midmonth Car Sales Down 21.3%
LEAD: Sales of cars made in the United States continued to remain sluggish, falling 21.3 percent in mid-December from the comparable period a year earlier.


Karajan's Provocative Successor at Salzburg
LEAD: ''Not all operas should be played.
It is good to hear some unknown operas, but also good to forget some.
There is no real reason to stage Wagner's 'Ring' now that Patrice Chereau has done it for our time at Bayreuth.''


Book Notes
LEAD:
Japanese Literature


Crossman, LaFontaine Each Score Twice
LEAD: The Islanders, who have spent most of the season in last place, began the second half of their schedule by vacating it.


Tranzonic Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tranzonic Cos. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
25,407,600
20,936,300
Net inc
1,345,000
1,166,600
Share earns
.37
.33
9mo sales
72,462,700
59,986,200
Net inc
b4,193,900
c3,667,600
Share earns
1.15
1.02


Alan Colby Green, 54, Cooper Union Official
LEAD: Alan Colby Green, the executive vice president of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, died of a heart ailment on Friday at the Maho Bay campground in St.
John, V.I., which he was visiting with his family.
He was 54 years old and lived in Pelham, N.Y.


Israeli Sought in Panama May Have Been Alerted to U.S. Invasion
LEAD: An Israeli reputed to be Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's closest associate may have eluded capture on the night of the United States invasion because he was warned to flee nearly six hours before American troops swept into the capital, the deputy commander of Panama's new police force said today.


O'Rourke Takes Oath for 3d Time in Westchester


Vow by Schembechler
LEAD: Bo Schembechler seemed more convinced than ever yesterday that Michigan could have beaten Southern Cal in the Rose Bowl were it not for a controversial penalty on a fake-punt run late in the game.


Vector Aeromotive Corp. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vector Aeromotive Corp.
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,609,084
224,039


About Education
LEAD: In a happy academic coalition, Fiorello H. La Guardia Community College in Long Island City, Queens, which admits all applicants, and highly selective Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have become what they describe as an academic ''odd couple.''


Czechoslovak President Visits Wall and Buries It
LEAD: Vaclav Havel, Czechoslovakia's dissident-turned-President, paid brief visits laden with symbolism to both Germanys today in his first trip abroad since becoming head of state on Friday.


Liberia's Leader Ousts Aide For Ignoring Hints of a Coup
LEAD: The President of Liberia, Gen.
Samuel K. Doe, dismissed his Interior Minister today for failing to heed a warning of an uprising by dissidents last week.


Sort Out Your Chilies
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Tap Transport Trust
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Stock Market Record:


Strike Leaves Deep Vein of Anger in Coal Country
LEAD: There were no celebrations in the coal towns of Appalachia today, no banners unfurled, no outward signs of joy that there may soon be an end to one of the nation's longest and most bitter miners' strikes.


Genentech Seeks Approval for Drug
LEAD: Genentech filed an application with the Food and Drug Administration seeking approval to sell gamma interferon to treat patients with chronic granulomatous disease.
If approved, it would be the third drug created by genetic engineering to be sold by the biotechnology company, based in South San Francisco, Calif.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Ronald J. Benza and Steve Centrillo have been promoted to executive vice president and general manager, and senior vice president and management supervisor, respectively, of Bozell's Minneapolis office.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: LUCIUS BOLEY is standing in the cafeteria line at the American Museum of Natural History.
Ever-mindful of his low-cholesterol diet, Mr.
Boley seeks the help of a young woman in front of him in making his choice. 'Is that meat or vegetable?'' he asks. ''I wouldn't know,'' she replies. ''I'm in fossils.


Lessons
LEAD: American grade schoolers can be forgiven if they occasionally confuse their classrooms with aviaries.


State of State: Proposals by the Dozen
LEAD: The annual State of the State address, which Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo will deliver here on Wednesday, is often described as a road map for the coming year, filled with gubernatorial directives and proposals.
But it also has its share of dead ends.


Reliance Is Buying Transamerica Unit
LEAD: Reliance Group Holdings Inc. agreed to acquire the title insurance unit of the Transamerica Corporation for about $65 million.
The acquisition of the Transamerica Title Insurance Company will add to Reliance's title insurance operations, primarily in the West and Midwest.
Reliance operates the Commonwealth Land Title Insurance Company in


A Death in Border Clashes In a Muslim Soviet Republic
LEAD: One death and two separate episodes of riot and ambush were reported today in the southern Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, with Tass, the Soviet press agency, describing ''barbarous'' actions and rising tensions along the Iranian border.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Cadbury Schweppes, to Ammirati &amp; Puris, for its Crush and Hires soft drinks, with an undetermined budget.


Lisbon Premier Shuffles Unpopular Cabinet
LEAD: Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva replaced five ministers in his center-right Government today, two weeks after his Social Democratic Party suffered heavy losses in municipal elections.


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ketema Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
45,577,000
-
Net inc
1,300,000
-
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
4,431,871
-
9mo sales
145,462,000
-
Net inc
3,617,000
-
Share earns
.81
-
Shares outst
4,413,538
-


Index for Jakarta Stocks
LEAD: A new daily index to measure the Jakarta stock market will be issued starting Wednesday by BT Brokerage Asia, a unit of Bankers Trust New York.
The Jakarta Stock Exchange's own index has been criticized as being imprecise.
The base of the BT Jakarta index will be Jan. 4, 1988, and will use the adjusted weighted capital of all issued shares of listed companies, BT said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Top Officer Resigns At Diversified Services
LEAD: Barry E. Loughrane has resigned as chairman and chief executive of Diversified Agency Services, the division of the Omnicom Group that includes its direct marketing, financial advertising and other specialty communications companies.
Bruce Crawford, president and chief executive of Omnicom, will take over as chief executive of Diversified Agency Services.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,034,000,000
2,048,000,000
Net inc
b125,000,000
c122,000,000
Share earns
1.25
1.01
Shares outst
97,990,287
118,119,242
Yr rev
7,745,000,000
7,592,000,000
Net inc
b452,000,000
c147,000,000
Share earns
4.34
.93
Shares outst
101,230,418
146,451,343


LAWMAKER IS SEEN ACCEPTING $3,000
LEAD: Jurors today watched a videotape that showed a State Senator who is charged with bribery and extortion accepting a $3,000 check from an undercover Federal agent.


Good Fortune Prompts Gifts For Neediest
LEAD: For some people, the way to celebrate good fortune - their own or that of others - is to give to those whom fortune has overlooked.
Few occasions bring that generosity out more than a wedding, or the prospect of one.


I.R.A. Kills Ulster Cab Driver And Cites Paramilitary Link
LEAD: I.R.A. bombers today killed a Belfast taxi driver taking his teen-age daughter to school and said he had been a Protestant paramilitary militant.


George B. Vest, Ex-Government Lawyer, 94
LEAD: George B. Vest, general counsel of the Federal Reserve Board from 1945 until his retirement in 1957, died of liver cancer on Sunday at his home in Washington.
He was 94 years old.


Study Says Ford Leads In Efficiency
LEAD: A study of North American auto plants has concluded that the Ford Motor Company has better manufacturing efficiency than its Big Three rivals, giving it the best competitive position for the 1990's.


Local Military Contractors Cautiously Brace for Peace
LEAD: As relations warm with the Soviet Union and talk grows in Washington of smaller defense budgets, military contractors in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut and communities dependent on military bases are girding themselves for what might become leaner times.


Let Marketplace Repair Our Crumbling Nation;   Not With Pension Funds
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Air Where the Martyrs Fell, A Question: Where To From Here?
LEAD: In Palace Square, where the worst of the fighting had taken place, the people came slowly across the cobblestones, huddled against the cold, as if a long hibernation had just ended.


And Now, The Last Word On Dieting: Don't Bother
LEAD: AH, the Great Diet Paradox: If you diet long enough, you're not really dieting anymore.


Barbara Miller Wed in Omaha
LEAD: Barbara Ruth Miller, a Foreign Service officer, was married yesterday in Omaha to Dr.
James H. Alleman, the director of the International Center for Telecommunications Management at the University of Nebraska at Omaha.
Judge Samuel V. Cooper of the Douglas County Court in Omaha officiated at the home of the bride and bridegroom.


Budget to Be a Week Late, White House Tells Congress
LEAD: The Bush Administration has told the Democratic leadership in Congress that it cannot meet the statutory deadline for its 1991 budget and will submit it Jan. 29, a week late.


Drug Foe's Brother Is Killed in Quarrel With His Landlord
LEAD: The brother of Maria Hernandez, the Brooklyn woman who had campaigned against drug dealers on her block and who was shot to death last August, was killed Monday in an argument with his landlord, the police said.


The Goalie With No Nerves;   Meola's Calm Helps Keep U.S. in World Cup Play
LEAD: Whether reclining in a chair in his living room here or positioning himself on a soccer field in some other part of the world, Tony Meola, the goalkeeper for the United States national team, is relaxed.
His composure does not waver when he dives for a save in a World Cup qualifying match or reaches for a cookie in his kitchen before watching a National Football


Panamanian Runs the Canal: A First
LEAD: In the tumult surrounding the American military invasion of Panama and the overthrow of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, one historic watershed has passed without fanfare: For the first time in its 75-year history, the Panama Canal is now being run by a Panamanian.


Good Holiday For Toys 'R' Us
LEAD: Toys ''R'' Us Inc. said yesterday that its sales rose by 22.7 percent, to $2.02 billion, in the eight-week Christmas season, despite a weaker toy industry.


Oracle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oracle Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
224,556,000
123,745,000
Net inc
28,491,000
17,189,000
Share earns
.21
.13
Shares outst
136,729,000
134,720,000
6mo rev
400,046,000
214,384,000
Net inc
40,170,000
24,256,000
Share earns
.29
.18
Shares outst
136,427,000
134,588,000


Stuffing, in Their Words
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Contemplating the Past, at 40 Going on 36
LEAD: As of Wednesday I am no longer 30-something.
Nor am I 40-odd; that will come next.
Beginning Wednesday and for the rest of this year I am just plain smack-in-the-middle-of-your-life 40.


The Fed Intervenes to Slow Dollar's Rise Against Yen
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply yesterday, forcing the Federal Reserve to intervene by selling dollars several times to stem its rally against the Japanese yen.


Evangelos Averoff, Ex-Official of Greece And a Politician, 79
LEAD: Evangelos Averoff, a former Foreign Minister and former Defense Minister of Greece and a leading conservative politician, died of a heart attack in Apolloneion Hospital in Athens yesterday, an official at the Greek Mission to the United Nations said.
He was 79 years old.


Orange Juice Rises Sharply; Energy Prices Also Climb
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices rose sharply yesterday after Florida and Brazilian juice processors announced cash price increases of more than 20 percent in reaction to frost damage to the Florida orange crop.


Apogee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apogee Enterprises
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
154,711,000
113,900,000
Net inc
b3,014,000
4,031,000
Share earns
.22
.30
9mo sales
436,990,000
311,426,000
Net inc
b9,761,000
10,205,000
Share earns
.72
.76


Phone Fraud: It's Still a Big Problem on Campus
LEAD: With college students returning to campuses after the holiday break, long-distance telephone companies are continuing their nationwide crackdown on students who steal telephone services by using illegal credit card numbers and access codes.


2 Nuns, One From U.S., Are Slain By Gunmen in Nicaragua Ambush
LEAD: Two Roman Catholic nuns, one of them American, were killed Monday night when their pickup truck was attacked on an isolated highway in this remote Atlantic Coast region by armed men who Government and church officials said were American-backed contras.


Notre Dame Only Played 1 Bad Game
LEAD: rrLou Holtz, who had a golf appointment later in the day, sounded very much the golfer devising some exotic handicap system as he tried to justify why Notre Dame should be rated the top college team in the country, instead of Miami, which is.


Wales All-Stars Led by Lemieux
LEAD: The center Mario Lemieux and the defenseman Paul Coffey of the Penguins have been voted to the Wales Conference starting team for the 41st National Hockey League All-Star Game, to be played in Pittsburgh on Jan. 21.


Tandem Expected To Show Computer
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. is expected to introduce next Monday its first fault-tolerant computer based on the Unix operating system, analysts said.
The company has scheduled a news conference for Monday for an announcement, but officials were unavailable to elaborate.


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,934,474
11,361,762
Net inc
870,721
627,063
Share earns
.24
.18


Material in 4 Bombs Was the Same, F.B.I. Finds
LEAD: Bombs that killed a Federal judge and a Savannah lawyer last month as well as two others disarmed before exploding were made from the same material, a Federal Bureau of Investigation spokesman here said today.


The Pop Life
LEAD: Among the innovations the 1980's brought to pop music were the rise of MTV, home videos, the compact disk and rap.
But what comes next?
The heads of three major record companies were invited to speculate on what the 90's might hold for pop music technologically, stylistically and in the techniques for breaking - record company parlance for commercially establishing - performers.


Books of The Times;   A Vietnam Medic Heals His Own Hidden Wounds
LEAD: Veteran's Day
By Rod Kane
314 pages. Orion Books/Crown. $18.95.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THERE is no dearth of experts ready to tell us what to drink.
Most concentrate on what to buy for the next few weeks, with occasional tips on wines to lay down for the future.
Would anyone dare suggest what we will be drinking for the next 10 years?


New Chief to Be Named at Federal Health Agency
LEAD: Dr.
William Roper, the top health adviser at the White House, will be named head of the Federal Centers for Disease Control, Federal officials said today.


Eligible Bachelors (And They Cook)
LEAD: GREAT COOK: 43, together, tall, fit, attractive, divorced male professional with youthful outlook toward life in search of attractive, classy, fun-loving female . . .
- The Washingtonian, December 1989


Rise in Health Insurance Rates Levels Off
LEAD: After several years of climbing steeply, increases in health insurance rates are leveling off in many parts of the country, according to executives of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, the nation's largest health insurer.


Israelis Come to Terms On Weizman Dismissal
LEAD: The Likud and Labor parties averted a breakup of their governing coalition today with a compromise under which Ezer Weizman, the independent-minded Labor Party Science Minister, would keep his post but be suspended from the Government's decision-making core.


Review/Music;   Rap and Politics From Public Enemy
LEAD: Public Enemy's show early on New Year's Day at the World was a mess of contradictions.
The group, notorious because of its anti-Semitic statements, both in interviews and on its most recent single, ''Welcome to the Terrordome,'' allows inconsistencies to make its show politically incoherent.
Group members pronounce anti-authoritarian slogans like the ambiguous ''fight the power'' while keeping a squad of stone-faced guards -dressed in military outfits, and the image of power - onstage.


For Epicurean Elite, Trouble in Paradise
LEAD: GASTRONOME is the magazine of the Chaine des Rotisseurs, a food and wine society with about 7,000 members in this country and some 50,000 more worldwide.
Gastronome articles read like this:


28 Invited to Train
LEAD: Brent Goulet, dropped from the United States national soccer team last fall after a scoring slump, was among 28 players invited yesterday to report to the team's training camp when it regroups Friday to prepare for the World Cup.(AP)


Felix Bloch, Still in Limbo
LEAD: For several days last summer Felix Bloch, the suspended diplomat, was being tailed by the F.B.I. and the agents in turn were tailed by journalists and photographers - all on the streets of Washington and much of it on television news.


Fitch Benches Carroll For Uninspired Effort
LEAD: The Nets' starting lineup was so inept tonight, the game was lost almost from the moment it began.
And it was an especially frustrating and embarrassing night for Joe Barry Carroll, the starting center.


Critic's Notebook;   Film Makers' Youth: Outsiders Looking In
LEAD: In an interview with Martin Scorsese not long before ''The Last Temptation of Christ'' opened, I asked when he had first read the novel on which the film was based.
The answer emerged 15 minutes later: he had heard about the book as a film student at New York University.
But first his conversation took a revealing detour through his childhood in Little Italy, where he was an asthmatic boy who spent endless hours at movie theaters watching biblical epics in Cinemascope and even more time rooted in front of the family television set watching black-and-white reruns of ''The Red Shoes.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
PRO BASKETBALL
Technicals and Foul Shots Abound
There were 10 technical fouls in this game, which visiting Detroit won, 115-113, by scoring 15 of its last 17 points from the free-throw line.
Orlando's Sidney Green was ejected after picking up his second technical.
Bill Laimbeer scored 14 points in the second half and had the Pistons' only field goal in the last six minutes, a 15-foot jumper that gave Detroit a 111-104 lead with three minutes left.


The Mosaic Thing
LEAD: First there was the melting pot, but that seemed overly romantic.
Then came patchwork quilt, a down-home image that Jesse Jackson has used over the years.
Now the metaphor of the moment is gorgeous mosaic, Mayor David Dinkins's favorite description of New York City. ''I see New York as a gorgeous mosaic of race and religious faith, of national origin and sexual orientation,'' he said in his Inaugural Address on Monday, turning his oft-used campaign slogan into - a trademark, the equivalent of George Bush's ''kinder, gentler nation.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-13
All of Rumania's former Politburo is in detention, the new Government announced.
More than three dozen members of the ruling body commanded by Nicolae Ceausescu were arrested after the dictator's execution.
Page A1


Reaction Mixed to Certification Plan
LEAD: An agreement among seven Northeast states that will ease restrictions for teachers who want to cross state lines for a job is getting a mixed reaction from educators.


Reagan Fighting a Subpoena
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan moved today to stall attempts to subpoena him as a witness at the trial of his former national security adviser, John M. Poindexter, in the Iran-contra affair.


Bush Picks a Panama Envoy And Sends Team There, Too
LEAD: President Bush today announced the appointment of a veteran diplomat, Deane R. Hinton, as the new United States Ambassador to Panama.


Bridge
LEAD: The two Player of the Year races of the Greater New York Bridge Association have never been closer than they were in 1989, with decisions coming Dec. 17, in the final hour of tournament action at the Winter Regional Championships.


U.S. Economy Stayed In Slump in December
LEAD: The economy remained in a slump in December, although production levels rose and exports expanded, the nation's purchasing managers said in a monthly report.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Federal Bank, Greenville, S.C., named Michael A. Trimble, its chief financial officer, to the additional post of chief operating officer.


U.S. Aid for Khmer Rouge Is Repugnant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Union Pacific Agrees To Sell Real Estate
LEAD: The Union Pacific Corporation said today that it had agreed to sell most of the assets of its Union Pacific Realty subsidiary to a California real estate investment firm for about $532 million.


RAC Income Fund reports earnings for As of Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RAC Income Fund (NYSE)
As of Oct 31
1989
1988
Net inc
112,143,520
-
Share earns
11.09
-
Net income represented net assets.
The company began operations on Dec. 30, 1988.


For Dinkins and Fernandez, First Day on Job Is Brisk;   Mayor Seeks Advice On Budget Problems And Welfare Chief
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins began his first real day on the job yesterday with a sunrise appearance on national television, an impromptu breakfast and walk with senior aides and meetings with friends and advisers on how to handle the simmering stew of a city he inherited Monday.


$1 Billion Fund Set Up to Back Poland's Currency Program
LEAD: The United States and 14 other industrialized countries, having promised to help Poland overhaul its currency, have established a $1 billion fund to support Warsaw's efforts to make its currency partly convertible into dollars and other hard currencies, the Treasury said today.


Chemicals Sprayed on Oil Slick Off Morocco to Safeguard Coastline
LEAD: Helicopters sprayed chemical agents on a 100-square-mile oil slick and cleanup crews vacuumed some of the muck from the surface of the Atlantic Ocean today in efforts to protect Morocco's coastline.


Let Marketplace Repair Our Crumbling Nation;   Use Municipal Bonds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bronx Councilman in Line For Top Post on Land Use
LEAD: As the New York City Council begins assuming greater powers under a new charter, its leadership has hired staff members, raised salaries and shaken up its most important committess.


70% Wage Increase Decreed in Lebanon, Fueling Rise in Tensions
LEAD: Lebanon's already severe political and military tensions have been further strained by the prospect of widespread labor and economic upheaval.


First Day on the Job for New Mayor and Schools Chief


New Rival for Personal Computer
LEAD: The personal computer, which has dominated the computer industry since the early 1980's, has a new competitor that could someday take away a significant share of the office market.


Solomon Birnbaum, Scholar, 98
LEAD: Solomon Birnbaum, a Jewish scholar credited with establishing the authenticity and age of the Dead Sea Scrolls, died here on Thursday.
He was 98 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
1050
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.50
8.00
9.40
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.59
8.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.60
8.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.96
7.96
9.28
30-YR.


Sakharov Memorial Service
LEAD: A memorial service for Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet human rights champion, will be held at 3:45 P.M. tomorrow at the Celeste Bartos Forum of the New York Public Library, 42d Street entrance.
The service is sponsored by the International League for Human Rights.
Speakers will include Elie Wiesel, Robert Bernstein, Yuri Orlov and Jerome J.


Miniscribe, Citing Lawsuits, Makes Bankruptcy Filing
LEAD: The Miniscribe Corporation, which makes disk drives for computers, said today that it had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.


Review/Opera;   With Dazzle and Hubbub, 'Turandot' at the Met
LEAD: Franco Zeffirelli's extravagant staging of Puccini's ''Turandot'' generated considerable heat when the Metropolitan Opera unveiled it in 1987.
Like most of the director's other recent productions, it seemed predicated on the notions that operagoers' eyes should get as thorough a workout as their ears, and that no expense should be spared in the pursuit of detail.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The state wants to keep every community it can.
But when you have a declining population and tax base and have to keep the schools going and the highways going and the medical services and the nursing homes, it's going to be almost impossible to keep these communities alive.''
-Gov. George Sinner of North Dakota.


Montana Is M.V.P.
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers' Joe Montana, who finished 1989 with the best all-round passing year in National Football League history, has been named the league's most valuable player by The Associated Press in balloting by sportswriters.


In Spain, It's Grand Ham Time
LEAD: If anything unites the European continent it is the ubiquitous pig in all its culinary renderings.
But it is hard to imagine the pig being more deeply rooted in folklore, tradition and gastronomy than it is in Spain.


Governor O'Neill's Commuter War
LEAD: Fares for Metro-North commuters went up 15 percent on New Year's Day - except for riders to and from Connecticut.
At the last minute, Gov.
William O'Neill vetoed any increase within Connecticut's boundaries.
By blocking needed funds, he pandered to affluent Fairfield County commuters.
In a gubernatorial election year, that's good politics but weak leadership.


Inflation Up in Sri Lanka
LEAD: Sri Lanka's annual inflation rate rose marginally, to 15.1 percent, in December, from 15 percent in the period a year ago.
The index rose 3.8 percent in December alone, up from a rise of 2.3 percent in November and 2 percent in December 1988.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD: Restaurant Outlook


Assassination Attempt Reported by Prosecutor
LEAD: The Camden County Prosecutor said today that two gunmen fired at him on Monday in what he described as an unsuccessful drug-related assassination attempt.
He shot one of the assailants in the head, he said.


Brief Trading Halt in Italy
LEAD: Stockbrokers in various parts of Italy today suspended trading of shares for 20 minutes to protest the nation's slow pace in modernizing the securities business.


Orange Bowl Top Draw
LEAD: NBC's telecast of Notre Dame's victory over Colorado in the Orange Bowl drew more than twice as many viewers as ABC's broadcast of Miami's victory over Alabama in the Sugar Bowl, according to overnight ratings released yesterday.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American General Corp., Houston, a holding company, said it had completed the sale of its group life and health insurance operations to Associated Insurance Cos., Indianapolis.
The price included $175 million in cash and a $10 million note.


Allegheny Selling Stake in Titanium
LEAD: Allegheny International Inc. reached an agreement to sell its interest in the Titanium Metals Corporation of America to the Baroid Corporation.
Allegheny said Baroid, based in Houston, would pay $50 million for about 30 percent of Titanium Metal's outstanding stock and for a $3.25 million note to be paid by the metal company.


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oxford Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 1
1989
1988
Sales
142,151,000
154,145,000
Net inc
3,038,000
2,720,000
Share earns
.31
.28
Shares outst
9,874,855
9,973,131
6mo sales
288,860,000
301,691,000
Net inc
7,013,000
6,244,000
Share earns
.71
.63
Shares outst
9,876,169
9,973,571


Is This Justice Necessary?
LEAD: Surely the United States can't really want custody of General Noriega.
It's understandable, of course, that President Bush should pretend he does.
Having sent the Army to unhorse a tinpot Caesar, he is obliged to huff and puff about having him handed over to Yankee justice.


American Nursery Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Nursery Products
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,081,000
3,895,000
Net loss
1,047,000
1,182,000
6mo sales
9,036,000
8,227,000
Net loss
1,985,000
2,107,000


Correction
LEAD: A chart on Monday showing New York City parking rules for 1990 misstated the date for Labor Day, when Sunday rules will be in effect.
It is Sept. 3, not Sept. 12.


Bucharest Says Entire Politburo Ruled by Ceausescu Is in Custody
LEAD: All members of the Rumanian Politburo commanded by Nicolae Ceausescu, the executed dictator, are in detention, a spokesman for the current Government declared today.


Prague Chief Visits Germanys
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia paid brief visits, laden with symbolism, to East and West Germany.
It was the former dissident's first official foreign trip.
Page A13.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: ON a cold day, nothing makes for a simpler, friendlier party than curry.
Fortunately, it cooks quickly and well in a microwave oven.
Serve with a large bowl of rice - the pilaf in Micro-Tip does well - and small bowls of selected accompaniments like raisins, sliced banana, grated coconut, chutney, yogurt and roasted unsalted nuts.


U.N. Takes Step Toward Global Climate Pact
LEAD: After difficult negotiations, the nations of the world have laid the groundwork for an accord between rich and poor countries on protecting the atmosphere and encouraging ecologically sound development.


Bread, Up 38%, Gas, Up 100%, But Still the Poles Are Hopeful
LEAD: The Government's economic program to move Poland toward capitalism went into full force today, and Poles were shaken but optimistic as bread prices jumped by 38 percent and coal prices for households by 600 percent.


Andover Offers Tuition Prepayment
LEAD: What is thought to be the first ''guaranteed tuition'' plan at the secondary school level has been announced by Phillips Academy at Andover, Mass.


Labor Dispute in Louisiana Ends With Ecological Gain
LEAD: The end of a long, bitter labor dispute against a major Louisiana chemical maker has left in its wake not just a new contract but a new toughness in the state's environmental movement.


Perles High on Jets' List
LEAD: George Perles of Michigan State is the front-runner in the Jets' search for a new coach, several sources in the National Football League and in the college ranks said yesterday.


O'Toole's Group reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Toole's Group
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
28,246,805
16,204,296
Net inc
1,271,373
730,197
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
7,711,000
7,192,000
Some year-ago figures have been restated.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Saab Leaves Lord, Einstein
LEAD: Saab-Scania of America Inc., the United States unit of the Swedish car maker, yesterday removed its account from Lord, Einstein, O'Neill &amp; Partners.
The agency, whose survival was assured when the automobile manufacturer first awarded it the $20 million to $25 million account, had won the business in April 1988.


FACING SENTENCING, REP. GARCIA QUITS
LEAD: Representative Robert Garcia, one of the country's leading Hispanic politicians, resigned his House seat from the Bronx yesterday less than two weeks before he is to be sentenced on conspiracy and extortion convictions, and Assemblyman Jose R. Serrano emerged as the person most likely to replace him.


Price-Shaken Argentina Halts the Money Flow
LEAD: As grocery store workers were busy doubling prices and pharmacies opened with nearly bare shelves, the Government of President Carlos Saul Menem undertook a new plan today to turn back inflation by making Argentina's currency a scarce commodity.


Meeting Sought On Nekoosa
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation said today that it had solicited enough approval by shareholders of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation to call a special meeting to consider replacing Nekoosa's board with nominees who support its takeover offer.


None but the Homeless Stopped; None but the Homeless Helped
LEAD: To the Editor:


None but the Homeless Stopped; None but the Homeless Helped;   Take It to St. Agnes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gain in Home Affordability
LEAD: A typical American family's ability to buy a median-priced home improved in November, but many first-time home buyers were still unable to afford starter houses, a trade group said today.


Japan's Luxury-Car Gains Pose New Threat to Rivals
LEAD: Behind Japan's recent entry into the luxury car market lies a fundamental change in the way the Japanese producers manufacture cars, posing a new and costly challenge to Detroit and other rivals.


Real Estate;   S.R.O. Hotel Razed; Long Fight Ended
LEAD: FOR the first time in more than five years the owners of a single room occupancy hotel in New York City have demolished their property as a matter of right.
The action ends a decade-long battle over the S.R.O. issue in City Hall, which led to protest demonstrations by advocates for the homeless and legal fights that stretched from New York to Albany to


Market Place;   Payout Increases Slumped in 1989
LEAD: THE end-of-the-year treat for shareholders of a dividend increase was less evident last year than at any time in nearly two decades.


A.J. Ross Logistics reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A.J. Ross Logistics
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
55,205,134
47,770,632
Net loss
b3,211,254
c802,211
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
14,544,842
8,695,507
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $454,000.


Chicago Journal;   Famed Shopping Street Is Fighting for Survival
LEAD: Maxwell Street has been called ''The Great Incubator of Capitalism.'' It has also been called a junkyard.
Both descriptions fit.


A Top Officer At Shearson Steps Down
LEAD: Jeffrey B. Lane, one of the top officials at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., has resigned from the firm he has worked for since 1969 to pursue business opportunities elsewhere.


Booming Business: Drug Use Tests
LEAD: As employers begin testing millions of transportation workers for drug use under Federal rules that took effect in December, the laboratories that conduct the tests say their business is surging.


With Rural Towns Vanishing, States Choose Which to Save
LEAD: Since the 1950's half the people and most of the businesses have left the barren buttes and prairies of Sheridan County in central North Dakota.
The county has no doctor, no hospital, no traffic light, no Greyhound bus service and more ghost towns than live ones.


Economic Scene;   The Americans Are Coming
LEAD: TO Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, the case for discouraging European imports of American television programming is self-evident. ''Have we the right to exist, to perpetuate our traditions?'' he asked broadcasters meeting in Paris in October.
They approved guidelines for 1992 limiting


African Studies at Yale Continue to Thrive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spy's Role in Soviet H-Bomb Now Discounted
LEAD: Nuclear experts have concluded that the Soviet Union learned almost nothing of how to make the hydrogen bomb from the atom spy Klaus Fuchs and may have instead deduced the crucial secret by analyzing radioactive fallout from American nuclear blasts.


R. Jess Brown, 77, Civil Rights Lawyer In Mississippi Cases
LEAD: R. Jess Brown, a civil rights lawyer whose clients included James Meredith and a young black man who was lynched before he could be brought to trial on charges of raping a white woman, died of cancer on Sunday at Hinds General Hospital here.
He was 77 years old and lived in Jackson.


Nicaraguan Candidate Hurt
LEAD: The leading oppositon presidential candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, injured her knee in a fall today and plans to fly to Houston for surgery, a spokesman said.
Mrs.
Chamorro, the National Opposition Union candidate, hoped to return here by mid-January, said the spokesman, Luis Chavez.
Elections are scheduled for Feb.


Bangladesh Curtails Protests
LEAD: The Government announced today that it was banning demonstrations outside Parliament, the site of several opposition rallies last year.
The decision, which takes effect Wednesday, is apparently meant to thwart a demonstration when Parliament opens its session Thursday.


EASTERN CUTS FARE ON MANY ROUTES
LEAD: Eastern Airlines yesterday introduced fares at up to 45 percent below the lowest discount fares in the industry.


Volcano Spews Plume In Largest Outburst Yet
LEAD: Redoubt Volcano erupted again today in what scientists said appeared to be the largest outburst since the volcano emerged in December from a 25-year sleep.


Lawrence Alloway Is Dead at 63; Art Historian, Curator and Critic
LEAD: Lawrence Alloway, an English-born art critic, historian and curator who was one of the earliest European champions of postwar American art, died of cardiac arrest yesterday morning at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63.


Peru Inflation at 2,775.3%
LEAD: Peru's inflation rate reached 2,775.3 percent in the last 12 months after consumer prices rose 33.8 percent in December, Government figures showed today.
Last month's inflation was down from the 42.9 percent rate in December 1988.


Construction Outlays Up In November
LEAD: Construction spending rose 1.5 percent in November, hitting a 10-month high, the Commerce Department reported today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


150 May Be Dead in Crash Of Trains in South Pakistan
LEAD: More than 150 people were feared killed in southern Pakistan early today when a passenger train rammed into a freight train in what the railroad police said could be the worst such accident in the country.


Burmese Government Ends Martial Law in Two Regions
LEAD: The Burmese Government said it was ending martial law in parts of the troubled Mandalay and Sagaing regions starting today, a move seen by diplomats in Bangkok as an attempt to reassure the public before planned elections in May.


Senate Is Urged to Stall Clean Air Measure
LEAD: A business coalition including major oil, gas, automobile and chemical companies favors stalling early action on a Senate clean air bill, according to a memorandum describing a private strategy session.


Bull and Bear
LEAD: Bull and Bear Group Inc. has hired the Berkshire Capital Corporation to seek a buyer or a joint venture partner for its mutual fund business.
Bull and Bear's stock rose 50 cents a share yesterday, to $3.875, in over-the-counter trading.
Its 16 percent gain was the 10th best of the day among Nasdaq issues.


Walter Heldmann, 85, Staten Island Physician
LEAD: Dr.
Walter T. Heldmann, a physician, died of cancer on Monday at his home in Ward Hill, S.I.
He was 85 years old.


Computer Chip Fails on Venus-Bound Craft
LEAD: The space agency said today that a computer chip had failed on the Magellan spacecraft, but the defect will not endanger the $550 million mission to map the surface of cloud-shrouded Venus starting in August.


Investor's Suit Settled by CBS
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday approved a $6 million settlement of a lawsuit filed by a CBS shareholder who contended that the network was mismanaged from 1983 to 1986.


Cuomo Defuses Protest And Still Makes a Point
LEAD: A member of the ubiquitous AIDS protest group, Act-Up, disrupted Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's State of the State address today, presenting an opportunity that Mr.
Cuomo converted into the most dramatic moment of his hourlong speech.


New Gerber President Called Sound Manager
LEAD: Alfred A. Piergallini today was named president and chief executive of the Gerber Products Company, succeeding David W. Johnson, who will take the top posts at the Campbell Soup Company.


New Coach, Old Faces Bring Hope to Devils
LEAD: Despite minimal contributions from several newcomers who were expected to be important players, such as Vyacheslav Fetisov, success has overshadowed disappointment for the Devils in the first half of the National Hockey League season.


Coghlan Reconsiders
LEAD: Just over a year after he retired from competition after suffering a hairline leg fracture and other injuries in an automobile accident, Eamonn Coghlan, the world-record holder in the indoor mile, announced that he was suspending part of his retirement, the part that takes place under a roof.


Redmen Pursue Rivalries
LEAD: St.
John's, in an apparent reaction to criticism of its soft nonconference schedule, announced yesterday that it wanted to add games against Georgia Tech and Indiana to its 1990-91 basketball schedule and renew a home-and-home series with U.C.L.A. next season.


Ballet Theater Steps Gingerly Into the Post-Baryshnikov Era
LEAD: At the beginning of its 50th-anniversary year, American Ballet Theater has - after Mikhail Baryshnikov's unexpected departure in September - no artistic director.
But it does have a strong-willed executive director in Jane Hermann, who is minding the store.


Surgery for Liut
LEAD: Mike Liut, the Hartford Whalers' goaltender who was injured Dec. 20, underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair torn cartilage in his knee. . . .
The Islanders assigned the defenseman Wayne McBean to Springfield of the American League yesterday.
McBean appeared in five games for the Islanders since they recalled him from the Indians Dec.


Knicks Set for Oakley's Return As He Says His Knee Is Better
LEAD: At a time when the Knicks need his physical presence and rebounding the most, Charles Oakley should be back for the game tonight against the Atlanta Hawks at Madison Square Garden.
The Hawks, with such huge players as Moses Malone, Kevin Willis, Antoine Carr and Jon Koncak, have one of the biggest and most physical front lines in the National Basketball


Upheaval in the East: Economy;   Rumanians Take Stock Of a Tattered Economy
LEAD: As they grapple with ways of turning a revolution on the streets into a broader transformation, Rumanians face the bleak legacy of the broken economy left by the regime of Nicolae Ceausescu and his family.


Sematech Today: Cash Dispenser
LEAD: Sematech, the Government-industry alliance formed two years ago to develop better ways of making computer chips, has been forced to become a financier as well as a coordinator of company research efforts.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about a turnaround in the health insurance business of Blue Cross and Blue Shield associations misstated 1987 financial results for the Independence Blue Cross Association in Philadelphia.
It had a loss of $38 million.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the inauguration of Andrew P. O'Rourke as Westchester County Executive misidentified the justice who administered the oath.
He was Samuel G. Fredman.


Mafia Prosecutors Quitting As Strike Forces Disband
LEAD: Nearly one-fourth of the Justice Department's organized crime prosecutors have resigned since Attorney General Dick Thornburgh announced plans to put their strike forces under the control of local United States attorneys.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Some Parties Want Elections Postponed
LEAD: Some of Rumania's nascent political parties called today for a delay of national elections, now planned for April, because they said they could not get ready in time.


Federal Express Sharing Contract
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation said it was one of five companies sharing a Defense Department contract valued at more than $700 million.
Federal Express estimated its potential share of the $724 million contract at about 68 percent.


Rams Are Looking Ahead, Not Back at Easy Victory
LEAD: All day, from the moment they arrived for practice until the sun began to fall in the late afternoon, the Los Angeles Rams were forced to remember the game they played almost two months ago on a warm Sunday at Anaheim Stadium.


Attendance Mark
LEAD: The National Football League set a record for paid attendance during the 1989 season when 13,626,672 tickets were sold for an average of 60,833 for the 224-game schedule.
The previous record was 13,606,990 tickets sold and an average of 60,745 a game in 1981.


Selma Official's Ouster Spurs School Boycott Over Bias


Want to Coach Jets? Here Are Some Tips
LEAD: What do you look for when you're trying to hire a new coach for the Jets?
And if you want the job, how do you approach the interview?


Soviet Pressure Sidelines Mogilny
LEAD: When the Buffalo Sabres were the hosts to Moscow Dynamo last night, they chose to leave Aleksandr Mogilny out of their lineup.


UAL Moves Up Meetings on Buyout
LEAD: The UAL Corporation said today that it was accelerating talks with its nonunion workers over a possible employee buyout, but the parent of United Airlines will still miss a deadline set by a big shareholder for coming up with a plan.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, the pharmaceuticals company, appointed William T. Comer president of its Bristol-Myers Pharmaceutical Research unit and Bristol-Myers Squibb Licensing Group.


Atlantic City Mayor and 3 Others Are Indicted on Corruption Counts
LEAD: A state grand jury today indicted the mayor of Atlantic City, James L. Usry, and three others on corruption charges in a wide-ranging investigation of influence peddling among government officials in the gaming resort.


Top Contras Deny Killing Nuns, but Clergy Differs
LEAD: A senior official of the American-backed contras emphatically denied today that the rebels played any part in an attack that killed two Roman Catholic nuns, one of them American, in northern Nicaragua on Monday night.


OPEC Quota Rise Sought
LEAD: Because of the high price of oil, OPEC should look at the possibility of increasing quotas when the group's oil ministers meet in March, the Kuwaiti oil minister, Sheik Ali Khalifa al-Sabah said today.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Dec. 29
Dec. 22
Dec. 30
1989
1989
1988
Gasoline production, daily
6.1
6.9
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.5
3.1
Gasoline stocks
216.9
221.7
228.6
Distillate stocks
108.2
112.2
126.8
Crude imports, daily
4.9
6.2
5.7
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.8
2.7
Crude stocks
341.8
342.0
334.4
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
79.3
89.8
84.6


New Insights on Why Some Children Are Fat Offer Clues on Weight Loss
LEAD: Experts are finally gaining insight into the genetic and chemical roots of childhood obesity and are trying to develop sensible programs for childhood weight loss.


First Lady Starts Radiation Therapy for Eyes
LEAD: Barbara Bush yesterday began the first of 10 radiation treatments to her eyes to relieve the persistent double vision, discomfort and tears that she has suffered as part of a thyroid condition, the White House said.


Currents;   New Urns That Look Old
LEAD: IN the old, old days - 575 to 475 B.C. - these urns, amphoras and pitchers, decorated with sports, love or war scenes, would have been used to hold or serve oil, wine or water.
Their 20th-century counterparts, imported from southern Italy, are the latest neo-archeological decorating accessory: reproductions of pieces from the J.


Pena Wants To Be the Stopper
LEAD: It wasn't a challenge and it wasn't a warning, but Alejandro Pena said yesterday that he wanted to become the right-handed stopper in the Mets' bullpen and not just the man who set the stage for John Franco to chalk up the saves that make relief pitchers rich and famous.


People
LEAD: *
Ralph McGill has joined the McDonald Group, Atlanta, as senior vice president and a creative partner.


With a New Charter and New Powers, the City Council Votes Itself a Raise


G.M. Displays the Impact, An Advanced Electric Car
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation today displayed what it called the most advanced electrically powered car yet developed and said that it could be on the market as soon as the middle of the decade.


Big Rise in Blue Cross Rates Fought in New Jersey
LEAD: A proposal by New Jersey Blue Cross and Blue Shield to increase premiums for 605,000 individual subscribers by an average of 33 percent is drawing strong opposition from organizations representing the elderly, women and minorities, who will bear most of the increase.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE holiday season is barely over, yet many of the presents that children had so fervently demanded only a few weeks ago lie neglected in a corner of the room.
So it is only natural that, at this time of the year, a great many parents find themselves worrying about whether their children have become spoiled.


Port Authority Planning for $6 Tolls by '93
LEAD: Tolls for Port Authority bridges and tunnels would rise, to $6, in 1993, and the PATH fare would go up, to $1.50, if a long-range plan released this week becomes a reality.


Peter Paul Muller, 72, Long Island Architect
LEAD: Peter Paul Muller, an architect, died of cancer on Sunday at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital after a long illness.
He was 72 years old and lived in Bridgehampton, L.I.


Safecrackers Use Sleight of Hand


Topics of The Times;   Digital Density
LEAD: Los Angeles, which fancies itself America's trend-setter, may set yet another in 1992 when it becomes the nation's first city with three area codes.
Pacific Bell has announced that parts of the sprawling metropolis will become a new 310 area, split off from the original 213 and the 818, which was itself split off five years ago.


Real Videotape by Real Divorce Lawyer
LEAD: A Hartford lawyer is helping unhappy spouses negotiate the legal complexities of what he calls the ''most powerful judicial institution in America,'' divorce court.


Don't Let Privacy Be a Luxury for the Wealthy;   Violation of Law?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan Store Shuns Bloomingdale's Bid
LEAD: The Tokyu Department Store of Japan said it had decided not to join in a proposed management buyout of the Bloomingdale's department store chain.
The decision came late last year after a series of studies and contacts with Bloomingdale's, a Tokyu official said.


Oscar Gass, 77, Dies; Economic Consultant
LEAD: Oscar J. Gass, a retired economic consultant, died of respiratory and circulatory collapse Monday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 76 years old and lived in Washington.


Currents;   Artist Sees Hippo Bite Washer
LEAD: LIFE-SIZE household items like pianos, cars, outboard motors, magazines and mantels are intrinsic to David Mach's artwork: overscale constructions that juxtapose seemingly disparate elements.
One of his latest pieces, on view through Jan. 13 at the Barbara Toll Fine Arts gallery (146 Greene Street, between Prince and Houston Streets), glorifies a washing machine by placing it in the locked jaws of a fiberglass hippopotamus.


Kentucky Job Brings A Cast of Characters
LEAD: There is nothing like a college coaching vacancy to perk up the travel industry.


Noriega's Surrender: Celebration;   As Word Spreads in Panama, Thousands Turn Out to Cheer
LEAD: Jubilant street celebrations broke out tonight as the news spread in the capital that the country's deposed military ruler, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, had voluntarily handed himself over to the United States authorities and would be tried in a United States court.


DINKINS WILL DELAY HIRING OF RECRUITS FOR POLICE FORCE
LEAD: In his first major act as Mayor of New York, David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would indefinitely delay hiring 1,848 police officers who were to have gone on the payroll on Jan. 16 as recruits at the Police Academy.
He said he might also have to delay another class that was scheduled to start in


Dr. Nathaniel Pier, 37; Treated AIDS Patients
LEAD: Dr.
Nathaniel H. Pier, an internist whose practice consisted largely of AIDS patients, died of acquired immune deficiency syndrome at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 37 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, sued Massachusetts, challenging the state's 7.9 percent limit on automobile insurance premium increases for 1990.


TRW, Motorola Develop New Chip
LEAD: TRW Inc., of Cleveland, and Motorola Inc., of Schaumburg, Ill., have built a microprocessor chip with four million transistors as part of a Defense Department program to create very-high-speed semiconductors.
It is intended for high-speed mathematical applications and can also repair itself.


Guggenheim Artworks Stolen From Italian Villa
LEAD: Thieves raided an Italian villa that houses a collection belonging to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, stealing four paintings and a piece of 18th-century furniture that have a total value of $115,000, the police said.


Precious Metals Are Down While Crude Oil Prices Rise
LEAD: Precious metal prices continued to fall yesterday, largely on the firmness of the dollar and the belief that the Federal Reserve will not reduce interest rates because of recent signs of economic improvement.


Merrill Lynch Deal to Sell Canada Unit
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Canadian retail securities brokerage business to Wood Gundy Inc., a leading Canadian investment firm.


Matt's Scooter Wins an Award
LEAD: Matt's Scooter, who won more than $1.1 million in 30 starts in 1989, has been named Pacer of the Year in voting conducted today by the United States Harness Association.


Oil Spill Cleanup Continues; Iranian Tanker Defects Cited
LEAD: Seamen fought today to keep a huge oil slick from fouling the sensitive Atlantic coastline of Morocco as Dutch television reported that three sister ships of the tanker involved were recently seized for maintenance defects.


Dow Slips by 0.42 as Stocks Close Mixed
LEAD: Stocks ended narrowly mixed yesterday, as investors' fervor faded in the wake of Tuesday's strong advance.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which moved decisively past 2,800 to set a record on Tuesday, slipped 0.42 yesterday to close at 2,809.73.
But 887 issues rose in price on the New York Stock Exchange, outpacing the 724 declining ones.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a calculation error in editing, a table on Monday showing population shifts in the United States misstated percentage changes.
A corrected version appears today on page D20.


Hospitals Start Transfer Plan In Emergencies
LEAD: Facing an unprecedented crush of emergency cases in New York City, the Emergency Medical Service yesterday began for the first time to transfer seriously ill patients from emergency rooms to beds in other hospitals.


President Appointed By Pacific Exchange
LEAD: The Pacific Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had appointed Leopold Korins president, effective Jan. 22.
Mr.
Korins, who is currently managing director of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, is also expected to be named chief executive officer by the exchange's board of governors on Jan. 25.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The new agency created to manage the huge savings and loan bailout was instructed to sell the real estate it inherited from hundreds of insolvent savings institutions as quickly as possible.
While the mandate from the Bush Administration to the Resolution Trust Corporation could mean that billions of dollars in residential homes, apartment buildings, shopping centers and raw land could be available to investors in 1990, bankers warned that an overzealous sales program could do more harm than good.


Camping and Hiking Instruction in Cold Weather
LEAD: If you have thought about extending your backpacking activities into cold weather, you might start by attending the Appalachian Mountain Club's Jan. 26-28 winter camping workshop at its Pinkham Notch lodge in the White Mountains in New Hampshire.


Alaskan Volcano Settles Down
LEAD: Redoubt Volcano quieted down today after a violent outburst that sent ash and steam eight miles into the sky and caused some airlines to cancel flights.


Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia;   A Casualty of Amnesty: A Plant Using Convicts
LEAD: When President Vaclav Havel declared an amnesty for 20,000 prisoners on New Year's Day, he obviously was not thinking about what the effect would be on the country's biggest automobile factory.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Saturday headed ''Tracking the Markets'' misstated the dividend yield on the Dow Jones industrials as of Friday and the difference between that yield and the interest on AAA corporate bonds.
The Dow dividend yield was 3.6 percent and the resulting spread should have been 5.55 percent.


Storming Through the 80's
LEAD: The latest telegrams were being delivered to the coach of the 1989 unofficial-but-pleased national college football champions, and a floral arrangement was on its way to Dennis Erickson's unfinished office.


Vote of Confidence
LEAD: His teammate may be the great one, but when it comes to current popularity, not even Wayne Gretzky can hold a candle to Luc Robitaille.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-15
Gen.
Manuel Noriega surrendered to United States authorities in Panama, giving President Bush the final victory he had been seeking.
Gen.
Noriega was flown to Florida to face trial on drug charges.
Page A1
As word spreads of surrender, joy erupts in Panama


Anselm Kiefer to Receive Israeli Prize
LEAD: The West German painter Anselm Kiefer is to receive the $100,000 Wolf Prize in the arts, the Wolf Foundation announced today.


Noriega's Surrender;   Guerrillas in Colombia Kill 6 Policemen and 3 Civilians
LEAD: In their first major attacks of the year, leftist guerrillas ambushed and killed six policemen on patrol and burned a city bus, killing three passengers and wounding 20, the police said today.


A Deputy Police Head Will Join Philip Morris
LEAD: Alice T. McGillion, First Deputy Commissioner of the New York City Police Department, has been appointed director of corporate communications at Philip Morris Companies, Inc., the company announced yesterday.


Market Place;   Eastern Bloc Shift Worries Western Banks
LEAD: The move away from Communism and toward market economies in Eastern Europe may be good news for the Europeans, but some Western bankers are getting nervous.


Review/Cabaret;   Songs for Grown-Ups, by Cy Coleman
LEAD: In the literature of pop songs that celebrate sophisticated flirtation, the collaborations of the composer Cy Coleman and the lyricist Carolyn Leigh rank just below those of Cole Porter in their wit and mischievous eroticism.
Songs like ''The Best Is Yet to Come,'' ''You Fascinate Me So,'' ''Witchcraft,'' and ''When in Rome'' combine slinky syncopated melodies and tongue-twisting double-entendres to portray a game of romantic hide-and-seek that almost always ends in a passionate embrace.


Where Thomas Jefferson Went to Get Away From It All
LEAD: THE archeologists have unearthed the foundation of a long-lost addition, an afterthought grafted on by an owner who just could not stop tinkering with his original design.
The historians have read through reams of letters, uncovering a telling paragraph here, a helpful sentence there.


Joseph Magruder, 76, Ex-Business Executive
LEAD: Joseph H. Magruder, a retired businessman, died of lung cancer on Saturday at his home in Venice, Fla.
He was 76 years old and had lived for many years in Fairfield, Conn.


Peru, in Switch, Plans to Attend Drug Talks
LEAD: Peru, which said it would boycott a drug summit meeting in Colombia next month to protest the United States attack on Panama, has reversed itself and will attend the conference, American and Peruvian officials said today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Federal AIDS Estimate Is Being Revised
Scientists say that while AIDS continues to rise sharply, there will be at least 10 percent fewer cases over the next three years than previously predicted.
Experts are debating why the rate seems to be changing.
Page D20.
Treatment for First Lady
Barbara Bush began the first of 10 daily radiation treatments to relieve the double vision, eye discomfort and tears caused by Graves' disease, a thyroid affliction.


Salvatore J. Licata, 50, An Educator on AIDS
LEAD: Salvatore J. Licata, an AIDS educator with the New York City Health Department, died of AIDS-related illnesss on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old.
In 1985, Mr.
Licata helped found People With AIDS Newsline, a monthly newspaper written by and for people with AIDS.
He also wrote articles for the newspaper.


HEALTH INSURANCE FOR ALL CHILDREN IS URGED BY CUOMO
LEAD: Presenting an election-year array of new programs, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed a universal health insurance program for children and an overhaul of the method that the state uses to distribute education aid.


Lecture on the History Of a Black Community
LEAD: Weeksville, a historic community in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, is to be the subject of a free lecture on Feb. 7 at 7:30 P.M. at Lehman College, Gillet Hall Auditorium, Goulden Avenue and Bedford Park Boulevard, in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx.


Paul Corbin, 75, Dies; Robert Kennedy Aide
LEAD: Paul Corbin, a political consultant who was an aide to Senator Robert F. Kennedy, died of cancer on Tuesday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 75 years old.


Events: Gardening, Walks and Interiors
LEAD: Exhibit Times Three, The Municipal Art Society, the Urban Center Galleries, 457 Madison Avenue at 51st Street; 212-935-3960.


Resignation at Brown
LEAD: John C. Parry, the Brown University athletic director, announced yesterday he would resign at the end of June, ending 11 years at the Ivy League school.


Subway Voucher Policy Rescinded by T.A.
LEAD: The Transit Authority reversed itself yesterday and rescinded an order that stopped riders over 65 years old from using subway tokens bought before Jan. 1 to obtain a free return-trip voucher, a transit spokesman said.


Green Thumbs in Winter
LEAD: WHEN green thumbs are blue with winter cold, the indoor sill is the garden location of choice.
Take the scene at George and Virginie Elbert's Manhattan apartment, which is landscaped with more than 500 plants, give or take a pot or two.
Windowsill space has been extended by tiers of shelves and movable tables, and every cranny is covered with vegetation.


Disrupting Worship Was Wrong, but the Reasons Were Right;   Like Operation Rescue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tragedy and Loss Stir Some To Give to the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Some gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund break the heart, as much for the donors' situation as for that of the recipients.


Campbell Hires a Chief Executive
LEAD: David W. Johnson, who led a sharp two-year turnaround at the Gerber Products Company, was named yesterday to become president, chief executive and a director of the Campbell Soup Company, one of the world's largest but most troubled food companies.


Richard Steinhaus, 61, Lawyer and Lobbyist
LEAD: Richard Z. Steinhaus, a lawyer and lobbyist, died of a heart attack on Dec. 25 at St.
Thomas Hospital while on vacation in the United States Virgin Islands.
He was 61 years old and lived in Loudonville, a suburb of Albany.


Currents;   Wiltons, Axminsters And Less
LEAD: FERNANDO MATEO'S flagship Carpet Fashions shop (111 Fourth Avenue, at 12th Street) built its reputation on a far-ranging stock of floor coverings.
Now Mr.
Mateo and Bill Seyler, vice president of the company, are venturing farther uptown, where about 8,000 samples are on display at a new store at 143 East 54th


Charter Starter
LEAD: The Charter amendments approved overwhelmingly by New York City voters in November impose a dizzying array of requirements and deadlines for restructuring city government.
Putting aside his personal differences with many of the Charter changes, Mayor David Dinkins moved wisely this week to insure a smooth transition.


Don't Let Privacy Be a Luxury for the Wealthy
LEAD: To the Editor:


City Council Increases Its Members' Stipends
LEAD: Meeting for the first time under a new charter, the New York City Council quickly voted stipend raises yesterday for most of its members, totaling $113,900.


Upheaval in the East: Caucasus;   Azerbaijan: An Old Puzzle
LEAD: The Azerbaijanis are a Turkic-speaking Shiite Muslim people who live on both sides of the Soviet-Iranian border, in territory that has been a battleground for peoples and tribes for centuries.


City Cars Taken Away From School Officials
LEAD: Bearing down on what he called wasteful spending, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday took city cars away from 14 top-level Board of Education officials who, he said, were using them chiefly to get to and from work.


Editor in Chief Named At Elle Decor Magazine
LEAD: Louis Oliver Gropp has been named editor in chief of Elle Decor, a new magazine managed by Diamandis Communications, the American subsidiary of Hachette Publications, the French publishing house.


Close to Home
LEAD: WE went to the animal hospital, my daughter and I, with the cat wrapped up in an old yellow comforter. ''It's all right,'' the cabdriver said when we choked up trying to give directions. ''I know how you feel.''


Assassination Attempt in Lebanon Fails
LEAD: An attempt to assassinate Lebanon's chief of military police at a mountain resort near here was foiled today, but four soldiers and a civilian were killed.


Upheaval in the East;   Angola Meeting Next Week
LEAD: A meeting of eight African leaders aimed at ending the 14-year Angolan civil war will be held Jan. 10, Angola announced today.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: One of the best activities to brighten a dreary winter is cross-country skiing, which is suitable for nearly all ages and stages of physical ability.


Stiff Security for Militant as Gaza Trial Opens
LEAD: A cleric who headed a militant Islamic group in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip went on trial there today amid tight security.


Coast Guard Says Oil Spill Off S.I. Exceeds 200,000 Gallons
LEAD: The rupture of an underwater Exxon pipeline, far more serious than officials calculated on Tuesday, has allowed more than 200,000 gallons of heating oil to leak into the Arthur Kill between Staten Island and New Jersey.
Environmentalists said the leak posed a significant danger to wildlife.


Girl, 12, Is Raped, Burned and Stabbed
LEAD: A 12-year-old girl was repeatedly raped, burned with a red-hot knife and stabbed with an icepick late Tuesday night during a five-hour attack by three teen-agers in a Harlem apartment, the police said yesterday.


Howard Helps North Carolina State Top Clemson
LEAD: Brian Howard scored 29 points and Tom Gugliotta hit an 18-foot jumper with six seconds left tonight to lift North Carolina State to a 79-77 victory over Clemson in their Atlantic Coast Conference opener.


Hollywood Registers A Bonanza For 1989
LEAD: Americans flocked to the movies in 1989, and spent more money at the box office than ever before.
Seven films sold over $100 million worth of tickets each, the first time so many have achieved blockbuster status.


Cocaine Tubes Tied to Vessel
LEAD: More than 250 pounds of cocaine was stashed in two waterproof tubes attached to the underside of a Colombian ship, said police officers who seized the drug on Sunday and arrested four men who showed up in diving gear, apparently to retrieve the cache.
The men were arrested on drug trafficking charges.


Hot-and-Cold Nets Losers Again
LEAD: Tonight's Nets game would have been even more bizarre had the Nets won.
As it was, New Jersey's 110-96 loss to the Milwaukee Bucks was loaded with unusual events.
How weird was it?
The Nets played a horrendous second quarter in which they scored only 10 points, committed 13 turnovers, and did not score for the first 4 minutes 56 seconds.


Upheaval in the East: Rumors;   Whispered No Longer, Hearsay Jolts Bucharest
LEAD: Rumors and conspiracy theories, once the spice of this Balkan city's romantic reputation, have crept back to life here, spreading old-fashioned intrigue through the hotel lobbies and coffee shops.


Savings Agency Ordered to Sell Real Estate Fast
LEAD: The new agency created to manage the huge savings and loan bailout was instructed today to sell the real estate it inherited from hundreds of insolvent institutions as quickly as possible.
The directive from the Bush Administration raised concerns among bankers that the properties could be ''dumped'' in an already weakened real estate market.


J. Willcox Dunn, Former Publisher, 91
LEAD: J. Willcox Dunn, a retired newspaper editor and publisher who actively opposed gambling, died Friday at a nursing home here.
He was 91 years old.


DAMAGES LIMITED FOR PAN AM SUITS
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled yesterday that an international treaty bars punitive damages for the families of the 259 passengers and crew members who died in the bombing of Pan American Flight 103 in December 1988 over Lockerbie, Scotland.


An Architect of Special Effects Builds for Himself
LEAD: WHY is this house smiling?


Topics of The Times;   Illegal Smoke
LEAD: Nonsmoking New Yorkers reporting for jury duty are accustomed to plenty of exposure to secondary smoke as other jurors light up while waiting to be called.
That was supposed to end on Monday, when New York's Clean Indoor Air Act took effect.


NBC to Link Broadcast To Cable TV
LEAD: NBC said yesterday that it would begin coordinating the sale of advertising time on its broadcast and cable-television networks, a move that could enable advertisers, for the first time, to buy commercial packages that include the two media.


Don't Let Privacy Be a Luxury for the Wealthy;   A Bigger Threat
LEAD: To the Editor:


Herbert Pollack, 84, a Physician, Teacher and Government Adviser
LEAD: Dr.
Herbert Pollack, a physician, educator and Government consultant, died of cardiac arrest Tuesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan before moving to Washington about 10 years ago.


Noriega's Surrender: Army;   For First Time, a Woman Leads G.I.'s in Combat
LEAD: An Army woman led an attack against troops of the Panamanian Defense Forces last month, the first time a woman has commanded American soldiers in battle, Administration officials said today.


Subcompact For Chrysler
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has been talking with at least one Asian auto maker about a joint project to build a successor to its Omni-Horizon subcompacts, a company executive said.
Chrysler Motors' president, Robert Lutz, said the nation's No. 3 auto maker was moving on two fronts to develop a new subcompact for the mid-1990's to succeed the Dodge and Plymouth models.


Phoenician Resort Goes To Cramer-Krasselt
LEAD: The task of advertising the Phoenician Resort, a Scottsdale, Ariz., luxury hotel that was embroiled in the national savings and loan crisis, has fallen to the Phoenix office of Cramer-Krasselt, an agency based in Milwaukee.
The account, which had been inactive, was put up for review in December, after the Federal Government seized the hotel, which is still in operation and is owned by the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, the failed institution that was operated by Charles H.


Rumor of CBS Bid Lifts Paramount
LEAD: Takeover speculation sent Paramount Communications Inc. stock sharply higher and CBS Inc. shares lower as unconfirmed rumors appeared that CBS was about to bid for the entertainment and publishing giant.
Paramount shares rose $1.50, to $52.375, on the New York Stock Exchange, while CBS tumbled $2.75, to $184 a share.


Arthur Gold, a Canadian Pianist Performing in a Duo, Dead at 72
LEAD: Arthur Gold, a Canadian pianist who performed for nearly 40 years as part of a piano duo with Robert Fizdale, died of lung cancer yesterday at the Manhattan apartment he shared with Mr.
Fizdale.
He was 72 years old, and also had a home in Water Mill, N.Y.


Treasury Prices Drop for 2d Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities skidded for the second straight session yesterday, as dealers sold securities on signs that the economy may not be as weak as many had expected.


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   Party Leaders Hold Discussion in Sofia With Key Opponents
LEAD: Communist Party leaders met today with opposition groups for the first time in discussions that could result in the formation of a transitional government until free elections are held.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Shineless Brass Brackets


Forecast of AIDS Cases Is Cut by 10%
LEAD: Federal scientists have revised their estimates of new AIDS cases in the next three years, saying that while diagnoses will continue to rise sharply, the total number will be at least 10 percent fewer than previously predicted.


Policy in Latin America: 2 Standards
LEAD: The killing of an American nun on a highway in a remote area of Nicaragua on New Year's Day highlights the differing standards Washington sometimes places on protecting American lives in Latin America.


Bridge
LEAD: In the final stages of major national championship events, a vast majority of the players are between the ages of 30 and 55.
They have acquired the experience, in terms of technique, psychology and partnership adjustment, and they have not reached the point at which stamina begins to fail after hours of grinding concentration.


Accounts
LEAD: * Mutual of America Life to Kaufman &amp; Maraffi, with a budget of $2.5 million.


Trump, Settling Suit, Will Endorse Cards
LEAD: Donald J. Trump has agreed to endorse a line of photographic business cards made by a small Georgia company he had sued for calling the product ''Trump Cards.''


Dole Winning Applause For Labor Dept. Actions
LEAD: With her help this week in reaching an agreement in the coal miners' strike in Appalachia, Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole has taken a step toward ending a bleak period for organized labor in its relations with the Government.


China Faults Report on 2 Rebels
LEAD: In a toughly worded statement, China today rejected as ''speculations pure and simple'' recent reports that the dissidents Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian would be allowed to leave China soon.


Review/Television;   A Drama and a Documentary on A&amp;E
LEAD: The Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, on cable television, is unusually active these days on the original-programming front.
Tonight at 9 o'clock, the monthly ''American Playwrights Theater'' series continues in its one-act mode with Paul Zindel's ''Let Me Hear You Whisper.'' And this Sunday at 8 P.M., Michael Palin sets off on a seven-part travelogue called ''Around the World in 80 Days.


Centrust Plan With Ensign
LEAD: A proposed merger of the troubled Centrust Bank with the Ensign Bank in New York was announced today in a plan to ward off regulators from the Miami-based savings and loan association.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article by The Associated Press in some copies yesterday about the killing of two Roman Catholic nuns gave an incorrect date for the collapse of the cease-fire in Nicaragua.
It ended on Nov. 1.


Cooney's Common Denominator
LEAD: On the late September day that Gerry Cooney's comeback on Jan. 15 against George Foreman was announced, Gil Clancy happened to bump into Bob Martin, the legendary Las Vegas oddsmaker.
Clancy, the CBS boxing analyst who had once been the trainer for Emile Griffith, a five-time champion, as well as for Foreman, had decided to drape a white towel over his shoulder again and return to the gym as Cooney's trainer.


Group Halts Deal With L. J. Hooker
LEAD: A $400 million offer to buy various real estate assets of the financially distressed L. J. Hooker Corporation has been withdrawn, according to an executive of the Shidler Investment Corporation, a Honolulu company that is part of the investment group involved in the deal.
Ian Killips, a Shidler partner, said the LHJ Funding Company broke off negotiations because of Hooker's decision to sell the properties individually.


Mr. Cuomo Dances on the Deficit
LEAD: With the eloquence only he can muster, Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York used his State of the State message to present a generous menu of plans and programs, but left unclear how he would pay for it.
Instead he called on the Federal Government to help, with money from the ''peace dividend.''


Low Water at Nuclear Plant
LEAD: Low levels of cooling water entering the intake canal at the Oyster Creek nuclear station today forced the power plant to go into the first stage of its four-step emergency plan.
The 650-megawatt plant continued to operate at full power, plant officials said.


Talking Deals;   It's Slow Going In Eastern Europe
LEAD: THE Samsonite Corporation, the world's biggest luggage producer, has been working on a deal for six months to make luggage in Hungary for sale in Western Europe.
Production is already under way, even though details of a joint venture with a Government cooperative are far from complete.


CHIEF IS TO RESIGN, HANOI PARTY SAYS
LEAD: The Vietnamese Communist Party Secretary General, Nguyen Van Linh, will resign at a coming party meeting, Vietnamese officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column yesterday cited the result of the 1962 World Series incorrectly in some editions.
The Yankees beat the San Francisco Giants.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Noriega will finally have his day in court, which is more than he gave the people of Panama.''
-Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.
[A12:6]


Books of The Times;   A Tale of Distressing Sunsets and Radiant Details
LEAD:
Picturing Will
By Ann Beattie
230 pages. Random House. $18.95.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   Leader Promises to Consult With Opposition
LEAD: The interim Government of the Communist Prime Minister, Hans Modrow, promised today to keep political opponents better informed about national affairs and to consult pro-democracy forces before making important decisions.


The Soviets' Terminal Crisis
LEAD: The following article is adapted from the conclusion of a longer historical analysis to be published under the pseudonym ''Z'' in the winter issue of Daedalus, journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Daedalus is withholding the author's name from all parties at the author's request. (Although it is not The New York Times's usual practice to withhold an author's identity, it is honoring


Disrupting Worship Was Wrong, but the Reasons Were Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


Noriega's Surrender: Indictments;   Drug Importing Charged
LEAD: In the February 1988 indictment in Miami, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is charged with conspiracy, racketeering, importing drugs and traveling to further the conspiracy.
It accuses him of these activities:


Syracuse Slips Past Pitt, 80-78
LEAD: Stephen Thompson, who scored 24 points, converted a 3-point play with 5 seconds left as Syracuse rallied from 13 points down, then lost a 5-point lead before beating Pitt tonight, 80-78.


Metro Matters;   New York Hopes, With Eloquence Or Otherwise
LEAD: When David N. Dinkins was running for mayor of New York City last year, his largely lackluster style was sometimes judged against the electricity generated by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Fare Moves By Airlines
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that it would raise fares to defray rising fuel costs, but added that it would cut most ticket prices to Florida to match an Eastern Airlines fare promotion.


Pontiac Sees Gain in '90
LEAD: The Pontiac division of the General Motors Corporation said today that it expected its domestic market share to rise in 1990 to as much as 7.5 percent from 7.2 percent last year.
Pontiac's general manager, John Middlebrook, said an array of new vehicles should help spur sales.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Jordan Leads Bulls Past Cavaliers
Michael Jordan scored 38 points and sparked an 11-1 run in the last three minutes last night as the Chicago Bulls defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers, 93-87.
Jordan had 5 points, an assist and a key steal down the stretch, leading the visiting Bulls to their fourth victory in a row and 10th in their last 12 games.


Contras Deny Part in Attack on Nuns in Nicaragua


New-Home Sales Post 9.6% Rise
LEAD: Sales of new homes surged 9.6 percent in November, the steepest gain in four months, the Government said today in a report that showed sharp gains in every region of the nation except the South.


Murray S. Kaplan, Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Murray S. Kaplan, a lawyer and textile executive, died of cancer Tuesday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 82 years old.


Jay Wells, 73, Founder Of Rental-TV Concern
LEAD: Jay Wells, who founded Wells Television, which became the country's largest supplier of rental television sets to hotels and hospitals, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 73 years old.


Noriega's Surrender: Overview;   NORIEGA GIVES HIMSELF UP TO U.S. MILITARY; IS FLOWN TO FLORIDA TO FACE DRUG CHARGES
LEAD: President Bush announced tonight that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega had surrendered to the United States military authorities in Panama, giving the President the final victory he had been seeking in the invasion of Panama.


Money-Fund Yields Rise
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were up sharply for the week ended yesterday.


Bombs Disrupt Sudan Relief
LEAD: Planes last month bombed and harassed rebel-held towns in southern Sudan, disrupting famine-relief operations, a United Nations official said today.
The planes bombed seven towns 10 times, said the official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified.


Teen-Agers Who Won't Join When Drug Dealers Recruit
LEAD: One recent Saturday afternoon on the South Side here, a 14-year-old boy received a telephone call from a gang leader.
He was calling, he said, to recruit drug dealers.
The boy, who did not know the gang leader, politely declined.


D. R. Capello, 80, Official Who Led Jersey State Police
LEAD: Dominick R. Capello, Superintendent of the New Jersey State Police from 1962 to 1964 and later a private detective, died on Sunday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 80 years old and lived in Hackensack, N.J.


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   Soviets Reinforcing Troops Along Iranian Border
LEAD: The Soviet Government reinforced its troops along the Iranian border today in the face of continuing reports of destructive protests by Azerbaijani crowds demanding an open frontier.


The Peabody, Ready or Not, Is Pushed to Go Out on Its Own
LEAD: One of cultural Baltimore's favorite sons is in danger of becoming its fiscal orphan.
The Peabody Conservatory, a source of civic pride since 1857, is suffering its biggest crisis since Johns Hopkins University rescued it from extinction 12 years ago.


Group W Sports Gains
LEAD: Group W Sports Marketing has contracted to sell advertising time on the Madison Square Garden Network, a cable television sports service.
The Westinghouse Broadcasting Company division was formed last year to serve as advertising representative for regional cable sports networks.
The MSG Network will maintain responsibility for its local ad sales effort in New York.


Jerusalem Journal;   Who Needs Hebrew? More and More Palestinians
LEAD: Like thousands of new immigrants, foreign diplomats and exchange students before them, Nabil Mushara, Mohammed Lafi and Issam Kassis spend four hours a week studying Hebrew for beginners.


Excerpts From Cuomo's Address: 'Journey Toward the Next Millennium'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the text of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's State of the State address to the Legislature yesterday:


Home Improvement
LEAD: WHEN water freezes and expands inside pipes, itcan cause major damage requiring expensive repairs.
Frequently, the pressure causes the pipes to burst or, at the least, to leak at the seams.
And, because pipes usually freeze when and where coping with them is most difficult, preventing the problem is as important, if not more so, than knowing what to do if it occurs.


Upheaval in the East: Government;   Council of National Salvation
LEAD:
Executive Committee
Chairman - Ion Iliescu
First Deputy Chairman - Dumitru Mazilu
Deputy Chairmen - Cazimir Ionescu and Carol Kiraly
Secretary - Dan Martzian
Members - Bogdan Teodoriu, Vasile Neacsa, Silviu Brucan, Gheorghe Manole, Ion Caramitru and Nicolae Radu
Working Committees


Currents;   Fitting New York Into Your Wallet
LEAD: EVEN if he said so himself, John Tauranac, a New York writer and graphic designer, has ''built a better mousetrap.'' Mr.
Tauranac, who designed the official Metropolitan Transportation Authority map 11 years ago, has produced new New York subway and bus maps in conjunction with the Transit Center, an alliance of mass-transit operators.


Dollar Up in Mark Trading But Declines Against Yen
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed yesterday against the primary foreign currencies, falling more than a yen against the Japanese currency and rising against the West German mark.


New Gadgets and Vistas Welcome Citizen Koch
LEAD: ''I don't care what anybody says: I won't give it up,'' Edward I. Koch once vowed, referring not to the Mayor's job but to his $475.49-a-month, rent-controlled one-bedroom apartment in Greenwich Village.


Home Is Where the Job Is
LEAD: BATHED in the burnt-orange light of a fading day, a youthful-looking man with a beard is working at his computer on his deck, his dog at his feet.
The message of the advertisement for American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company is clear: you can stay home in a beautiful setting and still pursue a career that will pay for the deck and the dog food.


Don't Let Privacy Be a Luxury for the Wealthy;   The Telephone Game
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joseph Loftus, 82; Was Times Reporter And a Cabinet Aide
LEAD: Joseph A. Loftus, for 25 years a reporter for The New York Times and then a special assistant for communications to Secretary of Labor George P. Shultz, died of heart disease yesterday at his home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 82 years old and had suffered a series of strokes.


New Uranium Pollution Is Found In Wells at U.S. A-Plant in Ohio
LEAD: Test wells drilled at the Federal Government's Fernald uranium processing plant show a new source of uranium contamination in an underground waterway.


Man With AIDS Is Shot to Death By Friend, Who Commits Suicide
LEAD: A close friend of a man dying of AIDS shot him to death in his hospital bed on Tuesday, then killed himself.
Groups counseling people with AIDS expressed sympathy today both for the pain of the dying man and for what they said must have been the fear and loneliness of his friend.


Currents;   Furniture Designers' Rebirth
LEAD: THE last decade has seen a renaissance of the craftsman, a generation of accomplished artists who feel at home combining traditional furniture techniques with contemporary design influences. ''New American Furniture: The Second Generation of Studio Furnituremakers,'' an exhibition that opened Dec.


Topics of The Times;   Usage, Decimated
LEAD: People irritated by the use of the verb ''aggravate'' to mean ''irritate'' had better prepare to have their irritation aggravated.
The Manchester Guardian Weekly reports that a panel of language experts regularly consulted by the Random House Dictionary gives this usage its blessing.
In 1969, a majority of the panel regarded it as a solecism.


Two Harbors Journal;   A Highway Is Viewed As Killer And Victim
LEAD: From his living room window, Myron Vold can see a great many deer, a bald eagle's roost and an occasional red fox chasing a quail.
He also sees a spectacular variety of traffic accidents on U.S.
Highway 61, one of America's most beautiful and treacherous highways.


Protecting Children: Health Plan for the Uninsured
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo outlined a plan today that would make New York the first state in the nation to subsidize health care for all its uninsured children.


Leonard Zahn, Stockbroker, 73
LEAD: Leonard Zahn, a stockbroker and philanthropist, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 73 years old and had homes in Palm Beach and Kings Point, L.I.


Ben Reifel, 83, Dies; Former Congressman
LEAD: Ben Reifel, the first Sioux Indian elected to the United States House of Representatives, died of cancer on Tuesday at Sioux Valley Hospital in Sioux Falls.
He was 83 years old.


Rangers Actually Win A Game
LEAD: It had been 27 days and 11 games, a brutal stretch of defeat and depression that had not produced a single triumph.
The Rangers, then, were slightly rusty with the ceremony they were able to perform last night at Madison Square Garden in the wake of their 2-1 victory.


Bernard Stephens, 72, Ex-Newspaper Editor
LEAD: Bernard Stephens, a retired editor of newspapers for labor unions, died of a heart attack yesterday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 72 years old and lived in Albertson, L.I.


Man Held in Queens Rapes
LEAD: A 27-year-old man has been charged in a string of rapes and armed robberies in Queens during the past two months, the police said.
Samuel Sanchez, of no known address, was charged yesterday with five counts of robbery and rape.
The first attack occurred on Nov. 28 and the last one took place Dec. 20.


Noriega's Surrender: The President;   Text of Bush Announcement On the General's Surrender
LEAD: Following is the text of President bush's statement last night on Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of ABC News:


Ex-Bolivian Aide, A Drug Suspect, Is Denied Bond
LEAD: A Federal magistrate refused bond today to a former Bolivian Government official brought to the United States to face drug charges.


John P. Devine, Bond Trader, 52
LEAD: John P. Devine, a municipal-bond trader, died of leukemia on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 52 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.


Study Says the Military Hurts Competitiveness
LEAD: Although Pentagon contracts provide ''safe havens'' for American high-technology companies, the military's emphasis on low-volume, high-cost products has put those companies at a commercial disadvantage, especially in competition with Japanese manufacturers, a study sponsored by the Ford Foundation contends.


Salvadoran Coffee Boycott Does Harm
LEAD: To the Editor:


Noriega's Surrender: Change of Command;   PANAMANIAN QUITS AFTER TWO WEEKS
LEAD: The newly appointed commander of Panama's security force resigned today, less than two weeks after the country's new civilian Government appointed him to head the remnants of the Panamanian Defense Forces.


Family Demonstrates Northern Hospitality
LEAD: To the Editor:


Noriega's Surrender: The Prosecution;   U.S. to Start Noriega Case With Miami Indictment
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega is likely to be brought to a Federal court in Miami on Thursday in the first step in a long and uncertain legal journey as the United States tries to prosecute him on a variety of drug-related charges.


The Z Document: 'Mr. X' in Our Time
LEAD: ''The cold war is over; the free world won and the evil empire lost; let's pick a date for V-C Day and celebrate the history-ending victory over Communism.'' So say our triumphalists.


Giants Could See Tricky Defenses
LEAD: When a pro football defense faces a passing situation, it usually puts in a nickel defense with five defensive backs or a dime defense with six.
It usually has three or four defensive linemen rush the passer (one may be a linebacker), and in addition one or more linebackers or defensive backs may blitz.


I.C.I. Markets Drug
LEAD: Imperial Chemical Industries of London said its Stuart Pharmaceuticals unit had started marketing the anti-depressant drug Elavil.
I.C.I. bought Elavil from a joint venture of Johnson &amp; Johnson and Merck &amp; Company on Tuesday in exchange for I.C.I.'s over-the-counter pharmaceutical business.
Elavil has annual sales of at least $25 million, said I.C.I., which valued the deal at more than $450 million.


A Dubious Reagan Achievement
LEAD: Despite Ronald Reagan's pledge to shrink the bureaucracy, Federal employment rose in five of his eight years in the White House.
When he left, the headcount was higher than at any time since World War II.
So much for that promise.


Tyson Says He Overcame Drinking Habit
LEAD: Mike Tyson says he had a drinking habit that intensified after Robin Givens filed for divorce in October 1988, but that he has stopped drinking entirely.


Daniel Moffat, Stockbroker, 78
LEAD: Daniel Moffat, a retired stock broker, died of complications following open heart surgery Tuesday at New York University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old and lived in Queens Village, Queens.


Syracuse Rallies to Defeat Pittsburgh


Chemotherapy Used On Ovarian Tumors Is Tied to Leukemia
LEAD: Chemotherapy drugs that were long used to treat ovarian cancer may have sharply increased the risk of leukemia, researchers have found.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.50
9.35
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.64
8.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.53
7.52
8.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
7.96
9.28
30-YR.


Alan Hale Jr., Who Was Skipper On 'Gilligan's Island,' Dies at 71
LEAD: Alan Hale Jr., an actor who gained fame as the jolly Skipper in the television series ''Gilligan's Island,'' died of cancer of the thymus on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old and lived in Hollywood.


A Correction: How the Population Has Shifted
LEAD: Because of a calculation error in editing, a table on Monday showing population shifts in the United States Misstated percentage changes.
This Corrected chart shows changes in the population of states and census regions, according to the Census Bureau.
The 1989 column gives the estimated population as of July 1.


Environmentalists and Ranchers Fight Pentagon Bid for More Land
LEAD: Military officials told Congress today that they needed millions of additional acres of public land for bombing-run practice, electronic battlefield training and tank maneuvers.


Jackson Calls for Reward in Racial Bombings
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson called on the Bush Administration on Tuesday to offer a reward for the capture of whoever is responsible for the bombings that killed a Federal judge and a civil rights lawyer in the South.


Review/Ballet;   So Much for 'Nutcracker'; Back to the Repertory
LEAD: Too many sugarplums?
The New York City Ballet resumed its repertory season on Tuesday night after having visibly overdosed on a month of ''Nutcrackers.''


Trustco Rebuffed By Albany Bank
LEAD: The National Savings Bank of Albany said it had rejected an offer from the Trustco Bank Corporation of Schenectady, and that its board had adopted an anti-takeover plan and declared a dividend of one preferred share purchase right for each common share held on Jan. 17.


Scientist Raises Question: Is Tyrannosaurus Still Rex?
LEAD: Generations of children have delighted in the scary lore that Tyrannosaurus rex was the largest and fiercest predator ever to walk the earth.
A leading paleontologist has announced, however, that another family of dinosaurs every bit as large and ferocious flourished 30 million years before tyrannosaurs ever saw the light of day.


Wisconsin Doesn't Cut Family Off for Truancy
LEAD: To the Editor:


For a Rumanian City, Revolt Wasn't Sudden
LEAD: Small and grinding deprivations led the people of Brasov, Rumania, to take up arms against tyranny on the night of Dec. 22 in the revolution that toppled Nicolae Ceausescu.


Harlem Hospital Overflows With Patients
LEAD: At the Harlem Hospital Center yesterday, some patients lay sleeping on parked emergency room stretchers; others were being treated in busy hallways.


What 'Permanent Congress'?
LEAD: It is disturbing that so many Americans have fallen prey to the easy temptation of Congress-bashing.
While some bashers attempt legitimately to hold Congress accountable for its obvious shortcomings, others illegitimately undermine it as an institution.


James P. McDonald, Publicist, 73
LEAD: James P. McDonald, a retired public relations executive, died on Dec. 27 at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J.


U.S. Accused of Failing to Assail Rights Abuse
LEAD: A human rights group accused the Bush Administration of failing to denounce abuses in 50 countries, including China, El Salvador and the Soviet Union.


U.S. Marshals Conferring on Overcrowded Prisons
LEAD: Federal marshals in the Northeast and elsewhere are throwing mattresses on the floor for Federal prisoners and driving hundreds of miles a day in a hunt for empty jail beds as the authorities grapple with badly overcrowded prisons.


The Editorial Notebook;   Moscow's New Deal Economics
LEAD: Thinking about economic restructuring on the grand Soviet scale is a thrill for any economist.
So it was with special eagerness that I approached a recent meeting with Abel Aganbegyan, the Soviet guru of perestroika.


MCI Mexican Link
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation and Telefonos de Mexico S.A. signed an agreement to provide voice and other telecommunications services between the United States and Mexico.
MCI, whose international division is based here, and Telefonos de Mexico said they expected to begin providing voice service early next week.


Bengals Deny Charges
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the former Bengals fullback who was suspended on the morning of the 1989 Super Bowl for snorting cocaine in his hotel room in Miami, says in the February issue of Penthouse magazine that he conspired to buy the drugs with his Cincinnati teammates Eddie Brown, Daryl Smith and Rickey


As Buyers Balk, Argentine Prices Dip
LEAD: Faced with the refusal of customers to buy and assurances from the Government of President Carlos Saul Menem that he is serious about stabilizing the economy, many stores began to roll back prices today that had doubled and tripled over the holiday weekend.


Science Has No Doubts on Theory of Evolution;   Dogs vs. Dogs
LEAD: To the Editor:


2d Man Slain in Case Of Murdered Agent
LEAD: A man suspected of helping Costabile (Gus) Farace elude the authorities for more than eight months in the murder of a Federal drug agent was found shot to death in Brooklyn early Wednesday, slumped over the steering wheel of a car.


Edgewater Sugar Factory Is Now a Rental Complex
LEAD: The opportunity to get a new luxury apartment in a rental complex is rare in the suburbs and older towns around New York City.
Hardly any rental buildings have been built for several years, and most of the rental offerings have been made by investor-owners of condominiums.


Insider Case Is Settled
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday approved a settlement between the Securities and Exchange Commission and a typesetting supervisor accused of illegally trading on confidential information from advance copies of Business Week magazine.


In Texas, AIDS Struggle Is Also Matter of Money
LEAD: As the AIDS epidemic rages in New York and California, Texas is struggling with a less noticed but no less destructive AIDS plague of its own.


Review/Dance;   Chuma, Skura, O'Connor: Improvisers With a Plan
LEAD: In a gracious program note for this year's Dance Chance performances at Dance Theater Workshop, Patsy Tarr, the producer and curator of the series for eight years, cautions future audiences not to underestimate the value of the experimental.


River in Pennsylvania Is Reopened After Spill
LEAD: Navigation resumed along the entire Monongahela River today, three days after at least 61 barges broke free and crashed downstream.
One spilled 10,000 gallons of gasoline.


Taxi Fare Increase Reflects Rise in Costs Only
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-15
General Noriega appeared in court in Miami, where he politely responded to a judge's questions while refusing to enter a plea.
Page A1


President Wins Bipartisan Praise For Solution of Crisis Over Noriega
LEAD: President Bush, who took the largest political gamble of his Administration by sending American troops into Panama last month, reaped the political rewards today as bipartisan praise poured in for the surrender of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Court Detours Effort to Repair an L.I. Parkway Junction
LEAD: No one ever liked the interchange between the Meadowbrook and Northern State Parkways, site of 130 accidents a year, six times the state average for similar spots.
So two years ago, New York State began rebuilding the awkward junction of two of Long Island's most heavily traveled highways.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Radio Deals By Evergreen
LEAD: The Evergreen Media Corporation, a privately held radio company, agreed today to acquire a station and a statewide network in Texas for $58.5 million in cash and debt.
Evergreen is purchasing


Review/Film;   Growing Up In Argentina, Isolated And Naive
LEAD: Civilization intrudes slowly and cruelly into the remote Argentine mountain setting for ''Veronico Cruz,'' a place so primitive that the mud hut in which the title character lives is wholly detached from any other signs of human society.
Veronico is a young boy whose mother died in childbirth, and whose father left soon afterward to seek work in the city.


Israel Is Criticized by Amnesty International
LEAD: Amnesty International has issued a report asserting that the Israeli Government appears to have encouraged the killing of Palestinians in an effort to crush the uprising in the occupied territories.


Review/Film;   Burning Books and Burying Scholars Alive
LEAD: More than 2,000 years ago, a crafty Chinese feudal king put down a rebellion in his province, went on to conquer six neighboring kingdoms, and then gave himself the name Qin Shihuang, meaning First Emperor.
Having established peace, the first Chinese Emperor maintained it ruthlessly, burning books that challenged his laws and burying alive 460 scholars who disagreed with him.


Some Russians Reflect on Pluralism
LEAD: The Soviet nation's cold and dreamy sense of imperviousness seemed especially pronounced on this moonlit night on the ice at Gorky Park, as skaters stopped to consider the fiery political events in Eastern Europe.


Vatican Issues an Ultimatum And a General Takes a Walk
LEAD: After 10 days of trying to persuade Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to give himself up, the Vatican's envoy to Panama on Wednesday entered the spartan quarters that served as the deposed Panamanian dictator's temporary sanctuary and delivered an ultimatum: His refuge in the Vatican Embassy would expire at noon today.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Film
LEAD: When Dustin Hoffman plays an autistic savant or Daniel Day-Lewis a man with cerebral palsy who paints with his left foot, it is easy to praise the distance these men have come to create their roles.
But when unknown actors disappear into their characters, it is easy to forget they are acting at all; who knows how far they have transformed themselves?


Rangers' High Hopes Undergo a Pounding
LEAD: There had been for the Rangers, in the brief hours of euphoria produced by their first triumph in 12 games, talk of perhaps making a move.
The stall that had become a full stop had ended.


Editors' Note
LEAD: Two articles in Business Day on Monday - about the stability of the Tokyo stock market and about the 1989 record of the world's stock markets - referred to the performance of the Japanese market.
Their percentage figures appeared contradictory.


New President Of Lane Bryant
LEAD: Cheryl Nido Turpin was named president this week of Lane Bryant, the 720-store division of the Limited Inc.
Lane Bryant is the country's largest retailer of special-size women's apparel.


U.S. Aide Hints at a Deal If the General Tells All
LEAD: Federal prosecutors insisted today that they would prevail in a trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, but a senior Administration official said the Government would be prepared to discuss a negotiated settlement if the deposed Panamanian leader provided detailed information about international drug trafficking activities.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Fiscal Quest For Cuomo
LEAD: ''For everything there is a season and a time,'' Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said Wednesday in his State of the State address. ''This will be a time for renewed discipline in our spending.''


Old Knick Typecast As Fighter
LEAD: In a charming new film called ''Sidewalk Stories,'' a couple of street artists are bickering over a prospective customer.
As the argument intensifies, one hustler gets up from his chair.
And gets up.
And gets up.
My goodness, it's Tom Hoover, all 6 feet 10 inches of him.


American Home Curtails Drug Unit
LEAD: The American Home Products Corporation said it had permanently ceased production and shipping operations at its Quantum Pharmics Ltd. generic drug subsidiary, but that research and development operations were continuing.
An American Home spokeswoman, Carol Emerling, said the Amityville, L.I., unit halted operations on Sept.


Corrections
LEAD: A table yesterday showing corrected figures for population shifts in the United States misstated the census region for Pennsylvania in some copies.
It is the Middle Atlantic region.
In addition the 1980 population total and percentage change for the Midwest were incorrect in some copies.
The 1980 total was 58,868,000 and the increase was 2.2 percent.


Pope Sees Thirst for Religion
LEAD: Pope John Paul II said today that the current collapse of atheist systems in Eastern Europe showed the error of trying to exclude God from human life.
He told a group of Italian pilgrims that mankind was living through ''exceptional times'' as the 20th century drew to a close. ''On one hand we are seeing the collapse of projects constructed by men with the explicit exclusion of all references to God, while on the other hand we are seeing a new hunger for the word of God,'' the Pope said.


Appeal Is Sought On Howard Beach
LEAD: The New York State special prosecutor's office yesterday asked the state's highest court to review a ruling that threw out the riot convictions of three of the defendants in the 1986 racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens.


Punished by Bucharest, City's Choice Was Revolt
LEAD: The man described his day.
He wakes.
He goes to buy milk for his children.
For the babies, there is no formula to buy.
He goes to work.
The bus line is long and slow.
It is cold at work.
There is no heat, no equipment for proper work.
He finishes work and goes to buy something to eat.
But there is no food to buy.


CREW CANNOT SUE MAIMED PROTESTER
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled Wednesday that a protester was not legally responsible for traumatizing the crew of a Navy weapons train that ran over and maimed him at a demonstration in 1987.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article and a caption on Dec. 20 about an American entrepreneur in Zaire misidentified him.
He is Elwyn Blattner.


No Johnson-Lewis Duel
LEAD: Ed Futerman, the attorney for the suspended Canadian sprinter, Ben Johnson, said yesterday he had not been contacted about a possible match race against Carl Lewis in September.


Red Cross Issues Emergency Plea For Blood in Some Regions of U.S.
LEAD: The American Red Cross has issued emergency appeals for blood donations in some parts of the nation, pointing out that critical spot shortages were reported in Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Virginia.


Seattle Journal;   Drug War Weapon: Manpower On Bikes
LEAD: When Seattle police officers began riding 21-speed mountain bicycles into drug strongholds in bright yellow Gore-Tex raincoats, black nylon pants, fashionable helmets and oversized galoshes, the gang members giggled.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Mark Murphy's Songs


TV Weekend;   'After the War,' Mini-Series on 'Masterpiece Theater'
LEAD: Something of an endangered species, the long-form mini-series returns to ''Masterpiece Theater'' on Sunday evening - on Channel 13 at 9 Channel 31 and 49 at 10 and Channel 21 at 11:30 - in Frederic Raphael's ''After the War.'' The 10-hour Granada Television production is to be presented in eight installments.


Edward West, Retired Canon And Author, 80
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Edward Nason West, the retired Canon Sacrist of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, where he was master of ceremonies for more than 40 years, died of pulmonary failure on Wednesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Art;   A Course in Portraiture by an Individualist With a Camera
LEAD: In her eighth exhibition at Metro Pictures in 10 years, Cindy Sherman continues the relentless forward motion that has characterized her career from the beginning.
In the past, Ms.
Sherman's photographic fabrications, which almost invariably star herself, have been inspired by film noir, fashion and girlie magazine shots, children's fairy tales and, more recently, the messiest scenes from C-grade horror or disaster movies.


PRAGUE IS SEEKING NEW TRADE SYSTEM FOR THE EAST BLOC
LEAD: Declaring the old Communist trading bloc a dead letter, Czechoslovakia's Government said today that it would propose the annulment of the group's previous trade agreements at a meeting of the Soviet-led organization next week.


New Jersey Blue Cross Wins Overall 24.6% Rise in Rates
LEAD: New Jersey Blue Cross and Blue Shield today was granted an overall increase in rates of 24.6 percent, effective Feb. 15, for 605,000 subscribers.
The insurer had sought a 33 percent increase.


A Theatergoer Is Shot in the Knee While Watching 'Steel Magnolias'
LEAD: In a strange night of high drama at the theater, a woman watching an Off Broadway performance on a Greenwich Village stage last night was shot, apparently when someone seated nearby dropped a pistol to the floor, sending a single stray bullet in her direction, the police said.


I.M.F. Panel Picks Leader
LEAD: The policy-making body of the International Monetary Fund Wednesday named Canada's Finance Minister, Michael Holcombe Wilson, to serve as chairman, setting the stage for a special meeting of the panel to work out an increase in I.M.F. financing.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Drilling Delay Is Proposed
A panel headed by Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. recommended to the White House a delay in oil drilling off Florida and California.
Page A16.
Hoping for a Bargain
Potential buyers jammed the phone lines of the Federal agency that is selling thousands of properties owned by failed savings units.


California Is Investigating Doctor Who Whisked Newborn Onto TV
LEAD: State regulators are investigating a doctor who speeded up delivery of a baby, put the infant in a Christmas stocking and dashed to a television studio next door to display her as the county's first newborn of the 1990's.


Conductors' Conference To Include Szell Tribute
LEAD: The 1990 Annual Conference for Conductors is to take place today through Sunday at the Kellogg Center of the School of International Affairs at Columbia University, 420 West 118th Street.
A major feature will be a retrospective of the career of George Szell, the music director of the Cleveland Orchestra for 24 years, until his death in 1970.


Inmates Set Up a Barricade In Jail Protest in Jersey City
LEAD: About 25 inmates at the Hudson County Jail barricaded themselves in a dormitory yesterday and refused to leave, and other prisoners tossed debris from windows, jail officials said.
No injuries were reported.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Asarco Inc., New York, a metals producer, sold its last operating coal mine, located in Peoria, Ill., to a group of former managers of the mine for $3 million.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Financiers and Fritters


Drexel Pays Fine for Fraud
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. paid a $1.3 million fine today to the State of Illinois for securities fraud, an administrative penalty stemming from a highly publicized Wall Street corruption case.


New State Treasurer Is Named by Florio
LEAD: Governor-elect James J. Florio yesterday appointed his campaign manager, Doug Berman, as State Treasurer.


Countdown Starts for Flight Of Shuttle to Save Satellite
LEAD: The space agency began the countdown today for the launching of the space shuttle Columbia on Monday on a 10-day satellite rescue mission.


Kings Lure Motta Out of Retirement
LEAD: When Dick Motta retired as coach of the Dallas Mavericks in 1987 after 19 seasons of marking X's and O's with three National Basketball Association teams, he did so after a 55-27 record by the Mavericks and a first-place finish in the Midwest Division.
Yesterday, the 58-year-old Motta was back as an N.B.A.


Simms's Pocket Inviting Target for Rams' Greene
LEAD: Under the baseball cap and behind the dark glasses, Kevin Greene seemed lost in the crowd of players that walked off the field in the late-morning sunshine today.
He stopped suddenly near the shade of a nearby tree, and then he smiled when someone asked him about Phil Simms.


Giants in Good Shape
LEAD: Only the injured Brian Williams was absent today as the Giants practiced for the playoff game here Sunday against the Los Angeles Rams.


Giants Need New Script To Win
LEAD: The Giants remember the horrible game they played eight weeks ago in a 31-10 loss to the Los Angeles Rams.
They know they will have to be a different team Sunday when they meet the Rams at Giants Stadium in the National Football League playoffs.


Alberto Lleras, Twice President In Colombia, 83
LEAD: Alberto Lleras Camargo, twice President of Colombia and an architect of a 16-year coalition Government that reduced rural violence, died today after a long illness, a presidential spokesman said.


Watts at Carnegie
LEAD: The pianist Andre Watts is to be the soloist with the American Composers Orchestra in Edward MacDowell's Piano Concerto No. 2 at Carnegie Hall on Sunday at 3 P.M.
Mr.
Watts is replacing Emanuel Ax, who is ill.
The program, which is to be conducted by Dennis Russell Davies, also includes the New York premiere of Chinary Ung's ''Inner Voices,'' the work that won the 1989 Grawemeyer Award, as well as Aaron Copland's Symphonic Ode and the New York premiere of Richard Danielpour's ''First Light.


200 at Manhattan Service Hail Sakharov as Hero
LEAD: Some 200 admirers of the late Andrei D. Sakharov gathered yesterday at a memorial service in the New York Public Library at which leaders of the international struggle for human rights paid tribute to the physicist and Nobel Peace Prize winner.
Dr.
Sakharov, who was 68 years old, died Dec. 14 in Moscow.


Truths Of the Pariahs
LEAD: One day it may become respectable again, maybe even fashionable, to speak plain truths about some of the world's more important political realities.


Laos Radio Calls '89 A Socialist 'Nightmare'
LEAD: The official Laotian radio has said that 1989 was ''a nightmare year for socialism'' but that the ideology will prevail and citizens should rally around the Communist Party leadership.


City Bar Association Long Enlightened
LEAD: To the Editor:


Super Bowl Is 2 Victories Away, But Glory Isn't Players' Only Goal
LEAD: The incentive for winning National Football League divisional playoff games this weekend is clear and concise for the participants.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums
''MAGIC OVER THE RAINBOW,'' a show of illusion and magic, presented by Danny Orleans and Jan Rose, 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.
Sunday, at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Admission: $8 and $12.
Tickets from the box office or by calling Y-Charge: 996-1100.
''GROUP SOUP 2,'' a collage of skits, dances and songs with an assortment of props and costumes; created and directed by Judith Martin, with music composed and played by Donald Ashwander, at 2 P.M.


Campeau Surrenders 29% Stake
LEAD: Robert Campeau, the Canadian developer who borrowed heavily to buy two big American retailers and then brought them into severe financial straits, surrendered about $100 million worth of his own stock in his flagship company, the Campeau Corporation, yesterday to a Canadian bank when he defaulted on a loan to two of his private companies.


Surge in Oil Prices Falters As Gradual Decline Is Seen
LEAD: After surging this week to one of its highest trading levels in four years, oil prices are likely to decline gradually before reaching a low point sometime in the spring, industry analysts said today.


Dinkins Says He Favors Special Fund to Hire Police
LEAD: Faced with fiscal problems that have forced him to delay hiring more than 1,800 police officers, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he favors creating a special fund to help pay for the police, but he did not say how the money should be raised.


Review/Art;   Death, Myth and a Resistance to Conventions
LEAD: Even if Gino De Dominicis is not as wild and wacky as some of his supporters believe, and even if his mixed-media work may not be a ''mix of sanctity and damnation'' that ''has not been seen in a European artist since the times of Rimbaud,'' as the critic Italo Tomassoni recently wrote in Flash Art, he is still an endearing, imaginative and occasionally inspired artist.


Buyers Found Less Confident
LEAD: Consumer confidence in the economy slipped in December compared with November, but the outlook for the next six months improved modestly, the Conference Board reported Wednesday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I've been on this earth 50 years, and I've read a lot of suspense stories, but I've not heard anything as bizarre and troubling as this.''
- Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston,on the apparent suicide of a victim-turned-suspect. [A21:4.]


NORIEGA ARRAIGNED IN MIAMI IN A DRUG-TRAFFICKING CASE; HE REFUSES TO ENTER A PLEA
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the fallen Panamanian leader who had vowed never to surrender to the United States, was arraigned on drug trafficking charges here today after giving himself up to American forces in Panama.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Wednesday about the inauguration of Andrew P. O'Rourke as Westchester County Executive misidentified the justice who administered the oath. (The error was repeated in some copies yesterday in a correction in this space.) The justice was Samuel G. Fredman.


Paratrooper in Practice Fall Is Killed by Plane in Midair
LEAD: A transport plane flew through a group of falling Army paratroopers at Fort Bragg on Wednesday, killing one soldier and injuring another, Army spokesmen said.


Illinois Museum to End Exhibit of Indian Remains
LEAD: A state museum has decided to shut down an exhibit featuring the exposed graves of 234 prehistoric American Indians because of ''heightened sensitivity to display of human remains,'' an official said.


Rumania Averted Massacre By Executions, Official Says
LEAD: A leading tactician of Rumania's Provisional Government said today that if Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife had not been swiftly executed last week the country might have endured ''a blood bath with hundreds of thousands of dead.''


Apple Expands Stock-Buying Plan
LEAD: The board of Apple Computer Inc. approved the repurchase of up to 2.5 million more shares of its common stock.
In August 1989, the company announced a plan for the repurchase of 2.5 million shares. ''We believe purchase of Apple shares represents good long-term value to our shareholders,'' said John Sculley,


Braniff Names A New Chief
LEAD: The financially strapped Braniff Inc. said today that David Murchison had been named its chief executive.


Vladimir Ussachevsky, 78, Electronic Composer
LEAD: Vladimir Ussachevsky, who composed the first piece of electronic music heard in concert in the United States and who went on to lead the pioneering Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center, died of a brain tumor yesterday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Pop, Jazz and World Music
LEAD: Shimmy-Disc Records, which is having a two-night showcase tonight and tomorrow at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street (219-3055), is a record label with an attitude somewhere between a shrug, a snarl and a chuckle.
Its founder and house producer, Kramer, used to be the bassist in Shockabilly, a group that sped up and pulverized golden oldies and its own songs with maniacal exultancy.


H. E. Edgerton, 86, Dies; Invented Electronic Flash
LEAD: Harold E. (Doc) Edgerton, professor emeritus of electrical measurements at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whose invention of the electronic flash expanded the scope of photography, died yesterday after a heart attack at the institute faculty club, where he was having lunch.
He was 86 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.


Goldman, Kidder Head Loan Plan
LEAD: New York State's loan program to improve and upgrade municipal sewer treatment systems will be managed by an underwriting team of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, Thomas C. Jorling, chairman of the State Environmental Facilities Corporation, announced yesterday.


Ethics Panel Widens Inquiry on Senator Over Condominium
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee has expanded its investigation of Senator Dave Durenberger to include a deal through which he was reimbursed for renting his Minneapolis condominium to himself, the Minnesota Republican said today.


Man Is Charged In Fatal Attack On Bleecker St.
LEAD: A 23-year-old Bronx man has been indicted on murder and robbery charges in what the police said was an unprovoked attack on a young advertising executive last month in the East Village, the Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday.


2,000 Reported Slain in Sudan
LEAD: Sudanese rebels said today that more than 2,000 people were killed in a central Sudanese town last week in what they termed a massacre by local militia forces recruited and armed by the Khartoum Government.


'Kinder, Gentler Noriega'
LEAD: The 12-year-old who picked Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to be her pen pal says she stands by the fallen dictator no matter what.


Lebanese Shiite Rivals Step Up Fighting
LEAD: Heavy fighting that has raged for nearly two weeks between rival Shiite Muslim factions in southern Lebanon gained intensity today as the combatants ignored an appeal from their spiritual leaders for an end to the bloodshed.


Jet Lands After an Engine Drops Off
LEAD: One of three engines on a Northwest Airlines jet fell off the plane yesterday as it flew over northern Florida, but the pilots were able to land safely.


Real Estate Sales Lure Investors
LEAD: Attracted by the hope of bargains, real estate investors and prospective home buyers are jamming the phone lines of the Government agency that this week began selling billions of dollars' worth of properties owned by failed savings institutions.


Review/Theater;   Scenes of Everyday Discord In One-Act Family Dramas
LEAD: It is not so much a matter of taste as a taste of matter that creates problems for the chubby housewife whose name gives the title to ''Beth,'' one of the three plays in Steven Sater's ''Carbondale Dreams'' package of one-acters at the Judith Anderson Theater.
The plays, presented two at a time, explore the tensions between family togetherness and individual yearnings.


Auctions
LEAD:
Old Master Paintings


Panama in Disorder: The 1980's
LEAD:
March 1982: After the death in 1981 of the armed forces chief, Gen.
Omar Torrijos Herrera, three senior officers - Col.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, Col.
Ruben Darlo Paredes and Col.
Roberto Diaz Herrera - cut a deal to resolve ja power struggle.
Paredes is promoted to general, takes over as armed forces chief and agrees to retire in August 1983, leaving Noriega to take over, with Diaz Herrera as second-in-command.


Motorist Gets 13 Years In Violence With Van
LEAD: A motorist who pleaded guilty to charges stemming from a rampage along a crowded downtown street last year was sentenced Wednesday to a minimum of 13 years in prison.


Market Place;   Money Managers Lagged in 1989
LEAD: Last year was a tough one for both investment advisers and mutual funds, with most of them failing to match the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
But the investment advisers seem to have done better than the stock mutual funds, according to figures released yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Business People column on Monday misstated the age of Frederick H. Joseph, chief executive of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
He is 52 years old.


Dinkins Fills Operations and Economic Posts
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins filled two more major positions in his administration yesterday, selecting as his director of operations a New York City school official whom he credited with helping to reduce the bureaucracy at the Board of Education.
The Mayor also named an investment banker to head the city's economic-development effort.


Pactel Will Reduce Work Force by 16%
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group, the regional telephone and communications company based in San Francisco, said yesterday that it plans to eliminate 11,000 jobs, or 16 percent of its work force, in the next five years to cut costs.


Freedom For What?
LEAD: ''You [Americans]  have known freedom always,'' Jaroslav Baraban of Czechoslovakia told a New York Times reporter, Craig Whitney, in Wenceslas Square on New Year's Eve. ''But we have only known it for a month.''


History Lesson for Children: Listening to Radio Dramas
LEAD: Children, it was once held, should be seen and not heard.
The Museum of Broadcasting, 1 East 53d Street, takes a different tack: children should be heard but not seen.
This is the stuff a new workshop, starting this weekend, is made of.


Ground Round Leader Started on Wall Street
LEAD: Michael P. O'Donnell, a 33-year-old executive who gave up a budding Wall Street career to return to his first love, the food service business, will become president and chief executive of Ground Round Inc., the restaurant chain announced yesterday.


'Criminal Is Gone,' but Joy Is Fleeting in Land He Ruled
LEAD: With Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega in American custody and out of the country, relieved Panamanians turned their attention today to the arduous process of repairing the damage he inflicted on the political, social and economic fabric of this nation of 2.3 million people during his six-year rule.


American Joins In Air Fare Cuts
LEAD: American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said it would cut prices to match a move by Eastern Airlines and join most of the industry in offering lower fares.
American, a subsidiary of the AMR Corporation, Fort Worth, said it would match Eastern's fares in the 600 markets in which the both compete.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Dance
LEAD: JEPPE MYDTSKOV,who was born in Copenhagen and received his dance training at the Royal Danish Ballet School, has proved to be just as distinctive as such earlier Danish recruits to the New York City Ballet as Peter Martins (now head of the company), Adam Luders and Ib Andersen.


Our Towns;   Quiet Community Stirs When Feast Turns Violent
LEAD: For 40 years, the Portuguese community in Naugatuck has celebrated St.
Paio, a patron saint, and the celebration has evolved into the biggest social event of the year for the 6,000 Portuguese and Portuguese-Americans who make up 20 percent of the town's population.


Jackson Hears Cheers Again
LEAD: As Mark Jackson stepped out of the shower in the Knick dressing room last night with a huge contingent of reporters waiting at his locker, he turned to his teammate Eddie Lee Wilkins and said, ''Welcome back, Kotter.''


Youth Held in Rape Of 12-Year-Old Girl
LEAD: A 16-year-old youth was held on $50,000 bail yesterday after a prosecutor said the youth admitted being part of a group that raped, sodomized and tortured a girl, 12, in Harlem Tuesday night.


First Executive Deal Collapses
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said today that a deal to sell a subsidiary, the Executive Life Insurance Company of New York, had collapsed.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Dime Savings Bank of New York, Garden City, L.I., appointed David J. Totaro first senior vice president and director of marketing, and Jack L. Wagner first senior vice president, responsible for the bank's data processing activities.


Review/Cabaret;   Lainie Kazan, a Torch-Song Diva With a Sense of Humor
LEAD: ''I understood pain at a very young age: I've been a torch singer since the age of 4,'' Lainie Kazan joked while introducing her version of ''La Vie en Rose,'' Edith Piaf's signature song, at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) on Wednesday evening. ''But I was never a little sparrow,'' she added.


Teachers to Go to Poland
LEAD: The Peace Corps announced today that it would send its first contingent to Poland, 60 volunteers who will train English teachers there.


Review/Dance;   Love at First Sight, in Both Classical and Ballroom Steps
LEAD: The New York Theater Ballet, a small company directed by Diana Byer, resembles a chamber-music ensemble.
Each of its members is a skilled performer and all work harmoniously together.


Retailers Say Sales Rose In December
LEAD: Many of the nation's big retailers yesterday reported that sales were moderately higher in December, bolstered by a buying pickup in the final days before Christmas.


Delta Tells of Getting Threat But Says It Suspects a Hoax
LEAD: Delta Air Lines said today that it had received a general threat against its trans-Atlantic operations but believed the warning was a hoax.


F.D.A. Begins Testing Milk
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration says it has begun testing retail milk supplies in 13 cities after an independent survey found samples in several areas tainted with potentially harmful drugs.
The agency said Tuesday that while it was concerned that these unconfirmed findings might indicate ''violative drug residues in milk,'' it saw ''no public health threat associated with animal drug residues in milk'' at the levels reported by The Wall Street Journal last Friday.


Dow Drops 13.65 Points, To 2,796.08
LEAD: Stock prices fell broadly yesterday, depressed by caution before the Government's report today of employment data for December.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell by 13.65 points to close at 2,796.08, just below the important 2,800 technical level.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Television
LEAD: Now that Catherine has been murdered and Vincent has begun a prolonged period of mourning, CBS's ''Beauty and the Beast'' (Wednesdays at 8 P.M.) is gingerly grooming a new leading lady to flesh out the title.
Exit Linda Hamilton.
Enter JO ANDERSONas Diana Bennett, special-crimes investigator for the Manhattan District Attorney's office.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Art
LEAD: It may be that the dawning of a new year, makes an art dealer's fancy turn to thoughts of fresh, undiscovered talent.
Whatever the reason, a number of debuts are under way this weekend, in galleries on 57th Street and in SoHo.


With Official Permission, Change Stirs Mongolia
LEAD: Less dramatically than in Berlin and less bloodily than in Bucharest, the winds of Communist change have swept across the Gobi Desert to stir up political life in the sparsely populated nation of Mongolia.


Honecker Free From House Arrest, But Could Still Face a Prison Term
LEAD: Erich Honecker, the East German leader who was overthrown in the protests that shook the country late last year, has been freed from house detention but could still face jail.


Chinese at the U.N. Seeking to Keep Jobs
LEAD: The union of United Nations civil servants has asked Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to extend the contracts of several Chinese workers at the Secretariat who the union says have been asked to leave their jobs under ''pressure from the Chinese Government.''


Islanders' Struggles Starting to Pay Off
LEAD: The Islanders began their schedule with a luxury losers do not always enjoy: they were virtually ignored.


Devils Put Clamps on Gretzky
LEAD: The Devils received offensive production from defensive specialists tonight and defeated the Los Angeles Kings, 4-2, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena to move into sole possession of first place in the Patrick Division.


Avon to Keep Giorgio Lines
LEAD: Avon Products Inc., the cosmetics maker, said yesterday that it had ended its effort to sell its Giorgio Beverly Hills retail fragrance division.


Gang-Logo Caps Inflame Crime Fighters in Boston
LEAD: Crime fighters in this city's tougher neighborhoods, who have pledged to win their war in the 1990's, can claim a victory of sorts as the decade dawns.


Fed Approval on Securities
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board said today that it had approved limited securities underwriting and dealing by three foreign banking companies that operate subsidiaries in the United States.


Charles E. Arch, Manufacturer, 79
LEAD: Charles E. Arch, founder and chairman of Blistex Inc., manufacturers of lip care products, died of heart disease Monday at Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood, Ill.
He was 79 years old and lived in Oak Brook, Ill.


Piece by Piece, the Berlin Wall Comes Down


Show on Black History
LEAD: ''When the Colored Band Goes Marchin','' a one-man show combining autobiography and black history, is to be presented by John Patterson on weekends through Jan. 28 at the Castillo Cultural Center, 500 Greenwich Street.
In the piece, Mr.
Patterson draws upon his own writings and works by Frederick Douglass, Langston Hughes, W.


Church Says Noriega's Sole Guarantee Was for a Fair Trial in U.S.
LEAD: The Vatican said today that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was given no special guarantees beyond the promise of a fair trial in the United States before he agreed to leave the papal embassy and surrender to American forces in Panama Wednesday night.


Toyota Sales Forecast
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation said today that it expects to sell one million cars and trucks in the United States in 1990.
Robert McCurry, executive vice president of the company's United States sales organization, said Toyota expects to sell 750,000 cars, 190,000 trucks and 60,000 of its Lexus luxury cars.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Biff the Bully


The Boat People and the Commonwealth
LEAD: The sad story of Hong Kong's Vietnamese boat people gets sadder by the day.
News that the refugees are now willing to risk violence to avoid repatriation only increases the urgency for a more humane global response.


Pop/Jazz;   Jazz Concerts Will Benefit An Ailing Innovator
LEAD: The drummer Ed Blackwell is one of those musicians who radiate influence.


Dollar Is Sharply lower As Bundesbank Intervenes
LEAD: The dollar dropped precipitously yesterday as a result of unexpected intervention in the foreign exchange market by the West German central bank.


Surgery for Dravecky
LEAD: Dave Dravecky, the former San Francisco Giants pitcher, underwent surgery for four and a half hours at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York yesterday to remove a tumor from his left arm.


Lawyers go to the Mat in a Battle Between Hulk Hogan and a 98-Pound Comedian
LEAD: It seemed like the classic mismatch.


Michaels Stores Buyout Bid Ends
LEAD: The leveraged buyout of Michaels Stores Inc., an Irving, Tex., retail chain, by MSI Holdings has ended because of financing problems related to the weakening ''junk bond'' market, the company said.
Michaels Stores said it would take a fourth-quarter charge of $3 million to $5 million to cover expenses.


Science Has No Doubts on Theory of Evolution;   Not Darwin's Phrase
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gorbachev Postpones Meeting With Kinnock
LEAD: Citing political events in the Soviet Union, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has postponed all his scheduled meetings with foreign politicians in January, a spokesman for Neil Kinnock, the British opposition leader, said today.


Car Sales Off 20.2% at End Of December
LEAD: Despite a late surge in light-truck sales, American auto makers ended December and last year with total sales badly depressed and little confidence that the current salesroom incentives are enough to solve the problem.


Lin Merger's Windfall: A Question of Fairness
LEAD: It will be a good New Year for shareholders of Lin Broadcasting, who will profit from the company's merger deal with McCaw Cellular Communications.
But it will be an extraordinary one for Lin's chairman, Donald A. Pels, as he sells his 1.3 million stock options to McCaw for about $200 million.


China's Coal Output Up
LEAD: China announced today that its coal output for 1989 had exceeded a target of one billion tons, but said industries still remained short of the fuel.
Output rose to 1.04 billion tons last year from 970 million tons in 1988, the official Economic Daily said.


Washington at Work;   Lobbyist's Bitter Attack on Congressmen Reverberates From 60's to the 90's
LEAD: Many people in Washington believe Marian Wright Edelman, the president of the Children's Defense Fund and an icon of sorts among many liberals, made a fundamental error when she bluntly accused two members of Congress of sabotaging a child care bill before adjournment late last year.


Judge Denies Bail to Woman Extradited on Drug Charges
LEAD: A woman extradited from Austria will remain in jail without bond to face charges that she operated an international marijuana-smuggling ring, a Federal district judge has ruled.


Dining Out: In and Near Chelsea
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current.
The Ballroom
* (June 30, 1989), 253 West 28th Street (244-3005) - The Ballroom features tapas, the national tidbit of Spain, served as appetizers with dinner or, more traditionally, as a bite with a drink at the long wooden tapas bar.


Checks, Large and Small, for Neediest Cases
LEAD: With contributions to the 78th annual New York Times Neediest Cases Fund pouring in, one gift in particular stood out this week - a check for $50,000 from Grenville and Sandra Craig of Paris and Princeton, N.J.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Classical Music
LEAD: One would think that the major endeavors by so well loved a composer as Franz Schubert have all been heard by now.
But in its quest to present the composer's complete works chronologically in a 10-year Schubertiade, the 92d Street Y has already made some significant introductions.
An important addition to the canon - a concert version of Schubert's first complete theater work, ''DES TEUFELS LUSTSCHLOSS''(D.


Gerhard Schroder, 79, Ex-Official And Founder of Bonn Party, Dies
LEAD: Gerhard Schroder, a former Foreign Minister of West Germany and a co-founder of the Christian Democratic Union that has been in power for much of the post-World War II period, died of heart failure on Sunday at his home on the North Sea island of Sylt, his family said.
He was 79 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Zenith Ends Claim
LEAD: The Zenith Data Systems Corporation, a unit of the Zenith Electronics Corporation, agreed to drop its protest against the award of a $706 million Air Force contract to the Unisys Corporation for desktop computer equipment, both companies said.
The contract calls for Unisys, a computer manufacturer based here, to make equipment that combines two of the most widely used desktop operating systems - Unix and MS-DOS.


Litton Seeks Sale Of 3 Divisions
LEAD: Litton Industries put up for sale three divisions that supply electrical and electronic interconnection products.
The three divisions, which have combined annual sales of about $170 million and employ about 2,200 people, are: Advanced Circuitry and Inter-Pak Electronics, based in Springfield, Mo.; VEAM, based in Milan, Italy, with domestic operations in Watertown, Conn., and Winchester Electronics, based in Watertown.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about new year's observances in Japan referred incorrectly to the calendar used in the West.
It is the Gregorian calendar, based on the solar year.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame, These Are the Faces to Watch;   Theater
LEAD: Anyone with a memory of the all-star film ''Grand Hotel'' should be surprised by the initial appearance of MICHAEL JETERin the Broadway musical of the same name.
The role of Kringelein, the dying bookkeeper embarked on a final fling, was created in the film by the portly Lionel Barrymore.
In contrast, Mr.


Official Warns S.I. Oil Leak Threatens Crucial Bird Area
LEAD: As efforts to clean up an oil leak of at least 200,000 gallons continued yesterday in the Arthur Kill, a New York State official warned that one of the most important feeding and nesting areas for rare birds on the East Coast would suffer major damage, unless the work was adequately performed.


E.P.A. Rules On Emissions
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency proposed regulations today to reduce hydrocarbon releases from cars and trucks when gasoline evaporates.


Bulgarians Protest Plan to Give Minorities Rights


From Apple Corps to WPA, It's Open House in Chelsea
LEAD: The revival in Chelsea on Manhattan's Lower West Side is not so much Gothic as it is theatrical.
The neighborhood, a center for New York show business in the 19th century, is dotted with small theaters of every description that, starting today, are proceeding to make a festival of themselves.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
Indiana Suffers First Defeat


C.F.T.C. Approves a Proposal to Restrict Dual Trading
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission today unanimously approved a proposed rule that would restrict dual trading on the nation's largest commodity markets, a first step toward the possible banning of the practice from all futures markets.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.31
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.62
8.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.53
8.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
8.02
9.33
30-YR.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CHICAGO (NL) - Placed Vance Law, third baseman, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
BASKETBALL
N.B.A. - Announced the resignation of Paul Gilbert, director of video promotions.
FOOTBALL
LOS ANGELES (NFC) - Signed Paul Butcher, linebacker.


Bogota Journal;   Police Chief's Tough (Just Ask the Death Squads)
LEAD: A visit to the ninth-floor office of Colombia's top police officer, Gen.
Miguel Maza Marquez, underlines the adage that office decor speaks volumes about the occupant.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
END OF THE SEASON


Operation Just Begun
LEAD: President Bush can now fairly and proudly claim success for the military phase of his Panama policy.
The surrender of Manuel Antonio Noriega to U.S. custody is a personal triumph for the President and a great relief to most Panamanians.


Woman, 31, Dies From Severe Beating
LEAD: A 31-year-old woman was found severely beaten in her apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan on Wednesday and died that night, the police said yesterday.
There have been no arrests.


Two Resign At D.F. King
LEAD: Two senior executives of D. F. King &amp; Company, a firm that solicits proxies from investors in takeovers and other corporate contests, resigned yesterday, the firm said.


Husband of Slain Boston Woman Becomes a Suspect, Then a Suicide
LEAD: From the first, the story seized the attention of the nation: a pregnant young woman dying of gunshot wounds while her husband, also shot, frantically called for help over his car phone; then the 17-day fight for life of their baby boy, delivered eight weeks premature.


Restaurants
LEAD: Distinguished Mexican food is not something that leaps to mind when describing the New York dining scene.
It may have something to do with immigration patterns, or maybe the weather, but it just seems that Mexican cooks don't settle here in significant numbers to nurture a culinary community that could adequately demonstrate their diverse cuisine.


Chancellor Vows to Take Charge Of Failing Schools in New York
LEAD: Continuing to move aggressively in his first days in office, Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Schools Chancellor, said yesterday that he would take command of schools and school boards that do not measure up to his academic standards.


Elsa Andresen Bledsoe, Contralto, 92
LEAD: Elsa Andresen Bledsoe, a charter member of the Oratorio Society of New Jersey, died Tuesday at the Arnold Walter Nursing Home in Holmdel, N.J.
She was 92 years old.
Surviving are two daughters, Margery Owen Bostrom of Red Bank, N.J., and Elizabeth Owen Greene of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.; two stepdaughters, Dorothy Barber of Bridgewater, N.J., and Geraldine Slattery, of Bryn Mawr, Pa.; two stepsons, Harry Bledsoe of Avoca, Iowa, and George Bledsoe of Council Bluffs, Iowa; 11 grandchildren; 13 great-grandchildren, and 2 great-great-grandsons.


Keating, Unshaken, Takes Stand
LEAD: For the first time since his Lincoln Savings and Loan Association was taken over by Federal regulators in April, Charles H. Keating Jr. took the stand in a crowded courtroom here today.
He denied any wrongdoing and answered questions about his involvement in the institution.


Science Has No Doubts on Theory of Evolution
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Masaryk on the 100!'
LEAD: To the Editor:


11'-6'' Minus 13' Equals a Traffic Headache


Economic Scene;   Business Cycle's New Stability
LEAD: IS the business cycle dead?
The United States economy has now completed seven straight years of expansion, the longest in its peacetime history.
Most economists foresee no recession in 1990 or 1991, and 1992 will be another Presidential election year, when the odds tip strongly against recession.
Japan, West Germany and most of the other capitalist countries of Europe and Asia are also on a long upward roll, with no end in sight.


Michaels to Coach
LEAD: The eight-team International League of Football, which begins play in eight cities in Europe in April, began assigning head coaches to teams yesterday and Walt Michaels wound up as coach of the Helsinki team in Finland and Jack Elway as coach in London.


At La Salle, It Pays to Be Nice
LEAD: When Lionel Simmons stops running so gracefully on the basketball court, perhaps he should run for political office.


Leonard Elliott, Actor, 84
LEAD: Leonard Elliott, an actor and comedian who performed on the Broadway stage and in Manhattan nightclubs, died of cardiac arrest on Sunday in St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.


For the Record
LEAD:
Ambiguity of the Law


The Council Crashes on Takeoff
LEAD: New York's ''new'' City Council, given real power in the just-approved City Charter, is off to a disappointing start.
At its very first meeting under the new Charter this week, the Council sent the message that it likes the perks of power, but isn't yet too interested in the responsibility.


At Least 210 Die in Pakistan's Worst Rail Crash
LEAD: Soldiers with acetylene torches cut into crushed railroad cars today searching for victims of Pakistan's worst train wreck, which officials said killed at least 210 people and injured 700.


Walesa Donates His Prize
LEAD: Lech Walesa gave away his Nobel Peace Prize money today to help relieve the economic hardships facing the Polish people in 1990.


Books of The Times;   Taking to the Highway, Fleeing the Inescapable
LEAD:
Escapes
Stories
By Joy Williams
168 pages. The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Christie's Appointment
LEAD: Emmanuel de Margerie, the Ambassador of France to the United States for five years through December and director general of the Museums of France from 1975 to 1977, has been appointed to the board of Christie's International and chairman of Christie's in Europe, a new position.
Mr. de Margerie, who is 65 years old, will be based in Paris.


Quaker State Plan
LEAD: The Quaker State Corporation is offering a free warranty on engine parts of new cars lubricated by its oil for 10 years or 250,000 miles.
Car owners must meet strict rules, including having an oil and filter change every four months or 4,000 miles using Quaker State oil.
The warranty does not cover claims already covered by auto manufacturers' warranties, but it will pay for deductibles not covered by the auto makers' extended service contracts.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Zydeco by Fernest


Suspect in Rochester Killings
LEAD: The state police said tonight that they have a suspect in 14 slayings of women in the Rochester area in the last two years, but they refused to release any details of the investigation.


Baroque Concert
LEAD: Donald Joyce will conduct a choir and a Baroque instruments orchestra in the Heinrich Schutz oratorio ''The Christmas Story'' tomorrow evening at 6:30 at St.
John's in the Village Episcopal Church, 224 Waverly Place.
Gregory Purnhagen will be the Evangelist in the performance.
The program also includes Guillaume Dufay's ''Hostis Herodes,'' and a Handel Organ Concerto (Op.


U.S. Panel Calls for Delays In Offshore Drilling for Oil
LEAD: Recommending choices to appease both environmentalists and the oil industry, a panel headed by Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. says more study is needed before oil companies drill off the coasts of California and Florida.


Edwin Shelley, 68, A Data Consultant And Systems Expert
LEAD: Edwin F. Shelley, a management consultant and an inventor and engineer, died of a heart attack yesterday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in New Rochelle.


Lithuanians Say Gorbachev Eases Off
LEAD: In a sign that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev might be softening his vehement stand against the splintering of the Soviet Communist Party, Communist leaders in Lithuania said tonight that Mr.
Gorbachev had strongly indicated that he would not try to force them to reverse their decision last month to break from


On Stage
LEAD:
On the Way


Treasury Security Prices Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities ended narrowly mixed in fairly light trading yesterday, as market participants largely shrugged off developments in the foreign exchange, energy and equity markets.


Business May Look Down, but Racing Fans Can Look Up
LEAD: Thoroughbred racing begins a new season amid a mixed forecast: a year of poor business but wonderful racing.


HBO's Pact Is Extended
LEAD: Home Box Office and the music syndicate BMI have extended a licensing agreement for one month, sidestepping a court order that could have temporarily barred HBO from broadcasting films with BMI songs.


Money Fund Assets Fall
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 469 money market mutual funds decreased by $955.0 million, to $365.04 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 144 institutional funds increased by $625.7 million, to $88.23 billion.
The assets of the 227 general-purpose funds were down $112.1 million, to $119.87 billion.


Fresh, Hot and Headed for Fame
LEAD: FOR performers and visual artists, recognition can be immediate -as a newcomer makes a striking first impression in a debut.
Or, after a period of anonymity, a more experienced professional may attract attention after finally having the opportunity to demonstrate originality.
In a theater or concert hall, there can be an audible certification of that newness, with the sound of an audience rustling programs to find the name of a previously unknown and soon-to-be-memorable performer.


Workers Say Moroccan Oil Spill Could Have Been Halted Sooner
LEAD: Dutch salvage workers trying to clean up a huge Atlantic oil spill said today that the accident could have been controlled much faster if the Spanish or Moroccan authorities had allowed a crippled Iranian oil tanker into their coastal waters for repairs.


A U.S.-Soviet Venture of a Gentler Kind


Right to Bear Arms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents;   New Flea Repellant
LEAD: Two researchers at the Elexis Corporation, a company in Miami that makes pulse monitors, have patented an electronic flea repelling device for household pets.
The heart of the device, which is mounted on a pet's collar, is a transducer that sends out periodic ultrasonic pulses that do not bother a dog or cat but apparently are intolerable to fleas.


Prosecutor Quits; Tale of Attack Was Hoax
LEAD: New Jersey's most flamboyant prosecutor resigned today after his tale of a high-speed chase and shoot-out between him and men he described as drug dealers, terrorists or members of the Ku Klux Klan turned out to be a hoax.


Patents;   A Tape Measure With Digital Readout
LEAD: The Kyoto Measuring Instruments Corporation, based in Kyoto, Japan, has invented a retractable tape measure with a digital readout.
The device is said to be easier to use and to read than the standard tool, in which measurements are marked on the tape itself.


The Noriega Case: Panama City;   Papal Envoy Asserts Psychology, Not Ultimatum, Swayed Noriega
LEAD: The papal envoy to Panama, the pivotal figure in 10 days of tense negotiations that ended in Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's surrender, insisted today that the general's departure from the Vatican mission resulted not from an ultimatum but from a precisely calibrated psychological campaign.


13 FACE CHARGES IN FAMILY KILLINGS
LEAD: Thirteen former members of a religious commune were charged with murder or conspiracy yesterday after the bodies of a family of five were found buried at an Ohio farm in what a prosecutor called a human sacrifice.


Travelers' Security Precautions
LEAD: The holiday travel rush is over, but passenger security precautions know no season.
Here is some advice for travelers from Christopher Grose, president of Control Risks Limited, an international security consultant whose United States headquarters is in Bethesda, Md.


Premature on the 90's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Inside
LEAD:
Recriminations in Boston


Anheuser-Busch
LEAD: Anheuser-Busch Inc. said it plans to begin selling its new non-alcoholic brew, O'Doul's, around the country starting on Monday.
The brewery said it has had strong initial sales in selected cities where the beer has been on shelves since March.
Anheuser-Busch, the world's largest brewery, said O'Doul's would meet the desires of a growing segment of consumers who like the taste of beer but do not want the alcohol.


Japanese Insurance Concern Invests in American Express
LEAD: The Nippon Life Insurance Company, the large Japanese insurer that already has a sizable stake in Shearson Lehman Hutton, the brokerage unit affiliated with the American Express Company, has agreed to make a $200 million investment in American Express itself.


Eased Verdict Sought
LEAD: Aaron Pryor, the former world junior welterweight champion, said in a motion filed Thursday in Hamilton County Municipal Court in Cincinnati that he should receive treatment for drug dependency instead of a conviction for possession of drug items.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What kind of crazy way is this to run a place?
If they treat me this way and I'm the Chancellor, what is going on here?''
-Joseph A. Fernandez, New York City Schools Chancellor. [1:4.]


Bridge
LEAD: Happy players at the end of a pairs contest often report that they had a ''big game,'' meaning that they did very well.
But to deserve the title ''Big Game'' with capital letters, one needs a score of 75% or better, which is very rare.


The Noriega Case: Statement;   Transcript of Bush News Conference on Noriega and Panama
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:
OPENING STATEMENT


'Legs Diamond' Suit Is Settled Out of Court
LEAD: The choreographer Michael Shawn will receive $175,000 from the producers of the 1988 musical ''Legs Diamond'' in an out-of-court settlement of a suit in which he charged that the producers had dismissed him because he had tested positive for the AIDS virus.


Minnesota Senator Denies New Charges of Impropriety
LEAD: Senator Dave Durenberger, who is already facing a Senate investigation of his financial dealings, today strongly denied new accusations of impropriety regarding the Government's reimbursement for his rental of a Minneapolis condiminum.


Vacancy For A Czar
LEAD: There is talk of creating a ''homeless czar.'' The position was mentioned to me by a well-connected Republican.
He knows of my ambition to replace Dan Quayle on the ticket in 1992. ''Get yourself a czardom,'' he counseled. ''Like Bennett.''


Upheaval in the East;   Poland to Cut Army Strength
LEAD: Poland will reduce required military service from 2 years to 18 months this year and also cut manpower, Defense Minister Florian Siwicki said today.


About New York;   For Paraplegic, Acting in a Film Is the Easy Part
LEAD: Kenneth Osborne has known grave disappointment.
When he was 19 years old and a carefree college football player, his spine was severed in a car crash, leaving him paralyzed from the chest down.
It was hell to adjust.
But he did. ''That took some serious time,'' Mr.
Osborne said.


Dakin Accord With Hallmark
LEAD: Hallmark Cards Inc. and Dakin Inc. said today that they had reached an agreement in principle for Hallmark to acquire Dakin, a leading marketer of plush stuffed toys, for an undisclosed amount.


Robert Sivard, 75, Former Art Director For the Government
LEAD: Robert Sivard, a painter and illustrator whose sprightly canvases range from urban street scenes to the lives of famous painters and literary figures, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 75 years old.


OPEC's Output at 1989 High
LEAD: OPEC's oil output reached a 1989 high of 23.6 million barrels a day throughout December and will probably remain strong in early 1990 despite a new production-cutting accord, oil industry, government and shipping sources said this week.


Citgo Stake May Be Resold
LEAD: Venezuela, which recently agreed to buy the 50 percent of the Citgo Petroleum Corporation that it did not already own, will probably resell the stake, the Energy Minister, Celestino Armas, said today.


Ian Horvath, Dancer, Dies at 46; A Founder of the Cleveland Ballet
LEAD: Ian (Ernie) Horvath, producing director of the Jose Limon Dance Foundation, a founder of the Cleveland Ballet and a former soloist with the Joffrey Ballet and American Ballet Theater, died of AIDS yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in New York.
Mr.
Horvath was 46 years old.


Treasury Securities Move Lower
LEAD: Most Treasury securities prices declined yesterday as the fixed-income market shrugged off the smaller-than-expected rise in employment that the Government reported for December.
The bond market also paid little notice to the strong rise in December factory orders.


Chairman of Joint Chiefs Briefed in Panama


Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia - The Talk of Prague;   Glee for Communists: Havel Suffers a Miscue
LEAD: The medieval squares and coffee houses of this city have come alive again with politics.
But the heady talk has been more about what may have been President Vaclav Havel's first mistake than about the crimes and abuses of the Communists.


MGM/UA Sale Seen as Stalled
LEAD: Jeffrey Barbakow, chairman of the MGM/UA Communications Company, has told company executives that efforts to sell the entertainment company are on hold, the trade publication Variety has reported, quoting unidentified sources.


The Noriega Case: Defense Strategy;   Noriega and Lawyers Meet for 2 Hours
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today plotted strategy with defense lawyers amid questions about the future of the defense team itself.


Review/Jazz;   Swan Songs From 1974 Still Strong
LEAD: Among the eight selections that the Modern Jazz Quartet played in its first set on Tuesday evening at the Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at East 76th Street, five were part of the group's concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Nov. 25, 1974 - ''Django,'' ''Softly as in the Morning Sunrise,'' ''True Blues,'' ''Skating in Central Park'' and ''Odds Against Tomorrow.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Magnetics Corp., Los Angeles, said it would consider inquiries from various groups, including one organized by members of senior management, regarding the purchase of the company's card-reader and access control businesses.


Maine Fights Nekoosa Bid
LEAD: The Maine Attorney General asked a state judge today to block on antitrust grounds the Georgia-Pacific Corporation's $3.8 billion hostile bid for the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation.


Carmen Hill, Pitcher, 94
LEAD: Carmen Hill, a former National League pitcher who compiled a 49-33 record in 10 major league seasons over 16 years, died on Monday in Indianapolis.
He was 94 years old.


ETHNIC RIVALRIES IGNITE IN BULGARIA
LEAD: Strikes and large protests by members of Bulgaria's Slavic majority opposed to religious and cultural freedom for ethnic Turks paralyzed towns and cities across the country today.


Prison for Attack on Gay Man
LEAD: Two teen-agers who admitted beating a West Hartford man in 1988 because he was a homosexual have each been given one-year prison sentences.
Superior Court Judge Raymond R. Norko sentenced Lawrence Brush, 19, and James M. O'Brien, 17, on Thursday.
Two other teen-agers involved in the West Hartford beating, Sean G.


Kwiatkowski Is Named Head Coach at Brown
LEAD: The Hofstra football coach for the last nine years, Mickey Kwiatkowski, moved from Division III to the Ivy League yesterday when he was appointed head coach at Brown University, succeeding John Rosenberg, who resigned Dec. 4.


Tree Devastation in Riverside Park Silences the Song of Birds
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Bird Injured in Loss to Clippers
Ron Harper and Benoit Benjamin sparked a 16-2 fourth-quarter rally and the Los Angeles Clippers ended a 10-year losing streak at Boston Garden last night with a 114-105 victory over the Celtics, who played most of the game without Larry Bird.
Bird sprained his left ankle with 42 seconds left in the first quarter and played just 19 minutes, 4 in the second half.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 6, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-7
Strikes and protests in Bulgaria were held across the country by Slavic majority members opposed to religious and cultural freedom for ethnic Turks.
Page 1
A Soviet Communist Party leader was forced to step down from his position as the head of a region on the border with Iran, which has been the site of disturbances and crowd violence.


Joseph Anderson, 75, Ex-Military Attache
LEAD: Jospeh Crook Anderson, a retired Army colonel and former military attache, died of leukemia Monday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 75 years old.


Richard H. Wels, 76, a Lawyer; Was an Expert on Family Law
LEAD: Richard Hoffman Wels, a lawyer who was influential in the reform of New York State's divorce laws, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.
Mr.
Wels, an expert on family law, helped to modernize the state's matrimonial laws.
For nearly 40 years, he was a leader of the New York State Bar Association and the American Bar


Gertrude Simon Kosting, Health-Care Worker, 84
LEAD: Gertrude Simon Kosting, a health-care worker and the president of the Huxley Institute of Connecticut, died of an embolism on Tuesday at Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
She was 84 years old and lived in Weston, Conn.


Ernest T. Brainard, 99, Broker in Connecticut
LEAD: Ernest T. Brainard, who apparently was the nation's oldest active stockbroker, died on Wednesday as he was getting ready to go work.
He was 99 years old and lived in West Hartford.


COURT OVERTURNS AWARD TO FAMILY IN SMOKING DEATH
LEAD: A Federal appeals court yesterday threw out the first verdict ever requiring an American cigarette manufacturer to compensate the family of a smoker who died of cancer.
But at the same time, the court, may have made it easier for smokers and their families to prevail in future lawsuits against tobacco companies.


Katmandu Journal;   Some Room at the Top of the World
LEAD: On Wednesday, when Dipendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, a young man of 18, rode a fine carriage from temple to temple to mark his coming of age as Crown Prince, a lot else was going on in this city transformed almost beyond recognition in less than a decade.


Principal to Be Charged With Incompetence
LEAD: New York City's new Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, said yesterday that he would file a charge of incompetence against the principal of a Brooklyn high school whom he removed from office over her handling of two disturbances by the school's students.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.50
10.50
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.31
9.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.57
8.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.47
8.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
8.00
9.30
30-YR.


Dollar Has Late U.S. Rally; Gold Prices Post Sharp Rise
LEAD: The dollar staged a turnaround yesterday, closing mostly higher in domestic dealings after taking a sharp hit in overseas markets that were focusing on events in Eastern Europe.


Department Spent $224,000 In Effort to Unmask Informer
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it spent $224,000 on an attempt to identify the source of an unauthorized disclosure of a preliminary criminal investigation involving Representative William H. Gray 3d, Democrat of Pennsylvania.


Upheaval in the East: Funeral;   Simple 'Last Homage' to One Who Stood Against Ceausescu
LEAD: Rumania's new leaders paid last respects today to Secretary of State Corneliu Bogdan, the first of their number to die since they took power two weeks ago.


Gary Reasons' Head
LEAD: The head is a strange instrument, an awesome thing, a thing of multiple utilities.
It can be used to cogitate; it can be used to ruminate; the skeletal remnant can be a memory device - ''Alas, poor Yorick!
I knew him, Horatio.'' And it can be used as a weapon - like being armed with your head.


Paroled Killer Accused in Deaths Of 11 Women in Rochester Area
LEAD: A convicted killer of two children was accused today of killing 11 women, most of them prostitutes, in a series of attacks that began here in March 1988, a year after his release from prison for the earlier slayings.


Inquiry at Clemson
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association will conduct an official investigation of the Clemson football program, the school said yesterday.
A preliminary investigation uncovered 14 alleged rule violations, ranging from wrongful payments to illegal recruiting contacts, the school said.


Campeau Unit Trims Office Staff 14%
LEAD: Federated Department Stores, a subsidiary of the financially troubled Campeau Corporation, said yesterday that it had eliminated 52 positions in its Cincinnati headquarters, or about 14 percent of its already reduced corporate staff.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Stain-Resistant Carpets
LEAD: These days, almost all American-made nylon carpets offer some sort of stain protection, which makes it easier than ever to remove spots.
So, parties that chase the post-holiday blahs need no longer leave permanent reminders.


Peru's Inflation Is Owed To Lack of Restraints
LEAD: To the Editor:


What? Send Women to War?
LEAD: Capt.
Linda Bray led an attack in the Panama invasion, apparently the first time that a woman has commanded American forces in battle.
But she was acting as a Military Police officer; women are still barred from combat roles in the armed forces.
Since women like Captain Bray already serve with distinction in danger zones, isn't it time to allow them into combat too?


Beliefs
LEAD: When the baby boomers needed backyards, America got suburbia.
When they protested, America got sit-ins and antiwar marches.
When their hormones began to act up, America got the sexual revolution.


Racial Manipulation in Boston
LEAD: When Charles Stuart jumped off a bridge to his death in Boston Harbor Thursday, he apparently took with him the answers to one of the most bizarre murder mysteries in Boston's history.
But his death is only the beginning of what is sure to be a period of soul-searching, even anger, in a city long torn by racial conflict.


Keating Questioned By Judge
LEAD: Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin took charge of the questioning of Charles H. Keating Jr. today, and in almost five hours of intense inquiries the judge voiced deep concerns about accounting methods used by the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its parent, the American Continental Corporation.


M.T.A. Amplifier Ban Is Blocked by Judge
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday blocked the Metropolitan Transit Authority from enforcing a rule that bans musicians from using amplifiers in New York City subways.


Elegy for an English Bike
LEAD: My bicycle was stolen the other day.
Or maybe I should say my friend was kidnapped on West 23d Street sometime between 7 P.M. and 10 P.M.
She was a Raleigh three-speed, English, heavy, black and one of the most remarkable machines I've ever had.
No effete, high-strung 10-speed from Italy or Japan was she.


Stocks Drop Broadly, With Dow Off 22.83
LEAD: Stocks retreated broadly yesterday in continued moderate trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 22.83 points, to 2,773.25.


Grand Juries: Wasteful and Pointless
LEAD: If a defendant pleads not guilty to a felony charge, the New York State Constitution provides that he cannot be tried for that charge unless he is indicted by a grand jury.
The idea is sound: No one should be accused, arrested or required to answer a felony charge at trial if there is no evidence to support the charge.


Don't Encourage a China Hostile to Freedom
LEAD: To the Editor:


Henry Luce 3d And Leila Hadley Exchange Vows
LEAD: Leila Hadley and Henry Luce 3d were married yesterday at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
David H. C. Read.


The Noriega Case: Security;   U.S. IS SECRETIVE ON NORIEGA PRISON
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega arrived in Miami guarded by dozens of police sharpshooters and bodyguards, part of an extraordinary security blanket that continued today as camouflaged military helicopters crisscrossed city skies while his lawyers conferred with their client at a secret location.


Pappy Mason's Mother Gets 10-Year Term
LEAD: The mother of the drug dealer Howard (Pappy) Mason was sentenced yesterday to 10 years in prison for running her son's crack business while he was in jail.


Bengals' Offensive Coach Interviewed by Steinberg
LEAD: Dick Steinberg yesterday conducted his second interview to select the next head coach of the Jets and left little doubt what he is looking for: a motivating, teaching leader who can bring the often-troubled team together.


Amid an Average Bunch, No One Is Counted Out
LEAD: The current college campaign composes a conundrum because there is no distinguishing the strong from the not so strong.
They all seem average in ECAC Hockey and Hockey East, the two Eastern Division I leagues, which are beginning the second half of their seasons.


Arlene D. Friehling, Hotelier, 59
LEAD: Arlene Dinnerstein Friehling, a former owner of the Stevensville Country Club, a resort hotel in Swan Lake, N.Y., died of cancer on Wednesday at the Community General Hospital in Harris, N.Y.
She was 59 years old and lived in Liberty, N.Y.


Israeli Denies in TV Interview He Served as Noriega Adviser
LEAD: The man identified by American officials as a top aide to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega appeared on Israeli television tonight to deny that he had served as security adviser to the fallen Panamanian dictator.


Carson Has a Team of His Own
LEAD: At the age of 58, after making the playoffs 11 times as an assistant coach, Bud Carson will run his very own National Football League playoff team for the first time today.


Oil Prices Push Transportation Charges Up
LEAD: The recent explosion in petroleum prices, especially diesel fuel, is raising transportation prices in a way not seen for a decade, economists and industry executives say.
Airlines and trucking companies are imposing fuel surcharges or indexing their rates to fuel costs.


Missing Boy: Drug Trade Hits Again
LEAD: The morning of Dec. 5, 12-year-old William Porter left his crowded railroad apartment on 132d Street in Harlem, walked down the dirty stairs, past the rotting sofa filled with garbage in the front of his building, and started off to school.


Bond Wins a Round In Fight Over Holdings
LEAD: Alan Bond's flagship company, Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd., successfully withstood an attempt today to liquidate the Australian's brewing and media holdings, but it now faces new demands from United States creditors to repay $510 million immediately.


From Jewish Eden to Embarrassment
LEAD: In 1823, James Fenimore Cooper described the Catskills in his novel ''The Pioneers'': ''You must have seen them on your left as you followed the river up from York, looking as blue as a piece of clear sky, and holding the clouds on their tops, as the smoke curls over the head of an Indian chief at the council fire.


Generic Drug Bribe Sentence
LEAD: A former chemist for the Food and Drug Administration was sentenced today to 30 days in jail for taking $4,300 in bribes to influence the Government's approval of generic drugs.
United States District Judge


Washington Talk;   Rationing In the Sky: U.S. Takes New Look
LEAD: Even in this era of deregulation and free markets, rationing remains the Federal Government's preferred solution to some problems.
While competition may be constrained, some social purpose is served, or so goes the theory, by limiting immigration, radio and television licenses - or the right to land and take off at airports where traffic is at full capacity.


11 Kashmir Cities Get Curfew to Counter Militants
LEAD: The authorities in the northern state of Kashmir have imposed an indefinite curfew in Srinagar, the capital, and 10 other cities after militants seeking independence threatened to disrupt the region, Government officials said today.


Contributors to the Neediest Continue to Recall Holidays
LEAD: The Christmas trees may be down and the decorations put away for another year, but the holiday season is not yet over.
The Feast of the Epiphany, which for Western Christians marks the homage of the Three Kings, is celebrated tomorrow.
And holiday themes continue to dominate the letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases


Councilman Asserts Minorities Dislike Education
LEAD: The new chairman of the New York City Council's education committee -long known for his outspoken views -has asserted in an interview that, in contrast to ''children of European-born'' parents, ''there appears to be no liking of learning'' among black and Hispanic children.


A New Air Force One
LEAD: A new Air Force One jet will be delivered to President Bush on Sept. 30, almost two years late, largely because of efforts to make it resistant to a nuclear explosion, the Boeing Company said Thursday.
Boeing, which has been building two modified 747 jumbo jets for the President's use, originally promised that a new Air Force One would be ready in November 1988.


Brooklyn Chorus Auditions
LEAD: Open auditions for the Brooklyn Philharmonia Chorus are to be held on Tuesday at 7 P.M. at the First Presbyterian Church, 124 Henry Street, in Brooklyn Heights.
Performances by the group, the oldest community chorus in Brooklyn, are scheduled for April and May in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
Information: (718) 640-3028.


Review/Dance;   Evolution of Three Familiar Works
LEAD: George Balanchine, perhaps more than other choreographers, liked to revise his ballets over the decades.
Two that he reworked, ''Danses Cocertantes'' and ''Tchaikovsky Suite No. 3,'' shared the New York City Ballet's program with Peter Martins's recent ''Barber Violin Concerto'' on Thursday night at the New York State


Factory Orders Rise by 2.4% Led by Demand for Durables
LEAD: Orders for manufactured goods rose 2.4 percent in November, reaching their second-highest level ever, the Commerce Department said today.


BUSH DENIES MOVE FOR NORIEGA DEAL, BUT DOOR IS OPEN
LEAD: President Bush today left open the door for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to try to arrange a reduction of the charges in his drug-trafficking case, but the President said he ''is not seeking a deal.''


71 Ships Use Suez Canal
LEAD: Seventy-one ships sailed through the Suez Canal today, the highest number in 12 years, earning Egypt $6 million in tolls, Canal Authority sources said.
The record was set in 1978 when 95 ships passed through the canal in a single day, they said.
A southbound convoy of 41 ships sailed through the 117-mile waterway from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, including 9 oil tankers and 13 container ships.


Letter: On Abortion;   The Problem of Parental Notification
LEAD: To the Editor: In 1977 and 1978 I was privileged to serve with an august group of people on the Governor's Commission on Alternatives to Abortion, headed by the then dean of the Fordham Law School, Joseph McLaughlin, who subsequently was named to the Federal bench.
The conclusions of that study group were the basis for subsequent policies of Gov.


Italy Devalues Lira by 3%
LEAD: The Italian lira was devalued by 3 percent against other major European currencies late today, while its trading band within the European Monetary System was narrowed.


Hanoi Allows Hundreds to Go
LEAD: Hundreds of Vietnamese who helped the Americans during the Vietnam War and who were punished for it after the Communist victory are on their way to the United States.
Three jets brought the first 156 former re-education camp inmates and their families today to Bangkok from Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, and 151 more are expected on Saturday.


Upheaval in the East: Poland;   Warsaw's Economic Chief Opposes Weakening of Plan
LEAD: Complaints that Poland's program of economic change is exacting too much pain are increasing, but the counry's Finance Minister insisted today that a severe economic program was the only way to reduce inflation and revive Poland's crumbling economy.


Pharmacist and Podiatrist Admit Medicaid Schemes
LEAD: A Bronx pharmacist and a New Jersey podiatrist have pleaded guilty to stealing $1 million apiece in separate Medicaid schemes, a state special prosecutor said yesterday.


Nils Hansell, Sailing Promoter, 80
LEAD: Nils Hansell, an amateur sailor best known as the originator of Operation Sail, an international maritime festival in New York City in 1964, died of pnuemonia last Saturday at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 80 years old and lived in Princeton.


Don't Encourage a China Hostile to Freedom;   Keep the Door Open
LEAD: To the Editor:


One Constant: Winning
LEAD: An air of edginess is evident among the San Francisco 49ers as the defending Super Bowl champions prepare for today's National Conference semifinal against the Minnesota Vikings at Candlestick Park.
Actually, the edginess has been apparent for most of this season, a season of incessant role changes for this franchise, ranging from management to coaches to players.


The Noriega Case: Intelligence Operations;   U.S. Worry: What Damage Can Noriega Do?
LEAD: Even as the Bush Administration celebrates its success in capturing Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, intelligence experts have turned their attention to the question of how much damage or embarrassment General Noriega can cause the United States in his new role as criminal defendant.


Gunn to Leave Transit Agency; Says System Is Now Acceptable
LEAD: David L. Gunn, who embarked six years ago on what he called a ''suicide mission'' to turn around New York City's crumbling mass-transit system, announced his resignation yesterday as president of a now ''acceptable, but not perfect'' system.


Death Toll in Pakistan Train Crash Is Said to Top 300


Welcome to New York City, Chancellor (but Please Hold)
LEAD: One day this week, Joseph A. Fernandez noticed that his office windows were dirty.
He called an engineer.
Sorry, he was told, the engineers' contract stipulates that the windows are cleaned once a year.


TBS Allowed Vietnam Link
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System said Thursday that it had won its battle with the Bush Administration over providing its Cable News Network and a satellite receiving station to Vietnam.


'Beauty and the Beast' Is Canceled by CBS
LEAD: CBS will cancel ''Beauty and the Beast'' after its broadcast on Jan. 24.


Why Milk Prices Are Soaring
LEAD: Elsie the Cow, meet Adam Smith.


Bruce Jay Heim, 37, An Investment Banker
LEAD: Bruce Jay Heim, an investment banker, died of complications of AIDS on Thursday at his home in Bernardsville, N.J.
He was 37 years old.


Upheaval in the East: Troops;   U.S. Says the Kremlin Seeks Deeper Cuts in European Forces
LEAD: Soviet officials have informally suggested that Moscow is prepared to make deeper troop cuts than those it has previously proposed in the Vienna arms talks, Administration officials said today.


Portugal Turns Away Damaged Iran Tanker
LEAD: A crippled Iranian tanker that spilled 19 million gallons of oil off the Moroccan coast was turned away today by Portugal, the third nation to deny the ship entry.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on Thursday about an art theft at an Italian villa misstated the ownership of the four paintings and one piece of furniture that were stolen.
They belong to the villa's owner, Giuseppe Panza di Biumo, not to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation.


Savings Data Are Revised
LEAD: The nation's savings institutions lost $6.4 billion in deposits in October, rather than the $5.6 billion in outflows originally reported, the Office of Thrift Supervision said today.


Books of The Times;   Two Memoirs of Changes in Journalism
LEAD:
How Many Words Do You Want?
An Insider's Story of Print and Television Journalism
By Leslie Midgley
Illustrated. 344 pages. Birch Lane Press. $19.95.
Right Places, Right Times
Forty Years in Journalism Not Counting My Paper Route
By Hedley Donovan
Illustrated. 463 pages. Henry Holt &amp; Company.


The Noriega Case: Public Opinion;   Panamanians Strongly Back U.S. Move
LEAD: The Panamanian people overwhelmingly approve of the sending of United States troops to remove Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from power, and they want them to stay for at least six more months, according to a poll taken in Panama that was made public last night by CBS News.


Knick Trainer Hurt
LEAD: Mike Saunders, the Knicks' trainer the last 12 years, was hospitalized yesterday with multiple facial fractures and lacerations after his vehicle skidded on ice and struck a tree yesterday morning at the team's training center at the State University of New York campus in Purchase, team officials said.


Patents;   A Chain That Becomes As Rigid as a Bar
LEAD: In a similar spirit, a Brooklyn inventor won a patent several weeks ago for what she called a ''chain bar.''


Duane C. Bogie, Television Producer, 67
LEAD: Duane C. Bogie, a television producer who helped create the ''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' drama series, died of brain cancer Tuesday in Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
He was 67 years old and had homes in Dallas and Litchfield, Conn.


Review/Music;   Philharmonic In Concerto By Neikrug
LEAD: For someone who has had genuinely mixed reactions to Zubin Metha's New York Philharmonic concerts over the years, Thursday evening's program at Avery Fisher Hall was an especially dispiriting event.


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   PARTY CHIEF QUITS IN MUSLIM REPUBLIC
LEAD: The Communist Party leader in a troubled region on the Soviet border with Iran has been forced to step down, the republic's Foreign Ministry said today.


The Mayor's Signal: Blunt, but Brave
LEAD: Score one for Mayor David Dinkins.
In his first days in office he announced that he had delayed hiring the next class of New York City police recruits.
The gesture, though blunt, was brave and important.
Nobody wants fewer police officers.
But neither does anyone want the city to stumble back into fiscal trouble.


Pilots Had No Way of Knowing Jet Engine Fell Off, Experts Say
LEAD: The pilots of a Northwest Airlines jetliner who flew for nearly 25 minutes on Thursday unaware that one of the plane's three engines had sheared off and plummeted 35,000 feet would have had no way of knowing what had happened, aviation experts said yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to delay the hiring of 1,848 police officers misstated a campaign promise he made about subway crime.
He pledged that by the end of his first term he would put an officer on every train every night, not in every car.


Noriega Can Get A Fair Trial
LEAD: Since Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega turned himself over to U.S. authorities this week to face drug trafficking charges, two contradictory predictions have been made about his trial.


Computer Brokerages Match Buyers, Sellers and Used Gear
LEAD: Demand is growing for both used and new computers for the home and office, and an increasing number of purchases and sales are being made through computer brokerages.


Creation of Jobs Is Only Sluggish In Latest Report
LEAD: New jobs were created at a markedly slower rate in December, but the nation's unemployment rate remained unchanged at 5.3 percent, completing a year of exceptional stability, the Labor Department reported today.


Dorsey Return Likely; Allegre Still Waiting
LEAD: Since the National Football League season began four months ago, the Giants have added only eight players to their roster.
On Saturday, the day before their first playoff game, they will probably add one and perhaps two or three.


Exxon Said to Be 'Stonewalling' on Arthur Kill Spill


Mortgage Rates Mixed
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 9.83 percent, up from 9.78 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.35 percent this week, down from 8.39 percent the week before.


For New York Area, 20 Lessons in Real Estate
LEAD: There will not be any Greenwich mansions at Levittown prices in the Government's sale of 30,000 properties taken over from failed savings institutions.
But a look yesterday at some of the 20 residential properties offered in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut showed housing for every pocketbook and life style and, maybe, a chance to save a few thousand dollars.


Less Delay Encountered On Real Estate Inquiries
LEAD: Prospective buyers eventually encountered fewer delays today in telephone calls seeking to learn more about the thousands of single-family homes, apartments, office projects and other properties inherited by the Government from failed savings institutions and now being auctioned off.


Patents;   A Spaghetti Sipper and a Rodent Derby
LEAD: This was an exceptionally rich week for patents on novelty inventions.
From a spaghetti sipper to a new jump rope, patents were granted for simple devices offering a creative, often whimsical twist to things most people assume cannot be improved.


Alaskan Oil Spill Laid to Collapse of Regulation
LEAD: A collapse of Government regulation of the oil tanker industry created conditions that led to the Alaska oil spill, a panel of scientists and oil industry experts concluded in a report released today by the state of Alaska.


80 Days With Michael Palin, In Pursuit of Phileas Fogg
LEAD: When Michael Palin agreed to circle the world in the company of a small television crew from the BBC, he knew the result would be no more a learned travelogue than the Jules Verne novel that inspired the journey.


Manila to Dismiss 126,000
LEAD: The Government will dismiss 126,000 employees this month in an effort to weed out unqualified civil service workers who got their jobs through patronage, an official said today.
The affected employees hold temporary positions received through the intercession of politicians, said Patricia Santo Tomas, head of the Civil Service Commission.


Don't Encourage a China Hostile to Freedom;   Hasty, Furtive Move
LEAD: To the Editor:


Many Flee Liberia as Clash Destroys Towns, Envoys Say
LEAD: Fighting between Liberian forces and rebels opposed to the West African country's leader, Gen.
Samuel K. Doe, has devastated two towns in northeastern Liberia and sent thousands fleeing across the border, Western diplomats said today.


Upheaval in the East;   Delay Appears Likely In Rumanian Election
LEAD: Pressure mounted today from new and revived political parties, including the Liberals and the National Peasants Party, to postpone elections beyond the April date set by the provisional Government.
Count Otto von Lambsdorff, head of West Germany's Free Democratic Party, said at a news conference here that in talks held with leaders of the new


U.S. Sets Offer on Contra Aid
LEAD: The United States is prepared to provide up to $3 million to an international commission to begin planning the voluntary relocation of contras to Nicaragua provided that democratic conditions exist there, the State Department said today.


Tandy Expects Earnings Decline
LEAD: The Tandy Corporation, whose sales have been hit in a weaker domestic computer industry, said it expects to post lower earnings for its quarter that ended Dec. 31.
The consumer electronics maker, which operates Radio Shack stores, said its profit for the second quarter would be lower than in the period a year ago, when it had earnings of $1.50 a share on sales of $1.4 billion.


Residents Can Return To Gramercy Building
LEAD: More than four months after they were forced to leave their homes, tenants of a Gramercy Park building that was coated with asbestos when a Consolidated Edison steam pipe exploded last summer can move back to their apartments beginning Jan. 15, the utility said yesterday.


Tokyo Official Takes on Bastion of Sexism, and Loses
LEAD: To the delight of traditionalists and the consternation of feminists, the first woman ever to be named chief spokeswoman for the Government of Japan was humbled today by one of the nation's most powerful remaining male strongholds, the world of sumo wrestling.


Dehere Sparks Pirates Over St. Peter's by 76-57
LEAD: Terry Dehere of Seton Hall played his high school basketball at St.
Anthony in Jersey City, just a few minutes from St.
Peter's College.


Asahi Breweries Plans U.S. Plant
LEAD: Asahi Breweries Ltd., the third-largest beer producer in Japan, said it plans to build a plant in the United States and produce its Super Dry beer, one of the company's largest exports.
Asahi is planning to invest about 10 billion yen, or about $70 million at today's exchange rate, to build a plant near Denver in


Exxon 'Stonewalling' on Spill, New Jersey Aide Says
LEAD: A spokesman for the New Jersey Attorney General's Office yesterday accused Exxon Corporation officials of ''stonewalling'' an investigation into the spill of at least 200,000 gallons of oil into the Arthur Kill.


Murdoch Deal in Japan
LEAD: Murdoch Magazines, a unit of the News Corporation, said Thursday that it had arranged for a Japanese publishing company to print a monthly Japanese-language edition of its Premiere, the Movie Magazine.
John B. Evans, president of Murdoch Magazines, said the new publication would be the first Japanese edition of a Murdoch magazine.


Radio Show to Feature Works by Beckett
LEAD: A memorial program honoring Samuel Beckett, who died on Dec. 22, is to be broadcast on WBAI-FM (99.5) on Sunday from 11:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.


The Noriega Case: Television;   President Complains About TV's Use of Split Images
LEAD: President Bush complained yesterday that by juxtaposing pictures of him in a jocular mood during a news conference last month and the arrival of the bodies of American soldiers killed in Panama, some television news organizations had made him appear insensitive to the deaths.


Your Money;   Are the Insurers Fiscally Strong?
LEAD: The Pacific Standard Life Insurance Company, a carrier with $7 billion of insurance in force that had invested heavily in ''junk bonds'' and ''junk mortgages,'' was declared insolvent by the California Department of Insurance at the end of November.
In the weeks since then, many financial advisers have asked whether the insolvency is an isolated event or whether other insurers are also at risk.


In Boston, a Storm of Recriminations
LEAD: A vicious round of finger-pointing began here today as prosecutors, the police and the news media began tracing the trail of faulty assumptions, disregarded suspicions, blunders and perhaps even lies that put the wrong man at the center of one of the most highly publicized and emotion-charged murder cases in the city's history.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Ex-Dissidents Will Monitor Bucharest on Rights
LEAD: A small group of former dissidents is setting up a committee to make sure that human rights are observed here as Rumania rids itself of the remnants of the Government of Nicolae Ceausescu.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Credit Card Savings
LEAD:
With interest rates headed down, as they are now, holders of bank credit cards with payments based on a fixed rate of interest can save as much as $100 a year in fees by switching to cards with interest payments tied to a variable rate.
The fixed rate charged on many bank cards has been holding at current levels for a few years - good for card holders while interest rates rise.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Weighing The Differences Among Heaters
LEAD: Another fad is taking hold in the business of keeping warm: ceramic electric heaters.
Like the portable kerosene burners and quartz electric heaters that preceded them, ceramic heaters have a few advantages over older models.
But they are also the subject of advertising and sales promotions that sometimes promise too much.


Patents;   A Raceway for Rodents That Is Escape-Free
LEAD: For people looking for an alternative to raising horses and greyhound dogs, Robert L. Tottey of Ithaca, N.Y., has invented an ''escape-free rodent raceway.''


Suffolk County Officer Held On Rape and Sodomy Counts
LEAD: A 49-year-old Suffolk County police officer with 20 years on the force was arrested today on charges of raping and sodomizing a girl, the authorities said.


Devils Bolster Checking Line, Trading Broten For Brooke
LEAD: The last of the Colorado Rockies left the Devils yesterday when Aaron Broten was traded to the Minnesota North Stars for Bob Brooke.


Patents;   New Jump Rope Offers Greater Control
LEAD: Priscilla Burton, a retired secretary in Providence, R.I., liked the aerobic exercise of jumping rope but wanted a rope she could swing more slowly and with less stress.


The 'Hounding' of Isabelle Adjani
LEAD: In the dazzling sunlight filling a gilded hotel suite on Madison Avenue, Isabelle Adjani was recalling the bleak season two years ago when she went on French national television to prove that she was alive and well.


Theodore I. Felner, 81, Former Textile Official
LEAD: Theodore I. Felner, a retired executive of Burlington Industries and of Macy's New York, died of an embolism on Wednesday at his winter home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old and also had a residence in Manhattan.


Dinkins Seeks Spending Cuts From Agencies
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, saying fiscal troubles may force trims in more city programs, told the heads of all city agencies yesterday to outline new spending cuts to help close a budget gap of up to $150 million for the rest of the fiscal year that ends June 30.


Alexis P. Fekula, Choral Conductor, 58
LEAD: Alexis P. Fekula, an oil and gas consultant and choral conductor of Russian liturgical music, died of heart disease on Thursday in Boston.
He was 58 years old and lived in Southport, Conn.


Big Jackpot and Big Dreams: Lotto Fever Hits New York
LEAD: When Zoriano Caballero picked up his newspaper yesterday, his eyes scanned the grim mug shot of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
He focused on the prisoner identification plate the fallen Panamanian leader held to his chest: ''U.S.
Marshal, Miami, FL 41586 004.''


Award for Reagan
LEAD: Former President Ronald Reagan will appear at the National Collegiate Athletic Association's annual honors dinner Monday night in Dallas to accept the Teddy Award, given annually for contributions or achievements in college sports.
Several women on the N.C.A.A.'s award committee said they would stage a low-key protest of the event, citing what they termed


Heating Oil Prices Plummet As Speculators Withdraw
LEAD: Heating oil futures prices plunged more than 5 cents a gallon for the second straight day on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday as warm temperatures in the Northeast flushed speculators from the market.


Plea in Martin Case
LEAD: A plea of not guilty was entered in Port Crane, N.Y., late Thursday for William Reedy, the Detroit bar owner who is accused of driving while intoxicated in the accident that killed Billy Martin of the Yankees on Christmas Day.
Town Justice P. Murray Benjamin also granted a request by Gerald Mollen, the Broome County District Attorney, for a 60-day adjournment to present findings to a grand jury.


Peter Carlsen, Writer, 43
LEAD: Peter Carlsen, a writer and editor who specialized in design and architecture, was found dead, apparently a suicide, on Dec. 26 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.


Wilfred B. Doner, Advertising Executive, 75
LEAD: Wilfred B. Doner, founder of W. .B.
Doner &amp; Company, an advertising agency based in Detroit, died Thursday, apparently of a cerebral hemorrhage, at his home in Birmingham, Mich.
He was 75 years old.


A U.S.-Soviet Venture of a Gentler Kind
LEAD: Susan Eisenhower, granddaughter of the President who led the United States in the early years of the cold war, and Roald Z. Sagdeyev, a former leader of the Soviet space program, announced today that they will marry in Moscow next month.


CARTER REDUX
LEAD: Your article on Jimmy Carter brought back fond memories of May 30, 1984, when my sixth-grade students and I gathered around the conference telephone in our school library, in East Windsor, N.J., to speak to Mr.
Carter in his office in Georgia.
They questioned the former President on issues that ranged from the peace treaty negotiated between Israel and Egypt, to deploying nuclear missiles in Western Europe, to friendship between China and the United


NETS LOSE AGAIN
LEAD: John Long, Aleksandr Volkov and Kevin Willis scored 3 points each in a 9-0 run early in the fourth quarter, which lifted the Atlanta Hawks to a 105-96 victory over the Nets tonight.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Streetscapes column on Dec. 3 misidentified the religious services conducted in the Church of Sweden by the Swedish Seamen's Church.
They are Lutheran, not Baptist.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Profiles;   Key Figures in the Criminal Proceedings Against General Noriega
LEAD: Following are profiles of the key figures in the criminal proceedings against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega:
William M. Hoeveler, Presiding Judge


NONFICTION
LEAD:
EASTER ISLAND: The Mystery Solved.
By Thor Heyerdahl. (Random House, $24.95.) The explorer Thor Heyerdahl argues in ''Easter Island,'' as he has in such books as ''Kon-Tiki,'' that ancient peoples were more developed and mobile than modern thinking gives them credit for.
Easter Island, off South America in the Pacific Ocean, has long been a subject of scientific speculation for its large stone statues, its cultural history, its language and even its plant life, all of which are distinct from those of its island neighbors.


The Fine-Dining Market Isn't Enough
LEAD: Silverware makers are hoping that sterling flatware and serving pieces, so popular at the turn of the last century, will make a comeback by the turn of the next.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Azerbaijan;   Angry Soviet Crowd Attacks What Is Left Of Iran Border Posts
LEAD: Crowds began tearing down remaining border installations along a stretch of the Soviet frontier with Iran today, but troops patrolling the troubled region in Soviet Azerbaijan did not intervene.


In the Deep South Of the Soviet Fold, Complaints Rise In Many Tongues
LEAD: EVERY time a new protest group announces itself along one of the mountainous turnings of the Soviet border, a vast frontier of disparate passions, Kremlinologists rush to their gazetteers the way they used to study the hierarchal lineup atop Lenin's tomb for hints of impending upheaval.


END PAPER: Community College;   Every Student Is a Story
LEAD: DESPITE the bargain-basement image and second-rate reputation of the community college - the ''K Mart of Education'' is what some people call it - its inner life is often rich and complex.
In one row there may be a middle-aged professional actor, an ex-marine who studies Amish philosophy, a wife and husband who separated during the term, a young day-care worker who hugs abused children every day, a French emigrant and an intelligence officer who says he was left to die in an outpost in Vietnam because he refused to perform illegal activities.


Miss Proctor Engaged To Dr. Eliot N. Heller
LEAD: The engagement of Bridgette Lefaye Proctor to Dr.
Eliot Naphtali Heller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene Heller of Huntington, L.I., has been announced by the prospective bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
William Puller of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
A February wedding is planned.


Single-Handle Faucet Woes
LEAD: SINGLE-HANDLE kitchen and bathroom faucets often feature replaceable cartridge valves.
Signs that a cartridge faucet needs repair are water dripping from the spout, difficulty in adjusting the water temperature, hot water entering cold water outlets like toilet supply lines and inadequately heated water at some faucets.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: ''I hope it's not getting to be a pattern,'' said Sergei Kudrin after losing his last two games in the United States championship at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Long Beach, Calif.
In this tournament, which ended Dec. 3, the grandmaster from Stamford, Conn., had done the same thing as last year: After fighting to get himself into contention for a good place, he stumbled and failed.


Haiti Schedules 2 Elections For President and Assembly
LEAD: The Government has scheduled legislative elections for July and a presidential vote for October, state-run radio reported today.


JOE MONTANA: STATE OF THE ART
LEAD: Through the writings of Kahn, Angell and Giamatti, the dynamics of baseball have been elevated to the stuff of pure poetry (''Joe Montana: State of the Art,'' by Irvin Muchnick, Dec. 17).
Conversely, I have always believed a bias existed against football as fodder for good journalism and literature.


Co-op Troubles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arthur Kennedy, Actor, 75, Dies; Was Versatile in Supporting Roles
LEAD: Arthur Kennedy, who appeared in more than 70 Hollywood films and won a Tony Award on Broadway for creating the role of Biff in Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman,'' died of a brain tumor on Friday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford.
He was 75 years old.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bay Shore
$550,000
1 South Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; pool, cabana, 1 acre waterfront, boat slip; taxes $9,000.
Copiague
$110,000
309 Pleasantview Court
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.


Program Ties Rent Aid To Job Training
LEAD: AN experimental program intended to encourage welfare recipients who head single-parent families to obtain counseling, job training and employment has proved more successful than had originally been anticipated, state officials say.
As a result, plans are now being made to expand the program beyond the six New


Browns Hold Off Bills in Playoff Shootout
LEAD: The Browns and the Buffalo Bills, Great Lakes teams that thrive in cold weather favoring the run, shocked each other today by creating aerial havoc.


THE NORIEGA CASE: The Trial;   Noriega's Prosecutors Seek Deals And Documents to Fortify the Case
LEAD: Working on an indictment of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega that draws heavily on the testimony of convicted drug traffickers, Federal prosecutors are scrambling to make deals with co-defendants and searching for new witnesses and documentation to fortify a case that involves not only individual guilt or innocence but also the Bush Administration's political influence.


Single-Handle Faucet Woes
LEAD: SINGLE-HANDLE kitchen and bathroom faucets often feature replaceable cartridge valves.
Signs that a cartridge faucet needs repair are water dripping from the spout, difficulty in adjusting the water temperature, hot water entering cold water outlets like toilet supply lines and inadequately heated water at some faucets.


Coals to Newcastle?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Khmer Rouge Claim Assault on Major City
LEAD: Khmer Rouge guerrillas claimed today they had attacked Cambodia's second-largest city, setting it ablaze and forcing Government troops to call for reinforcements.


Co-op Troubles
LEAD: To the Editor:


WHAT'S DOING IN: Boston
LEAD: Boston in the wintertime has a nasty reputation.
The snow flies, the slush forms and the wind howls on a daily basis.
But the city is small and easy to negotiate, and the crowds are thin.
Cars should be left at home if possible; the city's public transportation is reliable and fairly inexpensive, and in many cases it is possible to walk unless the precipitation is truly blinding, which is rare.


To the Brink and Back in Real Estate
LEAD: Back in the late 1960's, most people saw nothing more than cattle and horses rambling over the rolling prairie northwest of Dallas.
Ben Carpenter saw the community of the future.
So, in 1969, he set about building it.


STREETSCAPES: The Christian Herter Home;   Another Transformation For a 'Modern French' House
LEAD: IT has always been one of the most striking buildings on Madison Avenue - an ancient limestone facade over a newer but still elegant iron storefront below.
Now the 1893 Christian Herter house at 819 Madison, at 68th Street, is in the middle of a renovation - at least of its 1933 storefront - and the results should be available for inspection this spring.


Campus Tours for the College-Bound
LEAD: IF the wind-chill factor is minus 7 degrees and it's Sunday, we must be inspecting the campus of the University of Massachusetts in Amherst.
I am a few years out of practice in looking at campuses, but it all came back recently when I made a round of New England colleges with a high school senior to test a new travel offering: college tours conducted by a Long Island company that takes a van or bus of young people between Friday afternoon and Sunday evening, providing driver, hotel rooms, chaperones, meals and transportation for $315 a person.


Add-ons Ease the Pain of Shrinking Sterling Sales
LEAD: With consumer demand for silver sinking, silversmiths in the 80's started to cast about for other products that could benefit from their venerable names.
To survive, several began to import and market stainless steel and to move into other tabletop products like crystal and china to fill out their lines and make their accounts more attractive to department store retailers.


The Menorah On the Town Green
LEAD: Regarding the Dec. 10 article ''Effort to Display Menorah on Town Green Finally Succeeds,'' it is unfortunate that the Teaneck Town Council has decided to follow the United States Supreme Court's lead in Allegheny County v.
Greater Pittsburgh A.C.L.U. and now allows a menorah on the municipal green.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Skiing
Schneider Wins in Return: Vreni Schneider, surprising even herself, won a World Cup slalom yesterday in her first race after undergoing surgery to her left knee a month ago.
The 25-year-old Swiss skier captured her second slalom this season - the 29th World Cup victory of her career -leading an


Separate Paths in the Bloc
LEAD: All six of the Soviet Union's East European allies are in the midst of momentous change, but it is taking place at different rates and in different ways.
Here is a status report.
POLAND: Coalition Government


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Classical


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Two-Star Fare, Earthy to Elegant, in Manhattan&lt;
LEAD: This is a listing of Manhattan restaurants that have been reviewed by Bryan Miller in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Cafe Luxembourg


New Lesson In Humanity For M.B.A.'s
LEAD: THE University of Chicago Graduate School of Business has long been known for producing captains of industry, not leaders of humanity.
Now the school is trying to redress the imbalance, using a new Leadership Education And Development program as the counterweight.


And Then This U.F.O. Landed . . .
LEAD: Any chance that Samuel Asbell had for a second term as Camden County prosecutor went up in gunsmoke last week.
The day after New Year's, the official called a news conference to announce that he had been ambushed by two gunmen and became involved in a running high-speed gun battle.
His car windows were shattered by machine gun fire, Mr.


Going to Pieces
LEAD: Designers have uncovered their plans for this year's bathing suits, and the news is revealing.
The two-piece is back, in plenty of new variations.


Waterways Council To Publish Newspaper
LEAD: HOPING to increase its membership, the State Council on Waterways plans to begin publishing a newspaper in February.


East Europe Joins the Market And Gets a Preview of the Pain
LEAD: THE Eastern European countries that have paid with blood and struggle for their freedom to depart from Communism may decide some day that this was the easy part.
Politics and economics remain as inseparable as the Marxists kept saying they were, and the new leaders in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Rumania and


Traditions Offer Shelter From the World
LEAD: AT Aunt Ruth's house there is always candy.
And every child who visits there eats tons of it.
Aunt Ruth believes children need candy.
Their mother believes they need fruit.
But she gives in, for the debate is a sham, and Aunt Ruth always wins.
The children know to head straight for the chocolate as soon as their mother grins.


A Shot at Indy 500
LEAD: For years, he was the only American-born driver in Formula One racing and one of the few to have never raced in the Indianapolis 500.
But in a shifting of gears, Eddie Cheever signed a multiyear contract Friday to drive an Indy-car for Chip Ganassi Racing.


Janice Krug Wed To James Ringel
LEAD: Janice Lynn Krug and James Michael Ringel were married last evening at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I., by Rabbis Nathaniel Steinberg and Harry Danziger.
Mrs.
Ringel is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Krug of Dix Hills, L.I.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil E. Ringel of Memphis.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: MOST Americans say they would personally pay an additional $200 a year in taxes to improve public education.
Three-quarters of the 1,234 adults surveyed by the Gallup Poll said Federal spending on programs to improve public education should be increased.
The poll found that the public supported increased spending on education even when the condition of higher taxes was added.


A CONDUCTOR COMMITTED TO NEW MUSIC - AND OLD
LEAD: For most New York concert-goers, the name Dennis Russell Davies will evoke thoughts of new music, and new American music in particular.
As co-founder and principal conductor of the American Composers Orchestra - which he will lead this afternoon at Carnegie Hall - and as the recently appointed music director of the Brooklyn Academy of Music and its Next Wave Festival, Mr.


Why Those Bearskins in 'Le Sacre du Printemps'?
LEAD: The relevance that the past always holds for the present comes into focus in an unusual way this week.
On Friday evening at 9, the Joffrey Ballet's acclaimed reconstruction of Vaslav Nijinsky's 1913 choreography for ''Le Sacre du Printemps'' will be televised for the first time, as part of the Dance in America/Great Performances series on the Public Broadcasting Service.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   One-Dish Fish, Mediterranean Style
LEAD: Throughout the Mediterranean region there is some version of the accompanying fish dish with potatoes and tomatoes.
Most take much more time, usually calling for an initial cooking step, followed by baking.


Seasonal Delight: Holiday Cards
LEAD: I was sorry to read about your card anxiety, Elex Ingersoll (Opinion, Dec. 17), since I anticipate this seasonal occupation.
It is such fun!
Usually, I write notes along with the card, as well as receive a few from numerous friends and relatives who incidentally, have escaped me in these mobile times.


Miss Murphy Is Fiancee of Reid Leslie
LEAD: The engagement of Kristina Lynn Murphy and Reid Alan Leslie has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Donald Bruce Murphy of New York and Mrs.
Victor John Piccininno Jr. of Madison, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Mr.
Leslie is a son of Clark Leslie of Basking Ridge, N.J., and Marian V.


British Bullies Toppled From Pulpit
LEAD: PLAYGROUND bullies in Britain may be learning a lesson or two these days, thanks to an experimental program that encourages schools to set up ''bully courts.''


Review/Dance;   Isadora Duncan Repertory From Her Soviet Period
LEAD: In 1921, Isadora Duncan, the great pioneer of American modern dance, went to teach and choreograph in the Soviet Union.
Excited by the social changes she saw, she created several dances to Soviet workers' songs.
Five rarely revived ones were offered Friday night at Eden's Expressway in a program called ''From the Repertory of Isadora Duncan,'' and the stagings by Julia Levien and Hortense Kooluris proved fascinating.


IN THE TRENCHES OF THE DRUG WARS
LEAD: The United States' ''war on drugs'' was first declared by President Richard Nixon in the early 1970's.
The current drug crisis provides ample proof that this particular war has been a colossal failure.
The reasons range from obscene profits and widespread corruption to national interests and geopolitical maneuverings.


Parent Urges Yankee Rebirth
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


DODGERS AND DUNGAREES
LEAD:
BROOKLYN BOY
By Alan Lelchuk.
298 pp. New York:
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. $19.95.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Bulgaria;   Thousands of Slavs, Defying Sofia, Continue Anti-Turkish Protests
LEAD: Thousands of people from Bulgaria's Slavic majority defied the Government and kept up protests today in at least four cities to try to overturn new laws granting religious and cultural freedom to ethnic Turks.


THE APES AS WE WANT TO SEE THEM
LEAD:
PRIMATE VISIONS
Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of Modern Science.
By Donna Haraway.
Illustrated. 486 pp. New York:
Routledge. $35.


Out of Patience
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Ellen Neuwald Sherman, Literary Agent, 74
LEAD: Ellen Neuwald Sherman, a literary agent, died of lung cancer Tuesday at her home in Laguna Hills, Calif.
She was 74 years old.


2 KOREAN PARTIES SEEK AN ALLIANCE
LEAD: Two of the country's three opposition parties announced today that they would seek an alliance to prepare for local elections this year.


Some RUnaways Find A Place to Call Home
LEAD: IT may not be exactly home, but for some of the county's homeless and runaway teen-agers, it is a lot better than being out on the street at this time of year.


ARKADY RENKO GOES TO MUNICH
LEAD: IN AN UNLIT PARKING LOT, JUST OFF the road leading north out of Munich, the prostitutes are in their jeeps.
It's about 10 P.M., and there are maybe two dozen vehicles in the lot, some of them dark, with curtains drawn around the side and back windows.
In the others, the cab lights are on so the men who are walking or cruising by in their own cars can get a good look at the girls inside.


Hannah Terhune Engaged
LEAD: Hannah Marion Terhune, an associate in the law firm of Pitney, Hardin, Kipp &amp; Szuch in Morristown, N.J., and Second Lieut.
Harlan A. Carvey, U.S.M.C., are planning an April wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Terhune of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced.
Ms.
Terhune graduated from American University and the George Mason University School of Law.


Nan Silver, Editor, to Wed Arthur Katz, Lawyer
LEAD: The engagement of Nan Clarissa Silver to Arthur Shaye Katz, the son of Flora Dae Katz of Creve Coeur, Mo., and Albert M. Katz of Brentwood, Mo., has been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Silver of Woodmere, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.


Review/Music;   Rock Group From Poland
LEAD: Perfect, a rock band that has drawn stadium-size audiences to rock concerts in its native Poland, made its New York debut Thursday at CBGB.
In Poland, Perfect has been a legendary dissident band - formed in 1979, disbanded under pressure in 1983, reunited in 1987 with the blessing of Solidarity.
Here, playing a short set (only the songs that they have translated into English), Perfect was an aggressive, accomplished band whose songs suggested that in rock, Poland is a


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
12 Italian Cities Are Girding For World Cup


Romance That Henry James Would Approve Of
LEAD: Perhaps no dinners have ever sparkled as brilliantly as the annual Waterloo banquets held by the first Duke of Wellington at Apsley House, on the anniversary of the battle.
Not only were there 69 candles burning in various silver-gilt candelabra down the center of the table - surrounded by formations of silver dancing nymphs - but the whole extravaganza, known as the Portuguese service, was set off on the gleaming surface of a silver-gilt plateau 26 feet long.


THE LONE RANGER OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
LEAD:
SCHRODINGER
Life and Thought.
By Walter Moore.
Illustrated. 513 pp. New York:
Cambridge University Press. $39.50.


Question Of the Week;   How Should N.C.A.A. Football Champions Be Decided?
LEAD: Create a playoff system beginning sometime in early- to mid-December, culminating in a championship bowl on that boring late January weekend between the end of the pro season and the Super Bowl.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 7, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
11
THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen
King. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) Continuing the horror
story begun in ''The Gunslinger.''
2
8
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $5.95.) The struggle between the Spanish
Army and Basque separatists.


A Black Theater Group Faces New Hurdles
LEAD: Twenty-three years ago, black American drama was not yet a part of the country's cultural milieu.
Largely unwelcome on Broadway, black playwrights had their work confined mainly to a few Off Broadway and Harlem-based theaters.
When the Negro Ensemble Company opened in Greenwich Village in 1967 - and in that inaugural year staged plays by Richard Wright and Wole Soyinka - it ushered black drama into the mainstream, helping to alter the nation's cultural landscape.


Course Junkies
LEAD: EVERYONE knows that education is broadening, stimulating, the key to a better job and expensive.
Now add ''habit-forming'' to the list.


Shopping Isn't Fun For Retailers Either
LEAD: I can certainly appreciate Mr.
Fluhrer's complaint about the somewhat dubious joys of shopping during the holiday season [''Why Shopping in Department Stores Is No Fun,'' Opinion, Dec. 17] .
It is true that though we in the retail profession may deck the halls and staff the malls (as best we can in a tight labor market), shopping may not be the exhilarating experience one would wish for.


Diana Tasco Is Wed to John B. Meyer
LEAD: Diana Lee Tasco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Tasco of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Barry Meyer, the son of Beverly Barry Meyer of New York and John DeBard Meyer of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
James P. Swiader performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


Assuaging Children's Fear of Surgery
LEAD: WHEN 10-year-old Amanda Bagatta of Smithtown was wheeled into the operating room for surgery to remove her tonsils and adenoids, her father went along with her, holding her hand along the way.
And he stayed in the operating room until the anesthetic had taken effect.


Textbook Gold
LEAD: HOLD THE OLD and the new textbooks in your hands and the difference is startling.


Another Bowl to Miami
LEAD: The University of Miami will receive tangible evidence - a large, ornate silver bowl named after Gen.
Douglas MacArthur - to go along with its selection in the polls as the nation's No. 1 college football team.


Caroline Neville Weds James Freney
LEAD: Caroline Livingston Neville and James Raymond Freney were married yesterday at St.
Edward Roman Catholic Church in Palm Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
Gerald A. Hughes performed the ceremony.


Bed and Breakfast
LEAD: To the Editor: Interest in bed and breakfast establishments has been spurred by articles and photographs in slick magazines and newspapers.
Quite naturally, the most lavishly decorated rooms receive special treatment and have led the public to expect a great deal.
I write as the owner of a reservation service organization on Cape Cod to acquaint your readers with the definitions of bed and breakfast in Massachusetts as they appear in House Bill 1064 signed by the Governor on


TOO INTIMATE WITH THE ATOM
LEAD:
GRAND OBSESSION
Madame Curie and Her World.
By Rosalynd Pflaum.
Illustrated. 496 pp. New York:.
Doubleday. $22.50.


Baseball Notebook;   Yanks Champs! In 80's Payroll, That Is
LEAD: If there ever was any doubt that George Steinbrenner is the biggest spender in baseball, doubt it no longer.
The Yankees' owner spent so much more money on players in the 1980's than anyone else that the Players Association should erect a monument to him at Yankee Stadium in the form of a giant, 24-carat gold dollar sign.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on Nov. 26 about airline-ticket prepay charges referred incompletely to their use.
The $25 charge, for reserving seats in advance but picking up tickets at the airport, is imposed by some airlines on passengers who reserve directly with them, not just those who reserve through travel agents.


Sensory Overload
LEAD: LIKE the Chimera of Greek mythology, multimedia - a combination of techniques, hardware, software and applications - is a fabulous creature comprising elements of several familiar beasts.
It encompasses computers, television, textbooks, libraries, overhead projectors and blackboards.
As electronic technology makes multimedia more sophisticated, it has become - depending on whom you ask - either the most revolutionary educational technology since the textbook, or a marketing buzzword concocted by computer makers to sell more machines.


Axie Gibbons Engaged to William E. Sutcliffe 3d
LEAD: The engagement of Anne Thomas Gibbons to William Edward Sutcliffe 3d has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Anne T. Gibbons of Fairfield, Conn., and Maxfield S. Gibbons of Greenwich, Conn.
Mr.
Sutcliffe is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sutcliffe Jr. of North Redington Beach, Fla.
A 1990 wedding is planned.


Health Costs Worry Hospitals and Business
LEAD: DESPITE the rising cost of employee health insurance that businesses in the county have had to pay in recent years, hospitals are reporting increasing financial losses and warning that quality health care is being jeopardized.


On Language;   Trick or Treaty?
LEAD: WE ALL REMEMBER the names of old battles and wars, but few of us are attuned to the nomenclature of peacemaking. ''Faraway Places With Strange-Sounding Names,'' as the song had it, form the basis of much of the language of treatying.
Worldly economists and geopolitical scientists - the sort of people who begin their questions with given and begin their answers with absent - like to stud their argot with pact-impact.


THE NORIEGA CASE: Panama City;   New Talk, New Photos, New Army (Or, Adjusting to Life After Noriega)
LEAD: With a collective click of their heels, hundreds of soldiers from Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's disbanded army snapped smartly to attention today as their civilian President, Guillermo Endara, walked onto the grounds of the new Panamanian police force.


Artful Science
LEAD: IN HIS two published volumes of poetry, Roald Hoffman, a Nobel Prize-winning chemist and the John A. Newman professor of physical science at Cornell University, has struggled to unite the worlds of science and art, of reason and instinct.


Savory Fried Bread Of New Mexico
LEAD: WHETHER the visitor to New Mexico samples Spanish-American or American Indian fare, some form of simple native bread is likely to be offered with the meal.
The most ubiquitous forms are Indian fry bread, served at Indian pueblos or cultural centers, and sopaipillas - the puffed pillowlike breads served in most of the Spanish-American cafes and


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Discard the old catalogues as the new ones arrive.
If the seed lists of plant societies have arrived, do not hesitate to check them over and mail orders promptly.
Start to plan next year's garden.
Be sure gift plants are kept out of drafts and cool; too much sunlight and overwatering will shorten their lasting time.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Japan;   Tokyo Broadens Plan to Aid A New Poland and Hungary
LEAD: In a signal of Japan's eagerness to take part in the emerging new order in Europe, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu plans next week to announce a package of more than $1 billion in loans and guarantees for Poland and Hungary, Japanese officials said today.


Charlotte Fans Should Study Amazing Mets
LEAD: They are booing the home team in Charlotte.
Can you believe it?
Until last year, they didn't even have a home team.
Now they are yowling at it.


The Russians Are Coming, in Droves
LEAD: As political developments seem to bring surprises every day in the Soviet Union, a surprising torrent of music from that country has been pouring our way on recordings.
Some of it, by Soviet artists, is attributable to a confusing tangle of international distribution agreements that followed the recent split-up of the Soviet Melodiya label and Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga, the Soviet export company that formerly handled the label and still owns several hundred titles from the Melodiya catalogue.


Susan L. Ayanian and Dr. Daniel Pereles to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Zaven Ayanian of Matawan, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Lynn Ayanian, to Dr.
Daniel Joseph Pereles, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Pereles of Potomac, Md.
A May wedding is planned.


Failures Offer Lessons on Winning
LEAD: FAILURE - a word fraught with emotion, easily spoken in daily conversation, but feared by the person to whom it is applied.
Error, mistake, wrong, defeat, loss, all words that when directed at us evoke embarrassment and pain.
We are trained and culturally conditioned to want to succeed, to be the best, to win.


Uprooted by Blast, Gramercy Park Residents Return Home, to New Horrors
LEAD: Patti McCarthy returned home to Gramercy Park yesterday for the first time since she and others were forced out by a steam-pipe explosion last summer and found an elderly neighbor sobbing in the lobby, heartbroken by the condition of her apartment.
So Miss McCarthy asked another neighbor to go with her into her own apartment for support.


Prospects;   Housing Bounces Back
LEAD: Sales of new homes rose by 9.6 percent in November, the biggest jump in four months, according to the Commerce Department last week.
The Northeast and Middle West posted the strongest gains.
After months of soft prices and slow sales, do the November figures signal an end to the housing slump?
Four experts give their views.


Tour Grades From a Student
LEAD: The success of the College Preview Tour depends on the individual tour leader at each university.
The tour guide at Tufts was so enthusiastic about his school that he made me wonder why I had not previously considered it.
However, the guide at UConn gave the distinct impression that four years there could the worst four years of your life.


Our Suburban Children Could Learn Much From the Immigrants Among Us
LEAD: THIS new year is the 100th since the last of my ancestors left Eastern Europe to settle in Connecticut. 1990 is therefore a coming of age for my family, and I've been thinking how fitting it is that our anniversary falls during one the largest periods of immigration in recent American history.
These days, however, the immigrants often come from other directions: South America, the Caribbean and Asia.


Illusion and Tragedy Coexist After a Couple Dies
LEAD: The illusion of the perfect couple, secure in their jobs and striving for the next rung on the social ladder, persists here, despite the grotesque turn the story of Carol and Charles Stuart took this week.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING


Cool Reception for Devils' Latest Import
LEAD: While Moscow Dynamo was on the ice on Thursday preparing for tonight's exhibition game against the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, Aleksei Kasatonov was alone outside the Devils' dressing room, using a saw to take an inch or two off the edge of his stick for his National Hockey League debut.


CONSUMER RATES
LEAD:
$
Last
Prior
Year
In percent
Week
Week
Ago
Tax-Exempt Bonds
7.28
7.25
7.78
Bond Buyer 20-Bond Index
Money Market Funds
8.39
8.19
8.75
Donoghue's Money Fund 7-Day Compound Yield
Bank Money Market Accounts
6.35
6.35
6.22
Bank Rate Monitor


MOSCOW PROMISES TO BACK RUMANIA IN ITS NEW POLITICS
LEAD: Hailing the Rumanian revolution that ousted President Nicolae Ceausescu, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union said today that he found the new atmosphere here ''absolutely purifying'' and pledged Moscow's support for any political system Rumanians chose.


Flashback: A Video Tour Of the 80's
LEAD: INSERT videotape ''Flashback of the 1980's'' into the skull, between the eyes and the brain.
Press play.


Priest Who Imposed Dress Code Is Removed
LEAD: A Roman Catholic priest who denied communion to worshipers who violated his dress code has been asked to leave his Dayton parish, a spokeswoman for the Archdiocese of Cincinnati said Friday.


Environmental Groups Work With Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
Mount Kilimanjaro


FICTION
LEAD:
ALL ABOUT WOMEN.
By Andrew M. Greeley. (Tom Doherty/Tor, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $12.95.) As he did with his 1986 novel ''Patience of a Saint,'' the Rev.
Andrew M. Greeley affixes an introductory note to this collection, explaining that its title is less audacious than it sounds.
He does not, he says, ''purport to know 'all about women.


FICTION
LEAD:
BOY, GIRL, BOY, GIRL.
By David Michaelis. (Bantam, Paper, $7.95.) Sam Simon is one of the first boys to enroll in Miss Little's School, a private all-girl academy.
The setting of this first novel is Concord, Mass., the time 1971 - and the prospects for adventure rich.
Which is not to say that Sam and his older brother, Murray, prosper in their new milieu.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption with the Stage View column on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today refers incorrectly in some copies to ''The Art of Success.'' The New York production is that of the Manhattan Theater Club.


Sandra E. Laude and Herman Israel, Students, Are Married in Washington
LEAD: Sandra Elizabeth Laude and Herman Allen Israel were married last night at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington by Rabbi Harold White.
The bride is the daughter of Lawrence Laude of Pittsburgh and Janet Laude of Bloomington, Ind.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Israel of Washington and Royal Oak,


This Is Ridiculous
LEAD: When I was a correspondent for The New York Times in Asia and Eastern Europe, traveling Americans often found their way to my office to read the paper.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: East Germany;   Berlin Communist Urges Troop Cuts
LEAD: The head of East Germany's Communist Party proposed today that all NATO and Warsaw Pact forces quit both Germanys within a decade, adding spice to an already bitter political struggle shaping in East Germany.


ANTHOLOGIES
LEAD:
SUDDEN FICTION INTERNATIONAL: Sixty Short-Short Stories.
Edited by Robert Shapard and James Thomas. (Norton, Cloth, $22.95; Paper, $10.95.) The short-story writer Charles Baxter's introduction to ''Sudden Fiction International'' is almost enough to put one off the short-short stories that follow.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page contents listing in the Travel section today omits the page number in some copies for an article about French housewares and carries an incorrect number for an article about events in Boston.
The housewares article appears on page 6, the Boston report on page 10.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
MARGARET OF THE IMPERFECTIONS, by Lynda Sexson. (Persea, $9.95.) In one of these stories about the tradeoffs people make between the hard edges of reality and their own more malleable inner lives, a woman is going crazy - or she might be witnessing a visitation from an angel.
In 1988 our reviewer, Walter Wangerin Jr., said, ''Ms.


Defense Cuts Top Delegation's Agenda
LEAD: WEATHERING cuts in defense spending, reducing pollution in Long Island Sound and passing child care legislation for working families top the state's Congressional agenda for 1990.


Mutual Funds Turn to the Hard Sell
LEAD: Time was when the managers of the Janus Capital mutual fund group paid scant attention to their customers.
Cash-flow multiples and moving averages concerned them far more.
But faced with persistent redemptions, Janus concluded in 1987 that performance alone wasn't enough.
The marketing specialists came in, the advertising budget went up, and in 1989 the company's accounts doubled.


Broncos Aim to Stop Steelers' Momentum
LEAD: As the Denver Broncos head into the playoffs and take aim on a possible third Super Bowl appearance in the last four years, Coach Dan Reeves can take comfort in a rock-solid defense and productive running game, elements that generally win championships.
But he is not a satisfied coach.
Reeves is feeling obvious discomfort about his team's flaccid finish during the regular season.


HEIDEGGER FOR FUN AND PROFIT
LEAD: Martin Heidegger's centenary year has come and gone, and just as well.
It came at a bad time.
In Berkeley, New Haven, Moscow, Chicago, Paris and Marburg (and other places besides), conferences and parties have been celebrating the philosopher's birth.
Two or three years ago, when these jamborees were planned, it was still possible for most people to write off Heidegger's flirtation with Nazism as merely that - a foolish minor entanglement, which Hannah Arendt, who was briefly his lover, could generously attribute ''partly to the delusion of genius, partly to desperation.


THE ULTIMATE DECISION
LEAD: Andrew H. Malcolm's article ''The Ultimate Decision'' (Dec. 3) points out the critical need to educate and prepare the public for the day when each of us may stand in his shoes.


A Late Goal Wins As St. Louis Rallies
LEAD: Mike Richter, who had been both humbled and heroic in the most important game of his season, extended his left pad as far as he could, stretched out his glove as far as it would go.


Childhood Music Lessons That Put the Stress on Fun
LEAD: DANIEL PARRELLA of Pawcatuck loves music, from Mozart to the Rolling Stones.
So when he turned 4 last fall, his parents signed him up for Kindermusik, a program of music instruction for children 4 to 7.


Jennifer Hyams to Marry
LEAD: A March wedding is planned by Jennifer M. Hyams and Scott B. Prizer, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Ira L. Hyams of Jericho, L.I., have announced.
Ms.
Hyams, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
She is an assistant treasurer at Republic National Bank in Brooklyn.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have read about the problem that some people have with condensation forming between the two panes of glass in double-pane windows, but my problem is different.
My apartment has windows of this type, but with a metal frame.
When outside temperatures drop below freezing, condensation forms on the metal and then freezes to form a coat of ice on the inside.


PATIENT OVERFLOW ALARMS HOSPITALS
LEAD: Health-care experts, unable to identify any single cause for the record crush of emergency-room visits in New York City last week, say the sudden accumulation of patients in hospital corridors is an ominous sign of the public-health system's flagging ability to meet the city's needs.


Knicks Are Beaten by Pistons
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons, determined to keep their position as National Basketball Association champions, wanted to deliver a message to the Knicks tonight.
And after 48 minutes of pulsating basketball, the Pistons did indeed have the last word.


Small Turnout at White Supremacist Rally in Atlanta


THE YEAR OF THE BLUE DEVIL
LEAD:
FOREVER'S TEAM
By John Feinstein.
Illustrated. 375 pp. New York: Villard Books. $18.95.


Being Left Out On a Special Day
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Revolution Reshapes Movies
LEAD: Nothing that happened in the 1980's compares to the Videocassette Revolution, sometimes known as the VCR, a term also used to designate the appliance on which cassettes are played.
The VCR is turning the business of movies upside down and even affecting the kinds of movies we see.
Movies will never be the same again.


Wonderland II
LEAD: ELIZABETH Willse is going to a fair, but whom will she go with, and what will she wear?


Schools Renovating Neglected Buildings
LEAD: MANY of the county's aging schools are currently involved in ambitious renovations.
After years of deferred maintenance and austerity budgets, county school districts are confronting leaky roofs, sinking foundations and cranky boilers.


Food;   Celtic Cuisine
LEAD: AT MY FIRST WHIFF OF THE STEAMING GOLDENJU bowl of chowder thick with mussels, scallops ringed by coral roe, salmon and sole, I knew this was not the Ireland of old.
That was a place I'd visited many times for the sound of Gaelic, for warm folk and cold Guinness, but never for food.
A smoking peat fire, the slosh of fishermen's boots, a roaring laugh in Boluisce's Seafood Bar at Spiddal - all this was as familiar as the brine of wild Galway oysters.


Judith A. Wilner to Marry Donald Lawrence in May
LEAD: A May wedding is planned by Judith Anne Wilner, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at New York University, and Donald Paul Lawrence, a third-year student at the Albert Einstein School of Medicine.
Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Wilner of Long Island City, Queens, made the announcement of their daughter's engagement to the son of Mr.


Miss Cotler Plans Wedding in April
LEAD: The engagement of Rebecca Lynn Cotler to Rodney Andrew Nenner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Nenner of Great Neck, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie B. Cotler of New York and Lawrence, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.


Reviews/Music;   Playing Bowls of Water: An Indian Tradition
LEAD: The idea of filling bowls of different sizes with varying amounts of water so that each bowl produces a different pitch when struck, is both basic and ancient.
It is also fairly universal: makeshift instruments of this sort have appeared in many cultures, although few serious traditions of performance on such instruments have come down through the centuries.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The awful and wonderful events in Rumania over the past three weeks bring to mind a forgotten mini-collection that dates back to the days just after World War II.
The wreckage that was Rumania had just come under Soviet Communist domination, when Rumanian stamps became the subject of an obscure decree.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   Losing the Race
LEAD: THE CHORUS of alarms over the deterioration of science education in American colleges has reached a crescendo.
A familiar air of crisis prevailed when the physical sciences faculty gathered for a special convocation at the University of California at Los Angeles last month to hear the Dean of Physical Sciences, Clarence Hall Jr., warn: ''Unless there is a revolution in the way we teach and the way we help students learn, it is obvious that the nation's economic standards will follow those of the test scores and the number of majors in math and physical science.


Anyone Can Use A Good Laugh
LEAD: As a dental hygienist with almost 30 years of experience dealing with both patients and my D.D.S. colleagues, I have often dealt with the senses of humor of both.
Dentists lose hands down when it comes to laughing at themselves, as demonstrated by the anguished letters of protest over Barbara Klaus's column of Dec.


Rodgers and Bird Out
LEAD: As a result of separate incidents in a game the previous night, neither the head coach nor the chief player traveled with the Boston Celtics to Landover, Md., yesterday for their game last night against the Washington Bullets, which the Celtics won.
Coach Jimmy Rodgers was missing because he was suspended without pay for one game by the National Basketball Association after he bumped a referee during an argument Friday night.


Martin Details Found Excessive
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE EPIDEMIC: DID THE PRESS CRY WOLF?
LEAD:
THE MYTH OF HETEROSEXUAL AIDS
By Michael Fumento.
411 pp. New York:
A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $22.95.


Can the Star of Miami Save New York City's Schools?
LEAD: THE eyes of the nation are upon Joseph A. Fernandez, who last week took over as Chancellor of the New York City school system.


Have A Fight Before You Marry
LEAD: ONLY recently have I realized that for years I have been giving friends and relatives the wrong advice.
I don't know why it has taken me so long to come to the truth.
Maybe seeing Woody Allen's ''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' made me see the light.


Campanella Is Ailing
LEAD: The former Brooklyn Dodger catcher Roy Campanella was listed in serious condition yesterday at the Northridge (Calif.) Hospital, where he was being treated for pneumonia, which developed after he was admitted to the hospital on Dec. 30 suffering from a cold.


Lauren D. Putter Plans To Wed A.W. Menzin
LEAD: May wedding plans have been announced for Dr.
Lauren Dee Putter, a clinical psychologist in Philadelphia, and Dr.
Andrew William Menzin, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.


Reform by High-Tech
LEAD: LAST OCT. 18, the morning after the California earthquake, Gerry Erickson, the librarian of the Cougar Valley Elementary School in Silverdale, Wash., discovered that one of her parent volunteers had experienced several earthquakes in Guatemala.


In 'Minor' College Sports, Big Pressure
LEAD: College presidents and athletic directors gathering today in Dallas for the 84th National Collegiate Athletic Association convention will once again wrestle with the excesses of big-time basketball and football.


In Jazz, Two Steps Forward, One Step Back
LEAD: Jazz, through much of its history, has been seen by critics, fans and musicians as sticking close to a simple progression, where one stylistic innovation follows another.
And while the meaning of the change can be implied from as many critical angles as can be found - from Marxist or social criticism to psychoanalytical to formalist - the idea of a predominant style remains.


Fashion;   Resort Wear: Beyond the Beach
LEAD: Although automobile sales and other parts of the economy are sluggish, fashion retailers are cheered by the response to resort fashions that began arriving in the stores last month.


Review/Music;   'The Princess as Unorthodox Bride': Chinese Tradition in a Modern Opera
LEAD: Since the landmark visit of the Peking Opera to the Metropolitan Opera House 10 years ago, smaller Chinese companies have appeared in New York with some regularity.
When the Guangdong Yue Troupe played at the Beacon Theater in 1982, one of its lead performers was the actress Hong Xiannu, whose daughter, Hong


Get With The Program
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   When the Next Snowstorm Hits, Here's Where to Go With Your Sled
LEAD: With every snowfall, New York City's parks are taken over by an army of sledders who swarm the hills, large and small.
It is one of the less-heralded pleasures of city life; when snow crunches under the blades of your Flexible Flyer, the hustle and bustle of New York can seem very far away.


Portrait Of the Artist As Elderly
LEAD: AN 87-year-old woman once told Nola Denslow: ''They try to keep us alive so long, and then they don't know what to do with us when they succeed.''


Bagging Noriega Is Not the Same as Winning the Drug War
LEAD: THE transformation of Manuel Antonio Noriega from invincible leader of Panama and foreign nemesis to manacled criminal defendant in Miami buoyed the American psyche.
It was a political triumph for President Bush.


Buildup to a Revolution
LEAD: THE PHOTOGRAPH ABOVE, TAKen in Bucharest before the overthrow of the Rumanian Government, illustrates a work in progress that will now likely never be completed.
The Victory of Socialism Boulevard, a cruelly ironic name in the light of the popular uprising, is a three-mile stretch of largely unfinished apartment buildings and stores cutting through the heart of the city and leading to the Palace of the


2 'Old Timers' Make Music Together
LEAD: THREE years ago, Beveridge Webster, a world-famous pianist, and Herbert Baumel, a violinist whose career spans symphony orchestras and Broadway musicals, started to make music together.


DATA UPDATE: January 7, 1990
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Oct.89
Oct. 88
Change
Starts
1,428
1,532
-6.7%
Completions
1,312
1,516
-13.4%
Sales
648
718
-9.7%
*4(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Illinois and Kentucky at Odds Over a Disputed River Border
LEAD: A dispute between Illinois and Kentucky over a stretch of the Ohio River has lawyers researching sand, riverboats and fishing licenses.


In Marketing, It's Bracketing Brides and the Over-45 Set
LEAD: The manufacture of sterling flatware is among the oldest industries in the nation.
None of the leading silversmiths is less than a century old, and some trace their origins to before the American Revolution.
From one generation to the next, these companies had always considered their market to be forever green.


Turning Without Telling
LEAD: THE major automobile companies can easily reduce the cost of their cars by simply removing all directional signals.
No one uses them anyway.


Israeli Denies He Served as Noriega Adviser
LEAD: The man identified by American officials as a top aide to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega appeared on Israeli television tonight to deny that he had served as security adviser to the fallen Panamanian dictator.


Subtracting Insult From Injury
LEAD: Crew members of the munitions train that ran over S. Brian Willson in 1987 insisted that they, too, had been traumatized by the incident.
So while Mr.
Willson, whose legs were severed as he sat on the tracks to protest American arms shipments to Central America, was suing the Government, the train's crew was suing Mr.


Kean Reflects On Era
LEAD: GOV.
THOMAS H. KEAN became New Jersey's most familiar chief executive during his eight years in office.


Taxi Fares Increase Today
LEAD: Taxi fares in New York City are increasing today.
The drop charge is rising to $1.50 from $1.15 and the rest of the ride is increasing to $1.25 a mile from $1.20.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: THE United Nations has proclaimed 1990 International Literacy Year.
A fourth of the world's adults are illiterate, but the problem is not confined to developing nations.
Thirteen percent of Americans 20 years old and older are considered functionally illiterate.
The basic skills of functional illiterates do not reach beyond the fourth grade.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have read about the problem that some people have with condensation forming between the two panes of glass in double-pane windows, but my problem is different.
My apartment has windows of this type, but with a metal frame.
When outside temperatures drop below freezing, condensation forms on the metal and then freezes to form a coat of ice on the inside.


Wielding Names Like Weapons
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Releases Disaster Aid
LEAD: President Bush has authorized the release of $184.6 million in disaster aid to help with the recovery from Hurricane Hugo, which struck the South in September, and the earthquake in California in October.


Immigration Remains a Great U.S. Resource
LEAD: To the Editor:


Golden Gate, Silver Screen
LEAD: IT'S that film noir city in ''The Maltese Falcon'' (1941), in which a world-weary Bogart shadows slippery criminals and a double-crossing dame through thick fog.
It's that boozing, brawling Barbary Coast of ''San Francisco'' (1936), where the egotistical cad Clark Gable is finally humbled by a street-splitting, tower-toppling earthquake.


Help! My S.&amp;L.'s in Trouble
LEAD: It's a depositor's worst nightmare come true.
That friendly savings and loan association down the street, which had been paying some of the highest rates in town, is suddenly declared insolvent.
What is a person to do?
Below are answers to some commonly asked questions.
Q. Who's in charge?


Single-Handle Faucet Woes
LEAD: SINGLE-HANDLE kitchen and bathroom faucets often feature replaceable cartridge valves.
Signs that a cartridge faucet needs repair are water dripping from the spout, difficulty in adjusting the water temperature, hot water entering cold water outlets like toilet supply lines and inadequately heated water at some faucets.


Shelley B. Weinstock Engaged to Paul V. Bartick
LEAD: Dr. Shelley Beth Weinstock and Paul Vincent Bartick plan to marry in March.


Phantom Of the Oilers
LEAD: Someone might have to leave tickets for Jerry Glanville now.


On a Slide
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: 'New England Vernacular'
LEAD: The Beekman Estate, a private investment and development company in Manhattan, is seeking to add a new building to a shopping center it bought a year ago in Westport, Conn.
The 6,200- square-foot addition to the Jennings Plaza shopping center, at 1045 Boston Post Road Extended, would be finished in about a year if expected approval is given later this month by the Westport Planning and Zoning


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: China;   In Reaction to Rumania, A Hardening in Beijing
LEAD: Shocked at the upheavals in Rumania, the Chinese Government is reacting by taking an even harder line politically and adopting a tougher posture diplomatically, Chinese officials and foreign diplomats say.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bedford, N.Y.
$375,000
13 Woodland Road
5-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-baths, 24-year-old raised ranch; family room, office, eat-in kitchen, 2 acres; taxes $4,778.
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
$380,000
154 Sleepy Hollow Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 49-year-old Cape Cod; 2 fireplaces, country kitchen, den, 2-car garage, 1.33 acres; taxes $7,927.


CARTER REDUX
LEAD: The article on Jimmy Carter's new career was accompanied by brief biographies of other Presidents who had active public careers after their White House years.
You stated that John Quincy Adams was the only former President to serve in Congress.
However, Andrew Johnson was elected to the United States Senate from Tennessee in 1875, six years after his Presidential term ended.


Villanova Surprises Syracuse at Dome
LEAD: Greg Woodard scored a career-high 27 points tonight as Villanova took advantage of another poor shooting night by Syracuse and sent the Orangemen to their first loss of the season, 93-74.
The loss ended Syracuse's home winning streak at 15.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended Dec. 23
MANHATTAN
Battery Park City
$425,000
380 Rector Place
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 952-sq.-ft. condo in a 3-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, large kitchen, terrace, health club, pool, harbor view; common charge $778, 100% tax-abated (Broker: D.J.


Archie Bunker's South African Cousin Has TV Debut
LEAD: The plot would seem familiar to American television viewers: an amiable white bigot in a working-class neighborhood finds his complacent prejudices under assault when a family of color moves in next door.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
INVISIBLE MATTER AND THE FATE OF THE UNIVERSE.
By Barry Parker. (Plenum, $23.50.) Barry Parker explores what may be the ultimate mystery in ''Invisible Matter and the Fate of the Universe,'' combining history, astronomy, cosmology and physics.
Mr.
Parker, a professor of physics and astronomy at Idaho State University, traces a line of research from the first faint questions about our own galaxy's missing mass in 1932 to those questions' growth into a major concern for thousands of astronomers worldwide.


Forecasting Tools for the Novice
LEAD: Every business depends on forecasting, whether its executives know it or not.
How many new franchise stores should we open in 1990?
Will we have enough cash on hand in November to pay expenses?
Will our current staff be adequate to meet manufacturing demand in 1992?
When do we need to reorder widgets?


Employees of Exxon Receive Subpoenas In Heating-Oil Spill
LEAD: A state grand jury has issued subpoenas to about a half dozen Exxon Corporation employees in New Jersey as law-enforcement officials continued a criminal investigation into the spill of at least 200,000 gallons of heating oil into the Arthur Kill, officials said today.


From Russia, In Love
LEAD: If the world needed one last sign of new warmth between East and West, it came last week.
Susan Eisenhower, granddaughter of the cold war's first general, President Eisenhower, announced her engagement to Roald Z. Sagdeyev, a former chief of the Soviet space program.
The couple, who met at a conference on Soviet-American relations in 1987 and got to know each other better a year ago when she helped him work on his memoirs, admitted they had felt some trepidation about how officials in their countries would react.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   Where the Talent Goes
LEAD: THEIR stories are inspiring - of children who experienced a calling, of teen-agers clasped in the exhilarating grip of curiosity, of adults still driven by the delicious joy of discovery.


Ilene S. Kleckner To Marry in April
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Kleckner of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ilene Sondra Kleckner to Kent Richard Friedman, a son of Alfred Friedman of Hallandale, Fla., and the late Carol Z. Landham.
An April wedding is planned.


DATA BANK: Jan. 7, 1990
LEAD:
$
THE ECONOMY
Gross National Product
IV Q'89
III Q'89
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,162.9
$4,160.2
$4,029.2
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
3.0
2.7
2.0
Corporate After-Tax Profits
II Q'89
I Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$161.1
$171.6
$162.7
Industrial Production Index
Nov.


Gooden Upbeat for 90's After Up-and-Down 80's
LEAD: Dwight Gooden, who came out of the 1980's with a sore right shoulder and lingering memories of his ordeal with drugs, reports that he is entering the 1990's with no qualms, no fears and no demons and says, ''I couldn't be more upbeat.''


The Economics of Art
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pleased Preservationist
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jet Diverted to Boston After a Bomb Warning
LEAD: A British Airways flight from London to Miami with 360 people aboard landed instead at Logan International Airport here today after an anonymous caller warned that a bomb would explode in flight.


Birds and Beasts Inhabit Mattatuck Show
LEAD: NOT all the animals in the ''Animal Show'' are recognizable, some being fragmentary, others outright inventions.
They cluster close, nonetheless, as if to keep the human world at bay.
The small display, on view at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury, consists of works by Reuben Nakian as well as by Eddie Oates, Karen Rossi, Gil Scullion and Peter Woytuk, Connecticut sculptors to a man and woman.


Mary Cavallaro To Wed in May
LEAD: Mary Denise Cavallaro and First Lieut.
Anthony David McCann, U.S.A., plan to marry in May.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have read about the problem that some people have with condensation forming between the two panes of glass in double-pane windows, but my problem is different.
My apartment has windows of this type, but with a metal frame.
When outside temperatures drop below freezing, condensation forms on the metal and then freezes to form a coat of ice on the inside.


Protest Against Intervention in Panama


Montana Paces 49ers to Victory
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers toyed with the Minnesota Vikings here today in a manner that left the 49ers amused, the Vikings perplexed.


Man Steals a Calzone And Then Stabs 6 Men
LEAD: A man who stole a calzone from a Manhattan pizza parlor early yesterday stabbed six men in a melee that began when a customer told him to put the calzone back, the police said.


THE QUIZ
LEAD: By their quotes you may know them - at least that's the challenge in this quiz: quotes to tax your memory, quotes to test your history, quotes to try your patience and good humor (since not every one is what it seems).
But don't quote us on that.
WHO SAID:


Virginia McGraw Becomes Bride Of C. B. Seaverns
LEAD: St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Virginia Snyder McGraw to Charles Bushnell Seaverns.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony.


A May Wedding For Miss Daniel
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Daniel of Richmond have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Helen Hampton Randolph Daniel and George Gibson Carey 5th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carey 4th of Cincinnati.


Campus Life: Clemson;   Student's Death Raises Questions About Drinking
LEAD: The death of a 20-year-old sophomore at Clemson University has raised questions about drinking by under-age students on campus.


2 Little White Lies, And a Plot Darkens
LEAD: IN Alan Ayckbourn's farce, ''How the Other Half Loves,'' now at the Arena Players Theater in East Farmingdale, Bob Philips is having an extramarital affair with Fiona Foster, his boss's wife.


Vietnam Allows More Prisoners to Leave for U.S.
LEAD: More former inmates of re-education camps and their relatives arrived here today from Vietnam en route to new lives in the United States.


A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry
LEAD: ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of preparations.
They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric, cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper.
These are the main components, but the list can be expanded with many others.


POSTINGS: Ocean Grove Victoriana;   Seaside Condominiums With Porches
LEAD: A small seaside hotel and an adjoining waterfront residence on Ocean Avenue in Ocean Grove, N.J., are being rehabilitated into 11 condominium apartments.
The Victorian-style hotel, built in 1870, and the home, built in 1920, had been used as rental apartment houses and had fallen into neglect when they were bought for $750,000 last summer by the Booth Development Company of Ridgewood, N.J.


Frederic Raphael: Seriousness Can Be Smuggled Onto TV
LEAD: Beetle comes rushing into the room with the evening newspaper, displaying the banner headline: ''Ceausescu Toppled and Gone.'' Her proper name is Sylvia Betty, and she has been married to Frederic Raphael for 33 years.
When she met him, she told him that Beetle was a family pet name and that he was to promise never to use it, but since his way of showing his love for things is to tell of their secrets, he has never called her anything else.


Cuomo Gives A Speech, So Everyone Is Talking
LEAD: NO sooner did Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo utter the word ''global'' in his State of the State address last week than many Albany politicians began to speculate out loud that he would run for President in 1992.


WHO IS THE TRUEST PARENT?
LEAD:
PICTURING WILL
By Ann Beattie.
230 pp. New York:
Random House. $18.95.


Argentina's Economic Pain Makes Just Getting By a Struggle
LEAD: When Yolanda Mendolia saw the dizzying ascent of prices that began before the holidays, and how low her husband's salary was by comparison, she decided her only choice was ''to put myself in the hands of God.''


Lessons From a Cat On Letting Go
LEAD: OUR daughter and only child is now a sophomore in college, but it is just recently that my husband and I have begun to realize exactly what that means.
She is out of the nest, on her own, flown the coop - whatever cliche we use to describe the process of an adolescent becoming an adult and leading her own life.


Deauville
LEAD: To the Editor: Recently returned from France where we spent a night in Deauville, at the Royal.
Had been delighted to see your article on Deauville (Travel, July 23) shortly before we left.
Armed with the article, my companion and I headed for the Bar du Soleil for dinner to discover that it is only open for lunch.


Bed and Breakfast
LEAD: To the Editor: It is always pleasing to have bed and breakfast accommodations spotlighted (''The New Bed and Breakfast'' by Eric N. Berg, Travel, Oct. 15).
While the B &amp; B's described by Mr.
Berg are certainly a growing phenomenon across the country, traditional B &amp; B's are hardly on their way out.


MORE THAN HE BARGAINED FOR
LEAD: CONFESSIONS OF A MAIL ORDER BRIDE
American Life Through Thai Eyes.
By Wanwadee Larsen.
324 pp. Far Hills, N. J.:
New Horizon Press. $21.95.


HOW DO I LOATHE THEE?
LEAD:
THE GROWN-UPS
By Victoria Glendinning.
244 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Facts On File
LEAD: TEACHERS are discovering that not all computer software comes puter software comes on floppy disks, and stupact disk can be used to store more than just the latest rock hits from New Kids on the Block or Guns 'n' Roses.


Some Big Issues for N.C.A.A.
LEAD: Proposition 42, the N.C.A.A. bylaw that angered John Thompson and others when it was adopted last year, will be back on the table with some modifications when the National Collegiate Athletic Association opens its three-day convention on Sunday.


DEVALUING THE TUSK
LEAD: With his knack for publicity, Richard Leakey became an important leader in the campaign to ban the sale of elephant ivory and crush a flourishing illegal international trade supported by poaching.
Last October, with strong backing from the United States, a ban was adopted at a meeting of the 103 member countries of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (known as CITES and pronounced sight-ese) in Lausanne, Switzerland.


PRO HOCKEY: Midseason Report;   Rangers Hoping To End Free Fall
LEAD: A half a season has taken the Rangers full circle.
It's been an exhausting, exasperating route familiar to their followers, one on which they, like they have so often before, spun dreams only to then spin out of control.


Harry Karp, Engineer And Retired Editor, 67
LEAD: Harry R. Karp, an electrical engineer and retired editor in chief of Data Communications magazine, died of complications following heart surgery Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark.
He was 67 years old and lived in Westfield, N.J.


Meaning's Value
LEAD: To the Editor:


Women at Amherst
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
ENGLISH COMEDY


A RELUCTANT EDUCATION
LEAD: I am an adoptive mother.
I, too, had a ''reluctant education'' in infertility.
None of us - and there are millions of us - were raised to deal with this.
Our life scripts all were written with children, easily conceived, probably in our 20's.


CARTER REDUX
LEAD: How wonderful it was to see former President Jimmy Carter's portrait on the cover of The New York Times Magazine (''Carter Redux,'' by Wayne King, Dec. 10).
As a Democrat, I am thrilled to find the true Jimmy Carter rediscovered.
I only hope my party also will recognize the contributions he made.


Giants Are a Bit Short In Playoff Experience
LEAD: The last time the Giants were in the playoffs was three years ago, when they finished with a 14-2 record and went on to win Super Bowl XXI.
Compared with the current Giants, the 1986 version was older, more experienced and more sophisticated.


A LITERARY HIGH-WIRE ACT
LEAD: I cannot understand why everyone seems to be taking Umberto Eco's latest hit, ''Foucault's Pendulum,'' so seriously (''A Literary High-Wire Act,'' by Marshall Blonsky, Dec. 10).
Mr.
Blonsky quotes Salman Rushdie as saying that the book is ''humorless.''


Mysteries That Matter
LEAD: If the cold war is truly over, isn't it time to bring its mysteries in from the cold?
Eastern Europe's new governments have a rare chance to serve both justice and history by unlocking the secret archives of their former Communist masters.
When tyrannies collapse so suddenly, there's little time to shred papers.


Let's Make the Cable TV Industry Live Up to Its Promises
LEAD: WHEN the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 was passed, the cable industry made great promises in exchange for deregulation: promises of a technological utopia in which cable made anything from synchronized traffic lights to expanded educational opportunities possible.


Apartment Conversions Worsen Quality of Life
LEAD: It's time for preventive government interference.


Performance to Benefit Spoleto Hurricane Fund
LEAD: Philip Glass, Lynn Redgrave and members of the New York City Ballet and the Martha Graham Dance Company are to take part in a benefit for the Spoleto Festival U.S.A., Jan. 29 at 7:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The music, dance and theater series has been held in Charleston, S.C., for 13 years; this year's opening is May 25.


Campus Life: Wellesley;   Trustees Approve Adding Faculty From Minorities
LEAD: Reacting to a report that called Wellesley College ''covertly racist,'' the college's trustees have approved the hiring of five additional minority faculty members over the next five years.
These new positions are in addition to the current faculty limit of about 320 that was established by the trustees.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Some nice gestures cost a lot of money.
Others entail an expenditure of something perhaps still more precious: time.
But even accepting this as a given does not mean that nice gestures should go by the wayside.
For the fact is that the most meaningful of gestures cost nothing but a second or two of thought.


FICTION
LEAD:
ALICE ALONE.
By Amanda Brookfield. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) No novel that includes a middlingly sympathetic dentist can be all bad, but Amanda Brookfield's ''Alice Alone'' comes close.
Alice Hatton is an Englishwoman in her early 50's who, like countless other middle-aged people, has been left staring discontentedly at an empty nest when her children have grown.


'MA, WHY DID YOU MAKE ME BLACK?'
LEAD:
ADVANCE, RETREAT
Selected Short Stories.
By Richard Rive.
Illustrated by Cecil Skotnes.
121 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $16.95.


Four Stays In Sonoma County
LEAD: TURRETED Victorian, sand-colored adobe or period French, the traveler's choice of accommodations in California's Sonoma County is as varied as its scenery.
Whether you want the anonymity and professional service of a large hotel or the intimacy and do-it-yourself approach of a bed and breakfast, there are lodgings to suit your preference.


PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW
LEAD: For 25 years Bernd and Hilla Becher have been exhibiting serenely beautiful and slightly elegiac photographs of such often overlooked, unlovely industrial structures as water towers, gas tanks and blast furnaces.
But never has their work looked more beautiful or impressive than it does now at the Dia Art Foundation's galleries on West 22d Street, near 11th


Possible to Be Firm but Nice
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Airports
LEAD: To the Editor: Why does Los Angeles International Airport allow religious groups and charities to bother passengers in the terminals?


Iran Rejects Iraqi Offer of Talks as a 'Deception'
LEAD: Iran has dismissed an Iraqi proposal for reviving peace talks between the two countries as ''a new campaign of public deception,'' Iran's official press agency said today.


Jane Mintzer Plans To Marry in March
LEAD: March wedding plans for Jane Margaret Mintzer and David Louis Hoffman have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Steven A. Mintzer of West Islip, L.I.
Mr.
Hoffman is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Hoffman of Westport, Conn.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Don't Count Communism Out Yet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: LeMoyne-Owen;   College Reaching Out To Serve Its Neighbors
LEAD: LeMoyne-Owen College, a predominantly black, liberal arts institution with 1,000 students, is a 15-acre educational oasis in a desert of poverty and crime in Memphis.
In the last two years, LeMoyne-Owen's president, Irving P. McPhail, has been working to make that desert bloom by founding the Office of Community Outreach and ''adopting'' the nearby LeMoyne Gardens Housing Development.


Discovered: Four-Ton Flesh-Eater, Ugly, Vicious
LEAD: THE name Epanterias amplexus doesn't have quite the ring of Tyrannosaurus rex, long considered the largest of the flesh-eating dinosaurs.
But now the tyrannosaur may have to abdicate its position as king of the reptiles to its lesser-known predecessor, which stalked the earth 30 million years before the first tyrannosaur was born.


THE NORIEGA CASE: Noriega's Outcasts;   For Panama's Inmates, a Prison Like Devil's Island
LEAD: In many ways, it is the same place but with different names: Devil's Island, the Gulag - any of history's most nightmarish penal colonies.
In Panama, they call it Coiba.


A Lithuanian Pirate?
LEAD: Seton Hall has recruited a Soviet basketball player who plans to enroll in the school later this month, a report in a newsletter says.


Style Makers;   Helen Lee, Makeup Specialist
LEAD: As a model, Helen Lee found that hours under strong lights and frequent changes of climate were affecting her skin.
As a result, she spent a lot of time in beauty salons.
So two years ago she opened the Helen Lee Salon, at 115 East 57th Street in the Galleria building.


Singular Scenarios In the Manner Of Adrian Noble
LEAD: With ''The Art of Success,'' Nick Dear's earthy comedy about William Hogarth and his times, New York has the opportunity to experience the work of Adrian Noble, who, during the last decade in England, has proven himself to be one of the most consistently imaginative of directors.
While his Royal Shakespeare Company directorial colleagues - Trevor Nunn, Terry Hands and John Caird - have been achieving international reputations, Mr.


The Booty Of Drugs Enriches Agencies
LEAD: The sheriff's department in Tulsa, Okla., has a ski boat that once belonged to a drug dealer and is now used to dredge the lake for evidence.
The police in San Diego own two helicopters, taken in a drug raid, that they need but could not otherwise have afforded.


Nil to Save
LEAD: To the Editor:


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Orleans, Mass.;   Cape's Sales Continue Slide
LEAD: LAST January, Donald Fulcher and his wife, Susan, year-round residents on Cape Cod, put their modest two-bedroom, one-bath house in South Yarmouth on the market for $119,000.
Nothing happened.


Ms. Doherty Is Engaged to J. D. Perris
LEAD: Catharine Hereford Doherty, the head kindergarten teacher at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn, and John David Perris, a lawyer in New York, plan to marry in April, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Doherty of Kennebunkport, Me., have announced.
Mr.
Perris is a son of Eleanor H. Perris of Brooklyn and John R.


Battling to Reclaim A 'Lost Semi-Eden'
LEAD: In Pete Dunne's ''In the Natural State'' (Dec. 3), I was particularly aggrieved by the words ''as a lifelong New Jersey resident wrestling with his future - with the question of remaining here, or seeking a place that is what New Jersey was...''


Question Of the Week;   How Should N.C.A.A. Football Champions Be Decided?
LEAD: The tradition and local flavor of the bowl games should not be violated.
Any form of single-elimination tournament would necessarily do so.
Let the champion-selection process remain as is.
The resulting controversies are healthy.
LEONARD PUGATCH
Roslyn, L.I.


Dana Hokin and Robert Garvey Wed
LEAD: Dana Marie Hokin and Robert Vincent Garvey were married yesterday at St.
Malachy's Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
James E. Russo.
Alexandra Hokin was her sister's maid of honor and Joseph Garvey was his brother's best man.


Donna Ferdinand to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Ferdinand of New Haven have announced the engagement of their daughter Donna M. Ferdinand to Lloyd M. Prezant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Prezant of the Bronx.
Ms.
Ferdinand, who is 30 years old, works in the corporate safety office of the Southern New England Telephone Company in New Haven.


Fernandez Reorganization Will Cut Jobs and Bureaus
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday announced a sweeping reorganization of his central headquarters staff that will eliminate 14 bureaus and 218 jobs.


Museum in Florida Is Hiring Ex-Director Of Disputed Exhibit
LEAD: The woman who resigned as director of the Corcoran Gallery of Art last month after a six-month dispute over her decision to cancel an exhibit of Robert Mapplethorpe photographs has been named director of the Norton Gallery and School of Arts in Palm Beach, Fla.


THE ULTIMATE DECISION
LEAD: I do not believe that there is such a thing as a ''good death,'' but after reading Andrew Malcolm's article, I do feel that some deaths are better than others.


The Voting Booth Stall
LEAD: How much longer must New York City elections remain hobbled by outmoded manual voting machines prone to breakdowns?
The decrepit booths should have been replaced years ago.
Yet an indifferent Board of Elections still dawdles over the choice of a vendor for modern voting equipment.
A 1985 study of the board's operations by the New York City Partnership, a coalition of civic-minded business leaders, set as a top priority the purchase of electronic voting equipment commonly used in other big cities.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in the Education Life section today about a new approach to computers in public schools gives an incorrect location for Cougar Valley Elementary School.
It is in Silverdale, Wash.


A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry
LEAD: ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of preparations.
They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric, cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper.
These are the main components, but the list can be expanded with many others.


Mimi Anne House To Wed in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. House of Shawnee Mission, Kan., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mimi Anne House, to Jay Anthony James, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund H. James of Verona, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss House, who is 23 years old and a graduate of the University of Arizona, is a candidate for a master's degree in English at the University of California at Los Angeles.


TALKING: Mortgages;   V.A. Loans Regaining Acceptance
LEAD: AN unexpected byproduct of the weaker real estate market has been the return of the Veterans Administration mortgage as a popular financing tool, one that developers and sellers appear keener to honor than in the mid-80's, when sales were booming and any loan subject to possible bureaucratic delay was scorned.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-16


Debra Terry Plans Marriage
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Terry of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Debra Jill Terry and Douglas K. Mellinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Mellinger of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A graduate of George Washington University, Miss Terry, 23 years old, is a third-year law student at New York Law School.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: THE Federal Government provides three-quarters of financial aid to college students.
States furnish 6 percent and individual institutions contribute the remaining 19 percent.
Student aid amounted to $26.7 billion during the 1988-89 academic year.
- The College Board, ''Trends in Student Aid: 1980-1989''


How the Bankers Missed On Northeast Real Estate
LEAD: ONLY a few years ago, it seemed that New England, and most of the Northeast for that matter, had only bright days ahead.
Unemployment was minuscule, wages were soaring, and housing prices and new construction were booming.
But now, bankers find themselves wondering why they did not see that the New


Soothing Scents
LEAD: CRYSTALS, PSYCHIC READINGS, NEW-age music, organic food, holistic medicine - aromatherapy fits right in with all those ideas that are passing from the counterculture to the trendy.
Welcome back, Age of Aquarius.


UPDATE ON THE WOBBLY FORTUNES OF VIBRATO
LEAD: Tastes change; the immutable verities of today seem dated and clumsy tomorrow.
And often, a shift in one seemingly small area of taste reveals itself to be linked with larger changes in our cultural preferences.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
No Blah Ma and Pa


Miss Klein Plans a Wedding
LEAD: Susan Jane Klein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Klein of North Bellmore, L.I., and Dr.
Kenneth Jay Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Cohen of Brooklyn and Sag Harbor, L.I., plan to marry in February.
Miss Klein, 26 years old, is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at St.
John's University.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   High Hopes
LEAD: TO THE AVERAGE American high school student, science education is often a lesson in boredom.
There are hundreds of technical terms to memorize, outdated books to plow through and teachers who drone on and on.


Corrections
LEAD: The Works in Progress column on page 62 of The Times Magazine today about a government center built in Rumania under the direction of Nicolae Ceausescu refers to it incorrectly.


For Airlines, a Heated Push Into the Pacific Rim
LEAD: A few years ago, Jerry Connelly, a fashion executive in New York who flies regularly to the Far East, booked his flights to cities like Hong Kong a just few days ahead of time.
But no more. ''Now you need at least a week or two's notice,'' he said. ''Sometimes I can't even get a seat then.''


Immigrants Swell Language Classes
LEAD: Every time the young welder from Haiti called a factory or a restaurant about a job he'd seen advertised, he was told it was already filled.


The Czech Writer as Politician
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: An article on Nov. 26 about dining in Santa Fe misidentified the train station that is now Tomasita's; it was a station of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe, not the Denver &amp; Rio Grande.
The article also misnamed a brand of beer; it is Negra Modelo.


Should a County Sell Liquor? No Way, Says Student Group
LEAD: When Susan Bergeron, a high school senior who is a local official of Students Against Driving Drunk, learned that Montgomery County was selling its own brand of liquor, she was furious.


The Other City By the Bay
LEAD: OAKLAND Saturday night: everyone's ready for partying, for motorized cruising down once gas-lighted avenues.
From the MacArthur to the Nimitz, the old heroes have been turned into highways and the highways are free.
So get in your bumper car and bump around the town natives call Bump City.


NO RETURNS
LEAD: ART BUCHWALD DID A COLUMN recently about his lucky wife.
She had fallen in front of their house, as I recall, and broken her wrist. ''Lucky it was your left wrist and not your right,'' one friend said. ''Lucky you were so close to home,'' said another. ''Lucky you were at the foot of the stairs and not the top,'' said a third.


Louis A. Schuker, 84, Educator; Figured in Court Battle Over Flag
LEAD: Louis A. Schuker, an educator who in a 44-year career in the New York City public school system built a reputation as an iron-willed administrator and an outspoken proponent of the merit system for hiring teachers, died of heart failure Friday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 84 years old and also had a home in Boca Raton,


Images of Blacks Refracted in a White Mirror
LEAD: When white American artists looked at black Americans, what did they see?
Stereotypes, like banjo players, watermelon eaters, slaves and idlers?
Or dignity and purpose?
All of the above, as evidenced by a and idlers?
Or dignity and purpose?
All of the above, as evidenced by a complex new show, ''Facing History: The Black Image in American Art, 1710-1940,'' to open at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington on Saturday.


NOT THE NICEST PEOPLE
LEAD:
HANOVER PLACE
By Michael M. Thomas.
479 pp. New York:
Warner Books. $19.95.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   Home work
LEAD: His name is Mr.
Wizard, a.k.a.
Don Herbert, and he has worked science magic on television for 38 years.
His formula may clash with curriculum.
But there are some basics: Choose subjects that appeal to children; create experiments they can do themselves; use everyday items in novel ways.
What follows is a little Wizardry for children and adults alike.


'SHE HAD TO COME FROM THE MOON'
LEAD:
THE BOOK OF MAMIE
By Duff Brenna.
338 pp. Iowa City:
University of Iowa Press. $22.50.


Campus Life: Texas Tech;   4 Students Face Charges of Making False Licenses
LEAD: What do some college students under age 21 do when they want a drink and the legal drinking age is 21?
They may find a bar that does not force the issue, or, failing that, find false identification.


Review/Music;   Seeking Intelligence in Outer Space
LEAD: Lower Manhattan is alive with mixed-media experiments, and ''Urchin 1,'' which ends a three-night run tonight at 8 at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, is an energetic example of that all-encompassing genre.
But before it blasts into Lincoln Center orbit, so to speak (this is a science-fiction piece), it needs enriching.


Renewed Muslim-Christian Battle in Beirut Kills 3
LEAD: Tank, artillery and rocket duels resumed today across the Green Line that splits the Lebanese capital into Muslim and Christian halves, and the police said three people were killed and three were wounded.


For Poor Children: A Powerful Proposal
LEAD: Imagine a mother who lives in a rotten apartment, whose neighborhood is worse and whose baby is failing to thrive.
Imagine her going to five different agencies for five different kinds of help, waiting for hours in a pediatrician's office, leaving the baby alone because she's desperate for a break.


Is Photojournalism Also Art?
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: Rent-Control Waiver;   5 Renovations For Harlem
LEAD: The Harwin Corporation, a Manhattan development company that has been involved in many residential renovations, has gone into a joint-venture partnership with the Ziegelman Organization, which has concentrated on larger residential conversions, to upgrade five central Harlem apartment houses with 242 rental units and eventually convert them into condominiums or cooperatives


It's a Dirty Job, and 2 Rams Do It as Well as Anyone
LEAD: There is no glamour down there.
It is dirt and grass stains, grunting and grabbing, a sea of arms and feet and numbers, and a pile of bodies.
It is everything about football and yet nothing.


English Is Making a Comeback in Sri Lanka
LEAD: The English language, reviled and sidetracked for more than three decades by a Sinhalese majority intent on putting its ethnic stamp on the nation, is suddenly and unexpectedly back in fashion.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
FISHING SCHOOL


What the Retarded Need: Social Skills
LEAD: IT has been 30 years since mentally retarded children were removed from seclusion and allowed to participate in public education.


Single-Handle Faucet Woes
LEAD: SINGLE-HANDLE kitchen and bathroom faucets often feature replaceable cartridge valves.
Signs that a cartridge faucet needs repair are water dripping from the spout, difficulty in adjusting the water temperature, hot water entering cold water outlets like toilet supply lines and inadequately heated water at some faucets.


Recitals to Rouse One From Holiday Slumber
LEAD: LEADING the way out of the holiday slumber today are recitals by Chamber Music Plus in Hartford and the Sunday Afternoons Live series at First Congregational Church of Greenwich.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We do not accept dictatorship.


Dr. J. D. Altus Weds Leslie Hoffman
LEAD: Leslie Jean Hoffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Hoffman of Trumbull, Conn., was married last evening at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I., to Dr.
Jonathan Drew Altus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Altus of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Eric A. Silver performed the cermony, assisted by Cantor Zion


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 24 about Texaco Inc. misidentified the company's former chairman and the company's current chairman.
They are John K. McKinley and Alfred C. DeCrane Jr.


PERSPECTIVES: The 10-Year Housing Plan;   Issues for the 90's: Management and Costs
LEAD: IN housing, New York City has changed horses in midstream.
Mayor David N. Dinkins has come into office at about the halfway mark of the expensive, long-term municipal housing program begun by former Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1985.


Lost Battlefield
LEAD: To the Editor:


Togetherness After the Age of Reason
LEAD: WHEN my children were young, we took separate vacations.
Each June I packed them off to their grandparents, a continent away, and when they returned, we were all glad to see each other again.
I'd had a respite from single parenthood, and they'd had a month of unqualified approval and unlimited indulgence.


After A Fashion
LEAD: Uniforms have long been synonymous with elite private schools.
Crisp white shirts, ties, gray slacks or pleated skirts gave students that satisfyingly neat and, well, uniform look.
But these days some public schools, too, are seeing salvation in standard student dress.
Uniforms or dress codes, they reason, will put an end to clothes-horse competitions.


Aromatic Dishes From India
LEAD: IN a university town like New Haven one might expect to find a variety of inexpensive, ethnic restaurants and indeed that is the case.
But in all this diversity there is just one Indian restaurant, India Palace.


Getting Rattled
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Alison S. Aymar, Student, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John vanBeuren Aymar Jr. of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alison Simms Aymar, to Kevin Douglas Hancock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
K.
David Hancock of Casco, Me.
A July wedding is planned.


Susan A. Epstein To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Susan Amy Epstein and Eric S. Aledort, 1988 graduates of the Georgetown University Law Center, plan to marry in October.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Epstein of New York and Dr. and Mrs.
Louis M. Aledort of Tenafly, N.J.


A Maker of Bells for Any Occasion
LEAD: WANT to keep track of your cows?
Festoon your sleigh or your mantel?
Summon the butler to bring some tea or call your guests to the barbecue?
For these and other tasks, Bevin Brothers has the bell for you.


F.A.A. Proposes Fine of $70,000 on Delta
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration has proposed to fine Delta Air Lines $70,000 and suspend the licenses of a Delta pilot and a dispatcher for operating a mechanically faulty jetliner last June 17.


The Invisible but Giant Indispensible Giant
LEAD: When the All-Pro or Pro Bowl teams are chosen, some specialists are hailed for their skills.
Place-kickers, punters, even special-team tacklers.
But never a blocking back.
Although success in football has been defined by coaches from Amos Alonzo Stagg to Bill Walsh as boiling down to blocking and tackling, there is no such species as the All-Pro blocking back or a Pro Bowl blocking back.


A Bid to Put a Drug House To Good Use
LEAD: A LARGE wooded and secluded piece of property in the shoreline town of Clinton where its former owner sold drugs could end up as a new elementary school or even a police station.


Ford Sets Sights On an Elusive Title
LEAD: Besides increased television coverage, one reason for auto racing's current state of vigor worldwide is the extent of participation by major automakers.


Cuomo Remarks on Abortion Confuse Both Sides
LEAD: In an unusual section of his State of the State Message that confused advocates on both sides of the abortion issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this week called national abortion statistics sobering and vowed to propose funds ''specifically allocated for promoting the value of abstinence for young people.


A RELUCTANT EDUCATION
LEAD: My heart went out to Paulette Alden.
Having gone through an ordeal of my own to have children, I understand only too well.
In my case, after five pregnancies (one miscarriage, one ectopic pregnancy and two near-miscarriages where I had to have bed rest for the first trimesters), I now have three sons.


Vietnamese Refugees Protest Forced Repatriation by Hong Kong


Businesslike Business School
LEAD: LAST JULY, two months before fall semester began, William Glavin toured Babson College, in Wellesley, Mass.
He went into every dorm room, every classroom.
He checked the sports fields and gyms.


Question Of the Week;   How Should N.C.A.A. Football Champions Be Decided?
LEAD: There are 16 bowls in which ranked college teams play each other.
Why not have the top 32 teams (based on average ranking between the polls of the writers, the coaches, and the New York Times computer) play each other, with No. 32 playing No. 31 and so on down the line?


'THE HARDEST THING I'VE EVER DONE'
LEAD:
MIDSTREAM
By Le Anne Schreiber.
309 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: MORE than 7 in 10 public-school teachers in the United States are women.
Moreover, male teachers seem to cluster in specific parts of the country - in the North, for example, which has more male teachers than the South.
Oregon, Minnesota, Washington State, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin have teaching forces that are about 38 percent male.


Riverhead's Grant To Buy Music Hall
LEAD: The article ''Riverhead May Lose $300,000 Grant'' (Dec. 10) states incorrectly that I, Harold Smith, am the owner of the 1881 Vail-Leavitt Music Hall.
In actuality, Music Hall is owned by the Council for the Vail-Leavitt Music Hall Inc., a nonprofit, tax-exempt organization that has been restoring and operating the building for the past six years without a deficit.


Eurobeep
LEAD: Little noticed among the rattling upheavals that dominate the news, the 12 nations of the European Community are formulating a plan to synchronize beepers.
Unsuspecting observers may see this as no more than sensible coordination, removing yet another barrier to the free movement of commerce in the Common Market.


'American Power'
LEAD: To the Editor:


RON BROWN'S PARTY LINE
LEAD: Ron Brown has his work cut out for him in trying to implement a successful ''coordinated campaign'' for the Democrats (''Ron Brown's Party Line,'' by Robert Kuttner, Dec. 3).
Here in Massachusetts, our state party is a disaster, lacking the money, skill and resources to provide effective campaign services for Bay State Democratic candidates.


Starting Anew, Ex-Comptroller Ventures Uptown
LEAD: From his office on the 28th floor of the General Motors Building on Fifth Avenue, Harrison J. Goldin has a new vista these days - a panorama of Central Park and the Upper East Side.


COLOMBIANS BALK AT A CRUCIAL PART OF U.S. DRUG PLANS
LEAD: The Bush Administration's plan to step up military involvement in the war on drugs in Latin America was dealt a setback this week when Colombia balked at a crucial element, the stationing of United States vessels off its coast, Administration officials say.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about protests in Bulgaria referred incorrectly in some copies to the position taken by the demonstrators.
They oppose religious and cultural freedom for Bulgarian Turks.
Later developments in Bulgaria are reported today on page 14.


DEPARTMENT STORES: SHOP AND LEARN
LEAD: Department stores are in trouble these days.
Several are singing the bankruptcy blues, while economists and accountants look for answers in their charts.
But if they really want to know the cause, they need only try a shopping trip or two.


Claudia Steinberg to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Steinberg of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Claudia Wendy Steinberg and Dr.
Samuel Fenner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manuel L. Fenner of Long Beach, L.I.
A graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton, Ms.
Steinberg, 27 years old, teaches art at Public School 19 in Corona, Queens.


A Fair Share Of Medicare Taxes
LEAD: The Nov. 26 article ''State's Elderly Gain Influence as Lobby Group'' described the power of some of the elderly in getting the 1988 expanded Medicare bill repealed this year.
As one senior citizen who would have been paying a surtax in the expanded Medicare program, I am disgusted by the opposition of the more affluent seniors to helping their more needy peers.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   Hands On
LEAD: SCIENCE IS BORING, and scientists are just this side of crazy.
At least that is what children think, according to Rebecca L. Lubetkin, executive director of the Consortium for Educational Equity at Rutgers University, which provides training and assistance to educators.





The Czech Writer as Politician
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trying to Reconcile the Ways of the Vatican and the East
LEAD: A CATHEDRAL could be built with all the books written on prayer - how to do it, why to do it, when and where to do it, its glories and its dangers.
In mid-December, the Vatican added to this library.
With papal approval, the watchdog Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a 7,000-word warning to Catholics on the pitfalls of meditation derived from


CONFIDENT AT 11, CONFUSED AT 16
LEAD: THE ATMOSPHERE IN CAROLJU Gilligan's office at the Harvard Graduate School of Education could hardly be less like my own days as a Harvard graduate student - those seminars mired in torpor from which students were periodically roused by revivifying jolts of pedagogical bad temper.
Professor Gilligan's faculty and student colleagues at the Project on the Psychology of Women and the Development of Girls seem relaxed and almost unaccountably buoyant as they gather around the conference table on a rainy Cambridge morning to describe their current work.


THE NATION: New Rules;   California the Clean Faces Up to Corruption
LEAD: NEARLY three quarters of a century ago, as their state emerged from its rambunctious frontier days when money and water equaled power, Californians imposed strict new rules of government under the idealistic Progressive Party Governor, Hiram Johnson.
Provisions were made for the recall of elected officials, for lawmaking by public initiative and for nonpartisan local elections - measures emulated elsewhere and credited with having kept state politics comparatively honest.


New Zealand's Tougher Treks
LEAD: WHILE planning a recent hiking trip to New Zealand, I mulled the paradox of the Milford Track.
The three-day trek from lake to sea is so renowned for its scenic glories that it's billed as ''the most beautiful walk in the world.'' But the Milford is also a popular tourist destination and is strictly controlled by the authorities.


Pakistan Arrests Switchman In Worst Railroad Calamity
LEAD: The police have arrested a switchman in Pakistan's worst rail disaster, in which 307 people were killed and 700 injured when two trains collided in a station, officials said today.


Out of Office In the Bronx
LEAD: More and more, Bronx political careers seem to end not at the polls but in the courts.
Like the Bronx Democratic chairman Stanley Friedman and Representative Mario Biaggi before him, Representative Robert Garcia was caught up in scandal and convicted and now faces sentencing.
In a move that his friends said was calculated to win leniency from the judge who is to sentence him later this month on conspiracy and extortion charges, Mr.


Kai Cramer and Mark Bergman Marry
LEAD: Kainan Kelly Cramer, the president of Cramer &amp; Sirras, a legal recruiting firm, and Mark Steven Bergman, an associate in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Army Navy Country Club in Arlington, Va.
Rabbi Harold S. White officiated.


Merri Bergstein to Wed Peter A. Kingsly in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Bergstein of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Merri Lee Bergstein, to Peter Andrew Kingsly, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford N. Kingsly of Short Hills, N.J., and Longboat Key, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.


Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A
LEAD:
Special reports in this issue include:


Susan K. Wysoki To Marry in May
LEAD: The engagement of Susan Kay Wysoki and Jonathan Mitchell Joseph, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Harris Joseph of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Jack H. Wysoki of Terrell Hills and Bulverde, Tex.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Wysoki, 23 years old, is an assistant account executive at the Hill &amp; Knowlton public-relations concern in New York.


Congeleur Finally Ends Up a Victor
LEAD: Congeleur, who has spent much of the last two winters running second to King's Swan and Its Acedemic in stakes races, finally turned the tables on those two yesterday and narrowly won the $86,700 Aqueduct Handicap.


East Woos West in a Romantic Soviet Rock Opera
LEAD: It took six years, the denouement of the cold war and the passion of a French couturier to bring the first Soviet rock opera to the United States. ''Junon and Avos: The Hope,'' which opens tonight at City Center, will offer New York audiences a taste of contemporary Soviet pop culture.


Freedom Is a Sanctuary In a Changing World
LEAD: LIKE love, missed only when it isn't there, freedom is all too often taken for granted.
The political upheavals in Eastern Europe and the mass exodus of East Germans looking for a freer life brought into sharp focus my own family's flight from oppression.
Seeing the happy but bewildered faces of East Germans crossing into West Berlin, I am reminded of our own state of mind when, back in 1942, we first set foot on


Only Billy Martin Looked Into Their Eager Young Faces
LEAD: To the Editor:


Allegre Activated
LEAD: The Giants activated Raul Allegre, Eric Dorsey and Damian Johnson from injured reserve today for Sunday's playoff game here against the Los Angeles Rams, Sports Ticker reported.


Bank's New Name Irks Brooklynites
LEAD: It's happening again. Brooklyn is losing another piece of its identity.


Towle Makes a Second Stab at Reorganizing
LEAD: The turmoil of the last decade has slightly reshuffled the silver industry.
At least one company, Towle, is in dire straits.
One of the fine old names in silver, dating back to the late 1600's, the company in September filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy laws - again.


Grand Touches in Woodcuts
LEAD: COINCIDING with the invention of type, woodcuts began as crude, simple images.
But those produced for the cognoscenti by Durer and Cranach can scarcely be told from engravings, so fine are their lines and so sparkling their tones.


Fashion;   What Stylish Legs Are Wearing Now
LEAD: Two decades ago, climbing skirt lengths produced a new kind of underpinning: panty hose.
In this new decade, panty hose are again playing a key role, but now they are opaque tights, making the wearer feel less exposed in a short skirt or more pulled together, no matter the hem length.


Do Songs About The World's Ills Do Any Good?
LEAD: Anyone who follows pop music's ongoing hit parade must have noticed the unprecedented convergence on the charts of hit singles with lyrics bearing social messages, about topics from homelessness to race relations to child abuse.
In the national top 30 singles at year's end, no fewer than six songs took note of the world's ills.


Lifestyle;   There's More to Coin Laundries Than Just Getting the Wash Done
LEAD: Lily McKinley tossed small handfuls of clothes into a large yellow dryer at the West 79th Street coin laundry last week while listening to a description of Videotown Laundrette, which is scheduled to open on the next block in two weeks.
She shook her gray hair and light blue knit cap skeptically at the tanning salon and video rentals the new laundry will offer.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
'Des Knaben Wunderhorn'
Thomas Hampson, baritone; Geoffrey Parsons, piano. Teldec 244923-2; CD only.
Mahler is the composer most closely associated with ''The Youth's Magic Horn,'' the collection of German folk songs published in the early 1800's by Achim von Arnim and Clemens von Brentano.


ANTHOLOGIES
LEAD:
AND WE SOLD THE RAIN: Contemporary Fiction From Central America.
Edited by Rosario Santos. (Four Walls Eight Windows, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $9.95.) No Central American - save Guatemala's 1967 Nobel Prize winner, Miguel Angel Asturias - figured in the literary boom that brought so many young Latin American writers to print in the 1970's and 80's.


HE PARKED HIS CONSCIENCE IN THE HANGAR
LEAD:
TRAFFICKING
The Boom and Bust of the Air America Cocaine Ring.
By Berkeley Rice.
Illustrated. 303 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.95.


Question of the Week: Next Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Views of Sport;   Giants' Fans Wake Up To the Pain Again
LEAD: This year the Novocain began to wear off.
The shot administered during the third quarter in Pasadena was at once more powerful and longer-lasting than Giants 39, Broncos 20.
It blocked out 23 years of humiliation - Who's Rocky Thompson?
What Fumble? - while cocooning us against the ensuing Strike Year and the woulda-coulda-shoulda of 1988.


Hundreds of Villagers Reported Slain in the Sudan
LEAD: The Sudanese Government has unleashed Arab militiamen against African tribesmen, killing between 300 and 1,500 African villagers in one attack and many others in a series of raids, reports from Western officials in Khartoum say.


Nancy Raffel Wed to Mark Osherow
LEAD: At the Westview Country Club in Miami, Nancy Beth Raffel was married last evening to Mark Russell Osherow.
Rabbi David Sandmel, the bride's brother-in-law, officiated.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE DIANE GOODE BOOK OF AMERICAN FOLK TALES &amp; SONGS
Collected by Ann Durell.
Illustrated by Diane Goode.
63 pp. New York:
E. P. Dutton. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 10)


Question Of the Week;   How Should N.C.A.A. Football Champions Be Decided?
LEAD: The traditional conference-to-bowl alliances should be preserved.
When bowl bids to the five major New Year's Day games are extended, also designate the four games that will then be the quarterfinals of the playoffs.
The winners of these games would meet in two semifinal games, and the winners of those would meet in the title game.


Karen Cox Weds John J. Mandy Jr.
LEAD: At the Presbyterian Church in Rye, N.Y., Karen Leslie Cox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bert George Cox of Rye and Boca Grande, Fla., was married yesterday to John Joseph Mandy Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mandy of New Paltz, N.Y.
The Rev.
David L. Uhl performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgr.
Donald J.


Julie P. Brooks Plans to Marry
LEAD: Maj. and Mrs.
Gary D. Fraley of Springfield, Va., have made known the engagement of Mrs.
Fraley's daughter, Julie Patricia Brooks, to Robert Anthony Rouse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Rouse of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.


Praising Big Blue
LEAD: To the Editor:


On the Sweetness of Cold Winter Air
LEAD: SOMEONE should've warned me before I married him!
The things one overlooks in the clutches of romance!
Things so fundamental to compatible coexistence that they should be written into the marriage vows, possibly under ''worse,'' as in ''for better or worse.'' One of these is that thou shalt not suffocate thy partner through insufficient oxygenation!


A Fan Club For the Designs of the Roadside
LEAD: MARK GRAMPP loves old drive-in movie theaters.
Steven Hirschberg admires the Pride Cleaners building in Danbury and the Carvel stand on the Darien-Norwalk border.
Philip Langdon wrote a book about chain restaurant buildings and is also fond of gas stations.
Stuart Sachs goes for gaudy commercial strips.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 24 about the preparations for the Panama invasion misidentified an American killed in the operation.
He was Pfc.
Roy Dennis Brown Jr.


Scott Carneal to Wed Katherine M. Swan
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Channing Swan of Dover, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Moore Swan to Scott Hamilton Carneal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George U. Carneal of McLean, Va.
A March wedding is planned.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have read about the problem that some people have with condensation forming between the two panes of glass in double-pane windows, but my problem is different.
My apartment has windows of this type, but with a metal frame.
When outside temperatures drop below freezing, condensation forms on the metal and then freezes to form a coat of ice on the inside.


Hint of Summer at Boat Show
LEAD: Although we'll gain less than 45 minutes of daylight between now and the end of the month, daydreams of long, soft summer days afloat on river, lake or ocean might be engendered by a visit to the 80th New York National Boat Show, which this year runs from Saturday through Jan. 21 at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in


POSTINGS: 14th for Newark;   New Airport Hotel
LEAD: Hampton Inns of Memphis is building a 154-room hotel near Newark International Airport, the 14th to serve the terminal's immediate area.
The $5 million facility on Route 1-9 in Elizabeth, N.J., facing an entrance to the airport, is expected to be finished in about a year.
Airport officials attributed part of a major increase in hotel business around the terminal to the growing practice among business executives of flying in, attending meetings overnight in conference rooms and returning home the next day.


Shopping Is a Pleasure At Some Stores
LEAD: There are department stores that make shopping a pleasure.
One is Nordstrom, a Seattle-based family-owned store that is coming to the Northeast.
Another is Swezey's, a Long Island family-owned store with locations in Patchogue, Riverhead and Setauket.


Paper in India Closes in a Dispute Over Wages
LEAD: A three-week confrontation over a pay increase ordered by a Government tribunal has closed the New Delhi edition of The Indian Express, the country's most outspoken newspaper chain.


SPECIAL SECTION: Science Under Scrutiny;   The Overlooked
LEAD: A DECADE AGO, a nationwide effort was begun to increase the number of women and minority members pursuing science-based careers.


4 Steps to Reality For School Sports
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


More for Martin
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Pastimes: Gardening;   Plants That Like Cool Treatment
LEAD: January is camellia time indoors, when the shiny-leaved, subtropical shrubs burst into bloom.
Their performance often cures cabin fever.


Wedding in April For Johanna Lief
LEAD: The engagement of Johanna Lief to John Miller Socolow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Socolow of Chappaqua, N.Y., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Lief of New York and Weston, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Lief, 28 years old and a graduate of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University, is a television producer at A.


About Cars;   Japanese Satisfy Buyers With Wide Range of Choices
LEAD: Much has been made lately of Japan's entry into the luxury field, and Honda's Acura line did pave the way for Nissan's upscale Infiniti and Toyota's Lexus.
But the truth is that the Japanese manufacturers have been tippy-toeing up that scale for some time, and their cars now cover the spectrum of buyers' wants.


POLITICS WRIT LARGE
LEAD:
THE MEXICAN MURALITS IN THE UNITED STATES
By Laurence P. Hurlburt
Illustrated. 320 pp. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press. $45.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: VERMONT earned the most from public college and university tuition for the 1988-89 academic year, collecting an average of almost $5,500 per student.
A large number of students at Vermont's public colleges are from another state and therefore pay the higher nonresident tuition.
California charged the lowest average tuition - about $500 per year.


A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry
LEAD: ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of preparations.
They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric, cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper.
These are the main components, but the list can be expanded with many others.


Q and A
LEAD:
Delinquent Mortgage


More on the 54th Massachusetts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Charm Versus News Coverage
LEAD: To the Editor:


STAND UP AND SNEER
LEAD:
THE BRIDESHEAD GENERATION
Evelyn Waugh and His Friends.
By Humphrey Carpenter.
Illustrated. 523 pp. Boston:
A Peter Davison Book/Houghton Mifflin Company.
$27.95.


Robert Methven Weds Anne Kelly
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Crestwood, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Anne Katherine Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred F. Kelly of Crestwood, and Robert Thomas Methven, a son of Helen Methven of Christchurch, New Zealand, and the late Robert W. Methven.


Communist Paper Reports Revolt at Prison in Slovakia
LEAD: Inmates have rioted at a prison in Slovakia, taking over some parts of the building, the Communist Party newspaper reported today.


Treasure House of Gods of India
LEAD: IT is a land of vast and ancient temples, of spices and brightly dyed cloth, a land whose wealth was once proverbial.
Today, Madras and its state, Tamil Nadu, retain the visible marks and the continued tradition of India's Dravidian-speaking peoples, whose Hindu culture preceded all the many foreign invasions.


Space Shuttle Poised to Begin Mission to Retrieve a Satellite
LEAD: In the most ambitious mission undertaken since the Challenger accident four years ago, the space shuttle Columbia is scheduled to be launched tomorrow to rescue and bring back to Earth a bus-size satellite that is slowly falling out of orbit.


Bad Times, Bold Plans for Brazil
LEAD: Fernando Collor de Mello, Brazil's 40-year-old President-elect, has some ambitious plans for his troubled nation.


Folk Tales Of the Hudson Recaptured in Manuscripts
LEAD:
''Anyway, they tell some queer stories about Money Hill.
There is Lige Byliss, come from over back Alipartis way; used to be one of the Point fishing crew that had a seine over there when shad used to run more plentiful than they do now.
Lige was ready to swear that the hill was haunted; never would go near the place at night, after what he said he saw there one time.


Review/Dance;   La Fosse and Kistler in Robbins's 'Faun'
LEAD: Friday night's performance by the New York City Ballet featured the season's first view of ''Afternoon of a Faun'' and ''Antique Epigraphs,'' two ballets by Jerome Robbins to Debussy, and a surprise, a modified version of Peter Martins's ''Echo.''


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   Why They Can't Spell Communism At the Elite Party School in Moscow
LEAD: Nowhere is the fragile future of communism more candidly admitted lately than within the Higher Party School, the elite finishing school for Communist apparatchiks.
There, the rector, Vyacheslav N. Shostakovsky, no mean careerist himself, has been racing to accomplish these goals:


Corrections
LEAD: On page 33 of Arts and Leisure, with the Gallery View column, a painting by Cy Twombly is reproduced upside down in some copies.
In the correct copies, a square enclosing a small numeral 2 appears in the lower right quadrant.


A Mother's Lot: Exhaustion
LEAD: I AM at home recovering from an illness.
My son's.
Nothing serious; just the usual virus that a 7-year-old seems to get every other month.
He's trying to see how far he can shoot up the mercury before Mommy passes out.
Anything less than 104 and he's toying with me.
Put the toys away, Mama. 105.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The American Contract Bridge League has a membership of about 190,000 - just about what it was a quarter of a century ago.
But a downward trend has been reversed, thanks to a number of innovative efforts to attract new members.


Bed and Breakfast
LEAD: To the Editor: There are still a large number of reasonably priced B &amp; B's in both urban and rural areas.
There are plenty of people (probably the majority of B &amp; B travelers) who are not looking for all those luxuries and amenities offered by these so-called bed and breakfast places.
In my opinion such places should call themselves inns and omit the words bed and breakfast completely.


About Men;   Finally Answering The Call
LEAD: We hardly knew each other.
He and his wife had left the city, as we had, relocating to this small town in upstate New York with the idea of finding cleaner air and less noise and russet-colored dogs in russet-colored leaves.
I had two young sons, he had three, and we shared the conviction that this small, clean, safe part of the world would insure our children ''a better way of life.


Belatedly, the 'Plot Against Harry' Hatches
LEAD: Like a man who appreciates equally a good joke at his expense and his ultimate vindication, Michael Roemer recalls the day in 1970 that he showed the movie he had just finished to executives of Columbia Pictures.
Written and directed by Mr.
Roemer, it is an intricate but low-key black-and-white comedy about a small-time Jewish racketeer called ''The Plot Against Harry.


Secret Diplomacy Is the Best Kind
LEAD: To the Editor:


December Was Coldest on Record
LEAD: WHEN Connecticut residents look back on the end of 1989, they might remember it with a shiver.
December 1989 was the coldest December on record, according to the National Weather Service.


A RELUCTANT EDUCATION
LEAD: Paulette Bates Alden wrote the article I had always wanted to write (''A Reluctant Education,'' Dec. 10).
I have been through the same: post-coital tests, biopsies, nagging (or cajoling) my husband to have intercourse at what I estimated to be the precise moment of ovulation.


IN QUOTES
LEAD: ''If the retailer hadn't had the hook out, he wouldn't have had any customers in the stores.''
Walter Loeb, analyst, Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, on the holiday-season discounts.


Another Water Main Break in Manhattan


Animal Shelters And Care
LEAD: This long-delayed letter is in response to an article about the Elmsford animal shelter [''Animal Shelter in Elmsford Faces Charges on Crowding,'' Nov. 19] .
It was disturbing.


CRIME
LEAD: After more than 30 years of duty in the 87th Precinct, Detective Steve Carella has seen it all - almost.
In VESPERS (Morrow, $18.95), a shocking new chapter in Ed McBain's continuing morality tale about the forces of good and evil in the big city, this decent Everycop confronts another crime to try his soul: the senseless murder of a Roman Catholic priest.


Agents Meet to Coordinate Effort in Bomb Inquiry
LEAD: Federal agents and law-enforcement officials from three states met this week to coordinate their investigation of the recent rash of bombings in the Southeast.


Marriage Plans For Joan E. Iler
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Borden Iler of Middletown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Joan Elizabeth Iler, to Christopher Stuart Burdge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Burdge of Shelter Island, L.I., and Boca Grande, Fla.
A September wedding is planned.


HAS FIFTH AVENUE BECOME BESIDE THE POINT?
LEAD: There is a fragility inherent in the symbolism of every great street in New York: Broadway stands for a theater that is perpetually in crisis, Wall Street for financial empires that seem ever ready to decamp to New Jersey, and Fifth Avenue, perhaps the most celebrated of them all, for a luxury and a style that once seemed unique to New York, but now feels more and more like what can be found in every medium-sized city and shopping mall from here to La Jolla.


Fashion: On the Street;   Exotic Touches, Inaugural Flair
LEAD: David N. Dinkins has shown himself to have, among other things, a keen eye for sartorial elegance.
So it was only fitting that the 8,000 or so invited guests who watched while New York City's new Mayor was sworn in last Monday comprised a most stylish group.
Luxurious fur coats were in abundance, as were cloth coats with rakishly turned-up collars.


Marilyn Horne and Gay Men's Chorus
LEAD: Marilyn Horne will be the guest soloist in a benefit concert by the New York City Gay Men's Chorus, March 1 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Proceeds from the event will benefit the chorus's AIDS Outreach Fund, which makes donations to organizations that help people with AIDS.
The mezzo-soprano will sing Brahms's ''Alto Rhapsody'' and excerpts from ''L'Italiana in Algeri'' and ''Tancredi,'' both by Rossini.


Evening Hours;   Debutantes Dip, Then Get Down
LEAD: Fifty-two debutantes from throughout the United States and from abroad made their bows to society on Dec. 29 at the 55th International Debutante Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
In the informal competition to see who could curtsy the lowest, the Texans took the matter very literally, dipping so low they practically disappeared into the grand ballroom's parquet floor.


Theaters With Something to Say
LEAD: WHAT is regional theater in New Jersey all about?
Look at the programs, promotional brochures and newsletters of the state's major playhouses and you'll come upon lofty phrases about cherishing life and affirming the spirits.


Drug Fight Attracting Recruits to Coast Guard
LEAD: THE slogan on the recruiting posters has a definite savor. ''The Law on the Sea,'' it says.
There are flags flapping in the background and the tall bow of a cutter slicing the waves.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 17 about ''Born on the Fourth of July'' misstated the branch of the military that Oliver Stone, the film's director, served with during the Vietnam War.
Mr.
Stone was in the Army.


Polish Communist Party Plans Its Revision


College Basketball;   Minnesota Upsets Illinois by 91-74
LEAD: Melvin Newbern scored a career-high 27 points and Willie Burton had 21 tonight as Minnesota defeated previously unbeaten Illinois, 91-74, in a Big Ten Conference game.


CY TWOMBLY'S TUSCAN NOTES TO HIMSELF
LEAD: One of the best art shows of last year was saved until the very end, and has just become one the best of this year: an exhibition of paintings Cy Twombly made in a villa near Bolsena in central Italy during the summer and early fall of 1969.
The series of 12 exuberantly drawn and painted abstract landscapes has never been exhibited complete, but until Feb.


Say Which
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Gorbachev Meetings Are On, Moscow Says
LEAD: Radio Moscow said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had not canceled all January meetings with foreigners to deal with domestic problems, contrary to earlier reports that upset world financial markets.


In Seaside, A Florida Town With a Vision
LEAD: UNFOLDING blue beach chairs and snapping open a crisp blue and white umbrella, the beachboy said, ''I'm sorry you had to be here over a holiday weekend.'' I scanned the beach in both directions: a David Hockney sky, light surf, talcum powder sand, the landscape punctuated by perhaps 25 beach chairs.


Campus Life: Massachusetts;   Students Angered By Rise in Tuition For Out-of-Staters
LEAD: Outraged student leaders and administrators at the University of Massachusetts faced the latest in a series of defeats Thursday when Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis approved a tuition increase for out-of-state students.


Old Enough To Offer Help For Neediest
LEAD: David I. Farber of Port Washington, L.I., received a $100 birthday gift.
As he explained it in a letter to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, ''I got it for my ninth birthday.
From my aunt.
It was originally for college, but I changed my mind.
I thought that I should give my money to charity more than college.


The Czech Writer as Politician
LEAD: To the Editor:


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bud Lake
$164,900
26 Alcrest Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 18-year-old raised ranch; den, w/w carpeting, full basement, taxes $4,092.
Howell
$115,000
139 Harbor Circle
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old ranch; dining room, 1-car garage, C/A; taxes $1,484.


Vermont
LEAD: To the Editor: When one was raised in a place as remote as northern Vermont, it comes as quite a surprise to see an article promoting the area as a base for sightseeing (''Where Vermont and Quebec Meld,'' Travel, Sept. 24).
The article, which recently came to my attention, nicely captures the similarities and distinctions between the American and


Ku Klux Klan Leader Plans To Move to North Carolina
LEAD: James W. Farrands, the first northerner in 120 years to be elected Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, plans to move to North Carolina, where, he said, the people are ''more genteel.''


Eleanor Dillon Plans to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Martin P. Dillon of Merrick, L.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter Eleanor Ann Dillon to Daniel Petigrow, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Petigrow of Stony Brook, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Dillon, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell University and is an account executive at Burson-Marsteller, a public relations company in New York.


Scotland
LEAD: To the Editor: I'd like to recommend two restaurants and a tearoom in Edinburgh.


THE HILLS ARE FULL OF DEVILS
LEAD:
THE HIGHEST ALTAR
The Story of Human Sacrifice.
By Patrick Tierney.
Illustrated. 480 pp. New York: Viking. $22.50.


In 'Impromptu,' It's George Sand And Chopin Again the 1830's?
LEAD: ''This is rock-and-roll,'' shouts an exasperated James Lapine to an uncomprehending crowd of French actors. ''This is heavy metal, this is Mick Jagger!''


A Woman In Uniform
LEAD: Women in the armed forces continue to be barred from direct combat roles, but that does not mean they are not prepared for the day that policy changes.
There was praise all around last weekrr as word spread that during the invasion of Panama, Capt.
Linda L. Bray became the first woman to command American troops in combat.


As a Mayor Returns, Atlanta Is Rich and Poor
LEAD: THE words had both a familiar ring and a touch of paradox last week when Maynard Jackson was sworn in as Mayor.


BOTH SIDES LOST
LEAD:
HOLDING THE LINE
Women in the Great Arizona Mine Strike of 1983.
By Barbara Kingsolver.
Illustrated. 213 pp. Ithaca, N.Y.:
ILR Press. Cloth, $26. Paper, $10.95.


Forward March
LEAD: During the American invasion of Panama, an Army captain was sent with a platoon of soldiers to capture a Panamanian Defense Forces guard-dog kennel.
It turned out that the kennel contained more than dogs; inside there were also P.D.F. troops.
The shooting began, and by the time it stopped, three P.D.F.


Soviet-American Base A Good Antarctic Idea
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Showcase for Innovative Creations
LEAD: HUNTINGTON'S Petite Gourmet restaurant knows what it is about.
Its priorities are straight.
A few years ago, this diminutive storefront was a fancy-food shop selling coffee beans, croissants and cheese while dishing up lunches for weary shoppers.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
The Fine Art of Bicycling


An Outcry Over The Price Of Oil
LEAD: WITH fuel oil prices at an all-time high in the county, some homeowners are seeking help, landlords are demanding emergency rent increases and political leaders are calling on state and Federal officials for an investigation.


HEALTHY ECONOMY IS SEEN FOR FARMS
LEAD: A healthy farm economy for New York State this year and the rest of the 1990's was forecast this week by agricultural experts at Cornell University in Ithaca and the State Department of Agriculture and Markets here.


BEST SELLERS LIST: January 7, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
10
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Viking,
$21.95.) After a writer of horror tales kills off his
pseudonym, the deceased goes on a murderous
rampage.
2
1
8
DADDY, by Danielle Steel.


The Rock Hudson Story Gets Told. And Perhaps Retold
LEAD: The networks are competing more fiercely and frequently over the rights to titillating true stories.
Lately, ABC and NBC have been duking it out over the life and death of Rock Hudson, the Hollywood star who died of AIDS in 1985.
Last year, NBC announced plans for a biography and commissioned a script, but ABC quietly moved in and beat the peacock to the punch.


Ex-Student Faces Trial Over Computer Chaos
LEAD: In a legal battle fraught with questions as puzzling as the offense that spawned it, a former Cornell University graduate student who is an expert on computer security is scheduled to go on trial tomorrow in Syracuse on charges of infiltrating a nationwide computer network in November 1988.


Corrections
LEAD: A report on Dec. 10 about the marriage of Zerlina Stall and Dr.
Edward J. Kaplan included outdated information on the officiating clergy.
Rabbi Charles M. Feinberg performed the ceremony alone; Rabbi Erwin Zimet had become ill and has since died.


Revolt in Rumania: Days of Death and Hope - A special report:   How the Ceausescus Fell: Harnessing Popular Rage
LEAD: On Sunday, Dec. 17, President Nicolae Ceausescu summoned top party officials across the country and, on closed-circuit television, issued orders to kill.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Photographers equipped with SLRs and interchangeable lenses may have been tempted lately by ads trumpeting a new breed of lenses.
These lenses promise outstanding color rendition, contrast and resolution.
The only missing attraction is an outstandingly inexpensive price.
But before you leap, you should understand what makes these chunks of glass so marvelous and so costly.


Carol Rifenburg Marries R. J. Miller Jr.
LEAD: Carol Elaine Rifenburg and Richard Joseph Miller Jr., an associate in the New York law firm of Dewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer &amp; Wood, were married yesterday at Westminster Presbyterian Church in Albany.
The Rev.
S.
Albert Newman performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Randall Patterson, a Roman


Question Of the Week;   How Should N.C.A.A. Football Champions Be Decided?
LEAD: The present bowls-and-polls system, though imperfect, should continue to decide the N.C.A.A. football champion.


Ms. Ellant to Wed Howard J. Reiter
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Ellant of Great Neck, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jody Patricia Ellant, to Howard Jay Reiter, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley F. Reiter of New Haven.
The wedding is to be this winter.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: In 1921, the anthropologist Wallace E. Armstrong travelled to Rossel, the easternmost island in the Louisiade archipelago of Papua New Guinea.
He found a group of 1,500 islanders cut off from their neighbors, a group possessing a vastly different language and set of customs from the other Melanesian peoples of the area.


1990's AUDIO: DAT AND DISH
LEAD: The notion of decades sticks firmly in the mind.
We speak of the 60's, or, more distantly, of the 20's and 30's as if they were sealed compartments.
But time can't be tied up into parcels.


Lark Quintet Opens Chamber Series
LEAD: THE herald of our budding 1990 concert year in Westchester is the Lark Quartet.
This top-notch, prize-winning ensemble - the violinists Eva Gruesser and Robin Mayforth, the violist Anna Kruger and the cellist Astrid Schween - plays at 3 P.M. today, as the Sunday Chamber Series resumes at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.


A Giant Sale By Uncle Sam
LEAD: The biggest real estate sale in American history is under way as the Federal Government acts on Administration orders to move quickly to dispose of properties taken over from failed savings and loan institutions.
Last week the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency handling the dispositions, listed about 30,000 properties it had acquired since Sept.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Legal Offices;   When Law Firms Move, a Lot Moves With Them
LEAD: AS office tenants, law firms tend to be a settled bunch.
Pulling up stakes for this labor-intensive profession means dismantling law libraries, transporting tons of case files and uprooting lawyers and support personnel.


Nordiques Join List Of Islander Victims
LEAD: The Islanders, who have been beating almost everyone else for the last five weeks, finally beat Quebec tonight.


Suzanne Sunshine, M.B.A. Candidate, Is Wed to William Mendel, Producer
LEAD: Suzanne Pauline Sunshine and William Robert Mendel were married last evening at the Plaza in New York by Rabbi Harvey M. Tattelbaum.


A Dinner to Showcase a Fragrant Thai Curry
LEAD: ALTHOUGH curry usually brings to mind Indian food or dishes flavored with a premixed packaged spice blend, the term is actually an umbrella for a variety of preparations.
They do have in common a collection of spices, notably turmeric, cumin, coriander, ginger and pepper.
These are the main components, but the list can be expanded with many others.


Only Billy Martin Looked Into Their Eager Young Faces;   Fans Will Remember
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE ANSWERS
LEAD: Fold Back to Quiz on Page 32
WHO SAID:


Dentist Article Hit a Nerve
LEAD: We get the impression from the letters ['Dentists Fail to Smile in Response to ''Smile, Darn You, Smile,'' ' Dec. 24]  that Barbara Klaus's article about dentists hit a nerve.
Apparently there has been considerable erosion of the funny bone.
Come, gentlemen, you must allow us our gibes as you laugh all the way to the bank.


To Start, Dinkins Sits Down And Serves Up Bad News for All
LEAD: AS David N. Dinkins sat down last Tuesday for his first working day as Mayor of New York City behind the polished desk once used by Fiorello H. La Guardia, he looked at his deputies around him and smiled. ''Well, now,'' he said. ''Here we are.''


Cocaine Ring's Latest Campaign: Kidnapping Wealthy Colombians
LEAD: Shifting tactics from bombing and killing, Colombia's cocaine traffickers have kidnapped about 20 members of wealthy families in recent days, the police say.


Whose Broker Is It, Anyway? Albany Offers An Answer
LEAD: SUPPOSE a house-hunting couple wants to make a bid on a house.
They aren't sure how much under the asking price to offer, so they ask the broker.
The broker says, ''Well, the house has been on the market for six months, you saw how old the furnace is, so why don't you try this number?''


Jacqueline K. Nash Weds Peter W. Rea
LEAD: Jacqueline Kate Nash and Peter Wilson Rea were married yesterday at the Palm House of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden by Chief Judge Thomas C. Platt of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of New York.


INSIDE
LEAD:
New Communist Schooling
Nowhere is the fragile future of communism more candidly admitted lately than within the Higher Party School, the elite Moscow finishing school for apparatchiks.
Page 14.
Japan's $1 Billion Plan
Tokyo plans to announce a package of more than $1 billion in loans and guarantees for Poland and Hungary, Japanese officials said.


Robert E. Cabana And Miss Bona To Wed in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick E. Bona of Boonton Township, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Bona, to Robert E. Cabana, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Cabana of Boonton Township.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bona, 22 years old, is an export coordinator in the kraft paper and board division of the Union Camp Corporation in Wayne, N.J.





In the Citadel, A New View of Jerusalem
LEAD: When King Herod ruled Judea, Jewish sages said of its capital, ''Whoever has not seen Jerusalem in its splendor has never seen a fine city.'' In fact the splendor of Jerusalem changed dramatically during the centuries under the influence of several major religions.
Today visitors can trace the city's history in a new museum actually woven into the ruins of its most ancient fortress.


U.S. Pledges Fund Of Up to $3 Million To Resettle Contras
LEAD: The United States is prepared to provide up to $3 million to an international commission to begin planning the voluntary relocation of contras to Nicaragua, provided that democratic conditions exist there, the State Department said Friday.


FLASHCARD
LEAD: A 1989 study of elementary-school children in North Carolina found that teachers judged latchkey children (children who care for themselves after school) to be better adjusted than children with other after-school child-care arrangements.
Researchers at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro reported that teachers found no difference in the academic performance achievement of latchkey children and other students.


CAN HE SAVE THE ELEPHANTS?
LEAD: THE FLAT, KHAKI grasslands around Nairobi recede into the blue distance as the light plane piloted by the new director of Kenya's wildlife agency pushes north, past the snowy slab of Mount Kenya to the once magnificent Meru National Park.
Today, the park lies in tatters, most of its rhinoceroses and many of its elephants killed off.


Fines and Bans
LEAD: The National Hockey League got in the last licks yesterday when it announced fines and suspensions for some of the combatants in the pregame fight between Chicago and Minnesota players 10 days ago.
Wayne Van Dorp of the Blackhawks and Shane Churla of the North Stars were suspended for 10 games each without pay and their teams were fined $25,000 each.


Philippine Rebels Kill Mayor and Threaten G.I.'s
LEAD: Communist guerrillas near an American base claimed responsibility today for the killing of a mayor and said the next targets would be American servicemen and five other town officials fighting the insurgency.


Treating Trauma
LEAD: KINDERGARTEN classmates stand by stunned as a kidnapper snatches a boy from a line of children waiting to enter their Los Angeles school in the morning; the next day the child is found dead.


Robinson Lesson: Keep It Alive
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


For the Likely Successor to Garcia, an Eloquent Pride
LEAD: Jose E. Serrano learned English from the Frank Sinatra 78's his father brought home to Puerto Rico after serving in World War II.
For years, he sang along with the records -he still plays at least one Sinatra record a day - and dreamed of being an American nightclub entertainer.


Chile Airline Stake Sold
LEAD: Scandinavian Airlines System has agreed to pay around $15 million for a 30 percent share in LAN, the Chilean airline, LAN's president, Guillermo Carey, said Friday.
Mr.
Carey told the Santiago newspaper Mercurio that the agreement would not affect LAN's traffic rights, which include profitable routes to the United States and several Latin American countries.


Shira Tokayer Weds Barry Rozenberg
LEAD: Shira Tokayer, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Marvin Tokayer of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening at the Great Neck Synagogue to Barry S. Rozenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan S. Rozenberg of Brooklyn.
Rabbi David Halpern and the bride's father performed the ceremony.


The Man Who Saved the Subways
LEAD: When David Gunn took over as president of the New York City Transit Authority six years ago, the subway system was a municipal embarrassment, a shabby symbol of a city in decline.
As he leaves there is broad agreement that it has staged a remarkable recovery.
That's a proud legacy.


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Monica Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,286,001
2,946,313
Per share
.67
.60
Yr net inc
12,804,001
10,146,560
Per share
2.62
2.08
Total assets were $799,229,606 and $709,641,454 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Elisa Amitay, Executive, Weds J. S. Mazen, Trader
LEAD: Elisa Amitay, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Noach Amitay of Tinton Falls, N.J., was married last evening at Congregation B'nai Israel in Rumson, N.J., to Jeffrey Steven Mazen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Mazen of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Jack M. Rosoff performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Marla Barugel.


This Year's Cold
LEAD: It makes you cough.
It makes you sweat.
It makes you stare aimlessly at telephones you can't find the strength to dial and at television channels you haven't the energy to switch.
It makes ''phlegm'' the buzzword of the week and possibly -heaven forfend - of the month.
It's the thing that's going around.


Sikes Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sikes Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
34,626,000
34,510,000
Net inc
1,958,000
2,678,000
Share earns
.22
.30
9mo rev
105,923,000
100,622,000
Net inc
6,946,000
7,147,000
Share earns
.78
.80


Only One Winning Ticket for Big Jackpot
LEAD: Only one winning ticket was sold for Saturday night's $35 million Lotto jackpot, and if it belongs to just one buyer, it is the richest prize ever given in the New York State Lottery, officials said yesterday.


On Rights, New York Looks to State, Not U.S., Law
LEAD: As the United States Supreme Court's civil liberties rulings have grown more restrictive in recent years, New York's highest court has been battling this trend by basing its decisions increasingly on the New York State Constitution.


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beeba's Creations (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
27,574,807
23,204,083
Net inc
174,739
404,470
Share earns
.04
.09


Reviews/Music;   The Residents' Dark Vision of American Music
LEAD: The Residents have a peculiar way of showing how much they love American music.
The San Francisco group has brought ''Cube-E: The History of American Music in Three E-Z Pieces'' to Florence Gould Hall (55 East 59th Street) through Sunday. ''Cube-E'' has segments built on cowboy songs (''Buckaroo Blues''), early blues and gospel music (''Black Barry'') and Elvis Presley hits (''The Baby King'').


Reality Hits Rams' Hero
LEAD: Next time, Willie Anderson may remember the painful lesson he learned this afternoon in the dressing room of the Los Angeles Rams beneath the stands at Giants Stadium.


Water Main Breaks Disrupt Gas Service In Lower Manhattan
LEAD: More than 4,000 apartments and businesses in the West Village and Chelsea sections of Manhattan were without gas yesterday after two watermain breaks disrupted service.


Schembechler to Tigers?
LEAD: Bo Schembechler, whose 27-year football coaching career ended with Michigan's 17-10 loss in the Rose Bowl last week, will become president of the Detroit Tigers early this week, sources said today.


Books of The Times;   Seeing New York as Nurturer of Mind and Spirit
LEAD: Our New York
Text by Alfred Kazin; photographs by David Finn
224 pages. Harper &amp; Row. $35.


An Economic Overhaul Has Poland Grumbling
LEAD: Although the Polish people are famous for making huge sacrifices for causes they believe in, there has been grumbling aplenty this week in bakeries, butcher shops, train stations - and even economists' offices - about a program to overhaul the economy.


Helen of Troy Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
41,697,000
33,313,000
Net inc
4,128,000
3,436,000
Share earns
.75
.70
Shares outst
5,513,198
5,416,817
9mo sales
96,962,000
76,165,000
Net inc
9,455,000
7,170,000
Share earns
1.72
1.52
Shares outst
5,495,761
5,396,531


Harold Field Kellogg, Architect, 72
LEAD: Harold Field Kellogg Jr., an architect who restored or altered 200 town houses in Manhattan, died of a heart ailment Jan. 1 at Cottage Hospital in Nantucket, Mass.
He was 72 years old and lived on Nantucket island.


Lira Aligned With Other Currencies
LEAD: Italian officials said Saturday that Italy's long-awaited move to bring lira trading into line with other major currencies in the European monetary system represented an essential step toward a European monetary union.


DCX Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCX Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,090,705
5,658,976
Net inc
324,024
b294,714
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Interest Rates Are Expected To Be Stable
LEAD: Credit market analysts expect money market interest rates to remain in a fairly narrow trading range for the next few weeks, despite the recent statistics that suggest that the Federal Reserve Board will remain committed to lowering short-term rates soon.


Armstrong Laboratories Inc reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armstrong Laboratories Inc (OTC)
12mo to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,971,462
11,070,840
Net inc
1,143,016
940,350
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
12,052,245
12,157,480


Rams Eliminate Giants From N.F.L. Playoffs


Upheaval in the East: Bucharest;   Rallies Criticize Rumania's New Leaders
LEAD: The new Government of Rumania came under criticism today at separate rallies of university students and supporters of the revived National Peasant Party.


Frisch's Restaurants Inc reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frisch's Restaurants Inc (AMEX)
12wks to Dec 10
1989
1988
Revenue
33,502,652
34,707,586
Net inc
758,469
914,825
Share earns
.14
.17
Shares outst
5,543,390
5,372,507
28wk rev
78,654,096
81,254,913
Net inc
1,623,986
b2,382,068
Share earns
.30
.44


Metro Matters;   Their Own Paper Gives Homeless Money and More
LEAD: Lee Stringer is 40 years old and lives in Grand Central Terminal.


Crownamerica Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crownamerica Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Revenue
18,341,000
18,686,000
Net inc
403,000
1,022,000
Share earns
.38
.97
Shares outst
1,053,000
1,055,314
The latest first quarter results included about $89,000, or 8 cents a share, in foreign exchange gains and proceeds from disposal of surplus equipment.


Carena Development reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carena Development
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,480,915,000
1,267,913,000
Net inc
54,025,000
47,118,000
Share earns
.82
.73
Results are in Canadian funds.


Skiing While Skating
LEAD: Cross-country skiers who are faced with a dearth of snow can switch to a workout on ice.
By stepping onto speed-skate blades adapted for cross-country boots, skiers can practice their skiing technique while skating.


Broncos Overtake Steelers
LEAD: He has done this kind of thing so often that John Elway no longer seems struck by its magnitude.
When he talked about it later, dissecting the plays and recalling the moments that brought the Denver Broncos down the field in the fourth period today, it was as if he were detached from it all.


Outdoors: Chasing the Hardy Snowshoe Rabbit
LEAD: HUNTING varying hare in the snow-filled woods without a dog isn't an efficient way to put meat in the freezer, but it is a delightful challenge and a good excuse, if one is needed, for winter wandering.


Veterans Ignoring Free Burial, Agency Says
LEAD: The Veterans Affairs Department says too few people are taking advantage of its most lasting benefit, free burial in a national cemetery, and at a time when department officials are planning for more space.


Zavitz Technology reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zavitz Technology
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,769,573
10,164,846
Net loss
b201,374
c581,606
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $76,026, or 1 cent a share.
c-Net income
The 1988 results represented a 10- month period.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cupertino National Bancorp
12mo Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,147,000
652,000
Share earns
1.76
1.35


Player Uses Shelter To Store Dreams
LEAD: Donald Taylor is a basketball player for Prospect Heights High School in Brooklyn who prays daily to thank God for what he has.
It is evident that he does not have much.


Battered DeConcini Fights for His Reputation
LEAD: Senator Dennis DeConcini began last Friday with a relentless, 75-minute news conference, answering one question after another about the intricacies of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association failure and his action on behalf of the institution's chairman, Charles H. Keating Jr.
Then Mr.
DeConcini turned himself over to the less-than-tender mercies of talk radio, to the suspicions and inquiries of ''Jim from Phoenix'' and any other Arizonan with a telephone and the inclination to grill his or her


Peter Cookson, 76, A Writer, Producer And Stage Actor
LEAD: Peter Cookson, an actor, producer and writer known for his 1947 stage portrayal of Morris Townsend, the philandering fortune hunter in ''The Heiress,'' died of bone cancer on Saturday at his home in Southfield, Mass.
He was 76 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


What Price Art? Ask Japanese Collectors.
LEAD: Japanese art buyers may have become a dominant force in Western auction houses, but in Japan this flood of money is increasingly a source of gloom for many members of the art establishment.


Campbell Sale Opposed
LEAD: The daughter of the late John T. Dorrance Jr., the former chairman of the Campbell Soup Company, reiterated yesterday her intention to fight any attempt by other family shareholders to put the big food company up for sale.
In a statement released by their New York law firm, Mary Alice Malone and her husband, Stuart, who own about 10 percent of the company's outstanding shares, confirmed their ''commitment to the continued independence'' of Campbell, which is based in Camden, N.J.


Clarke Taylor, Correspondent, 46
LEAD: Clarke Taylor, a New York correspondent for The Los Angeles Times who wrote film and television reviews and articles for more than a decade, died of AIDS on Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Medchem Products Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medchem Products Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,264,000
5,304,000
Net inc
1,001,000
733,000
Share earns
.22
.18


Landry Learns To Strum Along
LEAD: WHEN he was coaching the Dallas Cowboys, Tom Landry was a dour, buttoned-lipped, poker-faced man whose sideline demeanor ranged from wooden to stony.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Azinger Wins 1990 Opener: Paul Azinger benefited from Ian Baker-Finch's last-hole mistake yesterday in taking a one-stroke victory in Carlsbad, Calif., in the Tournament of Champions, the opening event on the 1990 PGA Tour.


Awaiting the Shakeout on Fleet St.
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch's highly profitable British newspaper empire may be the envy of its competitors, but Andrew Knight certainly did not think he had landed a cushy job when he agreed to oversee the five newspapers.


Reviews/Music;   Pop Culture With a Strong Undercurrent of Psychedelia
LEAD: Friday night's show at the Knitting Factory, the first of two put on by the New York-based avant-rock record label Shimmy-Disc, was fine if one agreed with one or more of the following premises: that collegiate humor is worth anything at all; that the early 1970's deserve thought; that the personal isn't as important as pop culture's power.


The U.S. and Panama: Passage;   Noriega's Wife and Daughters Ask to Leave
LEAD: The wife and daughters of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, still in the Cuban Ambassador's house, are seeking safe passage out of the country, a Cuban Embassy official said today.


Reds' Davis Gets $9.3 Million Pact
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds gave Eric Davis a three-year, $9.3 million contract today that includes performance bonuses that could make the outfielder the highest paid player in baseball.


Matco Mart Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matco Mart Inc
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,900,000
10,100,000
Net inc
224,170
180,039
Share earns
.06
.05
Yr sales
41,100,000
43,100,000
Net inc
b299,883
818,112
Share earns
.08
.22
b-After an extraordinary credit of $247,110, or 7 cents a share.


U.S. Mustn't Stop Insisting on Trade Fairness;   Bad Press for Japan
LEAD: To the Editor:


23 American Deaths: Dreams Cut Short
LEAD: Last month, 23 American servicemen died in combat in Panama.


Cambodia Emerges - After the Vietnamese Occupation.;   Phnom Penh, Eye on West, Tries To Shed Image as Hanoi Puppet
LEAD: Since the announced withdrawal of Vietnamese occupation troops in September, the Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has taken a number of steps to establish Cambodia as a nation reviving politically and economically, ready to change to get rid of its image as a puppet regime.
The goal is to gain increased international recognition, especially in the West.


Healthwatch Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthwatch Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
608,368
1,423,008
Net inc
7,732
62,306
Share earns
-
.03


Datametrics Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datametrics Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 29
1989
1988
Revenue
8,580,616
7,753,054
Net inc
80,367
b378,547
Share earns
.01
.09
Shares outst
3,658,431
3,694,068
Yr rev
29,858,275
29,460,762
Net loss
2,051,206
bc2,058,180
Share earns
-
.49
Shares outst
3,655,468
3,768,727


Digital Tape Machines Expected by July
LEAD: Digital audio tape recorders, which could become the next major advance in home stereo equipment, should begin reaching the American market by the middle of this year, two leading manufacturers said this weekend.


Rams Win Toss and Game as Giants' Season Ends
LEAD: The Giants lost the coin flip at the start of overtime today, and the Los Angeles Rams chose to receive the kickoff.
Sixty-six seconds later, the Giants' season was over.


Bridge
LEAD: Computers make possible some types of bridge events that would be impossibly tedious without them.
Pairs events scored by imps, requiring many calculations, are now commonplace as a result.
Thanks to a specially devised computer program, the first individual event on these lines will be Omar Sharif's World Individual, to be played at the Showboat Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City on


Hungary to Raise Prices Over 25%
LEAD: The Government tripled water and sewer rates today and raised prices by more than 25 percent on milk, meat and bread to move the economy toward capitalism.


Review/Music;   Strings and 2 Guitars
LEAD: Some concert programs that look odd on paper fuse in performance, forming a granitic, seemingly inevitable whole and emitting a flash of insight in the process.


Tass Reports Venture Woe
LEAD: More than 1,000 foreign concerns have created ventures with Soviet partners, but many of the enterprises have failed to get under way and some have gone bankrupt, the official news agency Tass said on Friday.


Intermetrics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermetrics Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,923,000
12,020,000
Net inc
159,000
718,000
Share earns
.04
.20
9mo rev
34,175,000
37,090,000
Net inc
1,316,000
2,082,000
Share earns
.37
.60


The U.S. and Panama: Combat;   Report of Woman's Role Is Called Into Question
LEAD: A dispute has broken out over accounts of the Panama battle in which American troops were commanded for the first time by a woman.


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   Hostility to Ethnic Turks Worries Bulgaria Leaders and Opposition
LEAD: A decision by Bulgaria's new leadership to restore long-denied rights to ethnic Turks has produced a nationalist backlash that worries both the ruling Communists and a growing opposition out to topple them.


New India Leader Dismisses Gandhi's Loyalists in Capital
LEAD: The new Government has dismissed an opposition party corporation that controls major utilities and services here in the capital, accusing it of inefficiency.


Joe Robbie, Owner of Dolphins Of Pro Football, Is Dead at 73
LEAD: Joe Robbie, the owner of the National Football League's Miami Dolphins since their inception in 1965, died today.
He was 73 years old.


Business and the Law;   Panel Urges End Of Diversity Rule
LEAD: A 200-YEAR-OLD rule that has provided the basis for Federal court jurisdiction in many commercial disputes is coming under attack again.


Diane Edbril and Richard Levitan Are Married
LEAD: Diane Edbril, a lawyer in New York, and Richard Mark Levitan, a medical student, were married yesterday at the Ballroom of Windows on the World in New York by Rabbi Steven Rosman.


Crew of Halted Freight Train Robbed by Masked Gunman
LEAD: A gunman wearing a handkerchief boarded a halted Conrail freight train, robbed the crew and fled before dawn Saturday, a sheriff's dispatcher said.


Shasper Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shasper Industries
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
33,153,869
34,424,524
Net loss
307,708
b745,657
Share earns
-
.15
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.
The company said earnings were affected by non-recurring losses related mainly to the liquidation of the inventory of the Laynco division, which was closed in 1988.


Plan to Maintain Housing Dies as a Deadline Passes
LEAD: With the backing of city officials and local lawmakers, a group of community organizers and private investors went to Washington recently with an innovative plan to save a financially troubled apartment building here as housing for low-income residents.


SALVADOR LEADER LINKS THE MILITARY TO PRIESTS' KILLING
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani said tonight that an investigative commission had found that the army was involved in the killing of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter at a university here in November.


The U.S. and Panama: The Trial;   Lawyers for Noriega Spurn Deals and Assail Witnesses
LEAD: Lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today ruled out any plea arrangement with prosecutors and attacked expected Government witnesses as lacking credibility.


Review/Theater;   Politics, Flight and Sanctuary in 'De Donde?'
LEAD: Illegal immigration from Mexico to Texas has traditionally been a search for economic opportunity - migrants looking for farm work - but increasingly it has become a case of political necessity, as people run for their lives from repressive Central American regimes.
This is the basic premise of Mary Gallagher's compelling new play, ''De Donde?,'' which opened Thursday night at the Cincinnati Playhouse in the


Commercials Become News, And the Air Time Is Free
LEAD: Advertisers are increasingly using their commercials not for the tried-and-true purposes of showcasing products or appealing to consumers' emotions, but to generate controversy that they hope will translate into free air time and press clippings.


Changes in Accounting Leave Big Firms Strong
LEAD: Several months after mergers reduced the nation's Big Eight accounting firms to the Big Six, the leading firms have experienced little drop, if any, in their influence over accounting policy as a price for their global ambitions.


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seaway Food Town (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 29
1989
1988
Sales
134,035,000
124,824,000
Net inc
404,000
1,337,000
Share earns
.18
.58


Review/Theater;   A Soviet Musical That Mixes Romance and Idealism
LEAD: The most exciting moment in ''Junon and Avos: The Hope,'' the Soviet rock musical at City Center, comes late in the first act when the 19th-century Russian explorer Count Rezanov, joined by sailors from the Russian Imperial Navy, sets sail for America.


Shoehorn Maker Has 'Concept' for Diaper
LEAD: Edward Reiss did well with shoehorns and is trying to repeat his success with a ''new concept'' in diapers.


Athletes on Campus: A New Reality - Second of three articles.;   Black Student-Athletes Find Life of Privilege and Isolation
LEAD: The pressures that affect all athletes' lives in the high-powered world of major college sports are often magnified for black athletes at predominantly white schools.


Mad Jack's Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mad Jack's Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
13,405,969
13,902,510
Net inc
458,456
131,287
Share earns
.11
.04
Mad Jack's utilized net operating loss carryforward tax benefits of $79,200 in 1989 and $52,700 in 1988.


In Chile, Economic and Political Success Go Hand in Hand;   Tell the Whole Truth
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Victories by Colgate Lead to Cozy Situation
LEAD: One of the features of Colgate's home hockey games in the cozy Starr Rink is the opportunity to win a free truck.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGI Properties (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Net inc
1,406,000
5,419,000
Share earns
.15
.70
Shares outst
9,429,035
7,727,241
Yr net inc
7,735,000
12,652,000
Share earns
.83
1.64
Shares outst
9,329,124
7,724,183


What Exactly Do We Want From Our Schools?;   'I Hate Cocktail Parties'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ian Charleson, 40, An Actor Acclaimed For 'Chariots of Fire'
LEAD: Ian Charleson, who won international fame in the 1981 film ''Chariots of Fire'' as a devout Scottish runner competing in the 1924 Paris Olympics, died of AIDS on Saturday night at his home in London.
He was 40 years old.


Upheaval in the East: The Dissident;   A Ceausescu Political Prisoner Says He Betrayed Ex-Ruler, Not Country
LEAD: Mircea Raceanu, the last political prisoner to be released by the security forces as the dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu fell, said today that he felt vindicated but not vindictive about his time on death row here.


Tokyo Journal;   Emperor Stops for Traffic Lights; Is It a Portent?
LEAD: A year to the day after Emperor Hirohito died, Japan today completed the ceremony of burying him, and perhaps with him some of the memories of Japan's militaristic past that shadowed the Japanese royal family through Hirohito's life.


Macon Journal;   Georgia's Very Own: A-Wop Bam Boom
LEAD: William C. Randall has nothing against the state song, ''Georgia on My Mind.'' As a gospel enthusiast, he admits to being moved by its mournful and bluesy evocation of a place where ''an old sweet song'' is like ''moonlight through the pines.''


49er Defense Getting Tougher
LEAD: After the game Saturday afternoon, Ronnie Lott of the San Francisco 49ers stood at his locker under the glare of camera lights and was quizzed about Minnesota's first drive, a 70-yard, 14-play and nearly eight-minute affair that ended in a Viking field goal and a 3-0 lead.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
15,376,526
12,722,007
Share earns
.77
.64
Yr net inc
56,332,802
47,368,534
Share earns
2.82
2.37


Schultz Urges New Approach to Sports
LEAD: Richard D. Schultz, executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, opened the organization's 84th convention this evening by calling for a ''new model'' in administering intercollegiate athletics and maintaining their integrity.


FLURRY OF RUMORS IN A MURDER CASE
LEAD: For the last week, the Boston police and the news media have let loose with a barrage of reports and rumors about the slaying of Carol Stuart and the apparent suicide of her husband, Charles.
The case has aroused nationwide interest and inflamed old racial animosities here.


New Markets Are Found for Large-Print Books
LEAD: In a test to determine whether it should publish large-print books, Random House recently published a large-print edition of Robert Fulghum's best seller, ''It Was On Fire When I Lay Down On It.''


Crown Andersen Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Andersen Inc
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,119,592
3,813,007
Net inc
b687,877
cd1,214,517
Share earns
.46
-
Yr rev
18,745,213
15,505,636
Net loss
b989,592
d913,182
b-Included income of $294,868, or 20 cents a share, for the quarter and a loss of $2,312,103 for the year, both from discontinued operations.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Strategies for Salvaging an Off Day on the Slopes
LEAD: ALMOST every skier occasionally experiences a down day when the skis won't turn, the feet won't stay together, you're up when you should be down, off balance and out of sync.
The problem is not unusual; the best skiers in the world admit to down days.
The difference is that excellent skiers have developed secret ways to deal with this trying condition.


Chemfix Technologies Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemfix Technologies Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,700,000
6,100,000
Net inc
462,920
114,455
Share earns
.07
.02
Shares outst
6,800,000
6,700,000


Changing Lanes
LEAD: WHEN Amleto Monacelli, a 22-year-old little-known bowler from Barquisimeto, Venezuela, joined the Professional Bowlers Association Tour in 1982, he knew that the business of making a name for himself would be no easy task.
After all, he had a sponsor to find, a language to learn and a lot to prove.


Landing the Bargain Boat
LEAD: A SOFT boating market in 1989 is good reason to take a hard look at what the industry is offering consumers this year.
The New York National Boat Show, which opens Saturday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, offers the chance to shop and compare.
Here are a few tips.


Creative Computer Applicaion reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Creative Computer Applicaion
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,575,944
3,375,808
Net loss
352,891
761,530
Shares outst
10,283,518
9,702,768
The company said its 1989 results included an inventory valuation reduction adjustment of $512,000.


Mikros Systems Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mikros Systems Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
632,257
411,363
Net inc
50,260
b61,768
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
4,360,194
1,727,316
9mo rev
1,388,076
670,803
Net loss
123,767
448,227
Shares outst
4,288,116
1,690,501


2 Players Raise Their Games All the Way to the Top;   Hull Lives Up To His Name
LEAD: ''WHEN I was young, what I admired most about my dad was his whole physical being,'' said Brett Hull of his father, Bobby, one of the National Hockey League's legendary figures.


Liable for Action
LEAD: WHEN it comes to contact sports, everything from bruises to broken bones are generally attributed to the breaks of the game, the inherent risks of playing a rough-and-tumble sport.
But in Nebraska, at least, athletes who cause injuries can sometimes be held responsible for them and for the resulting damages, even when there was no intent to injure.


Allwaste Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allwaste Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
44,275,000
38,302,000
Net inc
2,970,000
3,089,000
Share earns
.10
.10
Shares outst
30,989,000
30,007,000


Exxon Faulted On Cleanup At Bird Refuge
LEAD: A top New York State environmental official yesterday criticized the Exxon Corporation for its cleanup efforts on Pralls Island, a marshy bird sanctuary that was awash with heating oil last week after a rupture in one of the company's underwater pipelines in the Arthur Kill.


Lillian Vernon Corp reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lillian Vernon Corp (AMEX)
13wks to Nov 24
1989
1988
Revenue
56,216,000
56,577,000
Net inc
5,857,000
5,374,000
Share earns
.95
.87
Shares outst
6,177,000
6,156,000
39wk rev
112,365,000
102,143,000
Net inc
7,689,000
5,627,000
Share earns
1.25
.91
Shares outst
6,173,000
6,156,000


Herbert Briggs, 89, Professor at Cornell And Arbitrator, Dies
LEAD: Herbert W. Briggs, who taught political science and international law at Cornell for 40 years before his retirement in 1969, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 89 years old.


Move by Russ Togs
LEAD: Russ Togs Inc., a New York apparel manufacturer, picked Buckley/ DeCerchio to handle its advertising.
The account, with a $4.2 million budget, was formerly handled in house.


Khmer Rouge Report Attacking Battambang
LEAD: Khmer Rouge guerrillas said today that they had attacked Cambodia's second-largest city, setting it ablaze and forcing Government troops to call for reinforcements.


Nets Defeat Hawks And End Slide at 5
LEAD: For almost two weeks, the Nets had been wondering what it would take to win a game.
Tonight, they found out.


Two Decades Of Suffering In Cambodia
LEAD:
March 18, 1970: Prince Norodom Sihanouk is ousted by Lon Nol after nearly 30 years as leader of Cambodia.
With American backing, Lon Nol fights North Vietnamese troops and the Cambodian Communist rebels of the Khmer Rouge.
From exile in China, Prince Sihanouk heads the Khmer Rouge liberation front.


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nabors Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,212,000
16,490,000
Net inc
1,620,000
b848,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
46,571,000
43,367,000
Yr rev
74,451,000
56,139,000
Net inc
5,497,000
c22,497,000
Share earns
.12
1.00
Shares outst
46,369,000
22,396,000


Canonie Environmental Servces Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canonie Environmental Servces Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,003,000
12,984,000
Net inc
674,000
1,208,000
Share earns
.12
.21
Shares outst
5,690,000
5,639,000
9mo rev
27,428,000
38,957,000
Net inc
1,108,000
4,684,000
Share earns
.20
.83
Shares outst
5,682,000
5,625,000


Keeping Their Eyes On Their Batons And the Bottom Line
LEAD: A session of the annual Conductors' Guild conference was about to begin at Columbia University, but the 80 conductors who had come to the three-day conference from around the United States were more interested in making contacts and comparing notes.


Shift of Control at Kao
LEAD: In an unusual move for a Japanese company, the Kao Corporation said Friday that it was shifting worldwide control of two divisions to the United States and West Germany.
A spokesman for the giant consumer products concern said the heads of the two divisions would be an American and a West German.
He said its floppy disk division would be controlled by its Kao Infosystems Company subsidiary in Hyannis, Mass., because sales of the disks in the United States were several times more than in Japan.


Bond Invites Buyout Offer
LEAD: A spokesman for Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. said today that the company is willing to listen to Jeff Reynolds, an American businessman who announced Saturday that he wanted to take control of the Australian company.
The spokesman, Peter


In Chile, Economic and Political Success Go Hand in Hand
LEAD: To the Editor:


Addenda
LEAD: * DiIorio, Wergeles has changed its name to Wergeles &amp; Drazen.


A Neighborhood's Guilt Lifted, but Not the Taint
LEAD: The bizarre twists in the case of Carol and Charles Stuart have taken second place to a more immediate local concern: the damage to the reputation of Mission Hill.


Vanzetti Systems Inc reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanzetti Systems Inc (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,922,753
4,944,382
Net loss
1,061,209
467,679


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
A lower capital gains tax rate will almost certainly be enacted this year, Administration officials and Congressional leaders say.
Democrats who fought the capital gains proposals in the fall pretty much concede that they do not have enough votes to block them again.
A lower capital gains tax rate has been one of President Bush's top legislative priorities.


ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATI Pharmaceuticals Inc (OTC)
12mo to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,971,462
11,070,840
Net inc
956,184
b1,051,870
Share earns
.09
.10
Shares outst
10,471,325
10,462,028
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $106,111, or 1 cent a share.


Costco Wholesale Corp reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Costco Wholesale Corp (OTC)
12wks to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
833,988,000
579,295,000
Net inc
6,861,000
2,795,000
Share earns
.21
.11
Shares outst
32,769,000
25,919,000
Last year's first quarter results included a $982,000 gain related to the sale of a land parcel which, on an after-tax basis, increased net income by $599,000, or 2 cents a share.


Cintas Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cintas Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
70,276,000
60,650,000
Net inc
6,331,000
5,227,000
Share earns
.45
.37
Shares outst
14,156,885
14,139,790
6mo sales
136,216,000
117,239,000
Net inc
12,262,000
9,904,000
Share earns
.87
.72
Shares outst
14,152,398
13,705,355


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 7, 1990:
MONDAY
Carolina Fght Corp
Phillips Pete Co
Kemper Corp
Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt
Oxford Inds
TUESDAY
Centerior Energy Corp
Weyerhaeuser Co
Diversified Energies Inc
WEDNESDAY
Bard CR Inc
Southwestern Pub Svc
CBI Inds
Woolworth Corp


In Northeast, a Battle Over Fuel
LEAD: An energy war is taking shape, as the owners of giant natural gas reserves in the Canadian Rockies prepare to challenge the oil barons from Houston to Riyadh.
The battleground is the Northeast - the part of the country most reliant on fuel oil.


Ford Division May Be Sold
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company is believed to be trying to sell its aerospace division, a large supplier of missiles, flight training technology and satellites.


Designatronics Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designatronics Inc (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,098,000
5,922,000
Net inc
129,000
61,000
Share earns
.04
.02
The share earnings were adjusted to give retroactive effect to a 5 percent stock dividend declared on Sept.


Sri Lanka Tamils Retaking Territory
LEAD: In a turnabout that is only beginning to be fathomed in a country at war with itself for more than a decade, a Tamil guerrilla army pounded by the Sri Lankan military and hunted down by Indian troops is closer than ever to its goal: domination of the Sri Lankan northeast, the homeland of the Tamil-speaking people.


The Cost of Travel Goes Up


Reviews/Dance;   'Cortege Hongrois,' Big and Cheerful, From City Ballet
LEAD: George Balanchine created ''Cortege Hongrois'' in homage to Melissa Hayden on her retirement from the New York City Ballet in 1973.
His third nod to the ''Raymonda'' of his Imperial Ballet days in St.
Petersburg, ''Cortege Hongrois'' is an artificial blending of two elements of the third-act divertissements of ''Raymonda'' and a galloping salute to Russian ballet classicism, character dancing and spectacle.


Under Pressures and Stigma, More Doctors Shun Abortion
LEAD: Under siege from protesters and largely isolated from medical colleagues, doctors who perform abortions say they are being heavily stigmatized, and fewer and fewer doctors are willing to enter the field.


Market Place;   Stocks in Europe Start Year Strong
LEAD: THE stock markets in West Germany and Britain came out of the blocks like a shot this New Year's week, hitting record highs and carrying into 1990 much of the euphoria and buying sentiment of the end of last year.
But even as these markets were taking off, several analysts were waving a caution flag, expressing concerns about the effect of Europe's rising interest rates and doubts about the optimism that has greeted changes in Eastern


Counting on Congress
LEAD: Members of the 101st Congress, on average, showed up for 95 percent of the roll call votes in last year's session.
That was the highest rate of participation in the 36 years that Congressional Quarterly magazine has been keeping track.
At first glance, it might appear that the 101st is attending more to its legislative obligations.


Devtek Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devtek Corp
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,016,000
32,496,000
Net inc
1,285,000
1,610,000
Share earns
.13
.17
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Reviews/Dance;   Aggression and Passion in Many Guises
LEAD: Brenda Daniels was choreographically both serious and comic in her program on Saturday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
But she was at her best when she was the least facetious.


Autoclave Engineers Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autoclave Engineers Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
19,946,000
17,149,000
Net inc
1,310,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Shares outst
4,349,505
4,341,902
6mo sales
38,360,000
32,876,000
Net inc
2,312,000
b2,307,000
Share earns
.53
.53
Shares outst
4,324,948
4,343,554


CULT LEADER SEIZED IN FAMILY'S KILLING
LEAD: Federal agents today arrested a religious cult leader wanted in the slayings of a family of five in Ohio and numerous weapons were seized, including an AR-15 assault rifle, the authorities said.


The U.S. and Panama: The Toll;   Deaths of 23 Americans in Panama: Their Dreams Cut Short
LEAD: Late last month Sheree Nelson Manrique got a strange, hurried telephone call from her husband, Alejandro, an Army paratrooper. ''Watch the news,'' he said. ''I love you.''


Question Box
LEAD:
Dodger Managers
Q.
In the 51 seasons since Leo Durocher became their manager in 1939, the Dodgers - in Brooklyn and Los Angeles - have had only five full-time managers.
Has any nonexpansion team had as few in that span?
A.
The contest is not even close, for not even an expansion team has had fewer managers.


Networks Seek a Winner After a Weak Fall Season
LEAD: THE network television season so far has been like the lottery.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Twin Med Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, for its Epi Products subsidiary's home health-care products with billings of $2 million.
The agency also won the account of New Zealand Fruit Co., Seattle, whose billings previously were $600,000.


Valley Forge Scientific Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Forge Scientific Corp (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,215,659
737,335
Net inc
b130,640
c91,777
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
5,194,579
4,685,734
b-Included a non-recurring $10,100 gain from the sale of a fixed asset.


Margaret Kelly, 91, Grace Kelly's Mother
LEAD: Margaret Kelly, the mother of the late Princess Grace of Monaco and the matriarch of the famed Kelly family of Philadelphia, died of pneumonia Saturday at a convalescent home here.
She was 91 years old.


Review/Television;   The Life, Death and Secrets of Rock Hudson
LEAD: Having spent most of his life trying to keep his homosexuality secret, Rock Hudson ended up having his AIDS-related death sensationalized internationally.
No more hiding.
The all-American guy, the very image of handsome ruggedness, was gay.
Ironically, his death was a turning point in the strenuous efforts by concerned citizens, especially gay groups, to have serious attention focused on AIDS.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


Rousseau Landscape Stolen in Soviet Union
LEAD: Thieves stole a painting by the 19th-century French artist Theodore Rousseau from a museum in the Russian Republic, the Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported today.


Key Cases Before the Court
LEAD: These are some of the major cases the Court of Appeals is to hear early this year.
The court sets its calendar only a few months in advance.


Many Covet Leadership of Education Panel
LEAD: Although Assemblyman Jose R. Serrano has yet to announce formally that he is running for Congress, his colleagues are lining up for the Education Committee chairmanship he would leave behind if he moves to Washington.


U.S. Disputes Korean's Account
LEAD: The United States took the unusual step of criticizing former President Chun Doo Hwan's ''distorted'' testimony last week regarding American actions during the 1980 Kwangju incident in order to stem anti-American sentiment, officials said on Saturday.


Park Electrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Electrochemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Sales
38,493,000
34,770,000
Net inc
1,067,000
1,201,000
Share earns
.21
.23
9mo sales
111,267,000
111,064,000
Net inc
3,142,000
b6,096,000
Share earns
.61
1.17


For the Neediest Cases Fund, A Hebrew Gift of Chai, or Life
LEAD: Most of the gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund come in round figures, but a significant number are made out for $18 or multiples of 18 - for chai, the Hebrew word for life.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''A lot of times I feel that they are part of the football team, or the basketball team, but they aren't part of our team.


TCA Cable TV Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCA Cable TV Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,587,000
18,143,000
Net inc
2,269,000
3,304,000
Share earns
.10
.14
Yr rev
79,088,000
68,938,000
Net inc
10,813,000
9,573,000
Share earns
.45
.40


Travelers to Cut Back on Medical Coverage
LEAD: Citing poor financial results, the Travelers Corporation has said it plans to stop selling major medical health insurance to individuals.
Another large insurer, Aetna Life and Casualty, is considering a similar move.


Body Found on Prison Land Is of Man Last Seen in 1988
LEAD: The skeletal remains found on the grounds of the Federal prison in Danbury last week have been identified as those of a 34-year-old Connecticut man.


Concord Fabrics Inc reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Fabrics Inc (AMEX)
13wks to Dec 3
1989
1988
Sales
40,448,855
35,853,962
Net inc
536,612
23,102
Share earns
.15
.01


U.S. Mustn't Stop Insisting on Trade Fairness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush's Double Vision
LEAD: Most of the television news networks have rejected, respectfully but properly, President Bush's request that they inform him before they again use the common split-screen technique in broadcasting one of his news conferences.


Ford Expands Air-Bag Plans to All Its Cars
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company will make air bags for the driver and front-seat passenger standard on all its cars by the mid-1990's, Harold Poling, Ford's vice chairman, said today.


Ault Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ault Inc
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Sales
4,238,000
4,535,000
Net inc
20,000
210,000
Share earns
.01
.11
6mo sales
8,207,000
9,054,000
Net inc
5,000
325,000
Share earns
-
.17


Corporate Management Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corporate Management Group
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,798,030
1,714,578
Net inc
19,912
201,929
Share earns
.01
.08
9mo rev
5,988,986
3,348,050
Net inc
83,680
135,546
Share earns
.02
.05


Chronicle
LEAD: The television industry gathered to hug itself last night.
The Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, which presents the Emmy awards, installed seven new members in its Hall of Fame.


Veronex Resources Ltd reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Veronex Resources Ltd (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
809,000
3,000
Net loss
186,000
15,505,000
9mo rev
2,708,000
21,000
Net loss
581,000
16,362,000
Last year Veronex reported a $15,052,000, or $1.59 a share, revaluation of assets.


In Bensonhurst, a New Course Tackles Bias
LEAD: The memory and the lesson of Yusuf K. Hawkins's death came alive again recently in a high school classroom in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, not far from the street on which the black 16-year-old was shot dead last year.


What Exactly Do We Want From Our Schools?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leo Burnett Quietly Builds Its Renown for Ads
LEAD: At first glance the Leo Burnett Company seems to be a provincial advertising agency steeped in the cozy Midwestern style it has created for clients like McDonald's, Kellogg and Keebler.
Every visitor to the agency, for example, is offered a shiny red apple - more than 400,000 are handed out each year at its headquarters here.


On-Line Software International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* On-Line Software International Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,728,000
20,182,000
Net inc
774,000
c444,000
Share earns
.13
-
Shares outst
5,918,000
6,085,000
6mo rev
41,749,000
38,847,000
Net inc
b1,118,000
c629,000
Share earns
.19
-
Shares outst
5,935,000
6,216,000


Cam Data Systems reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cam Data Systems
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,734,832
3,362,058
Net loss
169,814
700,560
Shares outst
1,055,540
1,012,000


U.S. Farm Credit Agency to Price Its Bonds
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, Wednesday's auction of seven-year notes and Thursday's auction of one-year bills.


Alabama's Curry Resigns
LEAD: Bill Curry, the football coach at the University of Alabama, announced today he would resign his job and seemed headed for the head-coaching post at Kentucky.


Critics' Award to 'Drugstore Cowboy'
LEAD: ''Drugstore Cowboy,'' Gus Van Sant Jr.'s tale of a small commune of middle-class junkies in Portland, Ore., was voted the best film of 1989 by the National Society of Film Critics, a 39-member group representing critics from New York, Boston, Washington, Los Angeles and other cities.
Mr.
Van Sant was also voted best director.


Bloomingdale's Sale Dropped
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation has abandoned its attempt to sell Bloomingdale's, The Financial Times reported in its Monday issue.


The Lethal Fist
LEAD: ''Noriega is not a partner of mine,'' said Mike Harari, a former Israeli intelligence officer, to a television interviewer in Jerusalem. ''I did not supervise or train his forces.
I did not organize his personal guard.
I am simply a private individual involved in business.''


The U.S. and Panama: Diplomacy;   NO MORE PANAMAS, BUSH AIDES PREDICT
LEAD: Pursuing a campaign to smooth relations with Latin American countries, top aides to President Bush said today that the Panama invasion did not portend a new policy of using the military to pursue drug dealers or to police elections in other countries.


Interphase Corp reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interphase Corp (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,502,645
19,149,957
Net loss
106,920
b1,627,689
Share earns
-
.60
Shares outst
3,132,709
2,732,326
b-Net income
The loss is primarily due to expenses of about $1,434,000 relating to the funding of its majority owned start-up company, Omni Solutions, a one-time charge of about $352,000 in connection with the termination of its acquisition of Ciprico


Shuttle Ready to Go, but Weather May Not Be
LEAD: Despite gloomy weather prospects, the countdown continued tonight toward a scheduled launching of the space shuttle Columbia on Monday morning on a mission to retrieve a satellite that is slowly dropping out of orbit.


Cabot Medical Corp reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Medical Corp (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,252,000
20,837,000
Net inc
1,426,000
1,259,000
Share earns
.21
.18
Shares outst
6,923,000
6,870,000


Miller, Herman Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller, Herman Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
212,442,000
205,189,000
Net inc
11,332,000
11,933,000
Share earns
.47
.49
Shares outst
24,198,973
24,313,623
6mo sales
408,585,000
395,687,000
Net inc
19,722,000
b24,709,000
Share earns
.82
1.01
Shares outst
24,184,657
24,446,645


2 Players Raise Their Games All the Way to the Top;   LaFontaine Seizes the Spotlight at Last
LEAD: JUST the other day, the National Hockey League's leading scorer, in town to spruce up his image with a haircut, stopped off at his customary diner for a bite.
Nobody made a fuss, which suited him.
Pat LaFontaine, on whose shoulders the Islanders are staking their claim to fame in the new decade, likes to leave the hoopla at the rink.


Drug Programs Needed For Mothers-to-Be
LEAD: To the Editor:


27 HURT IN RIOTING AT A WESTERN JAIL
LEAD: Prisoners in a cell block built to hold 24 men but crammed with 113 staged a brief but furious riot Saturday night that resulted in 27 injuries and a lockdown today.


Bishop Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bishop Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,691,000
2,322,000
Net inc
38,000
c176,000
Share earns
.02
.07
Year rev
10,217,000
10,061,000
Net loss
b355,000
bc2,531,000
b-Included non-recurring repositioning costs of $144,000 in the latest 12 months and $2,040,000 for year-ago period.


Southern Hospitality Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Hospitality Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,169,760
5,050,711
Net loss
49,320
bd234,119
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
5,536,566
4,881,244
6mo sales
10,963,770
10,902,960
Net inc
52,368
cd142,132
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
5,536,566
4,881,244


U.S. Woman Tells of Salvadoran Ordeal
LEAD: Jennifer Jean Casolo, the American seized in El Salvador in November and expelled from the country after 18 days in prison, offered new details yesterday about her arrest and imprisonment.


Church and State Clash Over AIDS Education
LEAD: Robert Scott pays income tax but refuses to vote.
He owns a safety-eyeshield business here but shuns the Chamber of Commerce.
His children attend public schools but do not socialize with other students.


Non-Persons No Longer
LEAD: In the last year, the Phnom Penh Government has recruited increasing numbers of non-Communist professionals who were either students or public officials associated with the old Sihanouk and Lon Nol Governments.


Israeli Army Kills Infiltrator
LEAD: An Israeli Army patrol shot and killed a Jordanian soldier who had crossed the border into Israeli territory south of the Sea of Galilee, the army said today.


Radiant Technology Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiant Technology Corp (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,975,200
6,608,300
Net inc
b61,900
b298,000
Share earns
.02
.11
b-After extraordinary credits of $13,500 for the latest year and $129,000, or 5 cents a share, for 1988.


Upheaval in the East: East Berlin;   Anti-Communist Coalition Falters in East Germany
LEAD: A coalition created by six East German reform movements crumbled today, three days after being formed as a challenge to the Communist Party.
Its failure underscores the difficulties that reformist forces face in the May elections there.


REDUCED TAX RATE ON CAPITAL GAINS WIDELY EXPECTED
LEAD: A lower capital gains tax rate, one of President Bush's top legislative priorities, will almost certainly be enacted this year, Administration officials and Congressional leaders say.


Reviews/Music;   Introspections Translated to Sound
LEAD: Saturday night's concert at Washington Square Church, sponsored by the World Music Institute and featuring the flutist James Newton, the cellist Abdul Wadud and the komungo player Jin Hi Kim, seemed like the presentation of intensely personal music.
The musicians are virtuosos, and they have an introspective way of playing that intimates that each phrase has disclosed some thoughts.


At Electronics Show, Phones of the Future
LEAD: The public got its first glimpse of what home telephones of the future will look like at the winter Consumer Electronics Show, which opened here this week.


People
LEAD: *
William M. Backer, president and worldwide executive creative director of Backer Spielvogel Bates, has been named chairman of the advisory board of the 1990 Clio awards.


United Tote Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Tote Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,201,450
6,291,317
Net inc
1,363,553
838,030
Share earns
.44
.34
Shares outst
3,079,667
2,445,395
Yr rev
31,234,661
22,521,339
Net inc
1,777,174
b1,760,073
Share earns
.58
.72
Shares outst
3,081,593
2,445,395


Indians and Neighbors Are at Odds Over Waste Dump on Reservation
LEAD: This desolate patch of windswept high desert seems an odd place for two seemingly disparate national issues to intersect: Indian rights and the disposing of mountains of urban garbage.


6 Children Die as Fire Sweeps a Foster Home
LEAD: Fire swept a foster home in a rural area early today, killing six young children and an elderly woman, officials said.


2 Holders Seek Role With G.M.
LEAD: Dismayed by the long competitive decline of the General Motors Corporation, two of the nation's largest pension funds have taken the unprecedented step of urging G.M. directors to consider a broad range of candidates to succeed Roger B. Smith, who is to retire this year after a decade as G.M.'s chairman and chief executive.


Ferrer Sworn In As Bronx Chief For 4-Year Term
LEAD: The Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, taking the oath of office for his first full term, told an enthusiastic Bronx audience yesterday that ''together we have begun to transform this borough'' from ''the national symbol of urban failure'' to ''the leading example of urban revival.''


Ewing's 44 Lead Knicks
LEAD: Patrick Ewing has been the Knicks' leader all season, but last night, he was more dominating than usual.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
Consumer Credit
Nov.
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
None
Thursday
None
Friday
Producer Price Index
Dec.
Retail Sales
Dec.


Asians Cited On 'Dumping'
LEAD: Far Eastern manufacturers have been dumping certain machine tools, small-business telephone systems and door locks in United States markets, the Commerce Department said last week.


Deltak Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deltak Corp
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,961,517
9,806,981
Net inc
350,742
425,626
Share earns
.30
.37
Yr rev
47,249,812
36,220,740
Net inc
1,679,869
986,438
Share earns
1.42
.86


The Gamble And the Call
LEAD: DURING the Giants' preparations for the Los Angeles Rams, the players were often reminded by Bill Parcells of the importance of ''understanding what goes on'' in the Super Bowl playoffs.


The Ending Boils Down To a 'Bump'
LEAD: Out of respect for the Los Angeles Rams' speedy wide receivers, the Giants' defensive backs played seven yards off the line of scrimmage for the first two halves today.
The only time Mark Collins, a left cornerback, moved up to bump Willie (Flipper) Anderson came in overtime.
Collins and the Giants paid dearly for the change in strategy.


OPEC's Output at 1989 High
LEAD: Oil output of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries reached a 1989 high of 23.6 million barrels a day throughout December and will probably remain strong in early 1990 despite a new production-cutting accord, oil industry, government and shipping sources said last week.


Upheaval in the East: The Pastor;   Catalyst of Revolution Still Guarded by Army
LEAD: More than two weeks after Rumania's revolution, Laszlo Tokes, the clergyman whose resistance to the old regime helped ignite the insurrection and who became its first hero, remains under military guard in a remote village after what might have been an assassination attempt, his family said today.


Senior Senator From Idaho To Retire After Current Term
LEAD: Senator James A. McClure, Republican of Idaho, said Friday that he would not seek re-election in 1990, ending his 24-year career in Congress.


Effort to Insure Adirondacks' Future Leads Planner to Albany and Beyond
LEAD: Twenty years ago, armed with a forestry degree and a deep affinity for the North Country, George D. Davis began preparing his doctoral thesis on land-use planning in the Adirondacks.
The thesis is still unfinished: he has been too busy planning land use in the Adirondacks.


National Defense: Against What?
LEAD: It won't be enough.
In the 1991 budget about to go to Congress, the Administration will probably propose a cut of only $6 billion in military spending.
The President and Defense Secretary Cheney will have to make deeper cuts.
As the Soviet threat recedes, Congress will press to reduce the deficit and spend more for domestic needs.


Violence at Discotheque Mobilizes Neighborhood
LEAD: Like many of the people waiting to enter the Underground on Friday night, Yvette Garner knew that three young men, including two bystanders, had been shot in front of the nightclub a week before.


Freda Corp reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freda Corp (OTC)
13wks to Aug 26
1989
1988
Revenue
15,543,802
16,772,706
Net inc
64,807
157,295
Share earns
.04
.09
52wk rev
58,735,951
58,281,947
Net inc
193,030
1,032,623
Share earns
.11
.57
Revenue represent gross revenues.


Governments Minimizing Message of 'Drug Wars'
LEAD: More than any other single event in recent times, the murder of a United States Drug Enforcement Administration agent in Mexico five years ago soured relations between the two countries.
Now, Mexican and American officials fear that a television mini-series about the murder could reopen those wounds, and they are seeking to blunt the program's impact through an unusual exercise in television diplomacy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
A.T.&amp; T., to Wahlstrom &amp; Co., for the Yellow Pages advertising of its consumer products units.


Doctor's Lawyer Blames Hospital In Trial on AIDS
LEAD: A 32-year-old doctor is dying of AIDS because of improper hospital procedures, the doctor's lawyer said yesterday during opening statements in a $175 million lawsuit in Brooklyn.


Khmer Rouge Report of Raid Is Called Inflated
LEAD: Claims by the Khmer Rouge on Sunday to have made a frontal attack on Cambodia's second largest city, setting it ablaze, appear to have been exaggerated, Western and Asian diplomats said here today.


Limerick 2 Plant Opens
LEAD: Ten years late and either several billion over budget or $382 million under, depending on how it's counted, the Philadelphia Electric Company's Limerick 2 plant began commercial operation yesterday, the company said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Electronics Retailer Hires 'Crazy' Pitchman
LEAD: Crazy Eddie may be bankrupt, but Jerry Carroll's career as an electronics pitchman continues.
Mr.
Carroll, who screamed the praises of Crazy Eddie's ''insane'' low prices for 17 years, has agreed to create a character for Sixth Avenue Electronics, which operates two stores in Manhattan and one in Paramus, N


Bronko Nagurski Is Dead at 81; Star Runner for Chicago Bears
LEAD: Bronko Nagurski, whose great strength as a running back and tackler seemed to football fans of the 1920's and 1930's the epitome of bonecrushing power, died Sunday night at Falls Memorial Hospital in International Falls, Minn.
He was 81 years old.


Giants Played Well Enough to Win, but. . . .


Bridge
LEAD: Since 1953 the American Contract Bridge League has published a most important annual record of hands played in the world championship.
This started as a bare record of the facts, but is now a sophisticated production with photographs and detailed analyses.


Shiite Muslim Factions Allow A 7-Hour Truce in Lebanon
LEAD: After 17 days of ferocious fighting in southern Lebanon, warring Shiite Muslim factions observed a seven-hour truce today, allowing the Red Cross to tend to the dead and wounded.


Crucial Time for New York Stores
LEAD: In the embattled terrain of New York-area retailing, seven key department-store groups remain in the fight not only for customers but for survival itself in the most difficult period American retailing has faced in decades.


Phnom Penh Journal;   G.I.'s Were Here. Gods, Too. A Journey in Time.
LEAD: The road from Ho Chi Minh City to Phnom Penh leads backward in time, from a primitive rural 20th-century society to a still more primitive 19th-century society.


Infested Traffic Lights
LEAD: An irresistible attraction to electric fields is causing fire ants to wreak havoc on traffic signal systems in Texas and several other Southern states.
As a result of infestation, researchers reported, ''The fire ant has become a potentially serious problem to the security and efficacy of signal systems in Texas.


Volt Information Sciences Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volt Information Sciences Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 3
1989
1988
Revenue
147,996,000
124,740,000
Net inc
b1,349,000
c375,000
Share earns
.22
.06
Shares outst
6,083,789
6,288,808
Yr rev
511,326,000
476,505,000
Net inc
b4,402,000
c4,505,000
Share earns
.71
.68
Shares outst
6,155,469
6,585,803


Nine Contras Go Home to Take Part in Vote
LEAD: A top official and eight others from the United States-backed contras today ended their armed fight against the leftist Sandinista Government to return home and take part in the electoral process.


Politics Aside, Flyers and Soviets Resume Action Tonight
LEAD: Late last week, Ed Snider, the owner of the Philadelphia Flyers, reacted angrily when Aleksandr Mogilny of the Buffalo Sabres was ordered to sit out a game against a touring Soviet team.


Diplomats See Barriers to a Trial of Salvador Military
LEAD: Despite President Alfredo Cristiani's announcement that an investigation has revealed Army involvement in the killing of eight people, including six outspoken Jesuit priests, there are major obstacles to a successful prosecution, diplomats and lawyers here said today.


Mellon Chief to Head Fidelity Bancorporation
LEAD: In a move that caught many in the banking industry by surprise, Anthony P. Terracciano was named late yesterday to be chairman, president and chief executive of the First Fidelity Bancorporation, a regional bank holding company based in Lawrenceville, N.J.


Arthur Kill Shipping Channel Reopens


Soviets and Partners Say Comecon Needs Repair
LEAD: The Soviet Government agreed with its Eastern European trading partners today that there is ''no dynamism'' in their Comecon trade bloc but insisted that the association was needed and could be repaired.


NORTHWEST IS HIT BY STRONG STORMS
LEAD: A series of storms packing heavy rain and high winds rolled across the Northwest over the weekend, cutting electricity to thousands of customers, felling trees and derailing a freight train.


Knogo Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knogo Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,713,000
16,184,000
Net inc
969,000
1,287,000
Share earns
.19
.25
Shares outst
5,233,647
5,188,469
9mo rev
49,042,000
45,668,000
Net inc
1,302,000
4,147,000
Share earns
.25
.80
Shares outst
5,224,969
5,197,809


Researchers Prepare For Fist Human Tests Of an Artificial Lung
LEAD: A DEVICE that adds oxygen and removes carbon dioxide from the blood has been developed as a temporary artificial lung, ready for its first human tests.
The device is to be inserted in a vein in the groin or neck and then guided into the body's main vein in the chest, where it can stay in place for up to a week, easing the burden on the lungs while they heal.


E. Leland Webber, 69; Led a Chicago Museum
LEAD: E. Leland Webber, who worked at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago as an usher at age 13 and eventually became its president, died of cancer Sunday in Evanston (Ill.) Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Wilmette, Ill.


Kentucky Hires Curry
LEAD: Bill Curry, who resigned Sunday as head coach at Alabama, became the coach at Kentucky yesterday after his hiring was approved by the board of directors of the school's Athletics Association.


Parrots in the Snow: A Comeback
LEAD: IN the rugged Chiricahua Mountains, where the winter landscape is shrouded in snowy silence, a handful of thick-billed parrots are on the wing, the survivors of a program to take birds seized from smugglers and reintroduce them to the wild.


Ganse Little, 85, Dies; Headed Presbyterians
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
H.
Ganse Little, a clergyman, author and former head of the United Presbyterian Church, U.S.A., died of complications of Alzheimer's disease last Tuesday at the Sweet Brook Nursing Home in Williamstown, Mass.
He was 85 years old and lived in Williamstown.


Fare-Card System Coming to New York City Subway and Buses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Digital Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
55,960,000
52,162,000
Net inc
b12,224,000
cd4,245,000
Share earns
.82
-
Shares outst
14,840,000
14,457,000
6mo sales
109,103,000
103,879,000
Net inc
b19,327,000
d2,824,000
Share earns
1.30
.19
Shares outst
14,858,000
14,869,000


Ewing at the Heart Of Knick Thrill Show
LEAD: ''And here they are, New York's biggest thrill, the New York Knickerbockers!'' says Mike Walczewski, the public address announcer, before he introduces the starting lineups at the Garden.


Giant Telescope Prepares to Take Its First Look Skyward
LEAD: PLOWING through the final thickets of technical and human problems, builders say that the Keck Telescope, the largest and most powerful optical telescope in the world, will be ready to open its huge glass eye to the heavens this spring.


Tadeusz Brzezinski, Ex-Polish Diplomat, Dies at 93 in Canada
LEAD: Tadeusz Brzezinski, a former Polish consular official and the father of President Carter's national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, died of pneumonia on Sunday at a nursing home in Montreal.
He was 93 years old and a resident of Montreal.


Color and Curves From Burrows
LEAD: The newest designer to introduce a collection of custom-made clothes is Stephen Burrows.
He is to present the mostly jersey collection at the photography studio of Charles Tracy this morning, just six months after he introduced his first ready-to-wear collection in eight years.


Joe Robbie, 73, N.F.L. Owner Who Founded Miami Dolphins
LEAD: Joe Robbie, the owner of the National Football League's Miami Dolphins since their inception in 1965, died Sunday.
He was 73 years old.


Detroit Tigers Name Schembechler President
LEAD: Bo Schembechler, who recently retired as football coach at Michigan, has decided to devote his organizational skills to baseball.


A New Supercomputer From Intel
LEAD: The Intel Corporation introduced a supercomputer yesterday that analysts said should gain a share of the growing commercial market but was unlikely to hurt the market's leader, Cray Research Inc.


Horse Racing's Oscars
LEAD: Here is the voting for thoroughbred racing's Eclipse Awards of 1989, which were announced yesterday.
The Horse of the Year and the awards for champion jockey and trainer will be announced Jan. 27.
2-Year-Old Colt: Rhythm 21, Grand Canyon 15, Summer Squall 12.
2-Year-Old Filly: Go For Wand 30, Stella Madrid 15, Sweet Roberta 3.


Bayly Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bayly Corp
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,899,000
11,170,000
Net loss
4,170,000
7,601,000
Shares outst
2,292,000
2,276,000
Yr rev
75,920,000
106,335,000
Net loss
6,247,000
14,844,000
Shares outst
2,292,000
2,280,000


Genetic Maps May Point the Way To Healthier and Sturdier Crops
LEAD: EVEN as plans are being made for an international effort to map the entire genetic blueprint of humans, plant scientists are proposing similar efforts to understand the hereditary messages that control the characteristics of plants.


AMTRAK REVENUE AT ALL-TIME HIGH
LEAD: Despite a slight decline in the number of passengers on its trains, Amtrak reported yesterday that it earned record revenue last year, reducing its reliance on Federal subsidies to the lowest level ever.


Metro Datelines;   Bomb Case Figure Receives Probation
LEAD: An animal-rights advocate was sentenced yesterday to the time she has spent in jail and three years of supervised probation for possession of two powerful pipe bombs found in her Queens apartment.


Baker to Visit Moscow to Discuss Arms Pact
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d will go to Moscow early next month to try to remove obstacles to a new Soviet-American treaty sharply reducing long-range nuclear missiles, Bush Administration officials said today.


Books of The Times;   Letters From an Unlikely Literary Friendship
LEAD:
Henry James and Edith Wharton
Letters: 1900-1915
Edited by Lyall H. Powers
Illustrated. 412 pages. Charles Scribner's Sons. $29.95.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Drop
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell again in fairly active trading yesterday, as dealers sold securities in the wake of a big drop in the dollar.


N.C.A.A. Eases Its Restrictions on Aid to Athletes
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association voted overwhelmingly today to allow incoming student-athletes to receive financial aid based on their family income, even if they fall short of academic requirements for athletic scholarships.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cipher Data Products Inc., San Diego, a maker of magnetic tape drives, is negotiating a confidentiality and standstill agreement with the Archive Corp., Costa Mesa, Calif., about Archive's hostile bid of $8 a share.


Soviet Muslims Seek Open Border With Kin in Iran


Warm Temperatures Send Energy Prices Down Again
LEAD: Energy prices continued to plunge yesterday as unseasonably warm weather covered most of the nation.


G.M. Denies Funds a Role On Its Board
LEAD: Responding to two large pension funds that asked to be included in talks about management succession, the General Motors Corporation said today that such deliberations were the purview of its board alone.


Chronicle
LEAD: STU JACKSON, the coach of the New York Knicks, has more on his mind than basketball.
His wife, DR.
JANET TAYLOR, is scheduled to deliver twins Thursday by Caesarean section.


Missile Attack on Tokyo Royalty
LEAD: Two homemade missiles struck near the home of Emperor Akihito's brother today and a third missile was found outside the Imperial Garden in Kyoto, the police said.
No casualties or damage were reported.


Hack Politics for Public Education
LEAD: It sounded like somebody's idea of a parody.
Arthur Katzman, the New York City Council's new Education Committee chairman, said, ''With the black and Hispanic children, there appears to be no liking of learning.'' It was no parody.
The 85-year-old lawmaker apologized yesterday, saying he'd been ''insensitive'' and had meant merely to make a point about poverty.


ALC Acquisition By Telecom-USA
LEAD: Telecom-USA Inc. of Atlanta signed a letter to acquire the ALC Communications Corporation for about $97.1 million.
Under terms of the proposed transaction, holders of ALC's common stock and its series B and C preferred stock will receive Telecom-USA units worth $3 a share.
The holders of ALC's series


Horace C. Stoneham, 86, Owner Who Moved Giants to West Coast
LEAD: Horace C. Stoneham, the longtime owner of the baseball Giants who moved the club from New York to San Francisco in 1958, died in a nursing home in Scottsdale, Ariz., Sunday.
He was 86 years old.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Mind Your Own
Q.What exactly is beeswax?
A.Beeswax is secreted by four pairs of glands under the abdomen of worker bees, said Roger Morse, chairman of the department of entomology at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.


Temple H. Buell, 94, Philanthropist, Is Dead
LEAD: Temple Hoyne Buell, an architect, developer and philanthropist, died Friday at his home in Denver.
He was 94 years old.


Panama, Without an Army
LEAD: Our Panamanian brothers and sisters have lived through difficult times, but new opportunities lie open for them.
We must all collaborate with Panama and its people for them to overcome the challenges they face today, and, in this hour of great confusion and violence, for them to undertake historical decisions that may change that country's destiny forever.


For Type With a Twist, Programs Make It Easy
LEAD: IF we wanted the headline on this column to curve in a graceful arc, the printers in the newspaper composing room would have a fit.
Wrapping letters along a curve takes technical and artistic skill, which they have in abundance, but it also takes a lot of time, which they lack.


Braves' Pact for Evans
LEAD: Darrell Evans prepared for his 21st major league season yesterday, accepting a minor league contract with the Atlanta Braves just hours before the midnight deadline that pertained to him and two other free agents, Joel Youngblood and Carmen Castillo.
If their 1989 clubs did not sign them by midnight, they would lose rights to them until next


Dr. Harry L. Shapiro, Anthropologist, Dies at 87
LEAD: Dr.
Harry Lionel Shapiro, an anthropologist and former curator at the American Museum of Natural History, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital, where he was admitted Dec. 23.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Reviving Affirmative-Action Issue, Court Will Decide on F.C.C. Rules
LEAD: Setting the stage for a renewed debate over Government-sponsored affirmative action, the Supreme Court today agreed to decide the constitutionality of two Federal programs aimed at increasing the number of radio and television stations owned by minorities.


UAL Board Responds To Coniston
LEAD: Buffeted for months by takeover efforts, the UAL Corporation said today that it had asked its financial advisers to explore the feasibility of recapitalizing the airline company.


LARGE BANKS CUT KEY LENDING RATE TO 10% FROM 10 1/2%
LEAD: The nation's largest banks yesterday reduced the prime rate to 10 percent, from 10 1/2 percent, the first cut in the closely watched lending rate since July.


DISCORD IN BERLIN ON SECRET POLICE
LEAD: East German groups advocating democracy today forced an early adjournment of weekly talks with the Communist Party on the nation's future, demanding proof that the secret police were being disbanded as promised.


Interco Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
376,923,000
547,449,000
Net loss
b28,522,000
cd10,506,000
Share earns
-
.29
9mo sales
1,275,775,000
1,528,846,000
Net inc
b58,539,000
d76,076,000
Share earns
-
2.02
Shares outst
40,076,000
37,599,000


Ash Gathered After Blast at Mount St. Helens
LEAD: Scientists took samples of gritty ash from the flanks of Mount St.
Helens on Sunday in hope of learning whether the volcano's latest burst will bring more explosive activity.


j Check Here for Tax Refund Lottery
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Tells Calmer Story of Woman's Role in Commanding Attack
LEAD: The United States military, seeking to clarify differing accounts of a firefight involving a female military police captain in the Panama invasion, today provided a detailed description of the episode that was less dramatic than the version presented by the White House and initial news reports.


Rosedale Fights a New Holding Center for Aliens
LEAD: To Federal immigration officials, the two-story former factory in Rosedale, Queens, is the answer to a long-standing problem: Where to detain foreigners who arrive at nearby Kennedy International Airport but are found to be inadmissible to the United States?


Dinkins to Cut Spending More Than $200 Million
LEAD: The Dinkins administration yesterday sent New York City agencies requests for spending cuts ranging from one-half of 1 percent to 4 percent of their budgets to help close a projected total budget gap of more than $200 million in the current fiscal year.


Continental Plans $9 One-Way Fare
LEAD: Continental Airlines introduced a $9 one-way fare within Texas and a few destinations outside the state but with several restrictions.


Barry Shrugs Off Report on Jackson, Jews and Sex
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of the District of Columbia, facing another embarrassing incident, today brushed aside comments attributed to him in a newspaper interview in which he boasted of his sexual prowess, criticized Jewish supporters who have abandoned him and mocked the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, a potential rival for City


Ex-Boesky Partners Get $248 Million Settlement
LEAD: A group of limited partners of Ivan F. Boesky, the arbitrager who pleaded guilty to securities fraud, received a $248 million payment yesterday, in the culmination of a complex settlement reached in recent months among Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the partners, Mr.
Boesky and other parties.


Witnesses in Noriega Case Are Few
LEAD: The Government's emerging case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega appears to hinge on a handful of witnesses, including some who have portrayed the deposed Panamanian dictator as a vain opportunist who demanded up to $200,000 to protect drug flights.


Pentagon Looks for Ways To Stave Off Budget Cuts
LEAD: As the annual ritual of presenting and selling the Defense Department budget to Congress approaches, the Pentagon is searching for new ways to help justify its spending plans.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Can Shops Stay Small And Alone?
LEAD: ''THERE is a fresh new wind blowing in the advertising business,'' James H. Quest said two years ago about the improved prospects for small national agencies, citing client dissatisfaction with the conglomeration of the industry.


Consumer Debt Rises At 7.2% Rate
LEAD: Americans took out $4.24 billion more in consumer credit than they retired in November, the largest increase in outstanding debt in nine months, the Federal Reserve reported today.


Op-Ed Columnists
LEAD: The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-15
The plan for easing third world debt proposed by the Bush Administration 10 months ago has fallen short of its goal to cut the commercial bank debt of 39 nations by 20 percent.
Page A1


Promotion at Viking
LEAD: Christine Pevitt yesterday was appointed senior vice president and publisher of Viking Penguin, the American book publishing company owned by Pearson P.L.C. of Britain.
She had been editor in chief since joining the company in 1987.
Before that, Ms.
Pevitt was editor in chief of Charles Scribner's Sons.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Sam Rand has been promoted to president of Ketchum Advertising's Philadelphia office.


Kiley Selects Transit Head From Houston
LEAD: Alan F. Kiepper, a native New Yorker transplanted to the arid flatlands of Houston, was named yesterday as president of the New York City Transit Authority, a system struggling to be reborn.


Recovering From the Flooding
LEAD: Two water main breaks over the weekend - one at Waverly Place and Broadway, the other on Fifth Avenue between 18th and 19th Streets -disrupted utilities in the West Village and Chelsea.
Water and subway service have been restored, but the following services continue to be disrupted:
GAS. 5,000 customers in 450 buildings remain without gas service.


Judge Says Murphy's Movie Is Based on Buchwald's Idea
LEAD: A Superior Court judge ruled today that the Paramount Pictures Corporation must pay Art Buchwald for a script idea that the columnist contended was the basis for the hit movie ''Coming to America,'' which starred Eddie Murphy.
But the judge, Harvey A. Schneider, also said the studio had not acted in bad faith and was not obligated to pay the humorist millions of dollars in damages.


Avibras Industria
LEAD: Avibras Industria Aeroespacial S.A., one of Brazil's largest weapons makers, said today that it was seeking bankruptcy protection from its creditors.
The company said one client had owed it $40 million for more than a year.
People at Avibras identified the client as Iraq.
Avibras, a private company, said it had $100 million worth of equipment ready for shipment to the same client, which has not been shipped because of nonpayment of the debt.


Comptroller Cites Increase In Bad Consumer Loans
LEAD: The chief regulator of nationally chartered banks said today that a significant number of consumer loans made by commercial banks were turning sour.


Chronicle
LEAD: JACQUES COUSTEAU has set sail again, this time for Antarctica.
Along with diving gear and cameras, he has also taken six youngsters from six continents.
Their presence is supposed to dramatize Antarctica's importance to the future.


Review/Music;   Composer's First Opera Reopens Schubertiade
LEAD: Two years ago, the 92d Street Y began a Schubertiade, an ambitious series in which the complete works of Franz Schubert - more than 1,000 pieces - are to be performed chronologically in 10 annual installments.
The series is patterned after a similar project in Austria undertaken by the baritone Hermann Prey, who is not only serving as the Y's artistic consultant for the project, but who is also one of the


Metro Datelines;   Police Investigating How a Patient Died
LEAD: The police and the Brooklyn District Attorney are investigating whether a hospital patient's life-support equipment was tampered with, causing his death yesterday.


New Details, but No Answers, in Killings
LEAD: While investigators remained tight-lipped about possible motives in the Stuart shooting and suicide case, new details emerged today about the activities of Charles Stuart, who jumped to his death from a bridge last week after learning that he was a suspect in the slaying of his wife and baby son.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Acclaim Entertainment, Oyster Bay, L.I., a home-entertainment products company, promoted Robert Holmes to president.


Opposition to Nuclear Power Grows Stronger;   No Disposal Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grandview Journal;   One Town's Barricades against AIDS and Drugs
LEAD: This western Missouri town has never reported an AIDS case and people here admit they would not know a crack house if they saw one.
But the whole community is waging an all-out war on those and other social problems just the same.


OFFICIALS PLANNING TO MOVE NORIEGA
LEAD: The Federal authorities plan to move Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from a holding cell in Miami to a more secure prison out of state, and the likely site is the Federal penitentiary in Atlanta, a person involved in the move said today.


Argonaut Group Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Argonaut Group Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
141,700,000
121,500,000
Net inc
18,200,000
17,500,000
Share earns
1.90
1.68
Shares outst
9,558,319
10,429,549
Yr rev
546,100,000
504,200,000
Net inc
81,600,000
101,800,000
Share earns
8.26
9.41
Shares outst
9,875,727
10,821,414


A Natural Laboratory on Hazards of Breathing Thin Air
LEAD: THE thin air atop this extinct volcano poses a potentially lethal hazard to workers at the numerous observatories proliferating on the mountaintop.
But the hazard has created an unusual opportunity to study the physiology of altitude sickness.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, two pictures on Saturday with coverage of Eastern Europe were reversed in some editions.
The picture of a large group carrying signs showed Muslims demonstrating in Bulgaria as protests over ethnic rights spread; the other picture on the same page showed people gathered in Prague discussing President Vaclav Havel's statement that Czechoslovakia owed Sudeten Germans an apology.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article yesterday about the New York State Assembly mentioned seven prominent candidates to succeed Jose E. Serrano as chairman of the Education Committee.
In discussing Assemblyman Albert


Metro Datelines;   Police Officer Held On Drug Charges
LEAD: A 23-year-old police officer was arrested yesterday for selling cocaine and an Uzi submachine gun to undercover officers from the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force, officials of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration said.


Edward Ennis, 82, Ex-Prosecutor And Head of Civil Liberties Union
LEAD: Edward J. Ennis, a former Federal prosecutor who became chairman of the American Civil Liberties Union, died of complications of diabetes on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 82 years old and had homes in Manhattan; Lido Beach, L.I., and Palm Beach, Fla.


Avondale Layoffs
LEAD: Avondale Industries, a Louisiana shipbuilder, laid off about 300 workers, and a company spokesman said another 615 workers might be released to cut costs.
The company, one of the nation's most active shipbuilders, has about 8,500 employees.
It has a $2 billion backlog of work, but much of it will not begin before later this year, the spokesman said.


Insider Case Accord Set
LEAD: A Connecticut man who is said to have traded on inside information obtained when one of his tenants opened someone else's mail agreed to pay almost $20,000 in fines and penalties, Federal officials said today.


Voices of Bulgaria Tell Story of Hate
LEAD: Around the equestrian statue of Czar Alexander II, the 19th-century Russian liberator of Bulgaria from Turkish domination, the talk today was of civil rights and racism, of patriotism and perfidy.


Vice President Named To Intel's Top Team
LEAD: The Intel Corporation named Craig R. Barrett its executive vice president yesterday, a move that makes him the likely heir apparent to Andrew S. Grove as president and chief executive officer of the semiconductor manufacturer.
Dr.
Grove, who is 53 years old, has said he will retire at 55.


Patterns
LEAD:
West Meets East . . .


DCNY Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,170,958
9,758,147
Yr net loss
1,878,892
8,546,174


Mandela Expects to Be Released Soon, His Wife Says
LEAD: Nelson R. Mandela, the long-imprisoned anti-apartheid leader, indicated today for the first time that he expected to be freed within weeks, his wife said.


In Shuffling Cards, 7 Is Winning Number
LEAD: IT takes just seven ordinary, imperfect shuffles to mix a deck of cards thoroughly, researchers have found.
Fewer are not enough and more do not significantly improve the mixing.


Careers;   Ever-Rising Demand for Paralegals
LEAD: THE Labor Department recently estimated that the need for paralegals would increase by 75.3 percent between 1988 and 2000, making paralegal work the nation's fastest-growing field.
Its projection: the 83,000 paralegals employed nationwide in 1988 will increase to 145,000 by the turn of the century because of rapid growth of the legal services industry as well as widening use of paralegals in corporations and elsewhere.


Opposition to Nuclear Power Grows Stronger;   Commitment Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television;   New Co-host on 'Today' Eases Her Way Into the Job
LEAD: After weeks of made-for-television promotion and emotion, Jane Pauley's seat on ''Today'' was occupied yesterday by Deborah Norville, beginning what her co-host, Bryant Gumbel, called ''an exciting new chapter in the rich history of this program.'' How did Ms.
Norville, NBC's new star, do on her first day?


Brave Stand for Justice in El Salvador
LEAD: In El Salvador, which too often resembles an army with a country attached, a conservative civilian President now links the military to a barbarous human rights crime.
In a nationally broadcast speech, Alfredo Cristiani said that ''elements'' of the armed forces were indeed involved in the November slaying of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter.


Robert Graham, Policy Analyst, 74
LEAD: Robert W. Graham, a former personal representative of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger at the Vienna arms talks, died Friday of respiratory failure.
He was 74 years old.


C. Robert Devine, 72, Ex-Magazine Official
LEAD: C. Robert Devine, a retired executive of the Readers Digest Association Inc., died of prostate cancer on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Refugees Report Liberian 'Scorched Earth' Drive on Rebels
LEAD: Refugees fleeing fighting in northeastern Liberia have told of a ''scorched earth'' policy by the Liberian Army, sent into Nimba Province to put down an insurgency that started there two weeks ago.


Less Expensive Infiniti Planned
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Corporation's Infiniti division plans to introduce a model less expensive than its current ones, Bill Bruce, the vice president of the division, said today.


Loss of Gas Disrupts Life In Chelsea And Village
LEAD: Bonnie Munshin and a friend, John Setaro, were roaming the streets of Greenwich Village yesterday in search of a hot meal.
Some restaurants were closed, others were offering only drinks, and still others were serving only sandwiches and salads.


2 Deadlines Intensifying Pressures on Campeau
LEAD: As deadlines approach for the troubled Campeau Corporation to come up with the money to meet its obligations, the company has given no indication of how it intends to address its problems.


Credit-Card Law Bars Requiring Addresses
LEAD: Chalk one up for consumer privacy.


President Quits Post at Varian
LEAD: Varian Associates Inc. said to-day that Norman H. Pond had resigned as president and a director to pursue other interests.
Mr.
Pond, who is 51 years old, joined Varian in 1984 from Teledyne Inc. and was named president in 1987.


Chaump to Coach Navy
LEAD: George Chaump, the Marshall University football coach, who has never had a losing season in eight years of college coaching, was named yesterday as the Naval Academy's coach.


50-Year Sentence Imposed In 'Wood Chipper' Murder
LEAD: A Newtown man convicted of killing his wife and shredding her body with a wood chipper was sentenced today to 50 years in prison after his sister complained he had shown no remorse.


Bryant and Tillmon Steal Show for Hoyas
LEAD: When the exploits of the Georgetown basketball team are bandied about, the names mentioned first are John Thompson, the coach, and Alonzo Mourning, the gifted center.


Pacific Telesis Plan
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group said it would repurchase up to 25 million shares of its stock, totaling about $1.2 billion, based on Friday's closing price.
The stock rose $1.25 today, to $49, on the New York Stock Exchange. ''We continue to believe that repurchasing our stock at current prices is a very good investment for our shareowners,'' said Sam Ginn, Pacific Telesis's chairman and chief executive.


On Horse Racing;   Two Surprise Choices For Eclipse Awards
LEAD: rrIt's a good thing for horseplayers that no one was taking bets on who would win racing's Eclipse Awards for 1989, most of which were announced yesterday.


25 Nominated for Awards From Book Critics Circle
LEAD: Twenty-five books were nominated yesterday by the National Book Critics Circle as the most distinguished books published in 1989.
The nominees incude ''Spartina,'' by John Casey, which won the National Book Award for fiction in November.


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Orlando Ends Eight-Game Slide
Scott Skiles hit a 3-point shot and Otis Smith hit five free throws in the final 1 minute 9 seconds last night as the Orlando Magic ended a losing streak at eight games with a 111-102 victory over the visiting San Antonio Spurs.
The victory was only the third in the last 19 games for the expansion Magic, but all have come against division leaders.


Market Place;   Behind Delay in Farley Deal For West Point-Pepperell
LEAD: It has been nine months since William Farley took control of West Point-Pepperell Inc. with the promise that all remaining public shares would be promptly purchased at $58 each.


Chronicle
LEAD: In his memoirs, ''A Native's Return: 1945-1988,'' arriving in bookstores this week, WILLIAM L. SHIRER offers his version of why he was dismissed from CBS in 1947 after a successful career as a war correspondent and broadcaster.


White House Denies Plans For Blockade Off Columbia
LEAD: The Bush Administration said publicly today that it was not planning a naval blockade off Colombia as part of its fight against drug trafficking.
Some Colombian officials had accused the United States this weekend of moving toward a naval and air blockade.


Police Kill 12 in Kashmir Riots
LEAD: Paramilitary troops shot and killed at least 12 people today during anti-Indian riots in parts of the Kashmir valley, officials there said.


Giants Knock, but Rams Answer
LEAD: The Monday morning quarterbacks found many reasons why the Giants were knocked out of the National Football League playoffs Sunday by the Los Angeles Rams.


Our Towns;   An Osprey Dies, And the D.E.C. Stoops to Ticket
LEAD: It was in September that a man walking his dog along a creekbank in Kerhonkson came upon a wounded osprey, possibly savaged by a fanged animal, perhaps a fox or a dog.


By Design;   Unburdening the Shoulder
LEAD: They are not the first part of the anatomy that comes to mind as an erogenous zone.
But when you stop and think about it, shoulders are pretty potent.


A Tradition Of Donating To Neediest
LEAD: To some people, forgetting to contribute to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is unthinkable.
Their habit is ingrained by more than half a century of giving.


China Buys U.S. Wheat
LEAD: China has bought an additional 300,000 metric tons of United States wheat under a price subsidy program, the Agriculture Department said today.
Delivery of the wheat is scheduled for May.
The sales were part of one million tons authorized for China under the department's Export Enhancement Program on Dec.


Reawakened Volcano Spews Ash in Alaska
LEAD: In its largest eruption since reawakening last month, Redoubt Volcano hurled an anvil-shaped plume of steam and ash more than eight miles into the air today.


Doug Jones Arbitration
LEAD: Doug Jones, the Cleveland Indians' ace relief pitcher, is seeking $1.15 million in salary arbitration.
Jones, who last year earned $307,500, submitted that figure yesterday.
The Indians filed a salary of $950,000 for the pitcher, whose 69 saves the past two seasons are only 3 fewer than the 72 compiled by Mark Davis for San Diego.


B. Boszormenyi-Nagy, A Piano Instructor, 77
LEAD: Bela Boszormenyi-Nagy, a Hungarian-born pianist who taught in the United States and Canada for more than 50 years, died of esophageal cancer on Saturday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 77 years old.


Wide Beliefs On Depression In Women Contradicted
LEAD: NEW research findings from Europe, little noted in America, contradict widespread beliefs about the risks of depression that women face after childbirth, hysterectomy and menopause.


'90 Detroit Church Closings
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Detroit announced Sunday that it would close five more churches in the city this year.
The diocese closed 30 last year.
The five parishes were among 25 subjected to a yearlong test of viability by Edmund Cardinal Szoka.
Nineteen parishes passed the test and one new parish will be formed from two of those to be closed, said Jay Berman, a diocesan spokesman.


Indiana, Behind by 20, Defeats Michigan, 69-67
LEAD: Indiana held Michigan scoreless for seven minutes, overcame a 20-point deficit and won, 69-67, tonight.


Readicare Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Readicare Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,651,000
6,301,000
Net inc
b452,000
c218,000
Share earns
.06
.03
Shares outst
7,904,000
8,269,000
9mo rev
19,772,000
19,543,000
Net inc
b1,470,000
c843,000
Share earns
.19
.10
Shares outst
7,885,000
8,773,000


Lemieux Scores 4 Against Lackluster Rangers
LEAD: Mario Lemieux didn't set a record for filling the net last night.
He might have, though, established an unofficial mark for emptying Madison Square Garden.
Lemieux, who had four goals before the game was 25 minutes old, drove the Rangers to distraction and defeat, and in the process sent the crowd of 15,849 streaming into the streets with a full third left in a miserable 7-5 mismatch.


Amtrak Project to Steer Trains to Pennsylvania Station


Futures Buying Lifts Stocks; Dow Up 21.12
LEAD: Stock prices rose moderately yesterday, spurred by futures-related buying about an hour before the close.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 21.12 points, to 2,794.37.


Foreign Press Helps Bombed Bogota Paper
LEAD: White paint, fresh plaster and new furniture still wrapped in plastic are signs that an international rescue campaign is restoring life to a newspaper gravely wounded here by a truck bomb.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Hanna-Barbera Follows Disney Map
LEAD: David Kirschner is the Hollywood producer and illustrator who made his reputation by creating ''An American Tail,'' the animated movie hit that chronicled the adventures of an immigrant mouse from Eastern Europe.


Photronic Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photronic Labs (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,830,000
5,666,000
Net inc
490,000
b802,000
Share earns
.15
-
Yr sales
27,680,817
18,763,031
Net inc
862,920
b1,704,702
Share earns
.27
-
b-Net loss and included tax benefits of $700,000 and $1,025,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Terry-Thomas, 78, Actor Who Satirized Britons
LEAD: Terry-Thomas, the comedian and character actor who satirized virtually every type of Briton from upper-class cads to crooks, from dandies to daredevils, died of Parkinson's disease yesterday at a nursing home in Godalming, Surrey, England.
He was 78 years old.


Argentine Stocks Fall 53%; Inflation Soars
LEAD: Prices on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange plunged an average of 53 percent in value today when the market reopened for the first time since Dec. 28.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Thursday misidentified a British conglomerate and located a division incorrectly.
The company is Hanson P.L.C., and its Weber Aircraft division is in Fullerton, Calif.


Review/Music;   Remembering Richard Tucker Telegenically
LEAD: The tenor Richard Tucker, who died 15 years ago, was an earthy, colorful character, and one can only wonder what he would have made of the 15th annual Richard Tucker Music Foundation concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday evening.
The long succession of opera excerpts seemed at times a curiously bloodless, unoperatic if not anti-operatic affair.


Birthday Celebration In Nixon's Hometown
LEAD: Former President Richard M. Nixon's 77th birthday on Tuesday is a holiday in his hometown, which is proudly planning for this summer's opening of the Nixon Presidential library.


Officer Quits At Doskocil
LEAD: The Doskocil Companies, the Hutchinson, Kan., food processing concern, said today that its president and chief operating officer, David S. Smoak, had resigned last week to pursue other interests.


Phone Company Chief Selected for SUNY Post
LEAD: Frederic V. Salerno, the president and chief executive of the New York Telephone Company, was nominated today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to head the Board of Trustees of the State University of New York.


Panama Fighters Continue Their Trek Home


What's Bad About Acting Like Hulk?
LEAD: rrAll right, who's going to leave the tickets for Jerry Glanville?
He brought a bit of color into our lives by pacing up and down the sidelines in all black garb, a mix of Johnny Cash and Darth Vader.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addendum
LEAD: *
Metropolitan Outdoor, an outdoor advertising company, has acquired eight-sheet operations of Transportation Displays Inc., which was formerly called AMNI America, in New York and Los Angeles for $30 million.


Talking Business; with Kelly of Resolution Trust;   Property Auction On an Epic Scale
LEAD: Lamar C. Kelly Jr. is the Government official with the task of organizing the sales of thousands of single-family homes, apartments, office buildings and other properties held by hundreds of troubled savings institutions now controlled by the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Many people will make up their minds on further aid to El Salvador based on the way this case is handled.''
-Representative Joe Moakley, Democrat of Massachusetts. [A10:3.]


Georgia-Pacific's Nekoosa Shares
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation said it had been tendered 41.4 million shares, or more than 75 percent, in its offer for a rival papermaker, the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation Georgia-Pacific also extended its sweetened hostile bid of $63 a share, or $3.6 billion, to Jan. 22.
The previous bid expired on


For Broncos and Browns, It's a Familiar Encounter
LEAD: When they were done tossing cliches Sunday night, the Denver Broncos faced the one thing that has become their destiny in the post-season: the inevitability of playing the Cleveland Browns in order to reach the Super Bowl.


Unisys Talks On Settling Fraud Case
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said today that it was engaged in ''constructive talks'' with the Justice Department aimed at a settlement of charges in the department's long-running inquiry into Pentagon fraud.


Chief of Defunct Angola Rebels Offers Plan
LEAD: The leader of a long-dormant Angolan insurgent group proposed a peace plan today involving a meeting of Angola's leaders, a United Nations peacekeeping force and free elections after an 18-month transition period.


Eye Drug Approved By F.D.A.
LEAD: The Government has approved a type of food poisoning bacteria for use as a treatment for two eye muscle disorders.


Communist Parties in West Are Shaken and Squabbling
LEAD: Having seen their political influence wane throughout the 1980's, the Communist parties of Western Europe are now being shaken by painful soul-searching and bitter infighting as they struggle to survive the collapse of traditional Communist governments in Eastern Europe.


From Adolfo, Accent on Evening
LEAD: Adolfo's snappy fashion shows always share the spotlight with the Adolfo styles worn by his audience.
It is usually against the rules for women to enjoy turning up in the same room with others in identical clothes, but the exceptions are Adolfo's shows, when everyone scans the audience to check the winning number.


U.S. Faulted for Search of Nicaragua Residence in Panama
LEAD: The Organization of American States declared in a resolution tonight that the penetration by American troops of the Nicaraguan Ambassador's residence in Panama was a violation of international laws that insure the immunity of diplomatic missions.


Councilman Issues Apology For Comments on Minorities
LEAD: The chairman of the City Council's Education Committee apologized yesterday for what he acknowledged was his insensitivity in saying that among black and Hispanic children ''there appears to be no liking of learning.''


Navy Postpones Sea Search For Stricken Jet's Cargo Door
LEAD: The Navy has postponed searching the ocean floor for the cargo door that tore off a United Air Lines Boeing 747-100 last Feb. 24, creating a hole through which nine passengers were sucked to their deaths.


WITH DEATHS TIED TO SALVADOR ARMY, AID FIGHT IS LIKELY
LEAD: Responding to a Salvadoran statement that military men were involved in the killing of six Jesuit priests in November, Administration officials acknowledged today that future aid to El Salvador would hinge on satisfying Congress about the progress of the investigation.


2 Studies Rate U.S. and States On Meeting Children's Needs
LEAD: The Federal Government and 44 states are not providing adequate programs to help children in need and the nation is falling behind other industrialized countries in reducing infant mortality, the Children's Defense Fund said today.


Grand Met Deal
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. said it would buy 20 Wimpy restaurants in Britain and convert them to Burger King outlets.
In announcing the purchase from Allied Leisure P.L.C. of London, Grand Met said the sale was to be completed by Jan. 29.
No terms were disclosed.
In the last three months, Burger King has doubled the number of its outlets in Britain and now operates 60 restaurants there.


Full-Blooded Candor Is Revived, and Evils Not of Dracula Unfold
LEAD: Up at the castle, the truth, at last, can be told.


Engineer Leads Morrison Knudsen Unit
LEAD: Walter C. Bell, an engineer who has overseen construction projects in the Middle East, Asia and Latin America, has been named president and chief executive of international activities of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation.
He has been given the mission of directing the giant construction and engineering company's aggressive re-entry into the worldwide market.


Financing to Buy Bond
LEAD: A 28-year-old Texan who hopes to rescue Australia's embattled Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. said today that he was close to securing $3.13 billion to buy the brewing and media empire.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


The Shortest Days
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chess
LEAD: Three players won the 1989 United States Championship, held at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Long Beach, Calif., from Nov. 9 to Dec. 3.
Two of them, the 45-year-old Roman Dzindzichashvili of New York and the 29-year-old Yasser Seirawan of Seattle, were eminent grandmasters who had each won the title previously.


Reader's Digest Adds Magazine
LEAD: Reader's Digest said yesterday that it had agreed to buy American Health magazine for $29.1 million.


Retailer's Fiscal Woes Are Reverberating on Wall Street
LEAD: When the Campeau Corporation acquired Federated Department Stores two years ago for $6.6 billion, Wall Street beamed with pride as investment bankers and lawyers were showered with more than $200 million in fees.


Uranium Miners Inherit Dispute's Sad Legacy
LEAD: From 1947 until the early 1960's, two Federal agencies struggled in secret over the fate of thousands of men who were being exposed to hazardous levels of radiation while mining uranium for the nuclear weapons industry.


Father Ritter's Slow Bleed
LEAD: By one solid estimate, three of every four ''street kids'' who seek help in New York City seek it at Covenant House, the rescue mission for runaways.
The organization's open door policy makes help accessible to hundreds of runaway youngsters who can't or won't navigate the intake procedures of other city agencies.


The Choreographers In Man-Made Festival Ponder How to Learn
LEAD: Stephen Petronio was 19 years old when he took his first dance class.
Soon after, he found a sign on a college bulletin board calling for pieces for a dance program. ''I thought I might as well try,'' Mr.
Petronio said the other day. ''There was a photograph by Ben Shahn of boys playing handball in the 1930's, and I thought I'd use it to jump off.


Rate on Note Issue Set by Sallie Mae
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday announced the interest rate for a $500 million issue of floating-rate notes due July 12, through various securities dealers.


Opposition to Nuclear Power Grows Stronger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jazz Bands to Perform In Benefit at Hofstra U.
LEAD: Buck Clayton and his Swing Band and Arvell Shaw and his Louis Armstrong Legacy All-Stars Band are to be featured at a benefit at 8 P.M. on Jan. 27 at Adams Playhouse of Hofstra University, Hempstead Turnpike, Hempstead, L.I.


Waterford in Talks On Selling Interest
LEAD: The Waterford Wedgwood Group P.L.C., the troubled china and crystal maker, said it was in talks that might lead to a cash offer for a large, but not controlling, stake in the company.
Analysts have speculated that Waterford has been seeking a minority shareholder to give it needed cash.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the chairmanship of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington misidentified the orchestra associated with the center.
It is the National Symphony Orchestra, not the American Symphony.


Joseph V. Giffuni, 77, Builder and Developer
LEAD: Joseph V. Giffuni, a New York City builder and real-estate developer, died on Friday at his home on the Upper East Side.
He was 77 years old.


Conditions Threaten Collections At Museum of City of New York
LEAD: The 58-year-old building that houses the Museum of the City of New York has deteriorated to such an extent that its director says its collections are in jeopardy.
The museum houses a vast store of New York artifacts, from elegant doll houses to vintage fire engines.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.31
9.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.54
8.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.46
8.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.03
8.01
9.31
30-YR.


Military Trials of Security Forces Begin
LEAD: The new Government announced today that special military courts had begun proceedings against members of the state security forces who were caught shooting at civilians after the fall of President Nicolae Ceausescu on Dec. 22.


Archibald Tunick, 82, Ex-Connecticut Judge
LEAD: Archibald H. Tunick, a former Connecticut Superior Court judge, died of heart failure on Sunday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Jet Whose Engine Fell Off Had Repeated Repairs
LEAD: The Northwest Airlines jet that lost one of its three engines over northern Florida on Thursday had a history of maintenance problems months before the engine fell off, aviation officials said yesterday.


Sharp Rise in Sabotage Is Reported in Ethnic Conflict in Azerbaijan
LEAD: An increase in hostage-taking and a sharp rise in sabotage were reported today in the ethnic conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, a troubled region in the Soviet republic of Azerbaijan.


PRESIDENT OPENS LEGISLATIVE DRIVE
LEAD: President Bush opened the legislative battle of 1990 today, attacking ''demagogues'' in Congress, renewing his demand for a cut in the capital gains tax and calling for a new five-year farm bill that would allow grain farmers more choice in deciding what crops to produce.


A Seductive Tax Cut; Dangerous, Too
LEAD: Last week every American worker began paying higher Social Security taxes.
Suppose someone proposed to cancel the increase to help low-wage workers and also expose the true size of the Federal deficit.
An irresistible offer, right?
Wrong.


Teledyne Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,176,800,000
1,247,300,000
Net inc
62,900,000
98,200,000
Share earns
5.68
8.68
Shares outst
11,082,569
11,320,289
Yr rev
4,636,400,000
4,597,800,000
Net inc
258,910,000
b391,800,000
Share earns
23.32
34.03
Shares outst
11,100,868
11,514,115


Dawn Steel Quits Columbia Pictures Post
LEAD: With her left leg in an ankle-to-thigh brace and a smile on her face, Dawn Steel resigned today from her position as president of Columbia Pictures.


INSIDE
LEAD:
New Transit Head Named
Alan F. Kiepper, a former Houston transit official, was named president of the New York City Transit Authority.
Page B1.
Athletes on Campus
For golfers and tennis players, college is often used as a brief stop to hone the competitive edge en route to the pro tours.


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lazare Kaplan International (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
28,295,000
20,731,000
Net inc
b1,056,000
c239,000
Share earns
.34
.08
6mo sales
47,513,000
36,590,000
Net inc
b1,911,000
c340,000
Share earns
.61
.11


Lotto Bunkum and Bubbly Get Reporters to Bite Again
LEAD: New York City's news organizations were the target of an elaborate hoax on Sunday in which a professional actress claimed to have won the $35 million Lotto jackpot in Saturday night's lottery drawing.


U.S. Falls Short On Its Debt Plan For Third World
LEAD: In the 10 months since it was announced, the Bush Administration's strategy for easing third world debt has fallen well short of its stated objective.


Way Stations En Route to Pros
LEAD: On today's college sports scene, the image of the hungry inner-city athlete playing basketball and football as a way out of poverty has been supplemented by that of equally hungry suburban athletes playing golf and tennis with hopes of professional careers.


Lesson From Frog's Mating Call?
LEAD: FEMALE tungara frogs favor lower-frequency mating calls, and the males of the species have evolved to exploit this preference, scientists at the University of Texas report in the current issue of the British journal Nature.


Elynuik's Late Goal Ends Devils' Winning Streak
LEAD: The Devils were slow tonight breaking out of their defensive zone and they showed little coordination in the neutral and attacking zone.
This inability to attack against Winnipeg led to a 4-3 victory by the Jets at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Liftoff Of Shuttle Is Delayed By Clouds
LEAD: A mass of clouds, rolling in with the wind as predicted, disrupted plans to launch the space shuttle Columbia today on a mission to retrieve a falling satellite.
Another launching attempt will be made Tuesday morning.


Quake Jars Part of Alaska
LEAD: A moderate earthquake was felt around Fairbanks early Sunday, but no damage or injuries were reported.
Alex Medberry at the Tsunami Warning Center in Palmer said the 2 A.M. quake was centered 40 miles northwest of here.
Charlotte Row of the Alaska Earthquake Information Center placed the Richter scale reading at 5 and said there were several small aftershocks.


Goliaths of Frogdom Put Contest in Turmoil
LEAD: An importer here has made some people hopping mad by entering giant frogs in an annual Frog Jump Jubilee: his contestants are up to 3 feet long and can weigh 15 pounds.


A Handy Kit Provides More Than One Tool
LEAD: QUICKSOFT, the maker of PC-Browse, likens the program to a Swiss Army knife: sure, you can buy separate tools to do the jobs it can do, but it brings them all together in one handy package.


Simms May Face A Tryout
LEAD: For most of the last 11 years, Phil Simms has been the Giants' starting quarterback.
Next season, he may be challenged for the job by Jeff Hostetler, a backup for the last six years.


First Snow of Year Slips Into New York, Leaving Slushy Mess
LEAD: The first snow of the new year slipped into New York by surprise last night, catching forecasters and commuters off guard with a slushy mix of snow and freezing rain.


Two Noriega Assistants Seek Haven in Embassy
LEAD: Two of Manuel Antonio Noriega's top associates have taken refuge in the Peruvian Embassy, Panamanian government officials said, and today United States troops ringed the embassy grounds.


Year of Elections
LEAD: This is going to be the year of elections, in the U.S. and West Germany, because elections come with regularity.
In the Soviet Union, local and municipal elections will be part of Mikhail Gorbachev's effort to get rid of the old apparatus paralyzing his perestroika.


The Dollar Declines Sharply As U.S. Rate Drop Continues
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply against key foreign currencies in active trading yesterday, skidding to a 20-month low against the strong West German mark amid continued concerns about declining United States interest rates.


Review/Theater;   Siamese Twins in a Musical That Stars Extremities
LEAD: The search for bizarre material for musicals hits barrel bottom with ''20 Fingers, 20 Toes,'' a musical about Siamese twins, in this case the Hilton sisters, who starred in Tod Browning's film ''Freaks.'' Because the show is at the WPA, the company that first presented ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' one begins with expectations of a musical noir.


Washington Talk;   Graying of the Senate: A Long-Distance View
LEAD: Strom Thurmond of South Carolina is 87 years old, Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island is 71, Howell Heflin of Alabama is 68 and Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon is 67.
But all four are seeking re-election to the Senate this year.


Interest Rates Rise At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Death of Patient, 78, Is Ruled a Homicide
LEAD: The death of a 78-year-old Brooklyn man who died at Kings County Hospital on Monday after being disconnected from his respirator was ruled a homicide yesterday by the Medical Examiner's officer.





At the Nation's Table
LEAD: IT is not easy to find a vegetarian restaurant in a blue-collar, burger-and-beer kind of town like Bridgeport.
For that matter, it is not easy to find one anywhere in the New York metropolitan region.
Perhaps that is why nonmeat eaters from Baltimore to Rhode Island flock to Bloodroot, a vegetarian restaurant and bookstore run by the Bloodroot feminist collective in Bridgeport's almost-gentrified Black


Energy Prices Move Higher In Volatile Trading Session
LEAD: Energy futures prices climbed on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday in trading that saw heating oil prices swing wildly before finishing with a modest gain.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about the suicide of Charles Stuart, a suspect in the killing of his wife in Boston, erred in reporting results of ballistics tests.


Man Charged in Death Plot To Inject Woman With Virus
LEAD: A man planned to kill his former girlfriend by hiring someone to inject her with the AIDS virus, officials say.


Family Mourns 15-Year-Old Slain in Brooklyn Feud


Accounts
LEAD: *
Bugle Boy Industries, to DDB Needham Los Angeles for the creative portion of its broadcast advertising, and to International Communications Group for media buying, with a total budget of $12 million.


The U.S. and Panama;   Peruvians Give Asylum To a Noriega Associate
LEAD: Peru said today that it had granted diplomatic asylum to a Noriega associate who is wanted by the United States and to 11 others who took refuge in the Peruvian Ambassador's residence in Panama City.


Browns' Mack Back in Form After an Unhappy Autumn
LEAD: They talk about Kevin Mack on the Cleveland Browns as if he were a returning hero and not a fullback who missed much of the season because he was in prison on a drug charge.


Waterford Unions Reject Demands
LEAD: Workers at Waterford Crystal P.L.C. rejected a drastic cost-cutting plan late Monday after a group led by Anthony F. J. O'Reilly, Irish-born chairman of the H. J. Heinz Company, proposed a big investment in the crystal and china company.
Mr.
O'Reilly was said to be heading a group of overseas investors negotiating to buy 29.9 percent of


I.O.C. Opens Link To South Africa
LEAD: A group of anti-apartheid advisers to the International Olympic Committee held a formal meeting with South African sports officials for the first time today, but the I.O.C. people said a great deal needed to be done before South Africa could rejoin the Olympics.


Knicks Defeat the Bullets in Overtime, 131-127


Transylvania Is Famous Beyond Dracula
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times;   Yankee Ingenuity
LEAD: Americans distressed by Japanese inroads into fields like automobiles and electronics sometimes find comfort in the Extrapolation Explanation.
They believe that the disciplined Japanese skillfully exploit known technologies to their fullest potential in the marketplace.
But, the theory goes on, it is stubbornly independent Americans who devise new technologies.


The U.S. and Panama: Legal Issues;   Scholars Say Arrest of Noriega Has Little Justification in Law
LEAD: The apprehension of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega on drug charges is largely unprecedented and was basically a blunt political act with only an after-the-fact legal rationale, several legal scholars say.


Colonial Investment Grade Municipal Trust reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Investment Grade Municipal Trust (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
126,856,000
-
Share earns
11.02
-
Assets represented net asset value.
The company said there are no year-ago comparable results because the fund began investment operations May 26, 1989.


Apartment Rules Will Stop Landlords From Heartless Evictions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Poindexter Argues Reagan Should Have to Testify
LEAD: Lawyers for John M. Poindexter urged a Federal judge today to reject legal arguments by former President Ronald Reagan that he should be excused from appearing as a witness in the Iran-contra trial of his former adviser.


Hong Kong After 1997: Blueprint for Rule Expected in March
LEAD: As alarm mounts over China's tough attitude toward Hong Kong and hopes rise that Britain will introduce greater democracy here, there is a growing sense that Hong Kong's future will be largely determined in the next few months.


New Options Rule Cleared
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said today that he had decided not to delay a new rule that would allow an option to be listed on more than one exchange in the United States.


Ruling Spares Utilities a Tax on Deposits
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the security deposits that many public utilities require of their customers are not taxable as income to the utilities.


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,900,000,000
2,500,000,000
Net inc
197,000,000
206,000,000
Share earns
1.81
1.81
Shares outst
108,800,000
111,100,000
Yr sales
11,400,000,000
9,600,000,000
Net inc
864,000,000
754,000,000
Share earns
7.72
6.57
Shares outst
109,400,000
111,600,000


UNIVERSITIES LOSE SHIELD OF SECRECY IN TENURE DISPUTES
LEAD: Rejecting broad assertions of academic freedom, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that universities accused of discriminating in tenure decisions must make the relevant personnel files available to Federal investigators.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If there is a 'smoking gun' to be found that demonstrates discrimination in tenure decisions, it is likely to be tucked away in peer review files.''
- Justice Harry A. Blackmun.
[B7:2.]


MGM/UA Communications Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MGM/UA Communications Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
211,524,000
170,346,000
Net loss
b2,019,000
39,470,000
Shares outst
50,831,000
50,325,000
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,581,000, or 3 cents a share, related to the purchase of $7 million face amount of subordinated debentures on Nov.


Upheaval in the East: Tokyo Venture;   Suzuki Reaches Deal to Build Hungary's First Car Factory
LEAD: In the biggest investment yet by Japan in Eastern Europe and its first effort to capitalize on the region's popular uprisings, the Suzuki Motors Company said today that it had agreed to build a $140 million automobile manufacturing plant in Hungary as part of a joint venture.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telemedia Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
60,500,000
59,600,000
Net inc
1,300,000
1,700,000
Share earns
.12
.16
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Upheaval in the East;   Communist Luminaries Shot a Lot
LEAD: Leonid I. Brezhnev, Fidel Castro and other Communist luminaries would bag up to 2,000 hares and pheasants a day on luxury hunting estates in Czechoslovakia, the state press agency said today.


Patients to Benefit From Reforms for Interns
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rawley Agrees to Pact
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox, trying to bolster their starting pitching rotation, reached agreement yesterday with Shane Rawley, a free agent whose 1989 team, the Minnesota Twins, chose not to sign him.
Rawley, a left-hander who earned $4.25 million in his previous five-year contract, accepted a nonguaranteed $350,000 salary.


Riggs National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riggs National (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,502,000
9,317,000
Share earns
.54
.65
Yr net inc
39,423,000
37,016,000
Share earns
2.86
2.54


Name Changes Decline
LEAD: The number of corporate name changes declined 14 percent last year, to 1,600, from a record 1,864 in 1988, according to a survey released Monday by Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc.
The 1989 total was the third highest in the 20 years that the identity-consulting firm has conducted its annual survey.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MARTIN E. SULLIVAN has long admired the Heard Museum in Phoenix for its commitment to Indian culture.
Now, he is leaving his job as director of the New York State Museum in Albany and is to take up his new one as head of the Heard on March 1.


Topics of The Times;   Franking Frenzies
LEAD: With great fanfare, Congress last fall tightened lawmakers' free mailing privileges.
The Senate now gives itself $24 million for mass mailings for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
That's still high, but more reasonable than the $35 million spent last year.
Further, the old rules put no dollar cap on individual senators.


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
882,000
1,293,000
Share earns
.26
.36
The company, which is the holding company for Home Federal Savings Bank, said its earnings for the quarter were significantly affected by a $600,000 increase in legal and other expenses related to a proxy contest by dissident shareholders.


In Rumania, a Tribunal for People Accused of Opposing the Revolution


Circon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,995,000
10,710,000
Net inc
145,000
b275,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
5,297,000
5,289,000
Yr sales
49,591,000
41,415,000
Net inc
302,000
b2,439,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
5,292,000
5,289,000


Revival Bought With Tourist Dollars
LEAD: A small but growing number of American towns, no longer able to prosper from the industry, mining or farming that once defined them, are using imagination and ingenuity in hopes of snaring some of the tourist dollars that usually flow to big metropolitan hot spots.


Social-Service Professionals Make Donations to Neediest
LEAD: Few people are as likely to understand the plight of the needy as those who work in social services and urban affairs.
Professionals from a variety of nonprofit organizations have sent gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, along with letters that resonate with special feeling.


Rose Kushner, 60, Leader in Breast Cancer Fight
LEAD: Rose Kushner, a vigorous and tenacious advocate for women with breast cancer, died Sunday of the disease.
She was 60 years old and lived in Kensington, Md.


Barton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barton Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,250,000
2,300,000
Net inc
681,524
b471,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Star Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
16,338,000
14,032,000
Per share
.57
.49
Year net inc
58,003,000
b58,496,000
Per share
2.01
2.03
b-After a gain of $3,066,000, or 11 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Upheaval in the East: Japanese Aid;  $1 Billion Plan for Poland and Hungary
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan announced a $1 billion economic aid package for Poland and Hungary today, and said Japan should play a political as well as economic role in Eastern Europe.


Goetz Files Libel Suit And Assails Lawyers
LEAD: Bernhard H. Goetz, acting as his own lawyer, contended in a $40 million libel suit filed yesterday that lawyers for a victim of his shooting on the IRT had called him a ''walking time bomb and a racist.''


John L. Clive, Harvard Historian And an Acclaimed Biographer, 65
LEAD: John L. Clive, a Harvard professor of history who won a National Book Award in 1974 for his biography of Thomas Babington Macaulay, the 19th-century Scottish historian, died Sunday while being driven to his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 65 years old.


About New York;   Those Who Color Rainbow Room Finally Sit Down
LEAD: The gentleman let the wine roll around his mouth, the perfect cap to a perfect meal. ''This is very good port,'' he pronounced.


Soviet Team Continues Dominance In Series
LEAD: The crowd of 17,423 at the Spectrum tonight seemed spirited even during warm-ups, with some fans holding small American flags that had been handed out by arena workers.
Some fans held a large, star-spangled banner behind the glass, near the blue line, at the end where Central Red Army of the Soviet Union took its warm-ups.


'Miss Saigon' Weighs Postponing Opening As It Seeks a Theater
LEAD: ''Miss Saigon,'' the smash hit London musical about the last days of American involvement in the Vietnam War, may not be coming to Broadway this fall as originally planned.
Cameron Mackintosh, the show's producer, said yesterday that it might not arrive until the spring of 1991, or even later.


Upheaval in the East;   A Frontier Turns Up Jewish Relics
LEAD: Relics of a Jewish neighborhood, including a disused synagogue and a well-preserved cemetery, have come to light in the former death strip at the border with West Germany, it was reported today.


McCaw Plans New Shares
LEAD: McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said today that it plans to distribute new shares of stock as part of its agreement last month to acquire the Lin Broadcasting Corporation.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13


Georgia-Pacific In Nekoosa Move
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation asked a Federal judge to cut the number of votes needed to dismiss directors of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation in the proxy battle between the rival paper companies.
Great Northern has resisted Georgia-Pacific's unsolicited $3.8 billion tender offer on antitrust grounds.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Peel and Eat


Wilder Holds to the Middle as Governorship Nears
LEAD: Virginia's Governor-elect, L. Douglas Wilder, who captured the historical and sociological imagination of the nation two months ago when he became the first black ever to be elected governor of any state, appears to be relying on the same political principle in setting up his new administration that he relied upon to run his successful election campaign:


Reviews/Dance;   Of Elegance, Tchaikovsky and Variations
LEAD: Choreographically, the theme is elegance; the variations are displays of brilliance to some of Tchaikovsky's most sumptuous music.
George Balanchine first used the ''Tema con Variazioni'' from Tchaikovsky's Suite No. 3 as the accompaniment for ''Theme and Variations,'' an abstract ballet he created in 1947.


Electric Revenue Bonds Are Priced
LEAD: The Sacramento Municipal Utility District, in California, yesterday tentatively priced a $125 million issue of electric revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.18 percent for a bond due in 2018.
The issue was priced through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Upheaval in the East: Economic Goal;   Unsnarling a Tangled Trade Alliance
LEAD: As the current Comecon negotiations in Bulgaria make clear, both the Soviet Union and the nations of Eastern Europe are eager to untangle their economic embrace.
The $10 billion question yet to be decided is how rapidly and on what terms.


Bridgestone Seeks Worker Buyouts
LEAD: Bridgestone-Firestone Inc., the company created by the buyout of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company by the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan, has given hundreds of United States workers until Jan. 31 to decide whether to leave their jobs in a cost-cutting move, a spokesman said.
The spokesman, Bob


Kean Stresses Need to Help Urban Poor
LEAD: In a joyous and familial farewell to the state he governed for eight years, Gov.
Thomas H. Kean delivered his final State of the State address today, warning New Jerseyans not to forget the problems and people left behind after an era of buoyant economic growth.


Real Estate;   Sprucing Up Marcos Gem On Wall St.
LEAD: FOR a brief time 60 years ago, 40 Wall Street proudly held the honor of being the tallest building in the world.
More recently it made news as one of the troubled Manhattan properties of Ferdinand E. Marcos, the late Philippine President.


N.C.A.A. Shortens Spring Practice and Basketball Season
LEAD: After a dramatic floor battle between college presidents and athletic directors, delegates to the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention voted today to limit spring football practice in Divisons I and I-AA and reduce the length of the basketball season.


Nets Win as Celtics Have 6-Point Second Quarter
LEAD: Even without Larry Bird, one would never expect the Boston Celtics to score just 6 points in the second quarter.
One would never expect the Celtics to score just 78 points in a game.
And one would never expect those two events to happen against the Nets.


The Two New Commissioners;   Lucius J. Riccio, Transportation
LEAD: Lucius J. Riccio brings to his new post as New York City Commissioner of Transportation all the skills of a master sand-castle builder.


Plan Unveiled for Improving Minority Education
LEAD: Citing a ''glaring gap between minority and nonminority educational achievement'' in the United States, a group of educators and business and community leaders presented an extensive plan today to improve the education of minority students.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Promoting Lambada


Versace Fined $3,500
LEAD: For verbally abusing a referee and failing to leave the court in a timely manner after Indiana lost to the Charlotte Hornets, 117-111, last Saturday night, Coach Dick Versace of the Pacers was fined $3,500 yesterday by Rod Thorn, the National Basketball Association's vice president of operations.


Rutgers to Name Coach
LEAD: Doug Graber, a defensive coach with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers the last three years and with the Kansas City Chiefs the four years before that, will be named head football coach at Rutgers University today, according to reports published in several newspapers.
Dick Anderson, the former coach, was dismissed last month with five years left on his contract after a six-year record of 27-34-4.(


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laidlaw Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
423,932,000
351,472,000
Net inc
61,246,000
42,918,000
Share earns
.27
.22
Shares outst
218,457,000
189,856,000
The results are in U.S. dollars.


2 Accused As Insiders
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission accused two individuals today of illegal insider trading based on information contained in advanced copies of Business Week magazine.


Total System Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total System Services Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
17,878,000
15,196,000
Net inc
3,474,000
2,968,000
Share earns
.22
.19
Shares outst
15,876,674
15,874,772
Yr rev
65,881,000
56,200,000
Net inc
11,288,000
9,529,000
Share earns
.71
.60
Shares outst
15,875,251
15,874,826


G.M. Appoints Director
LEAD: The board of the General Motors Corporation on Monday elected Ann D. McLaughlin as a director.
Mrs.
McLaughlin served as United States Secretary of Labor from 1987 to 1989.
Her appointment increases the number of directors to 18.


Palestinian Radical Denies Link to Flight 103 Bombing
LEAD: The leader of a radical Palestinian faction, Ahmed Jabril, today dismissed as unfounded accusations that his group was involved in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.


Harding Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harding Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,658,230
18,563,711
Net inc
1,160,143
824,320
Share earns
.25
.19
Shares outst
4,703,091
4,355,610
6mo rev
48,294,644
35,101,521
Net inc
2,626,107
1,893,108
Share earns
.56
.43
Shares outst
4,674,088
4,355,610


Josephine Case, 82, RCA Board Member And Poet and Writer
LEAD: Josephine Young Case, a poet and writer and the first woman to be a director of the Radio Corporation of America, died on Monday at the Harding Nursing Home in Waterville, N.Y.
She was 82 years old and lived in Van Hornesville, N.Y.


Dekalb Genetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dekalb Genetics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
31,800,000
33,300,000
Net inc
500,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.10
.22


Social Security Agency Can Act to Gain Trust
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AMI Healthcare P.L.C., London, a hospital group, said talks were under way with a number of potential purchasers for the 65 percent stake in the company owned by American Medical International Inc.


5 Countries to Meet on Reviving Cambodia Peace Talks, Paris Says
LEAD: Amid new concern over stepped-up attacks by Khmer Rouge guerrillas, the United States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Britain are to meet here on Monday to discuss ways of reviving stalled peace efforts on Cambodia.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Rare Victory for Suns Over Lakers
Kevin Johnson scored 10 of his 34 points in overtime, including four free throws in the final 10 seconds, as the Phoenix Suns beat the Los Angeles Lakers, 121-118, last night in Phoenix.
The Suns beat the Lakers for only the eighth time in their last 33 meetings, despite Magic Johnson's club-record-tying 24 assists.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Air Travel Fee Considered
Aviation officials say a passenger fee could provide more money for airport expansion without raising Federal taxes.
Page A16.
Going Against the Flow
Thousands of New Yorkers travel to work against the Manhattan-bound commuter flow, and the number of such commuters is growing.


C.D. Yields Down for Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money-market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were mostly lower for the week ended yesterday.


Upheaval in the East: Trade Bloc;   Moscow Proposes That Trade Bloc Begin Using Real Market Prices
LEAD: The Soviet Union today formally presented to its Eastern European partners a proposal to begin trading next year on a hard-currency basis at real market prices.


Sanka Spot Change
LEAD: Kraft General Foods and its advertising agency, Young &amp; Rubicam, have agreed to alter a commercial for Sanka to make it clear that actors, not consumers, are offering testimonials for the coffee.
The spot, depicting rush-hour train commuters who stop to enjoy Sanka, will now be labeled a ''dramatization.


Big Owner of Department Stores Appears on Brink of Bankruptcy
LEAD: With bills for merchandise coming due today and a deadline from its banks looming on Monday, the American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation, which include Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Jordan Marsh and six other leading chains, appear to be on the brink of bankruptcy.


U.S. Cuts Funds to U.N. Food Agency Over P.L.O.
LEAD: The United States has sharply cut its financial contribution to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization as a result of disputes over the agency's support for the Palestine Liberation Organization and its new budget.


A New Deal for Transit Cops?
LEAD: For 30 years, New York law enforcement officials and politicians have debated the sensible idea of folding the Transit Police into the larger New York City Police Department.
The election of a new Transit Police union leader alters the politics in a way that could finally break the stalemate.


U.S. to Study Oil Profits Resulting From Surge in Prices
LEAD: Under pressure from Congress, an Energy Department official said today that the department would immediately begin a study of any profits earned by the heating oil industry when prices increased as much as 50 percent in the Northeast last month.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The New York City Schools Chancellor, JOSEPH A. FERNANDEZ, has abandoned his plans to live in Staten Island.
He fell in love with Brooklyn Heights.


Merrill Lynch Trims Staff at Research Unit
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that it had dismissed 10 of the 130 employees in its equity research department as part of a program to improve profitability by reducing costs.


PRESIDENT ASSAILS BOMBINGS IN SOUTH
LEAD: Signing a proclamation for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday, President Bush voiced outrage today over bombings linked to a white supremacist group and vowed ''to bring the perpetrators of these hideous crimes to justice.''


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMISSION ON TRADE LAW - WORKING GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL CONTRACT PRACTICES - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Palmer and Morgan Join Hall First-Timers
LEAD: Jim Palmer and Joe Morgan, who shared in post-season honors in 1975 and 1976, shared in post-career honors last night.
The pitcher and the second baseman were elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in their first year of eligibility.


Review/Television;   Robert Bly Tells Moyers What's Wrong With Men
LEAD: Having brought public broadcasting stardom to Joseph Campbell, who taught and wrote about the place of myth in human history, Bill Moyers now presents Robert Bly, the poet, who, like Campbell, purveys interpretations of myth for the guidance of others.
As Campbell advised those who tuned in to Mr.


Big British Fight Shapes Up On Hong Kong Emigre Plan
LEAD: Some members of the British Parliament, including many Conservatives, have begun a major battle against Government plans to offer refuge in Britain to 50,000 of the most successful people in Hong Kong and their families before China takes over the colony in 1997.


Eating Well
LEAD: THERE is a long list of horror stories connected with the consumption of sugar: hyperactivity in children; criminal behavior in adults; diabetes; elevated cholesterol.
There is little good scientific evidence that sugar causes these conditions, but under certain circumstances it is thought to aggravate them.


It's On! Tyson-Holyfield Set for June
LEAD: The heavyweight match everyone has looked for - Mike Tyson vs.
Evander Holyfield - at last is on the fight calendar.
After much rhetorical warfare and posturing by the opposing camps, a deal was completed yesterday in Las Vegas, Nev., for a June 18 bout between the unbeaten stars.


The Real Commons, on Screen
LEAD: British television viewers today saw the worst uproar in the House of Commons since cameras were allowed into the chamber in November.


1 Park, 2 Superpowers


Economic Scene;   Subsidy, Not Tax, To Spur Recycling
LEAD: LIKE a desert cloudburst, a Bush Administration initiative to encourage recycling made a brief splash last week and then disappeared without a trace.
But the idea of taxing manufacturers who do not make maximum use of recycled materials, reportedly shot down by Administration political operatives distressed by the mere mention of the T-word, is likely to rise again - if only because


Clemson Reveals It Is Under Inquiry by N.C.A.A.
LEAD: The Clemson University football program is being accused by the National Collegiate Athletic Association of more than a dozen illegal recruiting contacts and of giving players up to $150 in cash from 1984 to 1988, an N.C.A.A. report released today said.


Status of Spring Training Is Questionable
LEAD: The status of spring training for the major leagues, scheduled to begin in five weeks, was thrown into question yesterday with the disclosure that the owners will meet Feb. 9 to decide whether to open camps.


The Two New Commissioners;   Albert F. Appleton, Environmental Protection
LEAD: Albert F. Appleton's vocation and avocation could blend into a perfect marriage of environmental advocacy and managerial dexterity in his new job as Commissioner of the city's Department of Environmental Protection.


Pannell Kerr Merger Talks
LEAD: Senior partners from Pannell Kerr Forster and Spicer &amp; Oppenheim have explored merging the two mid-sized accounting firms, Pannell's chairman said yesterday.
''It's been discussed,'' said


Those Mister Wonderfuls
LEAD: The mail is full of football questions, so let's get to them right away, mail fans.


Beyond Crumpets: Tea Trade Woos Youth
LEAD: THE television ad focuses on a mysterious beverage factory.
A professor appears, followed by a crowd of eager visitors.


Shuttle Astronauts to Deploy One Satellite and Retrieve Another


Restoring a Work by More Than One Master
LEAD: The denouement of a scholarly detective story was presented today at the National Gallery of Art with the unveiling of the newly restored ''Feast of the Gods,'' a 16th-century masterpiece by Giovanni Bellini.


A Slow Start Is Seen for The Infiniti
LEAD: The initial sales of the Nissan Motor Company's Infiniti, the newest Japanese entrant in the profitable luxury car segment, have not been as strong as expected, some industry analysts and dealers say.


3 Whites Accused Of Racial Menacing
LEAD: Three white teen-agers were arrested yesterday and charged with yelling racial slurs and menacing four black youths with a tire iron outside a high school in Brooklyn, the police said.


Providence Rallies to Set Back Seton Hall, 78-70
LEAD: Carlton Screen scored 6 of his 20 points early in the second half tonight to spark Providence to a 78-70 victory over Seton Hall in a Big East game.


Jerusalem Post Fills 2 Jobs Left Vacant by Resignations
LEAD: The Jerusalem Post has named a new managing editor and magazine editor in the first replacements of high-ranking staff members who resigned last week in a dispute over the newspaper's editorial policy.


Wine Talk
LEAD: THERE was a time, not too long ago, when buying wine by the glass in a restaurant didn't seem to make much sense.
A full bottle of good, inexpensive wine always seemed preferable to a glass of indifferent medium- or high-priced wine.


The U.S. and Panama: The Press;   Paper Noriega Crushed Is Reborn as a Watchdog
LEAD: Guillermo Sanchez Borbon had a bit of a fright when he returned this week to his newspaper office, which had been closed for 23 months.
There were four heavily armed soldiers outside the front door.


Congressman Joins Race for Governor
LEAD: United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison, a Democrat from the New Haven area, declared his candidacy for governor Monday, putting himself into conflict with Gov.
William A. O'Neill, a fellow Democrat who has said he will run for a third term.


Ewing Carries the Knicks Through Overtime Again
LEAD: Last night, the Knicks won their second consecutive overtime game, and again, it was Patrick Ewing who scored the deciding points.


Consolidated Gas
LEAD: The Consolidated Natural Gas Company said it plans to sell four million shares of common stock to raise nearly $200 million.
It said it would use the money to expand its pipeline and transmission operations in the Northeast, increase exploration and production and complete the $160 million purchase of the Virginia Natural Gas Company.


Suntrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suntrust Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
84,600,000
79,100,000
Per share
.66
.61
Year net inc
337,300,000
308,700,000
Per share
2.61
2.38


Giants Going Home On an Optimistic Note
LEAD: The coach was disappointed.
The players were disappointed.
But even though the Giants were eliminated from the playoffs Sunday, there have been few hang-dog looks.


Two Guilty on Drug Charges
LEAD: A Federal jury in Manhattan yesterday convicted a Harlem man of leading a violent gang that dealt heroin.
The defendant, William R. Underwood, 46 years old, was found guilty of racketeering, racketeering conspiracy, narcotics conspiracy and of being leader of a gang known as the Vigilantes.
The indictment accused the gang of committing six murders and of controlling street-level distribution of heroin in certain areas of Harlem from 1971 to 1988.





Coopers &amp; Lybrand Leases New Offices
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins took time out from the city's financial woes yesterday to announce a new tenant for a large portion of one of Manhattan's midtown office towers, which he said was proof that ''in good times and bad New York City remains at the heart of the international economy.''


College Officials Fear Loss of Frankness in Deciding Tenure
LEAD: University officials across the country said yesterday's Supreme Court ruling could make it harder to evaluate candidates for tenure because professors would not speak as bluntly about their colleagues if they knew their comments could be made public.


Bio-Logic Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Logic Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,570,513
2,320,998
Net inc
183,454
50,343
Share earns
.07
.02
Shares outst
2,724,272
2,718,611
9mo rev
7,306,009
6,929,971
Net inc
387,751
433,463
Share earns
.14
.16
Shares outst
2,732,712
2,788,288


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CARL McCALL decided yesterday against being a candidate for New York State comptroller.
He had been GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO's first choice as the Democratic nominee.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b5,950,000
752,000
Per share
.99
.12
Year net inc
b22,700,000
6,230,000
Per share
3.80
1.04
b-Included $8 million decrease in the provision for loan losses.


Gun That May Be Stuart's Is Found
LEAD: Divers found a revolver in a river north of Boston today that law-enforcement officials believe may be the gun used in October to kill Carol Stuart, a pregnant Boston woman whose husband committed suicide last week.


Colonial High Income Municial Trust reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial High Income Municial Trust (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
282,013,000
-
Share earns
9.35
-
Assets represented net asset value.
The company said there are no year-ago comparable results because the fund began investment operations Feb.


Southwestern Public Service Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Public Service Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
201,663,000
184,044,000
Net inc
37,844,000
23,290,000
Share earns
.88
.52


High Winds Cause Damage in Oregon


CHRONICLE
LEAD: And in Chicago, RICHARD J. PHELAN, the 52-year-old lawyer whose work for the House Ethics Committee helped bring down House Speaker Jim Wright last year, is reconsidering his primary run for president of the Cook County Board in the wake of personal and political difficulties.


Children's Names: Mirror of a Society
LEAD: IF a child's name tells more about the parents than it does about the child, then the 1980's may well be remembered as a decade in which some parents were self-indulgent, ambitious, proud of their heritage and just a little outrageous.


Farm Debate to Center on Pesticides
LEAD: Proposals intended to make American agricultural practices safer and less polluting are likely to emerge as the most contentious issues in the Congressional debate over national farm policy, farm groups, trade organizations and influential farm policy makers say.


Review/Opera;   Balancing Farce and Poignancy In First 'Cosi' of the Met Season
LEAD: Opera as a medium of musical expression is apparently not dead.
The first ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' of the Metropolitan Opera's season on Monday evening proved this in a performance that effectively fluctuated between low farce and deepest poignancy.
Led by Carol Vaness, a Fiordiligi who showed the vocal and emotional range of a young Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, the cast struck a fine balance in a work that requires high-wire poise by all concerned.


1 Park, 2 Superpowers


Adding Noise to Cut a Car's Noise
LEAD: Automobile engineers seeking to make a car quieter have typically padded body panels with a bit of cloth or fiberglass and added rubber to motor mounts.
Now, researchers at Lotus Engineering in Britain have devised a way to cut interior noise with microphones and microchips, a technique dubbed ''anti-noise.


Rumania Seeks Trade Status
LEAD: The new Government said today that it would seek most-favored-nation trading status with the United States.
Nicolae Ceausescu, the executed dictator, renounced the American trade agreement in February 1988, when it appeared that Congress would not renew it because of rights abuses under Mr.
Ceausescu.


The U.S. and Panama: Civilian Dead;   The Invasion's Civilian Toll: Still No Official Count
LEAD: Nearly three weeks after United States troops toppled Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's Government, killing what military spokesmen said were 314 of his troops, officials acknowledge that there is still no reliable count of how many Panamanian noncombatants died as a result of the fighting and street disorders.


C.P.A. Group Adopts Rule
LEAD: The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants said yesterday that its members had approved a bylaw change to require all of its members who audit public companies to undergo regular reviews by their peers.
The measure was approved by 87 percent of those who voted, the group said.


Percentage of Blacks in South Rose in the 80's
LEAD: The percentage of black Americans living in the South increased in the 1980's for the first time in the 20th century, the Census Bureau reported today.


London Journal;   At the Secular Funeral, a Tango May Be Tasteful
LEAD: The mourners listened solemnly to the song of praise for the deceased, a man who loved to dance.
Then, in their own creative tribute, they did a sedate tango out the door.


Boston College and Harvard Start Upward Moves
LEAD: Boston College and Harvard, the preseason favorites in the East's Division I leagues, made auspicious moves after slow starts as the second half of the college hockey season commenced last week.


Sales of Genentech Drug Improve
LEAD: Genentech Inc. said today that sales of its main product, tissue plasminogen activator, grew 30 percent in 1989, to $196.4 million, compared with $151.4 million in 1988.


Shuttle in Orbit; Satellite Chase Begins
LEAD: Five astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia rocketed into orbit today on a complex mission to deploy one satellite and after an intricate three-day chase to retrieve another.


ABC May Curtail Ads in Show's Premiere
LEAD: As part of an extensive promotional effort to identify a forthcoming prime-time dramatic series as unusual television, ABC is considering broadcasting the two-hour premiere of ''Twin Peaks'' without any network commercials, Capital Cities/ABC executives said this week.
The show would include commercials sold by local television stations, however.


U.S. Opposing Bid by Gillette
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it planned to file an antitrust suit to block the Gillette Company's acquisition of the Wilkinson Sword wet razor blade business outside the European Community.


Market Place;   Is '84 Weakness About to Return?
LEAD: TO some, 1984 may forever be linked to George Orwell and Big Brother, or to Ronald Reagan's landslide re-election, but on Wall Street it is remembered for the only slow and sustained decline in stock prices of the 1980's bull market.


Paramount Quits Agency
LEAD: The Paramount Pictures Corporation has withdrawn its $60 million advertising account from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the agency said yesterday.


Rangers Surrounded By Loud Trade Talk
LEAD: Neil Smith, the general manager of the Rangers, who has become incensed as much by his team's failure of nerve as its failure to win, left for Florida and the meeting of National Hockey League general managers last weekend.
He had, in the days leading up to his departure, publicly mocked his team's efforts and broadly hinted that it was a team likely to have been reshaped by his return


Action Staffing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Staffing Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
37,979,778
27,086,461
Net inc
198,904
b60,895
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
39,735,000
36,548,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $55,266.


Southern Lebanon Truce Holds
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militias continued to observe a truce in southern Lebanon today as a senior Iranian mediator said here that a durable cease-fire was imminent.


MGM/UA Sale Plan on Hold
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company said today that it had put on hold plans to sell itself and would instead try to rebuild by increasing film production.
The rebuilding plan calls for


Redlaw Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Redlaw Industries
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
78,320,000
62,957,000
Net loss
b3,149,000
c4,770,000
Share earns
-
.70
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $8,850,000.
c-Net income and included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,917,000.


REAL $35 Million Winner Is Auto Assembly Worker
LEAD: The real winner of the New York State Lottery, an automobile assembly-line worker from Westchester County, stepped forward yesterday to claim the $35 million Lotto jackpot prize.


Violent Protests Growing in Kashmir
LEAD: An Indian intelligence official was killed by unidentified gunmen in the northern state of Kashmir today, while at least 25 people were wounded in the second straight day of clashes between police officers and separatist demonstrators.


Patients to Benefit From Reforms for Interns;   Approach Is Too Broad
LEAD: To the Editor:


Control Data Loss
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation said today that it expects its fiscal year 1989 restructuring costs to climb to more than $650 million with the addition of a fourth-quarter charge of $210 million.
With the restructuring charges, the computer maker said it would incur a loss in the fourth quarter and for the year.


Corrections
LEAD: The cast listing with a television review yesterday about the ''Today'' program misidentified its directors and the newscaster who appeared on Monday.
The directors are John Libretto and Steve Rosen; the newscaster was Keith Morrison, not John Palmer.


Paramount Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paramount Communications Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
968,800,000
935,600,000
Net inc
b1,234,300,000
c144,000,000
Share earns
10.28
1.21
Yr rev
3,391,600,000
3,055,900,000
Net inc
b1,465,400,000
c384,700,000
Share earns
12.21
3.21
Shares outst
120,000,000
119,500,000


City to Suburb: Commuting Turns Around
LEAD: With a glass-walled apartment 32 floors above the Upper East Side and plenty of friends below, David Perlmutter is happily ensconced in Manhattan.
But each weekday morning, the 27-year-old developer drives to work here in the suburbs.


Oilers Name Pardee To Succeed Glanville
LEAD: Jack Pardee, whose teams compiled a 44-46 record when he was a National Football League head coach during two seasons with the Chicago Bears and three with the Washington Redskins in the 1970's, returned to the N.F.L. yesterday.
He succeeded Jerry Glanville as head coach of the Houston Oilers.


Addicts Awaiting Treatment Often Face Delays and Panic
LEAD: Beauvais J., a crack addict, moved in with his sister and her four children in Brooklyn because there was no room for him in a drug-treatment program.


Denying Slurs, Capital Mayor Repudiates Article
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that an article in The Los Angeles Times in which he was quoted as mocking the aspirations of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and criticizing Jewish supporters was both inaccurate and racist.


Trustco Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustco Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,490,000
2,127,000
Share earns
.83
.71
Yr net inc
9,446,000
7,826,000
Share earns
3.14
2.62
Results for 1988 have been adjusted for a 10-percent stock dividend paid in October 1989.


Commodity Case Details Emerging
LEAD: A wealth of details has emerged in the Government's case against 19 Chicago soybean traders charged with illegal trading and defrauding customers.


Wegener Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wegener Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 1
1989
1988
Sales
7,133,000
6,839,000
Net inc
43,000
b158,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
7,365,394
7,450,165
b-Included a loss of $334,000 from the cumulative effect of change in accounting method.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief profile on Sunday about Dexter Lehtinen, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of Florida, referred incorrectly to his education.
He graduated from the University of Miami and received his law degree from Stanford Law School.
Mr.
Lehtinen also received master's degrees in political science and business administration at Columbia University.


Mary O'Neill, 84, Dies; Children's Book Writer
LEAD: Mary O'Neill, a children's book author, died of heart failure on Jan. 2 in Yuma (Ariz.) Regional Medical Center.
She was 84 years old.


Electrosound Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electrosound Group (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,926,000
10,366,000
Net inc
b202,000
c5,154,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
15,005,000
17,904,000
Net inc
b611,000
c6,962,000
Share earns
.23
-


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Edward J. Ennis, a former president of the American Civil Liberties Union, misstated the period of his service.
It was 1969 to 1976.


U.N. Agency to Provide Aid To Ethiopia Drought Victims
LEAD: The World Food Program said today that it will provide almost $8 million in emergency food aid for drought victims and refugees in Ethiopia.


Rumors That Martial Law Will Be Lifted Sweep Beijing


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Campeau appears to be on the brink of bankruptcy, with bills for merchandise coming due today and a deadline from its banks looming on Monday. [Page A1.]  Marvin S. Traub, Bloomingdale's chairman and chief executive, asked fashion manufacturers to allow the store to postpone payments on December bills.


Formal Rites of Hirohito's Death Are Completed


Goodfellow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodfellow Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
32,799,000
33,819,000
Net inc
b2,352,000
b537,000
Share earns
.66
.15
b-Included extraordinary credits of $2,286,000, or 64 cents a share, for the latest quarter and $376,000, or 10 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


The Dollar Ends Day Mixed As Gold Gains in the U.S.
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed against key foreign currencies in active, choppy trading yesterday.


Aloft in Shuttle: Sketches of Astronauts
LEAD: For the flight of the space shuttle Columbia, the space agency chose two astronauts with experience in space and three who will be making their first shuttle flights.
Daniel C. Brandenstein
Mission Commander


Recommendation Made
LEAD: East German track and field officials have recommended that Wolfgang Schmidt, one of the top discus throwers in the world, be allowed to compete for West Germany, the East German newspaper Deutsches Sportecho reported yesterday.


6 in South Africa Die in Clash Of Black Transport Workers
LEAD: Six people were killed today as black transport workers fought each other with clubs, sticks and knives at a railway station here.
The clash was one of the most violent incidents of recent South African labor unrest.


Answering the Car Phone When Away From the Car
LEAD: At the Consumer Electronics Show here this week, a company introduced a portable handset system that allows people with cellular car phones to receive calls up to 1,000 feet from their vehicles.


Book Notes
LEAD:
'Crazy Horse' Suit


Awakening After Boston's Nightmare
LEAD: The story leaped into the news, a suburban nightmare become suddenly, horribly flesh: a young middle-class couple, the wife eight months pregnant, are kidnapped while driving home from birthing class.
The abductor, drug-crazed, remorselessly kills the wife and wounds the husband, who heroically guides the police to their car using his cellular phone.


4 Soldiers Are Killed In Crash of Helicopter
LEAD: An Army UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter crashed during desert exercises today, killing all four soldiers aboard, a base spokesman said.


Nursing Homes To Increase Beds For AIDS Cases
LEAD: New York State and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, which operates the only AIDS nursing home in New York City, announced plans yesterday to increase by nearly five-fold the number of AIDS beds there and in nursing homes elsewhere.


Abortion, Harassment and RU 486
LEAD: ''When [abortion]  was illegal, the fear was of losing my medical license and going to prison.
I had numerous blackmail attempts and people pulled guns on me,'' Dr.
Curtis Boyd told a New York Times reporter recently.
Now, he said, ''the harassment is tremendous.
Every day I have to walk through picketers who call me a murderer.


13 Fewer Rigs Working
LEAD: The number of United States rigs drilling for oil and gas dropped last week by 13, to a total of 1,029, Baker Hughes Inc., an oil-services company, said on Monday.
The number of working rigs a year ago was 872.
The weekly count reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil and gas, not those producing oil and gas.


Children's Book Medals Awarded
LEAD: The 1990 John Newbury Medal for the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children has been awarded to ''Number the Stars,'' by Lois Lowry (Houghton Mifflin).


Fish Truly Worthy of the Word Fresh
LEAD: LIKE sweet corn that goes directly from the field to the pot in midsummer, fish that is on the table within hours of being caught transcends the accepted meaning of fresh.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: LETTER from a failed ballerina:


Robert J. Smith, 90, Ex-Airline Executive
LEAD: Robert J. Smith, a former airlines industry executive, died of a heart attack on Dec. 31 at his home in Dallas.
He was 90 years old.


The U.S. and Panama: Noriega;   JUDGE POSTPONES MOVING OF NORIEGA
LEAD: A Federal District Court judge today ordered the Government to delay moving Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega from a jail cell in downtown Miami to a more secure site out of town after defense lawyers demanded assurances that they would have adequate access to him.


S.A.S.'s Chile Deal
LEAD: The Scandinavian Airlines System said the Chilean Government had approved its acquisition of 30 percent of the Lan Chile airline and an increase of its stake in the carrier to 35 percent later this year.
S.A.S. said the parties had agreed that S.A.S. would occupy three of the nine seats on the Lan Chile board.


The Next Summit's in June. Hurry.
LEAD: The next Bush-Gorbachev meeting is five months away - only five months.
What happens starting now will show whether the two leaders can ride the tigers Mikhail Gorbachev has set loose or whether they'll lose a momentous opportunity to reduce weapons and promote peace.


Oneok Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oneok Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
141,400,000
128,200,000
Net inc
6,800,000
5,300,000
Share earns
.49
.37


Dinkins Appoints Transportation and Environment Commissioners
LEAD: Bypassing the incumbent who had been recommended for reappointment by his advisory committee, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named a deputy in the transportation department, Lucius J. Riccio, to be New York City's new Commissioner of Transportation.


Repligen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Repligen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,061,796
2,256,011
Net inc
127,814
b857,254
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
7,747,622
7,333,867
9mo rev
9,744,468
6,285,820
Net loss
915,598
2,665,001
Shares outst
7,431,240
7,315,440


U.S.-Laos Anti-Drug Effort
LEAD: The United States and Laos agreed today to establish ground rules for cooperation in combating drug smuggling, the State Department said.
The department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the agreement, signed in Laos, reflects a ''significantly improved'' American relationship with the Communist Southeast Asian country, a major opium producer.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Two Student Militants Tell of Death Threats
LEAD: The threatening phone calls started last Saturday night for Marina Ranta, Tiberio Stoichici and eight other students of the Polytechnical Institute, a section of Bucharest University.


AIDS Trial Recesses as Doctor Takes Stand
LEAD: A 32-year-old doctor with AIDS took the witness stand yesterday in her $175 million suit against the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.
But the physician, Dr.
Veronica Prego, did not testify, because the court stenographer's machine broke down.
Justice Aaron D. Bernstein of State Supreme Court in


User Fee to Expand Airports Gains Favor
LEAD: Aviation officials in government and industry are expressing growing enthusiasm over the idea of letting airports levy a departure fee on every passenger to help pay for expanding the nation's air transportation system.


The U.S. and Panama: Soldiers of Fortune;   An Untold Guerrilla War: Noriega Foes Rule Border
LEAD: When invading American troops seized key installations throughout Panama last month, this vital border crossing was sealed off by a far different army, one that was formed as a secret alternative to just such a United States invasion.


Lord Gardiner, Ex-Judicial Head And Reformer of Laws, Dies at 89
LEAD: Lord Gardiner, who as Lord Chancellor, or head of the judiciary, from 1964 to 1970 presided over the abolition of the death penalty in Britain, died on Sunday, his family said.
He was 89 years old.


Lessons
LEAD: Donna Wall, a substitute kindergarten teacher, was half an hour into a crayons-and-scissors exercise at the Bartlett Elementary School in Lowell, Mass., when she realized that some of the students, having finished their assignment, were wandering all over the classroom.


Net Increases At Paramount On Unit Sale
LEAD: Paramount Communications Inc. said yesterday that its net income for the fourth quarter of the 1989 fiscal year rose more than eightfold because of a special gain from the sale of the Associates First Capital Corporation, its financial-services business.


Bloomingdale's Chief Sought Payment Delays
LEAD: In a last-ditch effort to help the American retail units of the Campeau Corporation avert a possible bankruptcy, Marvin S. Traub, the chairman and chief executive of Bloomingdale's, the centerpiece of Campeau's operations, asked key fashion manufacturers this week to allow the store to postpone payments on


The U.S. and Panama;   Noriega's Offices Reported Looted


Bridge
LEAD: For players in the New York area, the first major tournament of the 90's begins at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.


Continental Bank Job Reunites Old Friends
LEAD: When Richard L. Huber accepted a new job as vice chairman at Continental Bank, it was a reunion of sorts with Thomas Theobald, chairman of Continental and Mr.
Huber's former boss at Citibank early in the 1980's.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE prospects are dim for a substantial bay scallop harvest in Long Island Sound this year.
The results of the devastating brown tide of 1988 linger, and the few bay scallops that survive will be exceedingly expensive.
Hence, sea scallops are in greater demand than ever.


Reviews/Dance;   A Mixed Troupe From Japan And the U.S.
LEAD: Ballet is very popular in Japan today.
And the 21 teen-age Japanese dancers who performed on Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater in ''Young Ballet Dancers From Japan and New York'' were well trained and often personable.
But few were developed performers.
The performing highlight of the evening was the minxish Mihoko Sasao's easy and authoritative portrayal of the 19th-century Danish ballerina Lucile Grahn, in a staging of ''Pas de Quatre'' by Katsuko Okamoto.


New Move For Buyout Of UAL
LEAD: The management of the UAL Corporation and the unions at its United Airlines unit are preparing another effort to assemble a buyout proposal, people involved in their discussions said yesterday.


Books And the Hippodrome
LEAD: In ''Clarence Darrow for the Defense,'' by Irving Stone, a passage has remained in memory as a striking and most unexpected dollop of good sense.
Darrow, the guest speaker at a high school commencement exercise in Chicago 70 or so years ago, listened to a pompous principal lecture 500 graduates about their great responsibilities when they left that auditorium.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an alien detention center in Rosedale, Queens, referred incorrectly in some copies to comments by Susan Noreika, chairwoman of Community Board 13.
She said the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Wackenhut Corrections Corporation, the private company that operates the center, should have notified the community of their plans to establish it but were not legally required to do so.


Tarlow-Cosmopolitan
LEAD: Citing a limited potential for growth, Tarlow Advertising has resigned the $1 million trade advertising account of Cosmopolitan magazine. ''I want us to be working in areas where if you a do a great job, you reap the benefits,'' said Dick Tarlow, the agency's president.
George H. Simpson, a spokesman for Cosmopolitan, said creative differences had existed as well.


Apartments Rules Will Stop Landlords From Heartless Evictions;   Legislative Inaction
LEAD: To the Editor:





U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 5
Dec. 29
Jan. 6
1990
1989
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.3
6.1
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
210.5
216.9
228.8
Distillate stocks
107.8
108.2
126.9
Crude imports, daily
5.7
5.5
5.1
Product imports, daily
2.4
2.3
2.5
Crude stocks
342.2
341.8
329.0
Crude production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
81.1
79.3
85.3


Paul A. Kennon, 55, Honored Architect And a Dean at Rice
LEAD: Paul A. Kennon, an award-winning architect who was dean of the School of Architecture at Rice University, died of a heart attack on Monday at the Texas Medical Center in Houston.
He was 55 years old and lived in Houston.


The Upwardly Mobile Snifter
LEAD: FIRST Stolichnaya, Absolut and other ''super premium'' vodkas arrived.
Then came a parade of single-malt Scotches that sold extraordinarily well, even as Americans' consumption of spirits continued to decline.


Cable TV Is No Longer A Stepchild
LEAD: AS if it weren't bad enough that advertising executives have to deal with three networks and Fox television, the dozen large advertiser-supported cable services are demanding more attention.
And their numbers continue to grow.


Ruth Newman Schwarz, Social Worker, 81
LEAD: Ruth Newman Schwarz, an early psychiatric social worker, died of cancer Dec. 28 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia;   Prague Wants Soviet Pullout by Year's End
LEAD: Czechoslovakia said today that it will push for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from its territory by the end of the year while its own army tries to re-establish an independent identity after years of control by Moscow.


Tyco Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
518,174,000
505,933,000
Net inc
29,071,000
22,883,000
Share earns
.70
.57
Shares outst
40,990,000
40,050,000
6mo sales
1,067,521,000
938,513,000
Net inc
57,579,000
44,169,000
Share earns
1.40
1.16
Shares outst
40,985,000
38,110,000


U.S.-Soviet Park Proposed Along Strait
LEAD: A team of American and Soviet officials today recommended the creation of an international park along the Bering Strait, long a sensitive border area between the two powers.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
9.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.57
8.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.43
7.44
8.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.03
8.03
9.31
30-YR.


Rare Sea Mammals Die In Florida Cold Wave
LEAD: A record number of manatees have been found dead in Florida waterways over the past nine days and more than half may have been victims of the recent cold snap, state officials said.


Exxon Admits a Year of Breakdowns in S.I. Oil Spill
LEAD: Exxon officials said yesterday that a leak detection system that had been malfunctioning for at least a year, sending off false alarms, was ignored by its operators last week as more than a half-million gallons of oil hemorrhaged from a pipeline into the Arthur Kill off Staten Island.


A Nursing Aide Admits Killing Elderly Patient
LEAD: A former nursing assistant with AIDS who confessed killing seven elderly patients, then said the confessions were untrue, pleaded guilty today to murdering one of those patients and was sentenced to life in prison.


Detection Methods Raise Issue of Student Rights
LEAD: A New York City pilot program using metal detectors and X-ray machines to reduce the numbers of weapons getting into schools is also discouraging students from carrying illegal drugs and alcohol in some buildings, school officials say.


Excerpts From Court Decision Requiring Universities to Yield Tenure Data
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today requiring universities to disclose their tenure files.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the unanimous opinion.


Books of The Times;   Politician and Soldier, in Tandem
LEAD:
Roosevelt and Marshall
Partners in Politics and War
By Thomas Parrish
608 pages. Illustrated. William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


Upheaval in the East;   Bulgarian Panel Is to Investigate Corruption
LEAD: An official commission investigating charges of corruption by Bulgarian officials said today that it had collected enough evidence to start criminal proceedings against the country's disgraced former leader, Todor I. Zhivkov.


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Sales
42,037,000
40,345,000
Net loss
629,000
631,000
9mo sales
77,641,000
74,776,000
Net loss
4,920,000
b4,325,000
b-Included a pretax gain of $531,000 for the sale of properties.


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
244,705,000
239,509,000
Net inc
3,679,000
7,215,000
Share earns
.24
.47
Figures for 1988 have been reclassified.


Upheaval in the East;   Party to Organize in the East
LEAD: The ultra-rightist Republican Party of West Germany, denounced as ''neo-Nazi'' by the East German Government, will organize for East German elections, its leader, Franz Schonhuber, said today at a news conference.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Home Products Corp., New York, the drug, food and household products company, appointed Charles E. LaRosa president of its American Home Food Products division.
He replaces David P. Jaicks, who was named chairman of the division.


Aero Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,476,227
9,561,364
Net inc
312,634
b47,683
Share earns
.04
-
9mo sales
30,800,189
29,756,685
Net inc
429,217
489,332
Share earns
.05
.06
b-Net loss


Late Drop Sends Dow Down 28.37, to 2,766
LEAD: Stocks ended sharply lower yesterday as trading accelerated near the close of the session.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 28.37 points, to 2,766.


EX-DEFENSE CHIEF OF PERU IS KILLED
LEAD: A former Peruvian Defense Minister was shot and killed today, and security officials said Maoist guerrillas were responsible.


Computer Chaos Called Mistake, Not Felony
LEAD: A Cornell University student made a ''mistake'' in allowing a computer program he designed to go wild and paralyze a national computer network, his lawyer told jurors today in opening arguments at his felony trial.


Brooklyn Teen-Ager Killed For Failing to Give a High-5
LEAD: A 15-year-old died early yesterday after being shot Monday night in Brooklyn in a feud that started when he refused to give another youth a high-five greeting, the police said.


CBS Ends Contract Of Program Executive
LEAD: CBS announced yesterday that it has reached an agreement with Barbara Corday, the executive vice president of programs, to terminate her contract.
Her departure completes a housecleaning of the top ranks of the CBS Entertainment division.
The head of the division, Kim LeMasters, resigned under pressure in December and was replaced by Jeff Sagansky.


Students' Skills Termed 'Dreadfully Inadequate'
LEAD: Despite the efforts made in the 1980's to improve schools, the reading and writing skills of American students remain ''dreadfully inadequate,'' Education Secretary Lauro F. Cavazos said today in releasing the latest results of a national education assessment.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business People column on Monday about a new chief operating officer at the Centex Corporation misidentified the company's chairman.
He is Paul R. Seegers.


Patients to Benefit From Reforms for Interns;   No Way to Learn
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Rich New Biotech Frontier
LEAD: Biotechnology companies are developing potentially revolutionary new treatments for rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, multiple sclerosis and other disorders in which the body's disease-fighting system attacks the body's own tissues.


Mexico Inflation Rate
LEAD: Mexico's inflation rate was 19.7 percent last year, the country's lowest since 1978, the Government announced Monday.
Thus, Mexico ended the year meeting its goal of keeping inflation at 18 percent to 20 percent, the Government said in a report.


Treasuries Finish Little Changed
LEAD: Concern about a rush of new longer-term securities continued to build in the credit markets yesterday as dealers prepared to place bids on $7.5 billion of seven-year Treasury notes.


U.S. Forgives Portion Of Kenya's Loan Debt
LEAD: The United States today formally agreed to forgive all economic-assistance loans to Kenya, as part of an effort to give economic relief to Africa, including some of the continent's poorest countries.


People
LEAD: *
Bruce I. Carlson has been named chairman of Grant/Jacoby Advertising, Chicago, replacing Robert L. Flink, who is retiring.
R.
Milton Lynnes will replace Mr.
Carlson as president.


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,232,000
4,738,000
Per share
.58
.53
Year net inc
21,093,000
17,909,000
Per share
2.36
2.01
Year-ago 1988 results were restated to reflect the 1989 acquisitions of Peoples Bank of Forsyth County and Pickens County Bank, both on a pooling-of-interests basis.


France Plans to Reopen Kabul Embassy
LEAD: Despite American objections, France has decided to become the first Western country to send its diplomats back to Afghanistan, French and American officials said today.


Mansho T. Khilnani, Radiologist, 70
LEAD: Dr.
Mansho T. Khilnani, a radiologist and educator, died of a chronic heart ailment on Jan. 4 at Coral Reef Hospital in Miami.
He was 70 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Latshaw Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Latshaw Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 28
1989
1988
Sales
5,960,000
5,473,000
Net loss
b124,000
c224,000
Share earns
-
.40
Shares outst
564,014,000
566,242,000
Yr sales
26,062,000
22,905,000
Net inc
863,000
1,191,000
Share earns
1.53
2.10
Shares outst
564,843,000
567,555,000


New Coach at Rutgers Is an N.F.L. Assistant
LEAD: Doug Graber, a stranger to New Jersey and Rutgers football, was named today as the head coach of the Scarlet Knights.


Coke Settles Case in Europe
LEAD: The European Community Commission said Tuesday that it had closed an anti-competition case against the Coca-Cola Company, satisfied that the soft-drink maker had ended anti-competitive practices in the European Community.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: A FRIEND said once that he wished I'd write about men.
But I will have nothing to say, I protested.
I don't make gender distinctions.
I think about men the same way I think about women: I either like somebody or I don't.
Neither sex has a premium on any one quality.
I couldn't possibly begin a sentence with ''Men are .


Surprise and Skepticism On Campeau Payments
LEAD: Executives at some of Seventh Avenue's largest fashion houses were pleasantly surprised and elated yesterday when the Toronto-based Campeau Corporation notified them that they were going to be paid for goods shipped in December.


Farm Credit Issues Total $635 Million
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday priced at par a total of $635 million in consolidated systemwide bonds with maturities of three years and five years.


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McCormick &amp; Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
361,549,000
362,768,000
Net inc
20,320,000
c16,375,000
Share earns
.94
.71
Shares outst
21,538,000
22,961,000
Yr sales
1,246,080,000
1,220,371,000
Net inc
b135,525,000
c42,674,000
Share earns
6.17
1.83
Shares outst
21,943,000
23,267,000


U.S. to Pare War Games in South Korea
LEAD: The United States and South Korea will reduce the size of their annual joint military maneuvers to improve the climate for negotiations between North and South Korea, President Roh Tae Woo said today.


From Nissan, The Future On Wheels
LEAD: THOSE taking the pulse of future automobile design often look beyond industry soothsayers to concept cars.
If Nissan Design International Inc.'s Gobi concept car, introduced last week at the North American International Automobile Show in Detroit, is any indication, trends for the 1990's will include soft squeezable materials and a separation of components vaguely reminiscent of deconstructivism.


Beijing's Very Small 'Big Event'
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng presents China's lifting of martial law in Beijing as ''a big event.'' And the Bush Administration claims it as vindication of Brent Scowcroft's recent highly visible visit to Beijing.
They are wrong.


Note Cards Created For a Cause
LEAD: INSPIRED by Unicef, the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS has recently published a series of 12 boxed note cards by leading graphic designers.
Under the aegis of ID Magazine, the designers - Neville Brody, Ivan Chermayeff, April Greiman, Milton Glaser, Michael Vanderbyl and M &amp; Co. - were asked to create cards that could symbolize the foundation.


New Jersey Casinos Fight Plan for Taxes On Gifts to Gamblers
LEAD: Atlantic City's casinos today tried to head off talk of a new tax on the complimentary items they dole out to high rollers with a study that they say shows Nevada is a far more hospitable place to do business.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
R.
R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons Co., Chicago, the printing concern, named Roger D. Missimer senior vice president of its book group.


RJR Completes Sale of Del Monte
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc. has completed the previously announced $1.5 billion sale of its Del Monte unit to a Merrill Lynch group.
The sale, RJR said, substantially completes its plan to reduce debt through asset sales.


F.D.A. Withdraws Approval for Jarvik-7 Heart
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has withdrawn its approval of the continued experimental use of the Jarvik artificial heart because of deficiencies found in the manufacturer's plant operations, an FDA spokesman said today.


Conston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conston Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Revenue
37,997,000
44,437,000
Net loss
2,431,000
1,763,000
9mo rev
125,388,000
144,819,000
Net loss
5,033,000
1,313,000


School District Won't Eat Tuna
LEAD: Aurora's schools have crossed tuna off the lunch menu at the behest of a dozen students who object to fishermen's using nets that can drown dolphins.
An associate district superintendent, Dave Zeckser, who approved the ban, said the 43 schools use 40 cases of tuna a year.
The 26,000-student district is following the lead of schools in Milford, Conn., where a tuna boycott was begun as part of a nationwide effort to pressure fishermen into using fishing lines instead of nets.


Washington Journal;   The Dress for Success A Second Time Around
LEAD: ''Secondhand Rose,'' the Fanny Brice song of pluck and pathos, has become an anthem of the up-and-coming here, with two Capitol Hill consignment stores doing land-office business reselling the pinstripes of the powerful.


Siemens Buying 51% Of Nixdorf
LEAD: Siemens A.G., the West German electronics giant, said today that it would acquire a majority stake in Nixdorf Computer A.G.


HONG KONG CAMPS TERMED INHUMAN
LEAD: An American refugee monitoring group said today that conditions in Hong Kong's closed detention camps for Vietnamese, where more than 44,000 men, women and children are imprisoned, were ''inhuman.''


Bells, Whistles, Microchips
LEAD: THE glittering gold and crimson arch on the main floor of the Winter Consumer Electronics Show here last weekend seemed the entrance to a vast electronic casino filled with 70,000 players.
Like the darkened game rooms just a short ride away, it was full of diversions, deals and flashing lights.


Seven-Year Notes Well Received
LEAD: A successful auction of $7.5 billion worth of new seven-year Treasury notes helped to bring prices in the credit markets off their lows yesterday.
As a consequence, prices in the secondary market for Treasury notes and bonds closed narrowly mixed.


LAOS IS COURTING NEW BENEFACTORS
LEAD: Laos, one of the world's least-developed countries by the standards of the United Nations, is seeking several sources of foreign aid to replace assistance from Communist countries that now have other preoccupations.


Tokyo Market Uneasy On Fears About Soviets
LEAD: Fears about political turmoil in the Soviet Union helped undermine a record-setting stock market rally, causing prices on the Tokyo Stock Exchange to skid over the last week in an increasingly nervous investment climate.


Metro Matters;   Out-of-Towners Vs. New Yorkers: Vying for Posts
LEAD: Lee P. Brown, Joseph A. Fernandez and Alan F. Kiepper have something in common besides being named to the three most prominent appointive public posts in New York City: None is a New Yorker.


Chronicle
LEAD: Treasury Secretary NICHOLAS F. BRADY is back at work on crutches this week, a little more than three weeks after he had surgery to replace his right hip.
Mr.
Brady, 59 years old, had suffered from arthritis for many years and had begun to walk with a pronounced limp.


Exxon Names Executive on the Environment
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation yesterday named Edwin J. Hess, a veteran executive, as corporate vice president for the environment and safety, the first time it has elevated environmental concerns to the senior executive level.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about AIDS in Texas rendered the numbers incorrectly in a state legislator's comment on the idea of adding $48 million to spending on AIDS programs.
Apparently unable even to imagine an increase of that size, the legislator said, ''Four to eight million - why, that's unthinkable!


Allico Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allico Corp
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Sales
2,782,000
7,953,000
Net inc
b485,000
c2,848,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
5,042,000
4,042,000
9mo sales
6,874,000
32,616,000
Net loss
b721,000
6,847,000
Shares outst
4,375,000
4,042,000


Yields End Week Down
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday.


Talman Home Federal S&amp;L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talman Home Federal S&amp;L Assn (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,295,000
4,691,000
Per share
.34
.48
Year net inc
20,164,000
25,603,000
Per share
2.08
2.64
Shares outst
9,700,000
9,700,000


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Revenue
6,221,000
3,771,000
Net inc
753,000
304,000
Share earns
.25
.11
Shares outst
3,018,000
2,877,000


European and Asian Buyers Push Gold Sharply Higher
LEAD: Precious metals prices climbed yesterday, led by increased demand for gold in Europe and Asia.


Asiana in Tokyo Debut
LEAD: South Korea's fledgling second airline, Asiana, made its inaugural international flight today when a Boeing 737-400 flew to Tokyo from Seoul with 147 passengers, a company spokesman said.
The private airline, competing with Korean Air Lines, also privately owned, will fly to Tokyo four times a week.


At Campeau, All Details Are Secret
LEAD: The board of the Campeau Corporation met today for the third day in a row, amid great secrecy, to consider its options in the face of the possible bankruptcy confronting its American retail subsidiaries.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
8.18
9.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.54
8.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.43
8.42
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
8.03
9.30
30-YR.


Hallmark Cards In Stock Buyback
LEAD: The greeting card giant Hallmark Cards Inc. said it had bought back $289 million of its own stock from the Hall family and from the company's employee stock ownership plan.
The stock was bought Dec. 28 with ''available corporate cash reserves,'' a Hallmark spokesman, Steve Doyal, said.
The shares were repurchased so the employee plan would have enough cash to pay for future retirements, he said.


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Assn.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
68,006,000
58,894,000
Share earns
.66
.57
Shares outst
100,803,000
103,813,000
Yr net inc
257,635,000
225,082,000
Share earns
2.53
2.14
Shares outst
101,166,000
104,922,000


Endotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Endotronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,326,000
898,000
Net loss
381,000
494,000
Shares outst
14,244,000
13,346,000
Yr rev
4,334,000
-
Net loss
1,188,000
-
Shares outst
13,751,000
-


A.T.&amp;T. Sues MCI; Says Rival Switched Clients
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company filed a lawsuit yesterday charging its main rival, the MCI Communications Corporation, with ''unfair and deceptive'' marketing practices and with switching some of A.T.&amp;T.'s residential customers over to MCI's long-distance network without the consumers' consent.


Tyson Promoter Sued
LEAD: Donovan (Razor) Ruddock, a heavyweight contender, and Murad Muhammad, his promoter, are suing Don King, the promoter for the heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, for breach of contract.


Canadian Pacific's D.&amp;H. Bid Chosen
LEAD: Canadian Pacific Ltd. won the right to buy the bankrupt Delaware &amp; Hudson Railway for $35 million, beating five other bidders.
Francis P. Dicello, a Washington lawyer who is the trustee of the D.&amp; H., announced his selection of Canadian Pacific in United States Bankruptcy Court.


Cutbacks by Ames
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. cut 85 jobs in its corporate offices and announced plans to rename the last surviving Zayre stores as Ames outlets.
The discount retailer, acknowledging that it had overestimated customer loyalty to the 392 Zayre stores it bought in 1988, also said that a sluggish fourth quarter would prevent the company from showing a profit this year.


Doubt Raised on Noriega Prosecutor
LEAD: When Dexter Lehtinen took charge of the United States Attorney's office here 18 months ago he pictured himself as a battlefield commander.
At one meeting he waved a replica of a Russian-made AK-47 assault rifle and circulated a two-sentence message: ''No Guts.
No Glory.''


Children and Their Pets: Unexpected Psychological Benefits
LEAD: In new research into the bonds between humans and animals, therapists are discovering that pets provide unexpected psychological benefits for children beyond the obvious.


Orion Pictures Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orion Pictures Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
104,372,000
92,385,000
Net inc
1,762,000
1,204,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Shares outst
22,784,000
17,397,000
9mo rev
348,663,000
307,507,000
Net inc
8,457,000
6,284,000
Share earns
.37
.34
Shares outst
22,386,000
17,374,000


CVB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,262,000
1,809,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Yr net inc
7,831,000
5,780,000
Share earns
1.27
.95
All share earnings have been adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split paid Nov.


CBS Plans TV Film On Slaying and Suicide
LEAD: CBS yesterday announced plans to produce a made-for-television movie about the Boston man who committed suicide last week after learning that the police suspected him of killing his pregnant wife.
The story of Carol Stuart's death on Oct. 23 and the failed attempt to save her baby son's life, generated headlines nationwide after her husband, Charles M.


Excerpts From Yonkers Ruling: Limits on Power
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today overturning contempt fines against four Yonkers City Councilmen.
The vote was 5 to 4.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote the dissenting opinion.
FROM THE OPINION
By Chief Justice


Why a Drink for a Woman Acts Like Two for a Man
LEAD: Women become drunk more quickly than men because their stomachs are less able to neutralize alcohol, scientists have found.


Synovus Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synovus Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,661,000
7,514,000
Per share
.28
.24
Shares outst
31,303,000
30,755,000
Year net inc
31,412,000
26,838,000
Per share
1.01
.87
Shares outst
31,136,000
30,750,000


Flamemaster Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flamemaster Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,216,679
925,747
Net inc
78,151
134,837
Share earns
.04
.08
Yr rev
3,827,871
3,581,621
Net inc
288,634
438,384
Share earns
.14
.25


Metro Datelines;   Award Honors Head Of Landmarks Fund
LEAD: Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts, a historic preservation group, will present its Ralph C. Menapace Memorial Award to Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel, chairwoman of the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation, this evening at the Asia Society, at Park Avenue and 70th Street.
A reception will follow the 6 P.M.


Barkley's 12-Footer Wins It
LEAD: Charles Barkley ended the Knicks' comeback run tonight.


SHUTTLE DEPLOYS A NAVY SATELLITE
LEAD: The crew of the space shuttle Columbia released a Navy communications satellite in orbit today and sped toward their planned rendezvous with a satellite they hope to snatch and bring back to Earth.


Czechoslovaks Ask for Shorter Mandatory Military Service


Egyptian Bonds Are Selling Slowly
LEAD: Egypt has sold only 11 percent of the new dollar bonds it issued in November but is optimistic that it will eventually find buyers and create a new capital market, Mahmoud Abdel-Aziz, deputy chairman of the National Bank of Egypt, said today.


Talking Deals;   Social Stature's Role in Takeovers
LEAD: THE Social Register would seem to be an unlikely place to look when predicting the course of a takeover battle.
But a new piece of business research suggests that might be a good idea.


Chronicle
LEAD: STU JACKSON, the coach of the New York Knicks, became a father a day earlier than planned yesterday when his wife, DR.
JANET TAYLOR, gave birth to twin girls by Caesarean section at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The girls, still unnamed, weighed 6 pounds 10 ounces and 4 pounds 8 ounces.


Lean Budget Plan in California
LEAD: Gov.
George Deukmejian today proposed a lean $53.7 billion budget for California, calling for freezes in spending on health, welfare, AIDS programs and other social services.


Kenya Stressing Tea
LEAD: Kenya said Tuesday that it would increase payments to its tea producers in an apparent bid to increase output of the commodity.
President Daniel arap Moi announced that the Government would raise its initial payment to tea farmers some time this month to 3 shillings (14 cents) a kilogram (2.2 pounds) from 1.9 shillings (9 cents).


Efficient Devils Drive Lemieux to Distraction
LEAD: The Devils were so efficient in every aspect of their game tonight in their 6-3 triumph over the Penguins that it infuriated Mario Lemieux.


A Time To Talk Gardening
LEAD: Garden Talks, Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; 212-757-0915.


From Concert Operas to Cliburn, Carnegie Plans a Starry Season
LEAD: Carnegie Hall announced details yesterday of its star-studded 1990-91 centennial season, which will include an ambitious concert-opera series, 14 newly commissioned compositions, the return of Van Cliburn to the hall stage, a six-week folk-music festival in Weill Recital Hall and a 10-day festival culminating in a gala concert on the hall's 100th anniversary on May 5, 1991.


Great Bay Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,031,000
1,163,000
Per share
.34
.35
Shares outst
3,067,764
3,307,796
6mo net inc
2,122,000
2,077,000
Per share
.68
.62
Shares outst
3,114,156
3,374,615


Gillette Reacts To U.S. Move
LEAD: The Gillette Company said today that it was surprised and disappointed by a Federal Government decision to bring an antitrust suit to block its acquisition of the United States operations of Wilkinson Sword Inc.
Gillette had agreed to buy


Late Goal By Leetch Brings a Tie
LEAD: Brian Leetch, his hockey stick the wand it can be instead of the useless instrument it had been, plucked the puck out of the air.
Sliding backward, he pulled the puck to the top of the slot and shot.


Calendar: Designing Products And Quilts
LEAD: Beauty and Function, The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, Albert Nerken School of Engineering, 51 Astor Place at Third Avenue; 212-353-4155.


Gencorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gencorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
532,000,000
531,000,000
Net loss
b21,000,000
cd13,000,000
Share earns
-
.38
Yr sales
1,938,000,000
1,891,000,000
Net inc
b210,000,000
d70,000,000
Share earns
6.61
2.19


Primaries Also Needed For Special Elections
LEAD: To the Editor:


Life Among the Stars: A Photographer's Dim View
LEAD: For 30 years Douglas Kirkland has made his living by doing what some photographers might gladly do without charge: taking pictures of glamorous celebrities.
In creating the kind of poster-perfect images publicity agents dream of - Marilyn Monroe clad only in silk sheets, Jack Nicholson with a burning match between his teeth, Kelly McGillis sliding out of her clothes on a


Boston Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Technology Inc.
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,787,756
304,902
Net inc
b601,191
c543,463
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
19,839,074
14,700,613
9mo rev
16,540,859
868,635
Net inc
b1,359,632
c912,306
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
19,392,276
13,957,082


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


In the East Bloc, It's Trade or Fail
LEAD: Moscow's proposal that members of Comecon, the Soviet-led trade bloc, begin trading at market prices is a sign that the old order is crumbling.
To help fill the void, the West should move quickly to encourage new forms of economic collaboration among Eastern European nations.
Otherwise, support for democratic government and for reform itself could be undermined.


Albany's Optimism Wanes As Budget Shortfall Grows
LEAD: After several months of maintaining what analysts said was an overly optimistic view of New York's finances, the Cuomo administration today acknowledged that the state would end the fiscal year with a shortfall of almost $700 million.


Noriega Associate in Sanctuary


Calls Abroad May Cost Less
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation today announced cut-rate calling plans to Western Europe, the Pacific and Canada.
The plans - Call Europe, Call Pacific and Call Canada -will provide flat per-minute rates on weekdays and all weekend for a $3 monthly fee, MCI said.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARGARET E. MAHONEY, president of the Commonwealth Fund, will be the first woman to serve as a trustee of the Century Association.
She is on the unopposed slate - all the others are men - that is to be elected tonight at the club's annual meeting in Manhattan.


No Special Shield for Universities
LEAD: The Supreme Court has ruled unanimously that universities, as employers, enjoy no special exemption from civil rights laws that allow Federal investigators to see their personnel files.
It is a correct decision, even if too glibly dismissive of serious arguments for confidentiality in academic employment decisions.


Butler Aviation Chief Sees a Brighter Future
LEAD: The Butler Aviation Corporation, a company that has had some finanacial and performance problems, is getting a fresh start with new owners and a new chief executive, William W. Boisture Jr.
The appointment comes four months after a Fort Worth investment firm, Acadia Partners L.P., which is backed by the Robert M.


American Capital &amp; Research reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital &amp; Research
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
121,448,000
96,484,000
Net inc
2,171,000
2,151,000
Share earns
.15
.15
Shares outst
14,611,000
14,533,000
9mo rev
327,522,000
203,266,000
Net inc
5,550,000
4,473,000
Share earns
.39
.31
Shares outst
14,230,000
14,349,000


Margaret E. Hasebroock, Club Leader, 83
LEAD: Margaret E. Hasebroock, former president of the General Federation of Women's Clubs, died Sunday at Bryan Memorial Hospital, Lincoln, Neb., after a brief illness.
She was 83 years old and lived in Lincoln.


Systerm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systerm Inc.
Qtr to Nov 3
1989
1988
Sales
2,264,021
4,470,702
Net loss
b2,657,596
c80,439
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
8,696,186
16,529,993
Net loss
b3,713,133
c134,517
Share earns
-
.02
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $2,421,253 for the quarter and 9 months.


To Avoid Measles: A Vaccination Guide
LEAD: Here is a summary of the new measles vaccination recommendations issued by the Federal Centers for Disease Control:
Each child should get two doses of measles vaccine, the first at 15 months and the second just before entering kindergarten or first grade.
If a child lives in a high-risk area, where five or more cases a year have been reported for last five years, the first dose should be administered at 12 months.


Letter: On Yugoslavia;   Why Not Ethnic Self-Determination?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hong Kong's Governor Seeking to Ease Strain
LEAD: Hong Kong's Governor, Sir David Wilson, arrived today in Beijing for three days of talks with Chinese leaders intended to ease the hostility and recriminations that have developed between China and Hong Kong since the military crackdown in June.


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Celtics End Piston Streak
Reggie Lewis capped a season-high 32-point performance with 5 points in the final two minutes as Boston ended visiting Detroit's six-game winning streak with a 104-97 victory last night.
Kevin McHale, who added a season-high 30 points, had two key rebounds and four free throws in the last 15 seconds after Lewis's foul shot with 15.8 seconds left put Boston ahead 100-97.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''No matter what may happen in the world, we shall unswervingly follow the socialist road.''
- Prime Minister Li Peng of China. [A10:1.]


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Data Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,523,900
26,223,000
Net inc
750,300
b185,200
Share earns
.26
-
6mo rev
62,138,400
45,285,800
Net inc
1,719,600
116,100
Share earns
.60
.04


Mexico Eases Import Rules
LEAD: The Mexican Government has relaxed rules on technology transfers, removing obstacles to imports and ending limits on royalties, according to published reports Tuesday.


Court Overturns Contempt Fines Against Councilmen in Yonkers


OPEC Output at High
LEAD: Oil production by the OPEC nations rose to an average of 23.7 million barrels a day in the last quarter of 1989, the highest level since early 1981, the International Energy Agency said on Tuesday.


Bush Plans Trips South
LEAD: President Bush will travel on Jan. 19 to Atlanta for a speech and Miami for a fund-raising dinner for Gov.
Bob Martinez of Florida.
Mr.
Bush's Atlanta speech will be to the National Association of Homebuilders, the White House said.
In Florida, he will tour Everglades National Park before the dinner.


Dan Graham's Social Commentaries
LEAD: DAN GRAHAM'S photographs of suburban tract houses and model-home interiors explore the cliches of the 1960's, ''the ticky-tacky houses that the folk singers sang about,'' said the 47-year-old artist, who grew up in, yes, the suburbs.


Unisys, I.B.M. Set Up Units
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and the Unisys Corporation said separately yesterday that they had set up special units to help customers manage computer operations.


Purina Setting Up New Pet Food Unit
LEAD: The Ralston Purina Company said it would establish a new division for its specialty pet food unit and to promote its premium Pro Plan pet foods.
Pro-Visions Pet Specialty Enterprises will market Pro Plan products to pet shops, feed stores and veterinarians, the company said.


Market Place;   Hewlett-Packard Divides Analysts
LEAD: DESPITE the largest introduction of computer systems in the company's history, shares in the Hewlett-Packard Company continued to drift downward yesterday.
They closed at $47, down 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Excerpts From Speech Ending Martial Law
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Prime Minister Li Peng's speech today announcing the lifting of martial law in Beijing, as distributed in translation by the official New China News Agency:


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Keeping Decks Young
Q.
Three years ago we built a wood deck onto our house.
To help preserve it we have always swept off snow as soon as it accumulates.
Now we have decided to enlarge the deck and realize that constantly sweeping snow will become quite a job.
Do we need to keep doing this, or does it really matter if the snow is allowed to remain?


Who's Demagoguing Capital Gains?
LEAD: ''I am sick and tired of the demagogues who call this a tax cut for the rich.'' Thus President Bush blasted critics of his plan to cut the capital gains tax.
But such talk shouldn't frighten the critics, who have a lot to offer Mr.
Bush on this subject - if he'd only, well, cut out the demagogy.


Stocks Continue to Slide; Dow Off by 15.36
LEAD: The stock market continued to retreat yesterday on sharply higher volume.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: FOR many adults, the amount of money they make and how they choose to spend it is the most private of affairs.
Money is a topic laden with symbolism, a source of pride or of shame, a standard for measuring success and competence after concern with school grades or football touchdowns has passed.
It also brings about conflicting feelings of competitiveness between parents and children, who can be both proud and jealous of each other's success.


CAMPEAU'S STORES MEET THE DEADLINE TO PAY SUPPLIERS
LEAD: The American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation, which include some of the nation's most famous department stores, said yesterday that they had met a deadline for paying suppliers for December merchandise.


Review/Jazz;   From a Hard-Bop Revivalist
LEAD: Jazz's younger generation flexed its muscles on Monday night at the Knitting Factory, where Ralph Peterson Jr. led a quintet in music from his album, ''Volition,'' to be released in early March.
As composer and drummer, Mr.
Peterson is a wholehearted hard-bop revivalist, working in the style of Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers and the mid-1960's Miles


Machine Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Machine Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,579,901
5,979,087
Net inc
56,718
140,426
Share earns
.01
.03


Bridge
LEAD: Many bidding guidelines seem valid until they are examined closely: irritating exceptions occur, and they are difficult to classify.


Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly Industrial Coatings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
58,267,000
50,453,000
Net inc
3,539,000
3,072,000
Share earns
.37
.32
Shares outst
9,546,000
9,550,000
Yr sales
212,230,000
196,764,000
Net inc
12,574,000
11,284,000
Share earns
1.32
1.18
Shares outst
9,546,000
9,569,000


Savings Directors Penalized
LEAD: Regulators today penalized two directors of the failed Silverado Banking Savings and Loan Association in Denver.


Galtaco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galtaco Inc.
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
78,320,000
62,957,000
Net loss
b5,159,000
c776,000
Share earns
-
.51
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $7,339,000.
c-Net income and after a loss from discontinued operations of $2,950,000 and an extraordinary credit of $358,000, or 24 cents a share.


Don't Despair of the World the Young Will Build;   Wrong on 60's and 80's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hynes Takes Oath as Brooklyn District Attorney


Protesters Are Pleased, But Housing to Proceed
LEAD: Yonkers officials who defied a court-ordered housing integration plan were encouraged today by a Supreme Court ruling in their favor, but they said it would not delay the construction of low-income housing that is to begin in March.


Home S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home S&amp;L
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
460,537
811,867
Share earns
.27
.48
The company said the decrease in earnings resulted mainly from a $500,000 increase in the loss reserve on bonds owned by the association that are secured by pools of Mobile Home Loans issued by a Conner Corp.


Ex-Drug Addict Is Acquitted In Giving Out Clean Needles
LEAD: A former addict has been found not guilty of illegally distributing clean needles and syringes to drug addicts to prevent the spread of AIDS.


Rangers and Blackhawks Tie, 2-2


A Town Puts Itself Up for Sale
LEAD: When residents here decided that their corner of Palm Beach County was becoming too crowded and noisy, they put the town up for sale: the 75 houses, the streets and sidewalks, the town hall, the steeple and all.


5% Stake Acquired In Paine Webber
LEAD: The Tweedy, Browne Company, a New York investment firm, has purchased a 5 percent stake in the Paine Webber Group.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Tweedy, Browne said the shares had been purchased as an investment.


Noriega Co-Defendant Seeking Secret Papers
LEAD: Lawyers for two defendants named in the drug-trafficking case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega filed a series of motions today in Federal District Court, including one requesting classified documents.


When Hollywood Was Golden, the Movie Sets Were, Too
LEAD: THE Staffordshire dog slammed against the wall is bound for an oblivion it well deserves.
The topiary deer suffers a decapitation as merited as Marie Antoinette's.
As for the glitzy chandelier in ''The War of the Roses,'' that appalling confection looks better smashed into smithereens as the movie ends.


Books of The Times;   Caught in the Middle of a Changing Life
LEAD:
Midstream
By Le Anne Schreiber
Illustrated. 309 pages. Viking. $18.95.


LaFontaine Sparks Islander Victory
LEAD: Pat LaFontaine extended his goal-scoring streak to 10 games tonight with his league-leading 37th and 38th goals of the season as the Islanders defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs, 3-1.


Chronicle
LEAD: Today is moving day for JOYCE DINKINS and DAVID N. DINKINS.
They are leaving their three-bedroom apartment in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan for Gracie Mansion, the formal, Federal-style mayoral residence on the East River.


Peru Detains 15,000 in Hunt For the Killers of Ex-Minister
LEAD: The police detained 15,000 people today in a search for the killers of Enrique Lopez, the former Minister of Defense who was the most prominent victim of Peru's decade-long guerrilla war.


Sunair Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunair Electronics Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
851,851
1,490,055
Net inc
75,530
156,626
Share earns
.02
.04


Flowers Industries Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries Inc. (NYSE)
12wks to Dec 16
1989
1988
Sales
195,435,000
178,972,000
Net inc
6,681,000
8,109,000
Share earns
.19
.23
Shares outst
34,857,674
34,889,348
24wk sales
388,538,000
349,418,000
Net inc
b7,950,000
16,162,000
Share earns
.23
.46
Shares outst
34,868,480
34,894,660


Metro Datelines;   Her Purse Is Grabbed And Victim Is Killed
LEAD: A woman whose pocketbook had just been grabbed on Park Avenue by someone in a passing van was killed yesterday afternoon when she fell beneath the vehicle's wheels, the police said.


Review/Jazz;   Bill Dobbins Plays Ellington
LEAD: Bill Dobbins is a jazz pianist whose repertory ranges from Scott Joplin and Jelly Roll Morton to Thelonious Monk and McCoy Tyner.
But at the opening on Tuesday of his five-day engagement at the Fortune Garden Pavilion (209 East 49th Street), he put his primary focus on some of the less frequently heard compositions of Billy Strayhorn and Duke


PANAMA TO ASSIST U.S. ON DRUG WAR
LEAD: Panama's new civilian Government signed an accord with the United States today in which it pledged to cooperate in efforts to crack down on narcotics trafficking and money laundering.


A Teary Doctor Tells of AIDS From a Needle
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego calmly recounted yesterday her four years of terrifying uncertainty from the time she pricked her finger with an AIDS-contaminated needle at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn to the day she learned she had contracted the disease.


Israeli Camping Store Offers Tips From Afar
LEAD: At first glance, it looks like an ordinary camping store stocked with waterproof flashlights, down-filled sleeping bags and 12 brands of bug spray.
But a schedule on the front window gives a hint of the shop's larger purpose.


An Office Tower On Park Ave. Will Be Rebuilt
LEAD: The 32-story former ITT building in Manhattan will be redesigned and substantially rebuilt starting early next year, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday, making it ''the first new building project on Park Avenue in more than a decade.''


Metro Datelines;   Part of 5th Ave. Shut In Search for a Leak
LEAD: Fifth Avenue from 34th to 28th Streets was closed yesterday afternoon as engineers from the Environmental Protection Department searched for a water leak.
A leak was reported at 12:20 P.M. in a building at 29th Street, and a crew opened a valve too wide and overloaded sewer lines, a spokeswoman for the department, Tina Casey, said.


Richard P. Hayes, Theater Teacher, 60
LEAD: Richard P. Hayes, a theater arts teacher and drama critic, died after a heart attack on Monday in his Manhattan home.
He was 60 years old.


Insurers Seek Help for Uninsured
LEAD: Under pressure from government, business and consumer critics, many of the nation's health insurance companies are calling for new Federal and state laws to provide more affordable coverage for millions of working Americans who have no insurance.


N.C.A.A. Stiffens Drug Penalties And Expands Testing in Football
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association voted overwhelmingly today to require random, year-round testing of players in major football programs for performance-enhancing drugs, and to impose stiffer penalties for violators, in any sport, of the N.C.A.A.'s drug policies.


Lead Effects Still Harmful Over Years
LEAD: Young adults who were exposed to lead early in life have trouble reading and finishing high school, suggesting that even relatively small amounts can cause permanent brain damage, a new study indicates.


Peoples Bancorp-N.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp-N.C.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,226,000
2,862,000
Per share
.46
.41
Year net inc
12,402,000
10,295,000
Per share
1.79
1.52


Criticare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Criticare Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,260,897
3,422,522
Net inc
100,520
76,994
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
5,826,735
6,208,407
6mo sales
7,734,768
6,388,886
Net loss
68,631
b85,726
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
5,824,069
6,208,407


Review/Television;   The Care and Grooming of Beauty Queens
LEAD: The scenery of tonight's edition of ''48 Hours'' consists mainly of beauty-contest beauties posing, parading and dancing, sort of, in bathing suits, evening dresses and other snugly fitted costumes. ''Behind the Smile'' takes us offstage and backstage to meet several young women competing for the title of Miss California, Miss U.S.A.


Stateswest Airlines reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stateswest Airlines
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,566,153
5,921,014
Net loss
2,709,901
4,308,825


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,231,000
2,606,000
Per share
.40
.47
Year net inc
11,743,000
12,452,000
Per share
2.27
2.42


High Court, 5-4, Reaffirms Curbs On Trial's Use of Illegal Evidence
LEAD: The Supreme Court, in a 5-to-4 decision, today reaffirmed its longstanding rule that illegally obtained evidence must be excluded from a criminal trial.


Mets Keep Lyons
LEAD: Barry Lyons and the Mets agreed yesterday to a one-year contract for $220,000, almost double Lyons's 1989 salary of $115,000.
The catcher batted .247 last season. . . .
John Candelaria of the Montreal Expos became the second player to file for salary arbitration. . . .
Rafael Santana, released by the Yankees, joined the Cleveland Indians with a one-year nonguaranteed contract for $250,000.


Several Governors Oppose Plan on Acid Rain
LEAD: Several governors whose states have already cut the air pollution causing acid rain today denounced a plan that would have them help pay for reducing the problem in other parts of the country.


Immucor reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucor (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,927,115
2,173,652
Net inc
486,138
274,532
Share earns
.12
.07
6mo sales
5,680,942
4,530,983
Net inc
931,072
551,667
Share earns
.24
.14


4 Soldiers Are Killed In Crash of Helicopter
LEAD: An Army UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter crashed during desert exercises Tuesday, killing all four soldiers aboard, a base spokesman said.


FNW Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FNW Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,695,000
2,993,000
Share earns
.54
.44
Yr net inc
13,764,000
12,276,000
Share earns
2.00
1.79


Sign-Language Lawyer Is Good for Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maston E. O'Neal Jr., Former Congressman, 82
LEAD: Maston E. O'Neal Jr., a Democrat who served three terms in the House of Representatives in the 1960's, died of heart disease on Tuesday at his home in Bainbridge.
He was 82 years old.


Top Aide to Senator Riegle To Resign Post on March 1
LEAD: The embattled chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Donald W. Riegle Jr., announced today that his staff director, Kevin C. Gottlieb, will resign March 1 and be succeeded by Stephen B. Harris, the committee's general counsel.


Confusion Grows Over Boston Murder
LEAD: Confusion over the case of Charles Stuart increased today as an insurance company denied a report that it had prepared a $480,000 check for Mr.
Stuart, whose pregnant wife was shot to death last October.


Looking Back for Designs of the Future
LEAD: THE National Endowment for the Arts has published a resource for designers, ''By Design 2,'' that describes all the design projects it sponsored from 1977 to 1987.


Douglas MD-11 Ready for Flight
LEAD: The MD-11, a new wide-body jetliner from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, is ready for flight.
The plane is the first new trijet introduced since the Douglas DC-10 and Lockheed L-1011 two decades ago.


Court Bars Bid for Drug Therapy on Demand
LEAD: A legal move to force New York City and State to provide drug treatment to anyone who demands it has been dismissed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


East German Coalition Is Pulling Apart
LEAD: Three non-Communist parties in East Germany's Government threatened today to leave the coalition if the Communist Prime Minister, Hans Modrow, did not hasten reforms and abandon efforts to create a new domestic security force to replace the one that was disbanded.


Intermagnetics General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermagnetics General Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Sales
9,515,000
10,140,000
Net inc
126,000
419,000
Share earns
.02
.07
6mo sales
19,083,000
19,605,000
Net inc
326,000
820,000
Share earns
.05
.13


Syracuse Goes Inside and Comes Out on Top
LEAD: It was an annoying evening of basketball tonight for St.
John's that grew more and more frustrating each time Syracuse worked the ball inside.


In the Urban Jungle, Rooms for Play
LEAD: Baby boomers are producing their own baby boom, and where will all the children play?
If they live in new apartment buildings in big cities, the children may never have to leave home.
Partly to comply with zoning regulations and partly to attract buyers with young children, developers are providing playrooms.


Striking Rail Workers in South Africa Charge Non-Strikers in Fatal Battle    The violence at a train station in Germiston, southeast of Johannesburg, was the worst single incident in a 10-week-old strike by black workers of the South Africa Transport Services. (AP)


Corporate Bond Defaults Up Sharply in '89
LEAD: Defaults on corporate bonds more than doubled in 1989, according to an investor research company that tracks the fixed-income markets.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Political Strains In East Germany
Several non-Communist members of East Germany's governing coalition threatened to resign if Prime Minister Hans Modrow does not abandon plans to recreate a domestic security police force.
Page A15.
Soviet Arms Stockpiles
An American intelligence study says the Soviet Army is keeping large arms stockpiles in Eastern Europe as it withdraws some units.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL
A3-16
China ended martial law in Beijing, and within hours the United States announced that it was easing its blanket opposition to World Bank loans to China.
Page A1


Catholic School Expels 17-Year-Old Bride
LEAD: The principal of a Roman Catholic high school has expelled a newlywed student, saying her marriage set a bad example.


49ers Not Exactly One Big Happy Family
LEAD: Last year in Miami, Tim McKyer offered sights and sounds not often seen before a Super Bowl.
There he sat at a news conference beside his fellow cornerback, Don Griffin, promoting ''the Coverage Brothers.'' He was wearing a T-shirt that read ''the Blanket'' and Griffin wore one that read ''the Quilt.


U.N. Seeks Expanded Cambodia Role
LEAD: As diplomatic efforts increase to revive negotiations for a peace settlement in Cambodia, a senior United Nations official said today that the organization was ready to play a sharply expanded role in the country.


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Valley Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,088,000
1,253,000
Per share
.72
.48
Yr net inc
7,098,000
3,505,000
Per share
2.52
1.62


A New Producer Is Hired for 'Roseanne'
LEAD: Executives at ABC and the network's most successful program, ''Roseanne,'' said this week that concerns about the star of the show prompted a decision to hire an additional executive producer on the program.


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dionex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
20,310,000
19,005,000
Net inc
3,442,000
3,392,000
Share earns
.38
.35
Shares outst
9,072,000
9,647,000
6mo sales
39,139,000
37,369,000
Net inc
6,778,000
6,706,000
Share earns
.74
.69
Shares outst
9,131,000
9,649,000


Business Student in Crack Bust
LEAD: A 19-year-old freshman at the University of Pennsylvania was arrested Tuesday night in a Harlem crack den, the police said yesterday.


Villanova Star Named Top Female Athlete
LEAD: Vicki Huber of Villanova, the National Collegiate Athletic Association champion in the indoor and outdoor 3,000 meters, has been awarded the Honda-Broderick Cup as outstanding collegiate female athlete of the year.
She received the award Tuesday at the N.C.A.A. convention in Dallas.


Design Flaw Is Cited in School Collapse
LEAD: A state commission concluded today that a flawed design contributed to the collapse of a school cafeteria wall in high winds last November and the subsequent deaths of nine children.


Lewis Assails Johnson
LEAD: Carl Lewis has accused Ben Johnson of having supplemented his steroid use with an amphetamine before competing in the 100-meter race at the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea.
Lewis made the accusation in a report published Tuesday in The Washington Post.
He refused to specify the amphetamine.


S.E.C. Cites Lawyer Over Grand Met
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday charged a Minneapolis lawyer with trading on inside information about Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s takeover of the Pillsbury Company in 1988.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
44,668,000
41,545,000
Net loss
31,783,000
b10,574,000
Shares outst
31,274,000
31,824,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $12,216,000, or 38 cents a share.


Review/Dance;   And Now It's Men's Turn To Show Off At the Joyce
LEAD: Last year it was Womanworks.
This year it is Man-Made.
The Joyce Theater, with an unabashed gift for obvious marketing gimmicks, has just opened a series devoted to male choreographers - the counterpart of a season that focused on women.


Diagnostic Medical Instruents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Medical Instruents Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
974,213
1,919,679
Net loss
784,547
b72,201
Share earns
-
.02
Yr rev
5,500,485
7,446,064
Net loss
1,261,590
327,220
Shares outst
3,927,982
3,927,941


Taxpayer Bears the Expense of Public Pensions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sotheby's Is Ending Its Art Sales on Margin
LEAD: Sotheby's said yesterday that van Gogh's ''Irises,'' the most expensive painting in the world, was back on the market.
At the same time, the auction house disclosed that it was modifying its widely assailed policy on extending loans to art buyers.


Associates Corporation of North America reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associates Corporation of North America
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,407,200,000
2,008,800,000
Net inc
326,700,000
287,800,000
The company said it will change to a Dec. 31 fiscal year to conform with that of Ford Motor Company.


Tele-Metropole reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Metropole
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
36,814,000
33,319,000
Net inc
371,000
3,548,000
Share earns
.05
.45
Figures for 1988 were restated.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Dragone Elevated to N.Y.R.A. Chairman
LEAD: Allan R. Dragone, who is better known in business circles than the racing world, was elected yesterday as the chairman of the New York Racing Association, the nonprofit corporation that operates Aqueduct, Belmont Park and Saratoga.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart yesterday showing the weekly Nielsen television ratings reversed the figures for two networks.
CBS was second last week, with 22 percent of the prime-time audience; ABC was third, with 19 percent.


BI Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BI Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,272,000
806,000
Net inc
375,000
b465,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
3,352,000
2,829,000
6mo rev
4,509,000
1,725,000
Net inc
626,000
b1,177,000
Share earns
.19
-
Shares outst
3,343,000
2,714,000


Veronex Resources Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Veronex Resources Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
809,000
3,000
Net loss
186,000
15,505,000
9mo rev
2,708,000
21,000
Net loss
581,000
16,362,000
Last year Veronex reported a $15,052,000, or $1.59 a share, revaluation of assets.


Spud Chandler, 82, Star Yankee Pitcher On 7 Pennant Clubs
LEAD: Spud Chandler, who was voted the American League's most valuable player in 1943 and was twice a 20-game winner for the Yankees, died Tuesday.
He was 82 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Correction
LEAD: A topic yesterday misidentified a Japanese magazine for American entrepreneurs.
It is Business Tokyo.


U.S. to Seek Lower Federal Role in Transportation
LEAD: In a preview of the Bush Administration's national transportation policy, Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner today called for state and local governments to pay more of the costs of programs that have been financed primarily by the Federal Government.


ACC Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACC Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,905,994
10,697,353
Net inc
440,820
260,808
Share earns
.13
.08
Shares outst
3,335,638
3,250,902
Yr rev
39,400,137
38,673,205
Net inc
1,418,632
341,603
Share earns
.43
.10
Shares outst
3,296,689
3,278,500


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Health page on Dec. 28 about breast implants misidentified a New York City lawyer who represents women who received them.
She is Denise Dunleavy.


Seymour Krim Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for the writer and critic Seymour Krim is to be held on Sunday at 3 P.M. at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets.
Among those scheduled to participate are the writers Dan Wakefield and Nora Sayre and the composer David Amram.


Businessland Cuts
LEAD: Businessland Inc., a leading computer retailer, is expected to announce substantial layoffs at a news conference Thursday and may close some of its less active stores, people close to the industry said.
The move by Businessland, based in San Jose, Calif., comes as personal computer sales have softened nationwide, but also stems from the chain's loss of the Compaq Computer Corporation account in April, said Seymour Merrin, a computer retail consultant.


U.N., Bowing to Soviets, Halts Its Baltic Contacts
LEAD: Bowing to Soviet pressure, the United Nations Secretariat has agreed to suspend the informal contacts it has conducted for several months with Baltic nationalist groups seeking independence from Moscow, a senior official has announced.


Found Money Being Recycled To Assist the Neediest Cases
LEAD: Sometimes the coins found on the streets of New York end up in the coffers of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Metro Datelines;   Woman, 88, Killed In Her Apartment
LEAD: An 88-year-old woman was found beaten to death in her ransacked Queens apartment last night, the apparent victim of a robbery, the police said.


Personal Health
LEAD: In March 1982, the Centers for Disease Control, the nation's final authority on communicable diseases, predicted that measles would be eradicated from the United States within six months.


Deeds, Not Quayle
LEAD: George Bush says he'll send Vice President Dan Quayle to patch up Latin American resentments of recent U.S. strong-arm tactics south of the border.
That will cause some Americans to echo Casey Stengel's plaintive cry about the original New York Mets: ''Can't anybody here play this game?''


Founder Resigns as Chief Of the Carter Organization
LEAD: Donald C. Carter, the flamboyant adviser to a generation of takeover artists, resigned his administrative duties yesterday at the Carter Organization, the firm he founded in 1974 to solicit proxies from shareholders in takeovers and other corporate contests.


To Keep the Home Fires Burning
LEAD: SINCE 1827, the William H. Jackson Company has sold ''everything for the fireplace.'' So when thoughts turn to having a fire on cold days and nights, this is one place to turn for andirons, screens and fireplace tools.


Time Made To Order
LEAD: RETHINKING everyday objects is the raison d'etre of Zebra Design Inc., so when its partners, Steven Holt and Thomas Bley, began to consider clocks, they decided there was no reason designers should have all the fun.


Passage From Ezekiel
LEAD: The words across the front page read: ''Times Square Priest Probed: Former male prostitute cites 'gifts.' ''


Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Sales
1,827,000
1,881,000
Net inc
12,000
320,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
4,981,000
5,374,000
9mo sales
5,657,000
5,198,000
Net loss
275,000
b671,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
4,628,000
5,364,000


New S.E.C. Chief
LEAD: Roy Kramer, athletic director at Vanderbilt University, announced yesterday at the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention in Dallas that he was accepting an offer to become commissioner of the Southeastern Conference.


Nigerian Military Chief Postpones Visit to U.S.
LEAD: Confronted with a shake-up in his Cabinet, the President of Nigeria, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, has postponed a visit to the United States.


Xerox Loses Suit Over Age Discrimination
LEAD: More than $9 million in damages has been awarded to a Texas woman by a Federal District Court jury that found that the Xerox Corporation discriminated against her because of her age.


Mercury Finance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercury Finance Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,900,000
3,700,000
Share earns
.28
.22
Yr net inc
17,400,000
13,100,000
Share earns
1.01
.76
All share earnings have been restated to reflect a 4-for-3 split in December 1989.


Cooperstown Doors Open Quicker Now
LEAD: rrYear by year, the brethren of baseball writers seem to be getting softer.
Or smarter.
Or maybe both.


Turnaround on the Farm As Price of Milk Rises
LEAD: Gene Woodward stood looking out over a barnyard where his cows stood chewing, a cold drizzle dampening their black and white flanks.
Their bellies were full and their udders heavy with milk.


President Quits At Ziff-Davis
LEAD: The Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, the unit of the Ziff Communications Company that publishes magazines about computers, announced Tuesday that William Lohse had resigned as president.


Ozone Issue: Economics of a Ban
LEAD: As industrial nations move toward a ban on ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons - the refrigerant used in air-conditioners and refrigerators -by 2000, another problem looms: the likely replacement, although an improvement, also harms the atmosphere.


Owners Offer Revenue-Sharing Deal
LEAD: In an effort to implement a pay-for-performance salary scale, negotiators for baseball's club owners offered yesterday to share 48 percent of their revenue with the players.


Leaking Exxon Pipe Ran Through Regulatory Limbo
LEAD: The Exxon leak-detection system that failed off Staten Island last week had never been checked for flaws by any oversight agency because of a series of gaps in regulatory responsibilities, company executives and various Federal and state officials said yesterday.


Bulgaria Pledges an Investigation Of Bizarre '78 Killing in London
LEAD: It was one of the more bizarre episodes from the reviled rule of Todor I. Zhivkov, Bulgaria's recently ousted Communist leader.


Missing Girl Is Found After Night on a Bus
LEAD: A 9-year-old girl who failed to return home from school in Manhattan on Tuesday was found unharmed yesterday after falling asleep on a school bus and spending the night there, officials said.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Tuesday about Horace Stoneham, the baseball owner who moved the Giants to the West Coast, misidentified his daughter.
She is Valleda Rupert.


Banponce Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banponce Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,642,000
5,824,000
Per share
.81
1.01
Shares outst
5,764,694
5,763,694
Year net inc
20,531,000
20,913,000
Per share
3.56
3.63


Don't Despair of the World the Young Will Build;   Unrooted Generation
LEAD: To the Editor:


FLOODING FORCES HUNDREDS TO FLEE
LEAD: An estimated 2,000 people have been forced to flee because of rivers overflowing from days of heavy rain in Washington State.
But high water in some Oregon communities began receding.


Joseph Dermody, 84, Former Labor Leader
LEAD: Joseph Dermody, a retired labor organizer and former president of Local 12 of the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America, died of complications of diabetes on Friday at the Waverly Care Center in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 84 years old and lived in New Canaan.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,080,136
2,867,606
Net inc
1,678,602
566,684
Share earns
.32
.16
9mo sales
17,879,845
7,456,491
Net inc
4,905,062
1,366,350
Share earns
1.09
.40


Metro Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,558,000
1,513,000
Per share
.66
-
The year-ago first quarter's per share earnings were not meaningful prior to conversion to stock ownership on Nov. 10, 1988.


Dollar Up in Volatile Day; Central Bank Action Seen
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly higher yesterday against major foreign currencies in volatile trading following reports of central bank intervention.


Time Finishes Warner Buyout
LEAD: Time Inc. completed its $14 billion acquisition of Warner Communications Inc. yesterday, creating the world's biggest media company - Time Warner Inc.


Experiments in Living Creatively
LEAD: THE changing composition of American households has been the subject of countless news articles.


Washington at Work;   For Judge in Keating Case, Being on the Bench Is Not Sitting on the Sidelines
LEAD: It was a moment that Judge Stanley Sporkin obviously relished.


Johnny Sylvester, the Inspiration For Babe Ruth Heroics, Is Dead
LEAD: There are those who will tell you that little Johnny Sylvester was never that sick and certainly not dying.


Jail Officers File Suit Over Abortion Rule
LEAD: A suit filed yesterday against the New York City Correction Department contended that pregnant officers were told to have abortions or resign.
The suit, in Federal District Court in Manhattan, said a policy for pregnant officers was ''designed to harass, intimidate and abuse.''


Parents in Sweden Will Get 15 Months' Maternity Leave
LEAD: Parents in Sweden can look forward to 15 months of paid maternity leave after the birth of a child under the budget proposed today.


Police Say Man's Family Cut Respirator
LEAD: After disconnecting the respirator that was keeping an elderly Brooklyn man alive, three of his children physically held doctors back from reconnecting the life-support equipment, the police and officials at Kings County Hospital said yesterday.


Quayle Urges U.S. Innovation on Space
LEAD: Vice President Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, said today that the nation's space programs take too long and cost too much, and he called on the space agency to get new ideas and new technology from universities, Federal laboratories and private business.


U. S. EASING CURBS AS CHINA DECLARES MARTIAL LAW OVER
LEAD: China lifted martial law in Beijing today, and within hours the United States announced that it was easing its blanket opposition to World Bank loans to China.


SRI LANKA MUSLIMS THREATEN TO FIGHT
LEAD: Leaders of Sri Lanka's Muslim minority, fearful that their interests will be ignored in the granting of more autonomy to Tamil areas, are threatening to appeal to Islamic nations for support.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertrans Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
46,388,512
36,990,488
Net inc
1,356,868
1,083,401
Share earns
.26
.21
Shares outst
5,179,972
5,023,505
Yr rev
169,269,782
130,751,206
Net inc
4,763,569
3,650,960
Share earns
.93
.74
Shares outst
5,125,050
4,961,678


Recalling The Set As Movie Co-Star:


With Martial Law Lifted, An Eerie Quiet in Beijing
LEAD: The streets of the capital were quiet this morning after the lifting of martial law, more than seven months after it had been imposed to crush the pro-democracy movement.
But there appeared to be no slackening of the authorities' determination to suppress any new sign of unrest.


Royal International Acquisition Is Set
LEAD: The Royal International Optical Corporation said it had an agreement to be acquired by the privately held U.S.
Vision Inc.
Royal said the holders of up to 80 percent of its shares would receive $12.50 a share.
Holders not electing to receive cash will receive one common share of the merged company for each Royal share.


Soviet Bloc Trade Group Says It Needs to Make Big Changes
LEAD: Leaders of the Soviet bloc's trade group, Comecon, agreed today that their crisis-ridden organization needed a drastic overhaul to guide it toward a market-oriented system after four decades of stifling central planning.


Alan Handley, Television Director, 77
LEAD: Alan Handley, a television director and producer, died of a heart attack on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 77 years old.


Groups Protest Nissan Ad, Saying It Glorifies Speeding
LEAD: For Super Bowl watchers, the extravagantly produced commercials shown during the football classic are sometimes as exciting as the action on the field.
But some highway safety advocates, insurance companies and physicians have expressed outrage over a Nissan advertisement, scheduled for broadcast during Super Bowl XX


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
BC Sugar Refinery Ltd., Vancouver, British Columbia, said it would acquire a 50 percent stake in Lantic Sugar Ltd., a division of Steinberg Inc., Montreal, an operator of retail food markets and department stores, for $110 million Canadian ($94.8 million United States).


Reeds Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reeds Jewelers (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,457,000
11,054,000
Net inc
142,000
108,000
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo sales
31,129,000
30,847,000
Net inc
230,000
b503,000
Share earns
.07
.15


Hollywood Starts an Invasion Of Europe's Booming Market
LEAD: Hollywood has taken a close look at the growing European film market, and it likes what it sees.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Pages From the Catalogue: A Decorator's Workshop
LEAD: YOU might call it one-stop decorating for those who never do it themselves.
Noel Jeffrey does it for them.
His new office is a three-dimensional catalogue of furniture, finishes and fabrics, and the interior designer is the salesman. ''I felt it would be easier to show prospective clients things in my office than to take them running all over town,'' said Mr.


Kentucky Utilities Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kentucky Utilities Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
138,511,000
128,632,000
Net inc
23,166,000
12,876,000
Share earns
.57
.30
Yr rev
531,895,000
559,808,000
Net inc
b93,768,000
79,346,000
Share earns
2.32
1.94


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: WOODWORKING clamps are perhaps most often associated with furniture making and repair.
But they are also a boon in tackling home maintenance projects.
Knowing how to select and use clamps broadens the range of tasks that can be performed and makes many of them easier.


Mux Lab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mux Lab Inc.
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,601,998
1,828,735
Net loss
473,396
b121,918
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian funds.


Lithuanians Cry 'Freedom!' On Eve of Gorbachev Visit
LEAD: A day before President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is to arrive in Lithuania, tens of thousands of Lithuanians gathered here today in the center of their capital, carrying signs calling for ''Independence for Lithuania,'' and chanting, ''Freedom!''


Sale by Duriron
LEAD: The Duriron Company sold its Janssen subsidiary's operations in Belgium and France to a French concern.
Duriron did not disclose the sale price.
Duriron, which makes equipment for the chemical industry, said the operations had been sold to Performance Plastic Products, a subsidiary of Compagnie Plastic Omnium.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about competition among New York department stores misstated the amount of debt held by R.H.
Macy &amp; Company when it bought the California-based Bullock's and I. Magnin stores in May 1988.
It was $3.5 billion, not $7 billion.
Macy's current debt is $4.8 billion.


Washington Federal Savings &amp; Loan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings &amp; Loan (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
15,295,000
13,822,000
Share earns
1.05
.95
Shares outst
14,612,161
14,502,844


Publishing Units Merge
LEAD: John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc. announced yesterday that it had combined its domestic scientific and technical publishing division with its domestic professional and trade publishing division.
Stephen Kippur, who heads professional and trade publishing, will become group vice president of the combined operation.


Zubki Duze Journal;   To Market, to Market: How Will Garden Grow?
LEAD: Jan Kitlinski's 30-acre farm is undeniably primitive, with a horse-drawn cart that lugs coal to his home and dozens of squawking fowl wandering about the bare-earth front yard.


Times Appoints Chief Art Critic
LEAD: The appointment of Michael Kimmelman as chief art critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Max Frankel, executive editor.
Mr.
Kimmelman succeeds John Russell, who asked to retire from daily coverage but will continue to contribute reviews and articles to The Times.


2d Teen-Ager Held in Rape of 12-Year-Old
LEAD: A second teen-ager has been arrested in the rape and torture of a 12-year-old girl in a Harlem apartment, the police said yesterday.


Soviets Are Still Stockpiling Ammunition, U.S. Study Says
LEAD: The Soviet Army is maintaining large stockpiles of ammunition and fuel in Eastern European nations as it withdraws some of its units, the Defense Intelligence Agency concluded in a recent assessment.


Mist in Grocery's Produce Section Is Linked to Legionnaires' Disease
LEAD: Health officials said today that an automatic misting machine in a Louisiana supermarket caused a major outbreak of Legionnaires' disease recently, and supermarket chains around the country said they had stopped using similar machines as a precaution.


Helen Steele Reece, Educator, 99
LEAD: Helen Steele Reece, founder and director of the Reece School, a private elementary school for children with emotional and learning disabilities, died in her sleep on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 99 years old.


Notebook;   Rumors and Intrigue in Toronto
LEAD: The intrigue at Maple Leaf Gardens is like the court politics of the throne room in a castle of an ancient kingdom.


Battle Starts Before Game
LEAD: In the final days before they play for the American Football Conference championship, the Denver Broncos and the Cleveland Browns continued to wage a small war about the mile-high air.


Cablevision Refunds
LEAD: About 72,000 Cablevision subscribers in Long Island, New York City and Yonkers will get a total of $1.1 million in refunds from the state's largest cable television company because of Yankee, Ranger and Knick games they were either overcharged for or did not receive.
The agreement was announced today by Gov.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Canada
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,268,000
14,822,000
Net inc
1,061,000
1,047,000
Share earns
.49
.48
Yr rev
67,871,000
65,746,000
Net inc
4,828,000
4,255,000
Share earns
2.23
1.96


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
948,000
1,553,000
Per share
.21
.25
6mo net inc
1,960,000
2,673,000
Per share
.41
.46


Ranger Draftee Felled
LEAD: The Rangers announced yesterday that Ludek Cajka, the defenseman from Czechoslovakia whom they drafted in 1987, injured his spine severely in a game last week and has reportedly been left paralyzed.


Reporter's Notebook;   From Dictator of Panama to Dictator of Fashion
LEAD: Manuel Antonio Noriega may have driven tourists from Panama, but he is the object of a promising cottage industry here in his temporary residence.


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sheldahl Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 1
1989
1988
Sales
24,659,000
21,608,000
Net loss
b1,819,000
c687,000
Share earns
-
.15
b-Included $1,212,000 tax credit and a $3.2 million charge to close an operation.
c-Net income


Educational Development reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Educational Development
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
982,600
863,200
Net inc
129,000
90,000
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo sales
2,959,600
2,582,700
Net inc
419,500
191,900
Share earns
.19
.09


Banks Told to Add Reserves
LEAD: Federal regulators have ordered banks to more than double their reserves for loans to Argentina, an official said today.


$12,000 Ceiling Seen For G.M.'s New Line
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation's new division, the Saturn Corporation, will sell most of its cars for $10,000 to $12,000, a Saturn executive said today.


Fuller (H.B.) Co.  (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuller (H.B.) Co.  (O)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
189,622,000
180,909,000
Net inc
5,051,000
4,805,000
Share earns
.53
.51
Yr sales
753,374,000
685,034,000
Net inc
15,671,000
21,081,000
Share earns
1.64
2.20


Wounds of Polish-German Border Don't Heal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Independent Bankgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bankgroup
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,104,000
1,203,000
Per share
.55
.60
Year net inc
4,807,000
4,028,000
Per share
2.41
2.02


Perkin-Elmer Accord Seen
LEAD: A Federal Government official familiar with the negotiations said yesterday that an agreement had been reached to insure that at least part of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation's troubled Semiconductor Equipment Group was purchased by an American buyer.
Earlier this week Electronic


I.R.A. Political Aide Charged in Terror Case
LEAD: Danny Morrison, a senior official of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, was formally charged today with conspiring to commit murder and two other terrorism offenses.


Contender for Health Chief Attacked on AIDS
LEAD: Advocates for AIDS patients are mobilizing to stop the appointment of the top contender for New York City Health Commissioner, the Health Commissioner of Indiana, saying they object to the AIDS policies he supported there.


Don't Despair of the World the Young Will Build
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bank of Granite Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Granite Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,547,000
1,343,000
Per share
.41
.36
Yr net inc
5,835,000
5,104,000
Per share
1.55
1.36


Banker Without Ads
LEAD: Starting Tuesday, The American Banker, a daily trade newspaper, will appear without a front-page ad for the first time in a century.
Gerald Taylor, the senior vice president for advertising, said that this and other design changes had been made so that American Banker ''will no longer look like a high school newspaper.


Martin H. Newman, Theater Executive, 76
LEAD: Martin H. Newman, executive director of the Will Rogers Memorial Fund and former president of Century Theaters, died of cancer Monday in New York Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Orange Losses Are Put at 29%
LEAD: Florida's orange harvest will plunge by some 29 percent this year because of damage from the Christmas weekend freeze, the Department of Agriculture estimated today.


India's Premier Offers Concessions to Sikhs
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh offered key concessions to Sikh separatists today, but said he knew of no sure way of ending the violence.


Ballet Theater Splits With Ex-Bolshoi Star
LEAD: Andris Liepa, a former principal dancer with the Bolshoi Ballet, has withdrawn from his contract with American Ballet Theater after failing to appear for scheduled rehearsals, the company announced yesterday.


Customs Is Testing Plan To Ease Airport Delays
LEAD: With international travel to the United States soaring, the Customs Service is testing new procedures to prevent the long delays that have characterized peak travel seasons at the nation's busiest airports.


Observing Martin Luther King Jr. Day
LEAD: A number of events are taking place in observance of Martin Luther King Jr.
Day on Monday.
Here is a sampling of events this weekend and on Monday.
TODAY
LOCAL 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union, 310 West 43d Street (947-1944).
A photographic memoir of King and the civil rights movement by the photojournalist Flip Schulke opens today with a reception at 6 P.M.


Our Towns;   It's the Last Call At Rosie's Diner, And on the Road
LEAD: Rosie's Farmland Diner on Route 46 in Little Ferry may be the best-known diner in America, but it is still a real diner.


Alexander Lowenthal, Businessman, 91
LEAD: Alexander Lowenthal, a Pittsburgh businessman who was active in civic affairs, died of congestive heart failure Dec. 29 at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 91 years old.


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Bullets End Road Slump
Jeff Malone scored 22 of his season-high 39 points in the third quarter as Washington snapped a club-record road losing streak at 13 games with a 100-89 victory over Miami last night, the Heat's 12th consecutive defeat.
Malone reached the 10,000-point milestone for his seven-year career with his eighth point of the game.


After Battle On Abortion, A Struggle To Recover
LEAD: Eleven months ago, a team of doctors performed an abortion on a comatose Long Island woman, Nancy Klein, in a desperate attempt to help her chances of recovery.
The operation culminated a wrenching two-week court battle for her husband, who fought opponents of abortion all the way to the Supreme Court to gain legal guardianship of his 32-year-old wife and the right to decide on her abortion and, perhaps, her last chance for life.


Ammirati To Leave Omnicom
LEAD: ENDING a protracted and occasionally bitter eight-month negotiation, the Omnicom Group and Ammirati &amp; Puris announced yesterday that Ammirati, the New York advertising agency known for its stylish promotions for BMW cars and Club Med resorts, is buying itself back from the giant conglomerate.


New Year Inspires Donations For the Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: The arrival of a new year and a new decade inspired donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund to express a multitude of hopes for the destitute and the sick.


California May Deny Import of Giant Frogs
LEAD: Bureaucrats have thrown a hurdle in the way of the giant frogs from Cameroon that a man wants to enter in Calaveras County's annual frog jump.


All Nippon Deal
LEAD: The All Nippon Airways Company bought the Westin Hotel in Washington, for an undisclosed sum, a company spokesman said.
The name of the 416-room hotel will be changed to the ANA Hotel in January 1991.
The company plans to expand its ownership of hotels in overseas cities where it flies or plans to fly, the spokesman said.


Review/Film;   Two Early Scorsese Profiles, of His Parents and of an Actor
LEAD: Many of the characters in Martin Scorsese's films are inspired storytellers, fired by the gift of gab.
Can anyone who's seen ''Mean Streets'' forget the magnificent excuse that Robert De Niro's Johnny Boy rattles off in explanation of why he's neglected to pay his creditors?
Can anyone forget the ''Taxi Driver'' sequence in which an overeager, fast-talking gun dealer bluffs his way through a sales pitch and discovers, to his delight and amazement, that Mr.


Washington Talk;   Traveling Salesman Of 'Retail Politics'
LEAD: As President Bush wrapped up his first year in office with a quick hop to Malta, an afternoon in the Caribbean, a political swing through the Southwest, some hunting and fishing in Texas and Alabama and two trips to Florida, an old friend mused about the busy schedule.


Falcon Coach Arrested
LEAD: Jim Hanifan, who was named interim head coach of the Atlanta Falcons when Marion Campbell resigned Nov. 28, was hospitalized and in police custody yesterday after being arrested on charges of driving under the influence of alcohol.
He was also charged with having no proof of insurance, committing simple battery on an officer and driving without lights.


Bush Hails a Thaw in China; Congress Is Skeptical
LEAD: President Bush today hailed the lifting of martial law in China as ''a very sound step,'' but he found little support in Congress for his view that China's action was significant or that his policy toward Beijing was effective.


The Beat Goes On at the Board of Estimate (for the Time Being, at Least)


Flu Hits Texas and Spreads Across U.S.
LEAD: The winter scourge of influenza has made an early appearance this year, already striking hard in Texas and rapidly spreading its trail of aches across the country.


Beckett Took the Student to a Nearby Cafe;   The Success of 'Godot'
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Scholarly Mystery: ''Z'' Writes Darkly of Communism, but Who Is ''Z''?
LEAD: Who is ''Z''?


Books of The Times;   Hollywood Wanted Movies To Be Better Than Life
LEAD:
The Dame in the Kimono
Hollywood, Censorship and the Production Code From the 1920's to the 1960's
By Leonard J. Leff and Jerold L. Simmons
350 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $22.50.


Library Budget Cutbacks Are Opposed    One-third of the branches are now open fewer than five days a week. (NYT/Jack Manning)


Businessland Planning To Reduce Its Staff
LEAD: Businessland Inc., a leading computer retailer, said today that it would lay off from 5 percent to 7 percent of its worldwide work force of 3,900.


Mitsubishi to Drop A Biblical Quotation
LEAD: In response to viewer complaints, Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America has agreed to alter a television commercial for its Galant car that quotes in part from St.
Paul's Letter to the Corinthians.
The voice-over for the spot, set outside a New England church, originally began: ''Yea, when I was a child I spoke as a child and acted as a child.


4 Assembly Plants Are Shut Down by Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company temporarily shut down four assembly plants with a total of 9,700 hourly workers because of slumping auto sales, the company said today.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums ''CHARLOTTE'S WEB,'' a musical based on E. B. White's story about a spider named Charlotte, performed by On Stage Productions, 3 and 7 P.M. tomorrow and at 3 P.M. on Sunday.
Last performances.
At Hartley House Theater, 413 West 46th Street.
Tickets: students and the elderly, $8; others, $10.


Duke Inflicts First Loss on Georgia Tech, 96-91


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 483 money market mutual funds surged by $6.82 billion, to $375.23 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 144 institutional funds increased by $1.91 billion, to $90.14 billion.
The assets of the 241 general-purpose funds were up by $1.26 billion, to $124.50 billion.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-16
President Gorbachev in Lithuania implored the people to remain within the Soviet Union, warning that secession would mean economic calamity for the tiny republic, while weakening Soviet security and endangering his own position and program.
Page A1


Fewer Flights, but More Air Traffic Delays in 1989
LEAD: The number of air traffic delays rose sharply last year, especially at the nation's five most congested airports, Government officials reported yesterday.
Aviation experts found the figures particularly disturbing because delays increased even though the number of flights fell slightly.


Review/Film;   At Long Last, The Story of A Gangster's Redemption
LEAD: Harry Plotnik has been kept under wraps for 20 years, but he is none the worse for wear.
Harry is the glum Jewish gangster at the center of ''The Plot Against Harry,'' a funny, sharply drawn and appealingly modest film that very nearly missed seeing the light of day.


Noriega Headquarters Will Soon Be History


Clash Over Secret Data in Noriega Case
LEAD: The Government raised the issue of national security for the first time today in the drug-trafficking case of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, arguing that classified information had been improperly disclosed.


Record Number of Ratings Lowered by S.&amp; P. in 1989
LEAD: A record number of debt ratings were lowered by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation last year, according to preliminary figures compiled and released yesterday by the financial rating service.


TV Weekend;   Mexican-American Drama on 'Wonderworks'
LEAD: One of public television's more adventurous and distinguished excursions into family entertainment, ''Wonderworks,'' returns for a new season this weekend, having been moved to 10 o'clock on Sunday mornings on Channel 13 from early prime time.
The series is produced by a consortium of stations that is headed by WQED in Pittsburgh and that, perhaps significantly, does not include Channel 13.


Their Drug War - and Ours
LEAD: As a woman starts across the street, a van roars up.
Strong arms wrest her purse from her grasp.
As the van lurches away, she falls beneath the wheels and is crushed to death. . . .
Members of a drug gang kidnap an enemy's 12-year-old brother, hack off the boy's finger and enclose it with a ransom request.


2 Top Conservatives Fault Chirac On Role Since Loss to Mitterrand
LEAD: With power struggles already tearing at France's Communist and Socialist Parties, the country's conservative Gaullist movement has now been shaken by an unexpected onslaught on its longtime leader, Jacques Chirac.


Quilting Bee
LEAD: Come Quilt With Me Inc., a quilting-supply mail-order business, and the 92d Street Y are sponsoring their ninth annual quilting bee at the Y on Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M.
There will also be talks on quilting in America and Japan throughout the afternoon.
Admission is $5, and quilts may be appraised by the quilter Genie Barnes for $20.


Report on Hospital Death Rates Is Challenged
LEAD: The results of a Government study on death rates in nearly 6,000 hospitals were challenged today by researchers who said the Federal analysis failed to account for variations in the severity of patients' illness when they were hospitalized.


New York Officials Mobilizing for Drive For an Exact Census
LEAD: With New York's share of Federal aid and the size of its Congressional delegation at stake, officials here and in New York City have recruited the help of several powerful unions in an effort to have the state's population fully counted in the Census.


Top Morgan Stanley Officer Quits to Start Merger Firm
LEAD: One of Wall Street's leading merger and acquisition advisers, Eric J. Gleacher, resigned yesterday from Morgan Stanley &amp; Company to start his own firm.


INSIDE
LEAD:
East Berlin to Create Force


Study on Cable Competition
LEAD: Cable television may need competition at the local level, the Federal Communications Commission said today in deciding to study possible changes in rules that allow just one cable system in most communities.


Harmony and Dissonance as N.C.A.A. Meets
LEAD: When the National Collegiate Athletic Association began its 84th convention last Sunday, Richard Schultz, the association's executive director, made it clear that he wanted to change what seemed to be a prevailing public perception that the N.C.A.A. was a scandal-ridden, do-nothing organization whose primary function was managing the greed of its members.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about an increase in corporate bond defaults in 1989 misstated the financial situation of Integrated Resources Inc.
The company is seeking to reorganize itself but has not filed for Chapter 11 protection under the bankruptcy laws.


National Standards Won't Improve Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beckett Took the Student to a Nearby Cafe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Closes Down a Bit; Gold Prices Up Modestly
LEAD: The dollar ended slightly lower yesterday after a session in which dealers focused mainly on cross rates between foreign currencies rather than the dollar.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Friends of Libraries U.S.A. has selected Martin Marshall Jaccoma Mitchell to create a campaign to promote literacy and reading.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. said it would set up a trust to borrow about $550 million through a private placement to buy stock that will be used for future company contributions to its existing non-management employee savings plan.


The Jerusalem Post's Owners Pledge an Independent Policy
LEAD: The owners of The Jerusalem Post have pledged to respect the newspaper's editorial independence, but 30 senior journalists who resigned over the issue rejected an offer to return to work.


Notebook;   Unbridled Emerges as a Hot Item for the Winter
LEAD: The prime winter racing season in Florida unofficially begins in the coming week, with the Tropical Park Derby on closing day at Calder on Sunday and the opening of Gulfstream Park two days later.


Lodestar Rebuffed By Kinder-Care
LEAD: Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc. said a special committee of its board had determined that the previously announced takeover bid by Kind Acquisition Group, an affiliate of Lodestar Group, was not in the best interest of the company or its stockholders.
Lodestar said it had accepted the committee's decision and had withdrawn the offer.


Fuel Plane Explodes at Base
LEAD: An empty Air National Guard KC-135 refueling tanker exploded in flames today as it lay parked on a ramp at Pease Air Force Base, said a base spokeswoman, Sgt.
Susan Rau.
She said one base firefighter was slightly injured fighting the fire.


An East German-U.S. Deal
LEAD: A state-owned East German printing machinery company has bought a marketing concern in the United States in what is believed to be the first such deal with a Western company.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the winner of a $35 million Lotto prize misstated the Federal tax he will have to pay.
While 20 percent will be withheld from his 21 annual checks, the actual tax owed would be 28 percent under current Federal law.


Chip Index Posts Rebound
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's leading indicator rebounded in December as United States semiconductor shipments and orders increased, signaling a recovery from the summer slowdown, the Semiconductor Industry Association said today.


Utility Rewards Jurors Who Upheld It in Court
LEAD: Jurors who gave the Houston Lighting and Power Company a favorable verdict in a $419 million lawsuit will be flown from Dallas to Houston at the utility's expense for a tour of its nuclear plant and a stay at a luxury hotel.


3 Lawyers Accused of Using Bribes and Faked Evidence
LEAD: Three members of a personal-injury law firm in Manhattan have been indicted on Federal charges that they falsified evidence and bribed witnesses to lie in 19 accident cases dating to 1979, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney announced yesterday.
Four private investigators and an office manager for the firm were also charged.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
DANCING BEARS, ETC.


Metro Datelines;   Dismembered Body Of Woman Identified
LEAD: The dismembered body of a woman found in the Bronx Monday night was identified yesterday as a bank secretary from Brooklyn, the police said.


U.S. Proposes Higher Coal Mining Fees
LEAD: Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr., reversing a Reagan Administration decision, today proposed raising the fee that coal companies pay to states and the Federal Government for mining on Federal land.


Review/Art;   Heady and Hectic Works From Jennifer Bartlett
LEAD: Jennifer Bartlett has always divided opinion, and it is not in her nature, or in her art, to do anything else.
Her ambition, once fired, has no limit.
It was doubtless natural that one or two people would be disconcerted, and one or two professional feathers ruffled, by the original and imaginative design for a garden in Battery Park City that she has designed in partnership with Alexander Cooper and Nicholas Quennell.


Metro Datelines;   Schools Experience Continuing Violence
LEAD: The city schools underwent their fourth consecutive day of violence yesterday when a youth at Junior High School No. 4 was stabbed in an argument with another student, and hospitalized with injuries.


Economic Scene;   Trade Pressures On the Japanese
LEAD: THE drop in the Tokyo stock market earlier this week, attributed partly to fears of turmoil in the Soviet Union that could weaken the outlook for Japanese involvement in Eastern Europe, knocked down the yen and lifted the dollar.
The weakening yen is likely to worsen the huge United States trade deficit with


Federal Judge Blocks a New Anti-Abortion Law in Pennsylvania
LEAD: A Federal judge today blocked sections of a new anti-abortion law scheduled to take effect next week.


A European Market for Consumer Goods Opens;   In Alexanderplatz
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stock Prices in Rebound As Dow Climbs 10.03 Points
LEAD: Stocks rebounded yesterday as investors sought bargains in the wake of the market's recent weakness.
The Dow Jones industrial average, ahead as many as 22 points at midmorning, closed the day 10.03 points higher, at 2,760.67.


Top Coaches Named
LEAD: Bill McCartney of Colorado was named 1989 Kodak Football Coach of the Year in Division I-A, the American Football Coaches Association announced at its annual convention yesterday in San Francisco.
McCartney led the Buffaloes to an 11-0 regular season before losing by 21-6 to Notre Dame in the Orange


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Oregon and Washington Floods Rout 3,000
LEAD: Flood water lay across southwest Washington and northern Oregon today, closing part of a busy Interstate highway and other roads and forcing about 3,000 people to leave their homes.


Clorox's Move
LEAD: The Clorox Company said yesterday that it had transferred the Clorox Detergent advertising account from DDB/Needham in Chicago to the Foote, Cone &amp; Belding office in San Francisco.
A Clorox spokesman said the move had been made to consolidate its Clorox brand laundry products at one agency; Foote, Cone already handles the others.


Saints Ready for Indoor Season Opener
LEAD: Introducing some of his players at a news conference today, Tom Flatley, the general manager of the New York Saints, described Scott Huff as an enforcer.
Huff seemed to preen.


Dudley Field Malone, Theatrical Agent, 59
LEAD: Dudley Field Malone, a theatrical agent and manager, died of lung cancer on Jan. 1 at his home in Bellport, L.I.
He was 59 years old.


Arthur J. O'Brien, 80, Ex-Head of a Retailer
LEAD: Arthur J. O'Brien, former president of the Associated Dry Goods Corporation, died of a heart attack Monday at his home in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 80 years old.


Review/Music;   American Composers Orchestra
LEAD: Listening to the concert of the American Composers Orchestra on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, one couldn't help but reflect on a curious argument that seems to be gaining currency: that the symphony orchestra, as an outgrowth and repository of European musical tradition, is an artificial overlay on American culture, superfluous if not subversive of homespun values.


Review/Music;   A Collection Of Keyboard (Neo)Classics
LEAD: The ''Evening of 20th-Century Keyboard Classics'' offered on Monday at Merkin Concert Hall was eccentric in its length and juxtaposition of diverse performing forces.
It might also have been better named ''An Evening of 20th-Century Keyboard Neo-Classics.'' But it was full of good music well performed, and it built to two really excellent combinations of creation and re-creation at the end.


Purse-Theft Victim Is Named
LEAD: The Upper East Side woman who was killed during a midday purse-snatching on Wednesday was identified yesterday as Kim Stapleton, a 60-year-old grandmother who had served on the boards of several charities.


Upheaval in the East;   Havel Traces Passage 'From Jail to the Castle'
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel's third-floor office in the Prague Castle these days has the urgent chaos of a theater stage the day after opening night.
Mail is piled on the floor.
Young secretaries and assistants rush in and out.
Unwanted paintings stand around against the wall like discarded scenery.
Telephones ring and ring and often go unanswered.


Daniel Brockman, 86; Helped Save Carnegie
LEAD: Daniel David Brockman, a prominent tax lawyer and supporter of the arts, died of cancer at his home in Manhattan yesterday.
He was 86 and had homes in Manhattan, East Hampton and Marbella, Spain.


In Rural Panama, Hard Questions Remain About Who's in Charge
LEAD: When word came that invading United States troops were on their way, Hermel Rodriguez Aguilar came out of hiding, summoned up his courage and went to claim power from the local military officials who had made a habit of beating and jailing opposition politicians like him.


Bernini Bust Is Unsold; Top Bid Was $6 Million
LEAD: A 1621 white marble bust of Pope Gregory XV by Bernini went unsold at auction on Wednesday when bids failed to reach the sellers' minimum price.


Rumanians Report 207 Died In September Ship Collision
LEAD: The new Government said today that 207 Rumanians were killed in September when a passenger ship sank after colliding with a Bulgarian tugboat on the Danube river.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Ryobi America Corp., to Doe-Anderson Advertising Agency, Louisville, Ky., for its power tools, with a budget of $1 million.


Gen. B. O. Okello, 61, Uganda Rebel Leader
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
Basilio Olara Okello, a Ugandan rebel leader who led a coup against the civilian Government of President Milton Obote in 1985, has died of diabetes complicated by malaria.
He was 61 years old.


Outdoors;   Telemark Skiing Makes Fast Tracks
LEAD: rrTelemark skiing, considered an exotic hybrid of cross-country and downhill skiing just a few years ago, is growing rapidly in popularity.
More skiers are learning how to do it; they are participating in a variety of events, and the equipment is improving and becoming more specialized.


Ruling on Serving the Under-Age Is Reversed
LEAD: New York State's highest court today overturned a decision revoking for 10 days the license of Dorrian's Red Hand restaurant in Manhattan, where Robert E. Chambers met Jennifer Levin before killing her in Central Park in 1986.


SHUTTLE MOVES IN ON AILING SATELLITE
LEAD: Switching orbital lanes and climbing in altitude, the astronauts of the space shuttle Columbia maneuvered into position today for their planned retrieval of a faltering bus-size satellite Friday morning.


Review/Rock;   Down-Home Country Sounds in the Heart of Metropolis
LEAD: New York City is a long way from the country, but that doesn't stop some of New York's best bar bands from twanging their own kind of down-home music - high-octane honky-tonk that adds a modern urban kick to old-fashioned rockabilly.
At the Lone Star Roadhouse on Wednesday night, Roscoe's Gang and the World Famous Blue Jays shared a bill of New York country-rock.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Dec. 30 about the legacy of the playwright Samuel Beckett misstated the date of his death.
It was Dec. 22.


Georgia Gulf Down
LEAD: The stock of the Georgia Gulf Corporation dropped yesterday on speculators' fears that its recapitalization plan may have a lower value than originally expected.
Georgia Gulf shares fell $2.25, to $40.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The Atlanta-based chemical producer said last month that it had proposals from a number of financing sources.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Wednesday and an article on Thursday about the killing of a former Peruvian Defense Minister misidentified him.
He was Enrique Lopez Albujar.


Tourism Up In Sri Lanka After a Slump
LEAD: The nervous young waiter in his obviously new orange uniform was clearly smitten by the first French tourist of the season.


2 Successes In the Quest For Creative Uniqueness
LEAD: Two of jazz's great individualists, the singers Betty Carter and Abbey Lincoln Moseka, will step on stage tonight and give a lesson or two on how to secure a place in jazz history.
After a phrase or so, the singers will show off carefully constructed personalities built not out of economic necessity, but out of an act of the imagination.


Malpractice Award Stuns Houston Lawyers
LEAD: A Federal jury has stunned lawyers here by awarding $17.5 million in a malpractice case against a local law firm.


On Stage
LEAD:
A Friendly House Call for 'Annie'


Grains Fall, Soybeans Rise; U.S. Releases Crop Reports
LEAD: Grain prices fell and soybean prices rose yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
7.87
9.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.50
8.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.38
8.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.00
8.00
9.21
30-YR.


U.S. Penalty On Silverado
LEAD: Federal regulators said today that they had penalized the former chairman of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver and confirmed they met this week with a son of President Bush who was a director of the institution.


Review/Concert;   A Conductor With a Flair for the Contemporary
LEAD: The ever-busier Gerard Schwarz resigned last year as music director of the Music Today series at Merkin Concert Hall.
But his absence, along with the apparent good taste of the series' new music adviser, Andre Emelianoff, has opened up this ensemble to a variety of alternative leaders.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on Jan. 2 reported on a dispute at The Jerusalem Post, where journalists have accused the new publisher of trying to turn a liberal daily into a right-wing platform.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the vacant position of New York City Health Commissioner referred incorrectly to the extent of opposition to the candidacy of Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers, Health Commissioner of Indiana.
Some advocates for AIDS patients not all, oppose his appointment.


Why Connecticut Didn't Go Along With Metro-North Fare Rise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gregg Smith Singers
LEAD: The Gregg Smith Singers will present a concert of secular music, set to texts by William Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, and Italian and German madrigals by Don Carlo Gesualdo, Heinrich Schutz and Paul Hindemith tomorrow at 8 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, 54th Street and Lexington Avenue.
The group's Saturday concert series continues through Feb.


Backers Defend Top Contender For Health Post
LEAD: Supporters of the top contender for New York City Health Commissioner, who has been criticized by some advocates for AIDS patients, rallied to his defense yesterday.


Georgia Tech Loses At Last in Duke Rally
LEAD: Duke overcame a 10-point deficit in the last nine minutes to defeat previously unbeaten Georgia Tech by 96-91 last night.


Mexico Toasts, and Jeers, the Spanish Monarchs
LEAD: The arrival here of King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia of Spain for a state visit has reawakened all the ambivalent and contradictory feelings Mexico harbors for its mother country, with the Spanish couple getting a reception oscillating between warmth and hostility.


Albania, on Its National Day, Rejects Democratic Changes
LEAD: Hard-line Albania celebrated its national day today, firmly rejecting democratic changes that have broken the Communist grip on power elsewhere in Eastern Europe.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Link to Ellington


The U.S. and Panama;   An Israeli in Panama: Whose Broker?
LEAD: As American investigators try to piece together the business and political affairs of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, one of the most intriguing figures remains an Israeli who some say was a key adviser to the former Panamanian strongman.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
'Carried Away' Again


Witherspoon Stops Sims in 5 In Heavyweight Comeback Bout
LEAD: Tim Witherspoon , a former heavyweight champion, continued successfully his comeback tonight when Referee Frank Cappuccino stopped his bout against Jeff Sims after the fifth round of a scheduled 10-round bout at Trump Plaza.


Panel Sees Cover-Up of Teacher's Assault Record
LEAD: A man convicted of exposing himself to a child was licensed as a New York City teacher even though licensing officials knew he had covered up the fact that he had once been convicted in an assault case, an investigative commission said yesterday.


Pratt &amp; Whitney
LEAD: Ansett World Aviation Services of Australia has ordered $110 million worth of jet engines from Pratt &amp; Whitney to power as many as 12 Airbus aircraft, Pratt &amp; Whitney said.
Ansett ordered PW4000 engines for six A300-600R Airbus twinjets, a total of 14 engines including spares, and took options on 12 more engines to power another six planes, said Pratt &amp; Whitney, a unit of the United Technologies Corporation.


Continental Air Cuts Staff by 150
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation's Continental Airlines laid off about 150 employees earlier this week as part of a ''belt tightening'' program, a Texas Air spokesman, Art Kent, said.
The layoffs, which occurred Tuesday, affected employees who have no direct contact with customers, Mr.
Kent said.


Win or Lose, Noriega Case Means Victory for Lawyer
LEAD: Until two years ago, Frank Rubino was the typical Miami ''white powder'' lawyer, representing defendants in drug cases.
His most notorious client was a high official in the operation of Carlos Lehder Rivas, the convicted Colombian drug smuggler.
His client list included Tony Roman, a.k.a.
Antonio Piedra; Giuseppe Pellerito, a.k.a.


U.S. HALTS THE USE OF JARVIK HEART
LEAD: In an action that stunned heart researchers, the Food and Drug Administration has withdrawn its approval of continued experimental use of the Jarvik artificial heart because of deficiencies found in its manufacture.


Metro Datelines;   Suspect in Slayings Indicted in 9th Case
LEAD: Arthur J. Shawcross, who is accused in a series of slayings in the Lyons area, was charged yesterday with a ninth killing.


Mentor-Silicon Merger Is Set
LEAD: The Mentor Graphics Corporation of Beaverton, Ore., said today that it would acquire the Silicon Compiler Systems Corporation for about $110 million in newly issued Mentor shares.


Program Trading Slows
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that program trading had fallen to 6.7 percent of average daily volume in the Dec. 26-29 period from 7.9 percent of average daily volume in the previous week.
Average daily volume also fell in the period to 121.3 million shares from 168.7 million in the period before Christmas.


SALVADOR REBELS BACK PEACE TALKS
LEAD: Leftist rebels accepted a Government proposal today to ask the Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations to mediate peace talks, and proposed that negotiations start within 30 days.


Review/Dance;   Small Troupe Revives 'Annabel Lee' From 1951
LEAD: Every major ballet company seems to be rummaging in the dustbin of recent history for a forgotten work to expand its repertory and satisfy the public's thirst for the new.


Publisher at Scribner's
LEAD: Barbara Grossman has been named publisher of Charles Scribner's Sons, effective Jan. 29, the company announced Wednesday.
She is currently a senior editor at Crown Publishers, where she has worked for eight years.
The current Scribner's publisher, Robert Stewart, will have his own imprint at Scribner's and will be a senior editorial vice president of the adult trade division of the Macmillan Publishing Company, of which Scribner's is an imprint.


Promotion At Dayton
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation, owner of Target and Mervyn's retail stores and the Dayton Hudson Department Store Company, yesterday named Stephen E. Watson president beginning Feb. 1.


Bayer Investigated On Deal With Iran
LEAD: The West German Government is investigating whether the chemical giant Bayer A.G. sold equipment to Iran that could be used to produce poisonous gases, West Germany's public prosecutor's office said today.
Bayer, West Germany's third-largest chemical company, has previously denied the accusation, which first arose in


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the dairy industry misidentified a farmer from Maize, Kan.
He is Gene Woodard.


A European Market for Consumer Goods Opens
LEAD: To the Editor:


Blues and Rock
LEAD: Joan Osborne is singing blues and rock songs at tomorrow at 11 P.M. at Delta 88, 332 Eighth Avenue, at 26th Street (924-3499).
There is a $7 cover and a $5 minimum at tables, no cover at the bar.


Metro Datelines;   Former Accountant Is Sentenced in Theft
LEAD: A former deputy director of the city's Department of General Services was sentenced yesterday to 5 to 15 years in prison on charges of stealing more than a $1 million from the city.


AIDS Doctor Tells of a Fatal Future
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego testified yesterday about fearing the future because she knows ''what is coming'' as a result of her having AIDS.


Fee Increase Is Sought For Mining U.S. Land
LEAD: Reversing a Reagan Administration decision, Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. has proposed raising the fee coal companies pay to mine Federal land.


Mexico Pact Called Near
LEAD: Mexico and its commercial bankers are expected to sign their landmark debt reduction agreement early in February, according to the chairman of the 15-bank advisory committee and the Mexican under secretary of finance.


Exceptions, Rules and the Court;   In Yonkers, Officials Must Still Obey
LEAD: To judge from their initial preening for the TV cameras, you'd think that officials in Yonkers, N.Y., had been vindicated by the Supreme Court for resisting a Federal judge's order to build low-income housing.
True, the Court does say the judge was too quick to impose contempt fines against four City Councilmen who defied his order, and does absolve them of personal liability.


Outside Tiananmen Square, Little Sense of Drama
LEAD: Bundled like mummies against the freezing winds, those few Beijing residents who are now permitted to walk in Tiananmen Square strolled there and quietly speculated about whether the shifting political breezes may be carrying the first signs of a thaw.


Chronicle
LEAD: The Boys Choir of Harlem, founded by DR.
WALTER J. TURNBULL, has a lot to celebrate when it observes its 20th anniversary on the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday on Monday.


Boston Murder Suspect Sought a Brother's Help, Lawyer Says
LEAD: Charles Stuart asked one of his brothers to help him kill his wife ''weeks before'' she was fatally shot on Oct. 23, a lawyer for the brother said today.


Philips Industries Sees Lower Profit
LEAD: Philips Industries announced it expects lower third-quarter earnings, casting a shadow over its planned buyout deal with a Merrill Lynch unit, analysts said. ''Merrill Lynch may use this as an opportunity to restructure the deal or reprice the deal,'' said Elliot Schlang of Prescott, Ball &amp; Turben Inc.


Far Out in Space, a Giant Discovery
LEAD: Astronomers reported today that they had confirmed the existence of one of the largest concentrations of galaxies and matter ever found.
The finding could change the way astronomers think about the structure of the universe.


Upheaval in the East;   Lithuania; AT A GLANCE
LEAD:
Government


UAL Chief Warns on A Buyback
LEAD: Stephen M. Wolf, the chairman and chief executive of the UAL Corporation, has warned employees that a recapitalization of the company, which owns United Airlines, would ''cripple United financially.''


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
The directors of the Campeau Corporation took steps to allow the company's American retailing divisions to operate independently.
After four days of meetings at the company's Toronto headquarters, the directors said Campeau's U.S. operations would be overseen by a new board, with a majority of American residents.


Carolyn Haywood, 92, Illustrator And Author of Children's Books
LEAD: Carolyn Haywood, a popular author and illustrator of children's books who is best known for her ''Betsy'' and ''Eddie'' series for 7-to-10-year-olds, died of a stroke yesterday at her home in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
She was 92 years old.


Photography: Images of Past and Future
LEAD: The observance of photography's 150th anniversary may have ended in December, but you wouldn't know it from the number of exhibitions of photographs on view this month.
It's as if a brand new season has begun in the art world, with photographs once again playing a major role.
There's a feeling of fresh possibility in the air, in part because the 1980's are now history, and in part because history itself -in particular, the history of art - suddenly seems a subject on artists' minds.


2 File for Arbitration
LEAD: Wally Joyner, the California Angel first baseman, and Juan Nieves, a Milwaukee Brewer left-hander, filed for salary arbitration yesterday, leaving 184 players still eligible to file by the deadline next Tuesday.
Arbitration hearings will be scheduled for the first three weeks of February.


Campeau Takes Steps to Bolster The Credibility of Its U.S. Stores
LEAD: Pressing for a way to restore its credibility with creditors and suppliers, the directors of the Campeau Corporation took steps last night to allow the company's American retailing divisions to operate independently.


J. P. Morgan Earnings Fall 40% in Quarter
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company yesterday reported sharply lower profits in its fourth quarter and a loss for the year.


Auctions
LEAD: The pair of exuberantly carved Philadelphia Chippendale chairs stood for more than 25 years in the entrance hall of the Benjamin Dulany house in Alexandria, Va., a gray brick mansion that Howard and May Joynt called home starting in 1936.
Now, after Mr.
Joynt's death in July at the age of 86, Mrs.


Chronicle
LEAD: Arriving neatly between the spring and fall collections, Nell Neuville Merlo was born Wednesday to the designer CHARLOTTE NEUVILLE and her husband, KEN MERLO.


3 Steelers Vying for Hall
LEAD: Three pillars of the Pittsburgh Steelers' four Super Bowl victories - the running back Franco Harris, the linebacker Jack Lambert and the wide receiver Lynn Swann - head the list of 15 finalists for induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.


Upheaval in the East;   Doubts and Fears of Rumania's Lingering Germans
LEAD: Jurgen Breitenstein, a 30-year-old mathematics teacher, decided a year ago to join the thousands of ethnic Germans who had left Rumania for West Germany in search of freedom and opportunity.
Now, after the toppling of Nicolae Ceausescu, Mr.
Breitenstein is not sure whether to follow through on his decision or stay and support the dwindling


Ann Stringer, 71, Dies; A War Correspondent
LEAD: Ann Stringer, a war correspondent who in 1945 transmitted the first report of the linkup of American and Russian forces, died of a heart attack Wednesday at the Skyrest Nursing Home in Carbondale, Ill.
She was 71 years old and had lived until 1987 in Manhattan and Amagansset, L.I.


F.B.I. SETTLES SUITS BY BLACK WORKERS ON DISCRIMINATION
LEAD: In what appears to be a significant admission of racial problems within the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the agency has reached out-of-court settlements in recent months in major discrimination cases involving black employees.


Savings Unit Seized by U.S.
LEAD: Federal regulators today seized Atlantic Financial Federal, Pennsylvania's largest savings institution, transferring control to a new agency created to handle failing or troubled institutions.


New Dances Explore Offbeat Themes
LEAD: YOU can see a dance this weekend called ''I'm a Frayed Knot,'' inspired by Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''Scarlet Letter.'' Home videos are featured in another dance, ''Malad Justed,'' in which a fish responds to Navy war exercises in its sea.
But two other dances, by choreographers known for their individualism, will tackle relatively familiar dance subjects - women and clowns.


Japan Seen Extending Auto Quotas
LEAD: The Japanese Government is expected to announce soon that it will extend its ''voluntary'' quotas on automobile exports to the United States, but Japan's major manufacturers note that the action is now an annual political gesture that has no effect on the sales of Japanese cars.


Trophy for Montana
LEAD: Joe Montana, the National Football League's top quarterback, won the Jim Thorpe Trophy yesterday as the league's most valuable player.
He is the third successive San Francisco 49er player to win the award, following Roger Craig and Jerry Rice.


Reporter's Notebook;   Business as Usual at City Hall (the Tone Is What's New)
LEAD: In the worn old corridors of New York's City Hall these days, police guards at the metal gate outside the Mayor's wing are armed not only with pistols but with newspaper pictures of new deputies and commissioners, to avoid the embarrassment of stopping the wrong people.


A European Market for Consumer Goods Opens;   Boring No More
LEAD: To the Editor:


Billy Conn, 72, Takes On Robber
LEAD: A robber got more than he bargained for when he held up a convenience store on Wednesday and ran into Billy Conn, the 72-year-old former light-heavyweight champion, the police said.


The Rivalry Has Begun;   Anderson and Hurley, 2 Top Guards, Square Off in Atlanta
LEAD: They are acquaintances at best, having met about a half-dozen times at all-star games and summer basketball camps.
Yet Kenny Anderson and Bobby Hurley, last year's most highly rated high school playmakers, know plenty about each other, and will soon learn a lot more.


Robert Pirie, 84, Dies; Retired Vice Admiral
LEAD: Robert B. Pirie, a retired vice admiral who was Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for air when he retired in 1962 after a 40-year career in the Navy, died of congestive heart failure Tuesday at the Belvoir Woods Health Care Center, Fort Belvoir, Va.
He was 84 years old and had lived for many years in Delray Beach,


New York City Study Of Motorists Killed Finds Tie to Cocaine
LEAD: Almost one of every four drivers between the ages of 16 and 45 who were killed in New York City traffic accidents in recent years tested positive for cocaine use, a new study has found.


F.D.A. Accused of Improper Ties In Review of Drug for Milk Cows
LEAD: A veterinarian dismissed from the Food and Drug Administration said today that the agency's review of a genetically engineered drug designed to make dairy cows produce more milk had been marked by overly close ties to the animal drug industry.


Metro Datelines;   Black Ministers Meet On Rise in Attacks
LEAD: Some 40 black ministers met yesterday to coordinate a response to what they called an escalation in political and personal attacks against blacks.


Pentagon Plans $2.3 Billion Saving in '91 by Cutting 16,000 Jobs
LEAD: Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney announced today that improved management would save the Pentagon $2.3 billion and eliminate 16,000 jobs next year, but he declined to go into detail on what jobs would be cut.


Review/Music;   Guarneri Plus Davidovich
LEAD: Schumann's Piano Quintet (Op. 44) - with which the Guarneri String Quartet, joined by the pianist Bella Davidovich, ended its concert on Wednesday evening at Alice Tully Hall - is one of the composer's ripest creations.
Using a combination of instruments almost wholly novel in 1842, the composer immediately mastered it, producing a rich amalgam of emotion, ebullience and intelligence.


Royal Ballet Drops Plans To Tour U.S.
LEAD: The Royal Ballet announced today that it had canceled plans for a United States tour in July and August because the company could not obtain adequate financing.


Pleased With Past, Kean Looks to Future
LEAD: Eight years ago a former Assemblyman named Thomas H. Kean moved his belongings and a wobbly new administration into the Statehouse here, after stunning the public and himself with a 1,797-vote victory over Representative James J. Florio.


Dealer Is Jailed In 1988 Slaying Of Drug Officer
LEAD: Grim and silent, about 200 off-duty New York City police officers, many of them from distant precincts, crowded into a Manhattan courtroom yesterday to witness the sentencing of a drug dealer convicted last year of murdering an undercover police officer on the Upper West Side.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Richardson Emerges


Stephen H. Mayer, 74, Chairman of MEM Co.
LEAD: Stephen H. Mayer, chairman of the MEM Company, a toiletries concern with headquarters in Northvale, N.J., died of a stroke on Wednesday at Tucson (Ariz.) Medical Center.
He was 74 years old and had homes in Tucson and Denver.


Review/Dance;   Men at Work in City Ballet 'Gentilhommes'
LEAD: The New York City Ballet has an interesting crop of young male dancers moving up the ranks in the company.
And a slew of role debuts in a performance of ''Les Gentilhommes'' on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater offered a good chance to watch some of those dancers at work.


Business Wary About End Of Martial Law in Beijing
LEAD: While foreign companies welcome the lifting of martial law in the capital, the action is unlikely to have an immediate effect on their commercial or investment activities here, officials of a dozen companies said today.


G.M. Near Agreement On Venture in Hungary
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it was at an advanced stage of negotiations to assemble cars and engines in Hungary.


Havel Says Jail Prepared Him for New Office


Lord Macaulay, on the 1990's
LEAD: As commentators attempt to forecast political events in 1990 and the decade, they would be well advised to confer with Lord Macaulay, a 19th century British historian and arguably the finest designer of dramatic narrative ever to inhabit a page.


Exceptions, Rules and the Court;   In Criminal Law, a Line Maintained
LEAD: For years, prosecutors have been barred from using illegally obtained evidence at criminal trials.
But for years, with the Supreme Court's blessing, they've used a backdoor tactic to get such evidence before juries.
For example, when the defendant takes the witness stand, prosecutors will introduce such evidence during cross-examination - not, in theory, to prove guilt, but to impugn the defendant's credibility.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Cuomo Pledges Rise in Spending In Range of 4%
LEAD: Pledging to keep state spending increases in the next fiscal year below the inflation rate, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would present a tight budget next week that would grow by a little more than 4 percent.


Knight's 229 Leads Big Ten
LEAD: Anderson led an 18-2 second-half run with 11 points as Indiana turned a 6-point deficit into a 10-point lead and a 77-63 victory over Northwestern tonight, making Bob Knight the top-winning coach in Big Ten Conference history.


Upheaval in the East;   U.S. CRITICIZES U.N. OVER BALTIC MOVE
LEAD: The Bush Administration criticized the United Nations today for bowing to Soviet pressure to cut off informal contacts with representatives of Baltic nationalist movements seeking independence from Moscow.


5 Acts at CBGB
LEAD: The Black Rock Coalition will present J. J. Jumpers, Eye and I, Faith, Mascara and Karen Davis on Sunday at CBGB. 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street (982-4052).
Music begins at 9 P.M.; admission is $10.


GORBACHEV URGES LITHUANIA TO STAY WITH SOVIET UNION
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev implored Lithuanians today to remain within the Soviet Union, warning that secession would mean economic calamity for this tiny republic, while weakening Soviet security and endangering his own position and program.


Harold Zyskind Dies; A SUNY Professor, 72
LEAD: Harold Zyskind, professor emeritus of philosophy at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I., died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, on Tuesday at the Veterans Hospital in Northport, L.I.
He was 72 years old and had been in the hospital for the last 15 years.


Panama Needs No Army
LEAD: An army's primary mission is supposed to be the defense of national territory.
In Latin America, that is rarely the reality.
Costa Rica's President, Oscar Arias, proposed on the Op-Ed page this week that Panama abolish its army, as his country did in 1948.
His suggestion makes good sense.


Drew Middleton of The Times Dies at 76
LEAD: Drew Middleton, who covered World War II and postwar Europe for The New York Times and later served as the newspaper's military correspondent, died quietly in his sleep Wednesday night at his apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
The Polo for Brunch


Stallings Replacing Curry at Alabama
LEAD: The University of Alabama, where the pressure of being head football coach is so intense that Bill Curry left after a 10-2 season, yesterday hired as Curry's replacement Gene Stallings, who has a losing record as both a college and a professional coach.


Thames Controls Reeves
LEAD: Thames Television P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it had been tendered about 12.2 million shares, or 96.2 percent, in its $7-a-share bid for the Reeves Communications Corporation, a New York television production company.
Thames said the remaining Reeves shares will be acquired in a merger at the same price as soon as possible.


Blues and Zydeco
LEAD: Fernest and the Thunders, a blues and zydeco band from Lafayette, La., is appearing tonight through Sunday at Tramps, 45 West 21st Street.
Sets begin at 8:30 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M. tonight and tomorrow, 8 and 10:30 P.M. and midnight on Sunday; there is a $12 cover ($10 on Sunday) and a two-drink minimum at tables.


Clean Subways Are Emphasized By Transit Head
LEAD: The new president of the New York City Transit Authority vowed yesterday to continue the rebuilding begun by his predecessor.
He also described the subway system as unfriendly and said he would emphasize improving the appearance of trains and stations.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''My personal fate is linked to this choice. The two states must live together.''
- President Gorbachev, addressing Lithuanian on separatism.
[A1:6.]


McGraw-Hill Purchase
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. said this week that it had acquired TAB Books Inc., a publisher of nonfiction books, for an undisclosed amount.
TAB Books, based in Blue Ridge Summit, Pa., publishes books in 12 fields including computing, electronics, aviation, engineering and several how-to subjects.
The company will become part of McGraw-Hill's professional publishing division.


Jackson, Barkley Are Fined For Bets
LEAD: Mark Jackson, the Knicks' playmaker, and Charles Barkley, the Philadelphia 76ers' All-Star forward, paid yesterday for what Commissioner David Stern called the informal wagers between themselves in the game Wednesday night.


Review/Theater;   A New View of Israel's History, in 'The Return'
LEAD: A note in the program for ''The Return,'' Frederic Glover's play at the Jewish Repertory Theater about conflict between two leading Zionists, alerts the audience to something that is often left unsaid in television docudrama.


Victor J. Maritato, Priest, 65
LEAD: The Rev.
Victor J. Maritato, a priest in the Diocese of Brooklyn who had served as a Navy chaplain for 21 years, died Sunday at his home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 65 years old.


Restaurants
LEAD: If one were to study up-to-date restaurant-industry consumer research, read all the media soothsaying about dining in the 1990's and then go out and build a new restaurant, it would probably resemble Ten Twenty-Two.
Christopher Idone, the owner (and the co-founder of the caterer Glorious Foods), is nothing if not canny about popular taste.


No Headline
LEAD: Poland's sweeping new economic reform plan has just one goal: to increase economic growth.
To achieve that goal, the Government is relying on companies like Dresso, one of the nation's largest sportswear makers.


Georgie Auld, 70; Was a Saxophonist With the Big Bands
LEAD: Georgie Auld, a saxophonist who played with Bunny Berigan, Artie Shaw and Benny Goodman, died of lung cancer on Monday at his home here.
He was 70 years old.


Federal Officials Order Exxon to Explain Leak in Arthur Kill
LEAD: Already facing the threat of lawsuits and criminal prosecution by the attorneys general of two states, the Exxon Corporation was ordered yesterday to explain to Federal environmental officials what caused the leak of more than a half-million gallons of oil from a pipeline off Staten Island 11 days ago.


Treasury Security Prices Down
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in very sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers moved to the sidelines in advance of two important economic reports today.


Chronicle
LEAD: The wedding took place outdoors in Port Antonio, Jamaica, on New Year's Day in a stylistically suitable Palladian ruin befitting JOHN F. SALADINO, the interior designer who has said that a living room ''is meant to have the feeling of age and decay.''


Juliet Berto, Actress, 42
LEAD: Juliet Berto, who starred in the Jean-Luc Godard films ''Weekend,'' ''La Chinoise'' and ''Le Gai Savoir,'' died of cancer on Wednesday.
She was 42 years old.


Hong Kong Journal;   Help! Wicked Satirist Is Loose. Colony Skewered.
LEAD: Larry Feign's Hong Kong Chinese are shameless racists who love to gamble, toss garbage out their apartment windows and make money.
A greedy, materialistic lot, they prefer stability and prosperity to democratic freedoms.


Philippines Says U.S. Is Violating Bases Pact
LEAD: Manila accused the United States today of violating provisions in an agreement on two United States military bases in the Philippines and warned that the issue could affect negotiations on the bases' future.


An Early Independence Is Now Seen for Namibia
LEAD: Aided by a spirit of conciliation that has overtaken its long-contentious political factions, Namibia could be ready to declare its independence ahead of schedule, officials involved in the process say.


Robinson Was Worth The Wait
LEAD: rrThe cooks at the United States Naval Academy used to wonder if any nuclear submarine fuel had been slipping into David Robinson's hardtack and gruel, the way he shot up toward 7 feet on government time.


Market Place;   The Big Losers From Campeau
LEAD: SOME of the biggest losses from Robert Campeau's spending binge on department stores have been borne by individual investors who purchased ''junk bond'' mutual funds that bought large quantities of bonds issued to finance the Campeau Corporation's purchases.


J. Henry Smith, Insurance Leader And New York Official, Dies at 79
LEAD: J. Henry Smith, a former chairman of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States who later became New York City's Human Resources Administrator, died of pneumonia Wednesday in the infirmary of Meadow Lakes, a retirement community in Hightstown, N.J., where he lived.
He was 79 years old.


3 Victories in a Row? Break Up the Nets!
LEAD: Whenever a Nets victory appeared questionable, Purvis Short's jump shot was the answer tonight.


Review/Art;   Al Held's Passage in the 50's From Action to Abstraction
LEAD: ''Beautiful'' and ''graceful'' may have been the last words Al Held would have chosen to describe the paintings he produced between 1953 and 1955.
Adjectives like muscular, crude and raw might have been more in the artist's mind at the time, and they do apply to these Abstract Expressionist works.


Boat Show Opens Today
LEAD: The 80th New York National Boat Show opens today at 10 A.M. in the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan.
Today's session, which runs from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., is for so-called red-carpet visitors, those willing to pay $15 a ticket to avoid the crowds.


Review/Theater;   Language As a Toy, In One-Man Comedy
LEAD: ''Terminal Hip,'' Mac Wellman's ''Spiritual History of America Through the Medium of Bad Language,'' is a post-Joycean Jabberwocky.
Expect no exegesis.
Just sit back and enjoy the torrent of language, as Mr.
Wellman zigzags through time, space and participle.


Review/Film;   Physicality on Many Levels in 'Internal Affairs,' a Police Drama
LEAD: Mike Figgis's films could be watched at any hour, but they're really best suited to the middle of the night.
With only two theatrical features to his credit, the terrific 1988 sleeper ''Stormy Monday'' and now ''Internal Affairs,'' a dizzying police thriller, Mr.
Figgis has established himself as a master of steamy sex appeal and brooding, nocturnal murk.


Chronicle
LEAD: As an 80th birthday present for CHARLES H. DYSON, his family gave more than $12 million to several organizations.
Then they told him they had.


Leary Signs for a Year
LEAD: Tim Leary, who began his major league pitching career with the Mets nine years ago and was acquired by the Yankees in a trade with Cincinnati last month, signed a one-year contract yesterday that will pay him $825,000, a raise of $155,000.


White House Rejects a Tax Cut
LEAD: The White House said today that it opposed Democratic proposals to change the Social Security tax, including one that would cut the amount 130 million workers pay over two years by $62 billion.


Dining Out Guide: Hamburgers
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in Diner's Journal do not have stars.
Prices are current.
Corner Bistro Diner's Journal (Dec. 4, 1987), 331 West Fourth Street (242-9502) - This is a funky neighborhood tavern where regulars gather to watch sports on television.


Workers of the World
LEAD: The most striking development inside the Soviet Union in the past year has been the emergence of a genuine labor movement.


California Says Law on Aliens Fuels Job Bias
LEAD: A state panel in California has concluded that the 1986 immigration law has resulted in widespread job discrimination against Hispanic residents and others.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Monday is the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


Estee Lauder U.S.A. Hires Chief Executive
LEAD: Robin Burns, who climbed quickly in the cosmetics industry with the success of Calvin Klein's Obsession, is going on to a new challenge as president and chief executive of Estee Lauder U.S.A., a unit of the cosmetics maker Estee Lauder Inc.


P.L.O.'s Lebanon Commander Threatens to Attack
LEAD: The commander of P.L.O. guerrillas in the Sidon area of southern Lebanon threatened today to retaliate for attacks against his men by Lebanese Shiite Muslim militiamen.


Iran Welcomes Offer By Moscow on Talks
LEAD: Iran has welcomed an offer by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, to sponsor a meeting of Iranian and Iraqi foreign ministers to break the deadlock in talks on the Gulf war, the Iranian press agency I.R.N.A. said today.


A Frustrated Bronco Receiver Seeks More Moments in the Sun
LEAD: It was late morning and the sun had already risen high above the field where the Denver Broncos were preparing to begin their day of work.
Mark Jackson stepped into the warmth, seated himself on a table and squinted into the glare that has suddenly returned after a season that still somehow seems lost and full of misery.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Kellogg Co., Battle Creek, Mich., appointed Carlos M. Gutierrez vice president for product development.


Ballet Theater to Receive $1 Million
LEAD: American Ballet Theater announced yesterday that it will receive a bequest of $1 million from Eugenia Doll, the philanthropist and former wife of the choreographer Leonide Massine.
The company said the bequest by Mrs.
Doll, who created the role of the Flower Girl in Massine's ''Gaite Parisienne,'' was earmarked for its newly established endowment fund.


Islanders Move Into 2d; LaFontaine Streak at 11
LEAD: Pat LaFontaine extended his goal-scoring streak to a club-record 11 games with his league-high 39th goal and added five assists tonight as the Islanders beat the Minnesota North Stars, 8-4, for their fifth consecutive victory.


A Cigarette Campaign Under Fire
LEAD: Here in the root and stalk of tobacco country, everyone knows that marketing something that carries a health warning from the Surgeon General is bound to provoke an argument.
Mix in race and you really have a shouting match.
Just ask the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.


Cairo Ousts Hard-Line Interior Minister
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak dismissed his Interior Minister today in what seemed intended as a show of increased authority.
The announcement signaled the most dramatic change of the political lineup here in months.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Canada
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,268,000
14,822,000
Net inc
1,061,000
1,047,000
Share earns
.49
.48
Yr rev
67,871,000
65,746,000
Net inc
4,828,000
4,255,000
Share earns
2.23
1.96


Datapoint Suitors
LEAD: Martin Ackerman, a New York businessman, and Fidenas International Bank Ltd. of Nassau, the Bahamas, said they had told the Datapoint Corporation they were interested in exploring the possibility of acquiring the company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Ackerman and Fidenas said they jointly hold a 7.4 percent stake.


Wordstar International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wordstar International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,402,000
9,656,000
Net loss
2,826,000
2,607,000


Treasury Bond Prices Fall Sharply
LEAD: Treasury bond prices tumbled and yields climbed yesterday, largely because of heavy overnight selling of domestic and United States securities by Japanese and European institutions.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Everything went just the way we wanted it to.'' - Capt.


McMartin Jurors Ask About a Split Verdict
LEAD: Jurors in a preschool molestation trial here asked the judge today if they could convict one defendant while acquitting the other of a shared conspiracy charge.


Fur Vault Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fur Vault Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Revenue
38,394,000
35,743,000
Net loss
2,278,000
b27,000
Shares outst
12,544,000
12,559,000
6mo rev
55,293,000
49,319,000
Net loss
4,684,000
2,573,000
Shares outst
12,547,000
12,560,000


Review/Circus;   The Daredevils From Moscow
LEAD: Almost reflecting the way things are going back home, the Moscow Circus moved into Radio City Music Hall on Thursday in a dazzle of spin, whirl and precarious stability.


Marcos Allies Held Liable in Deaths of Foes
LEAD: Two allies of Ferdinand Marcos, the former Philippine President, were found liable in a civil lawsuit today in the killings of two opponents of the Marcos Government who were gunned down in 1981.


Upheaval in the East: Buying Time in Lithuania;   His Choices Severely Limited, Gorbachev Is Forced to Sell the Virtues of Federation
LEAD: Barnstorming across Lithuania this week, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has undertaken the most desperate diplomatic endeavor of his career: a campaign to preserve the integrity of the Soviet Union by personal persuasion.


The U.S. and Panama;   Pilot in Cocaine Ring Is Given 2 Life Terms
LEAD: An American pilot for the Medellin cocaine ring in Colombia was sentenced today to two consecutive life terms and fined $2 million.


Leonard Hutton, 87, A Dealer in Works By German Artists
LEAD: Leonard Hutton, an art dealer specializing in German Expressionist and Russian avant-garde works, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
He also had a home in Southampton, L.I.


City Penalized for Not Fixing Police Radios
LEAD: A judge placed the financially troubled city of East St.
Louis on one year's probation today for potentially endangering its police officers.


Florafax International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florafax International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,023,000
2,095,000
Net loss
219,000
b17,000
b-Net income


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Yes, Yes, Councilman Running for Congress
LEAD: A day after he said no, no, he was not a candidate for Congress, Wendell Foster, a City Councilman from the Bronx, said yesterday that yes, yes, he is a candidate.


Computer Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,647,881
3,391,610
Net loss
51,151
b99,870
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Poles Protest Price Increases
LEAD: A group of young anti-Government protesters broke a window of the National Assembly today and set a fire at Communist Party headquarters to protest recent price increases.
Calling themselves the Intercity Anarchists, the group of about 200 marched to the National Assembly, where the Senate was in session.


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodie Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
34,001,182
27,035,149
Net inc
1,059,908
828,532
Share earns
.21
.16


Free Election Air Time Could End Tax Checkoff
LEAD: To the Editor:


Uncertainty Over Gorbachev Cited as Dollar Rises in U.S.
LEAD: A wave of uncertainty over the political future of the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, pushed the dollar mostly higher in domestic dealings yesterday, overshadowing two bearish reports on the United States economy.


Astronomers Say X-Ray Glow Is Produced in Active Galaxies
LEAD: The glow of X-ray radiation that suffuses the universe, mysterious since its discovery 28 years ago, is apparently issuing from distant galaxies that are giving birth to new stars, astronomers said today.


The U.S. and Panama;   Congressman Criticizes Use Of Stealth Plane in Panama
LEAD: The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee today praised the military's planning and execution of the strike in Panama but criticized the use of the Stealth fighter plane as ''show biz.''


Is New York's Tax Cut Slipping Away?
LEAD: It appears Gov.
Mario Cuomo is preparing to torpedo the state income tax cut millions of New Yorkers were expecting this year.
No other conclusion can be drawn from his State of the State message, where in 178 pages of text he never once mentioned the pending reduction.
The omission casts a shadow over the final phase of the four-year Tax Reduction


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delchamps Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
235,440,000
224,981,000
Net inc
2,806,000
b81,000
Share earns
.39
-
6mo sales
470,143,000
446,815,000
Net inc
5,769,000
2,893,000
Share earns
.81
.38


Premier Resources Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Resources Ltd.
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,789,000
3,505,000
Net loss
1,000
b1,405,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
11,055,054
5,387,675
b-Net income and included an extraordinary credit of $668,000, or 12 cents a share.


Sonics' Ellis Is Injured In Traffic Accident
LEAD: Dale Ellis, who is leading the Seattle SuperSonics in scoring with a 23.6-point average, suffered a collapsed lung in a traffic accident early yesterday and will be out indefinitely, the club announced.
He was arrested for investigation of reckless driving and driving while intoxicated but was not taken into police custody because of his injuries.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Monday is the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


Preparing Tax Returns On Home Computers
LEAD: As income-tax time approaches, growing numbers of Americans are using personal computers to complete their returns.


Price Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Price Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 24
1989
1988
Sales
1,817,000,000
1,567,000,000
Net inc
44,300,000
38,900,000
Share earns
.86
.76
Shares outst
49,847,000
49,346,000
Latest quarter represents 16 weeks.


Accugraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Accugraph Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,800,000
3,800,000
Net loss
165,000
738,000
Results are in Canadian funds.


Grains Mixed, Soybeans Off After Crop-Report Release
LEAD: Prices of grain futures were mixed and soybeans futures closed lower yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade in reaction to the release of a crop report by the Agriculture Department.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in Weekend yesterday about holiday activities for the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. misstated the day for a video program at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street.
It is 11 A.M. to 1 P.M. tomorrow, not today.


About New York;   Barroom Wizard Sure Plays Up A Pinball Mien
LEAD: Some weeks ago, a big fellow in a Times Square saloon had presented himself as the best pinball player in the world. ''The Joe Montana of the Silver Ball'' was a phrase that kept careening around one columnist's gray matter.
Probably just another barroom braggart, but still . . .


Walter J. Brownstone, Executive, 89
LEAD: Walter J. Brownstone, the former president of a chain of clothing stores, died Thursday at his home in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Hong Kong Calls China Talks Useful but Sees No Progress
LEAD: The Governor of Hong Kong said today that his three days of talks with Chinese officials had been useful, but neither side reported major progress in easing tensions between Hong Kong and Beijing.


How to Deter Purse Thieves
LEAD: Officer Merri Pearsall of the New York City Police Department's Crime Prevention Unit suggests that people who carry purses and shoulder bags take these precautions to deter thieves:


Cordiality Marks Dinkins's First Pilgrimage to Albany


Salvadoran Leftist Abducted
LEAD: A prominent Salvadoran leftist was kidnapped today in the Guatemalan capital, party officials said.
Hector Oqueli Colindres, deputy secretary general of the National Revolutionary Movement, was seized with a Guatemalan woman who was driving him to the airport, the group said in a statement released in San Salvador.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: NICOLA RESCIGNO waves his baton over the Dallas Opera for the last time tomorrow.
Mr.
Rescigno has resigned, effective after tomorrow's matinee, as artistic director and principal conductor, positions he has held since 1957 when he co-founded the company with Lawrence V. Kelly.


Patents;   States Held Immune on Infringement
LEAD: In a decision viewed by some experts as a blow to inventors, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington has ruled that state governments are immune from charges of patent infringement.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-9
Plans for a new security force in East Germany were scrapped by Prime Minister Hans Modrow under pressure from the public and the opposition.
Page 1
News analysis: Separatists in Lithuania have presented President Gorbachev one of the most difficult diplomatic tests of his career.


Virginia Adloff, 86, A Writer on Africa And Southeast Asia
LEAD: Virginia Thompson Adloff, an author and teacher who wrote extensively on the countries of Southeast Asia and French-speaking Africa, died on Tuesday at the home of her sister in La Jolla, Calif.
She was 86 years old and a longtime resident of Manhattan.


In Everett, the Rams Trust
LEAD: If the San Francisco 49ers are entering the National Conference championship game as the team of the last decade, then what are the Los Angeles Rams?
Frustrated, for sure.
While the other teams in the National Football League futilely tried to match the 49ers' mastery in the 1980's, the Rams know how tedious that task has been in a special way.


Mascott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mascott Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
599,800
-
Net loss
77,900
30,100
9mo rev
1,425,800
-
Net loss
498,300
36,300
The company opened its first restaurant in March 1989 and did not have operating revenue in the prior fiscal year.


Japan Goes Full Throttle on Tests of Magnetic Levitation Trains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bronx Principal Named in Cover-Up Is Suspended
LEAD: A Bronx principal was suspended yesterday, one day after an investigative commission accused him of hiring a teacher with an arrest record and covering up allegations that the teacher had sexually molested two students.


COMPUTER MAKERS HALT A CHALLENGE TO JAPANESE CHIPS
LEAD: A trail-blazing attempt at cooperation among American manufacturers in the face of a challenge from Japanese industry is being abandoned because it has failed to attract enough investors, people in the computer industry said today.


Cost-Reduction Steps Are Begun by G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it was beginning a new round of cost-cutting measures, including voluntary separation packages for salaried employees, in the face of depressed revenue and profits from the North American car market.


Schembechler Scolded
LEAD: James E. Delany, the commissioner of the Big Ten Conference, yesterday publicly reprimanded Bo Schembechler, the former football coach at Michigan, for comments ''unduly critical of a game official'' made after the Wolverines' 17-10 loss to Southern California in the Rose Bowl on New Year's Day.


A. Schulman reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A. Schulman (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
164,656,000
160,886,000
Net inc
7,565,000
6,775,000
Share earns
.56
.50
Shares outst
13,398,208
13,392,291
Share earnings have been adjusted for the 3-for-2 stock split paid in the form of a 50-percent stock dividend on March 22, 1989.


Court Allows New York City To Take Over Welfare Hotel
LEAD: New York City said yesterday that it had won court approval to take over a bankrupt welfare hotel on West 43d Street that has been cited for more than 1,000 code violations.


Staff Builders Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
46,693,000
47,019,000
Net inc
102,000
1,042,000
Share earns
-
.14
9mo rev
142,701,000
125,861,000
Net inc
679,000
2,814,000
Share earns
.05
.38


Dr. Joseph J. Copeland, 82, Dies; Led City College in Turbulent Era
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph John Copeland, a biologist who became acting president of City College at the height of racial turbulence there in May 1969, died of pneumonia on Thursday at the Paul Kimball Medical Center in Lakewood, N.J.
He was 82 years old and had moved to a retirement community in Lakewood from Mount Vernon, N


Zavitz Technology reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zavitz Technology
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,769,573
10,164,846
Net loss
b201,374
c581,606
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $76,026, or 1 cent a share.
c-Net income
The 1988 results represented a 10- month period.


The Times Names 3 Editors
LEAD: Appointments to three major editing positions at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the newspaper's executive editor.


Designcraft Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designcraft Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,607,000
13,654,000
Net inc
754,000
28,000
Share earns
.31
.01
9mo sales
26,059,000
36,372,000
Net loss
2,125,000
193,000
The company said latest quarter and 9 months figures included income before taxes of $1,628,000 from liquidation of LIFO inventories.


Frederick Hurd, 86, Investment Counselor
LEAD: Frederick Hurd, a retired investment counselor and a trustee of the Children's Aid Society, died of a heart attack on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Applying for State Grants
LEAD: Seminars to assist cultural organizations and individuals in obtaining grants from the New York State Council on the Arts are to be held on Tuesday and Thursday at the offices of the Arts Council, 915 Broadway, at 21st Street.
The Tuesday seminar is to be open to new applicants; the Thursday session is for previous applicants.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After eight months of campaigning and three post-election vacations, RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI is back at his desk at White &amp; Case, the Manhattan law firm where he is a partner.
The question is: for how long?


A Furless Joy
LEAD: It is now O.K. to join a crowd and hiss people who wear fur coats.


Amserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amserv Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,070,747
2,121,211
Net inc
344,252
239,793
Share earns
.11
.09
Shares outst
3,123,295
2,811,178
6mo sales
6,160,684
3,991,603
Net inc
701,164
494,906
Share earns
.23
.18
Shares outst
3,114,055
2,813,938


What Brooklynites Really Miss Isn't Loehmann's, but Ebinger's;   What Might Have Been
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reserve Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reserve Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,103,155
2,123,584
Net inc
52,988
b112,503
Share earns
.03
.06
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $447,543, or 23 cents a share, which included a gain of $305,224 from extinguishment of debt and $142,319 from tax loss carryforward.


Columbia Snares Its 11-Ton Quarry After a Hunt in Space


Retrieved Craft Tested Stealth Materials
LEAD: One of the science experiments on the satellite retrieved yesterday by the space shuttle Columbia is a secret military effort to make ''Stealth'' satellites that are difficult to track by radar.


Anne Izard, 74, Dies; A Children's Librarian
LEAD: Anne R. Izard, a retired children's librarian in Westchester County, died of complications from cancer on Monday at her home in Gwynedd, Pa.
She was 74 years old.


Congress Is Warned by Bush Not to Cut Pentagon Budget
LEAD: Seeking to fight off deeper cuts in the military budget than those proposed by the Pentagon, President Bush today warned Congress against trying to ''naively cut the muscle out of our defense'' to provide more money for other programs.


Congress Street Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Congress Street Properties
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
154,000
462,000
Net loss
179,000
b83,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
1,075,000
1,129,000
b-Net income


Oak Hill Sportswear reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oak Hill Sportswear (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,000,000
31,117,000
Net loss
1,250,000
b687,000
Share earns
-
.26
Yr sales
118,000,000
115,820,000
Net inc
550,000
2,654,000
Share earns
.26
.86


Upheaval in the East: Albania;   Harsh Security Measures Are Reported in Albania
LEAD: The official Yugoslav press agency reported today that the authorities in Albania had imposed ''extremely strict'' security measures, but a senior Albanian Communist Party leader called the reports of unrest there ''slander.''


Police Wanted to Arrest Commune Leader Before Killings of 5
LEAD: For almost two years, the police in this small town in the Chagrin River Valley watched Jeffrey Lundgren.


Donors' Races to Be Sought To Identify Rare Blood Types
LEAD: To ease a chronic shortage of rare blood types, the New York Blood Center will for the first time begin asking donors to volunteer information about their racial and ethnic backgrounds.


Flanigan's Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flanigan's Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,741,000
7,053,000
Net loss
827,000
732,000
Yr sales
31,673,000
31,719,000
Net loss
1,184,000
603,000


Gtech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gtech Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Revenue
80,497,000
43,686,000
Net inc
3,025,000
b2,687,000
Share earns
.31
.28
9mo rev
140,758,000
106,901,000
Net inc
4,570,000
b4,199,000
Share earns
.47
.44


Temple Player on Center Stage, at Last
LEAD: If Duane Causwell had had the choice when he was growing up in New York, he would have been a baseball player.


Report Cites Officers' Acts In Cell Death
LEAD: A Brooklyn man who died in a police holding cell last week suffocated when officers squeezed his chest and neck while trying to subdue him, the New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday.


Air National Guard Plane Explodes in New Hampshire


Kay Jewelers
LEAD: Kay Jewelers Inc. said that as a result of recent inquiries from third parties about a possible acquisition of the company, it had decided to retain an investment banking firm to advise the board of directors about its alternatives.
No negotiations are in progress, and no agreements have been reached with any party concerning a transaction, the jewelry-chain owner said.


Lithuania and the U in U.S.S.R.
LEAD: Three triumphs for peace and freedom:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Spurs End Slump Against Celtics
San Antonio ended a streak of 20 consecutive losses to the Celtics last night with a 97-90 victory at Boston Garden.
The Spurs, who had not beaten Boston since Jan. 5, 1980, outscored the Celtics by 31-15 in the second quarter for a 56-43 halftime lead, then survived a 9-point third quarter.


Upheaval in the East: Warsaw Pact;   Historians Dig Up Dark Hints Of 1980 Plan to Invade Poland
LEAD: Did the Warsaw Pact plan an invasion of Poland in 1980 to suppress the Solidarity labor movement?
In the heady atmosphere of Eastern Europe these days, it is not hard to find people who believe that it did.


Rebels' Allies Stand Firm in Salvador
LEAD: Every morning he combs the local newspapers, looking anxiously for the names of captured and killed guerrillas.


Selfix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selfix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,158,172
7,510,161
Net inc
649,597
557,094
Share earns
.18
.18
Shares outst
3,532,052
3,066,200
6mo sales
17,425,589
15,601,915
Net inc
1,563,830
1,418,776
Share earns
.44
.51
Shares outst
3,534,027
2,771,976


Wisconsin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Toy (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
22,622,000
17,643,000
Net inc
1,947,000
1,678,000
Share earns
.42
.36
9mo sales
45,475,000
38,922,000
Net inc
2,267,000
2,819,000
Share earns
.49
.61


New Jersey Suit Says Exxon Violated Laws on Pollution
LEAD: New Jersey filed a civil lawsuit yesterday against the Exxon Corporation, charging that the company violated the state's pollution control laws when a pipeline ruptured, releasing more than a half million gallons of heating oil into the Arthur Kill.


Protesters March as Fighting Continues in Lebanon


Another Jet Candidate
LEAD: Vince Tobin, the Chicago Bears' defensive coordinator, was interviewed by Dick Steinberg, the Jets' general manager, last night in San Francisco.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Requiem for a Dictatorship, Sung Slightly Off-Key
LEAD: In many parts of this country, the popular uprising against Rumania's Communist Government was a scene of tragic bloodshed.
But here in the heart of Moldavia, it has unfolded more like an operetta.


Cup Dispute Nears End
LEAD: A two-and-a-half-year court dispute over the America's Cup has moved closer to a resolution.


Itel to Acquire Unit Of Sea Containers
LEAD: Sea Containers Ltd., which last month fought off a hostile takeover bid, agreed to sell its tank container business to the Itel Corporation for about $110 million.
The sale to Itel, based in Chicago, is part of an anti-takeover plan begun last year by the Bermuda-based cargo and ferry operator.
Sea Containers also said it had agreed to sell two vessels to unnamed


Dinkins Seeks Albany's Help In Cordial Talk
LEAD: Despite the friction that usually smolders between state and city governments in times of fiscal gloom, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins began their first budget dance today with a bow of studied cordiality.


Time Doesn't Improve Peary's North Pole Claim
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. PLANS STUDIES OF HOW A-PLANTS
LEAD: Sweeping aside much of the secrecy that has governed the production of nuclear weapons since World War II, the Energy Department announced today that it would prepare two comprehensive studies on the public health and environmental consequences of its program to clean up and modernize atomic weapons plants.


Rumania Bars Communists
LEAD: Bowing to demands of thousands of irate demonstrators, leaders of Rumania's governing Council of National Salvation agreed to outlaw the Communist Party.
Page 7.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
321,125,000
274,475,000
Net inc
14,272,000
11,088,000
Share earns
.46
.36
Shares outst
31,029,314
30,550,440
6mo sales
652,993,000
562,813,000
Net inc
28,699,000
20,750,000
Share earns
.93
.68
Shares outst
30,932,967
30,571,826


Pilot Survives Crash of Jet In a Suburb of Philadelphia
LEAD: A single-seat jet fighter crashed in a heavily populated neighborhood in suburban Philadephia yesterday, but the authorities said the pilot suffered only minor injuries and nobody on the ground was injured.


Three Bystanders Shot on Subway Platform
LEAD: Three bystanders, including a 15-year-old girl, were shot yesterday afternoon on a subway platform in Brooklyn when a man started firing during an argument, the Transit Authority police said.


Parole Board Under Scrutiny In Murder Suspect's Release
LEAD: The State Parole Board decision to release Arthur Shawcross from prison in April 1987 has been sharply criticized after his arrest in the murders of 11 women here over the last 21 months.


Medical Management of America reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Management of America (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,349,000
5,482,000
Net loss
b580,000
c2,582,000
Yr rev
15,282,000
21,292,000
Net loss
b7,921,000
cd568,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Included charges of $375,000 and $6,152,000 for the quarter and year, respectively, related to the company's sale of its non-medical real estate assets.


Earl D. Johnson, 84, Aviation Figure And Cabinet Officer
LEAD: Earl D. Johnson, who was an Under Secretary of the Army and a top executive at General Dynamics and Delta Airlines, died in his sleep on Thursday at a nursing home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Greenwich.


Upheaval in the East: The Baltics;   Nationalists in Vilnius Turn Down Soviet Call for New Secession Law
LEAD: Nationalist leaders in the Soviet republic of Lithuania today rejected a Kremlin call for a new law outlining the procedures when a republic seeks to secede from the Soviet Union.
The proposal was called a ''propagandist trap'' and an ''attempt to deceive the people of Lithuania.''


Wilding Is a Crime, Except in Law
LEAD: Whatever else needs to be done in New York City, we must maintain law and order.
No constructive social program can work if we descend into chaos.


Patents;   Fixed Mortgages Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 9.80 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
That rate was down from a rate of 9.83 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.41 percent this week, up from 8.35 percent the week before.


2 Teen-Agers Arrested In Central Park Attack
LEAD: Two teen-agers were arrested yesterday after their indictment in the attack of two men in the Central Park rampage by a group of youths that ended in the rape and beating of a female jogger last April.


Indian Shift on Bhopal Case
LEAD: The Indian Government said today that its predecessor was wrong to agree to absolve the Union Carbide Corporation of criminal liability in the 1984 Bhopal gas disaster, and it called the $470 million settlement inadequate.


Jack Lazar, Founder Of Knitwear Maker And Style Setter, 79
LEAD: Jack Lazar, the founder of Kimberly Knitwear Inc., in Manhattan, died Thursday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 79 years old.
With his wife, the former Helen Bandow, as the designer, Mr.
Lazar opened the company in 1946.
Over the years, Kimberley's knit dresses and other items came to be fashion staples in wardrobes of women from the Duchess of Windsor to secretaries.


Nets' Brundy Suspended For Drug Use
LEAD: Stanley Brundy, a seldom-used rookie forward with the Nets, has been suspended for the rest of the National Basketball Association season for failing a random drug test.


Review/Film;   Meanwhile, Pops Is Back At the Lodge
LEAD: Beware of movies that feature sweet old men named Pops.
If the writers can't do any better on a name, what can you expect from the rest? ''Ski Patrol'' has a Pops - Ray Walston, in about five brief scenes, as the owner of a resort - and sure enough, it turns out to be a perfect example of the nothing-is-too-obvious school of comedy.


Ziegler Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,630,000
9,859,000
Net inc
1,432,000
1,676,000
Share earns
.54
.57
Yr rev
34,807,000
36,331,000
Net inc
3,149,000
3,509,000
Share earns
1.18
1.15
Shares outst
2,676,311
3,060,019


EAST GERMAN CHIEF SCRAPS NEW PLANS FOR SECRET POLICE
LEAD: The East German Prime Minister bowed today to growing pressure from the public and the opposition and scrapped plans to form a new security service, at least until after the elections scheduled for May.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Home Electronics
LEAD: Each year, thousands of Americans are baffled by the ever-more complicated electronic devices they receive as holiday presents or are tempted to buy at sales.
Service centers say they are flooded with calls from customers who cannot set up or operate their gifts or purchases.


Your Money;   Global Investing For the Cautious
LEAD: The tumultuous events of Eastern Europe in recent weeks have given rise to capitalist hopes, and many small investors have rushed to buy shares of companies that they expect to profit from trade with East Germany, Poland, Hungary and other East bloc nations.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abbott Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,455,424,000
1,306,304,000
Net inc
253,037,000
222,327,000
Share earns
1.14
.99
Yr sales
5,379,751,000
4,936,991,000
Net inc
859,832,000
752,027,000
Share earns
3.85
3.33


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Jan. 2 about air temperature and precipitation gave an incorrect location for Pennsylvania State University.
It is in University Park.


Senate Suggests Arts Grant-Making Panelists
LEAD: The way has been cleared in the Senate for the appointment of members of a Presidential commission that will review the grant-making procedures of the National Endowment for the Arts.


Decade's Nought but 10
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents;   Using Special Viruses To Fight Tooth Decay
LEAD: Alan H. Norris, a chemical engineer in Rome, Ga., has patented a method for fighting tooth decay using customized viruses.


Expansion Set For Disneyland
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company announced today what it called its most ambitious expansion plans ever for its original theme park, the highly profitable 35-year-old Disneyland in Anaheim.
Disney's chairman, Michael


The U.S. and Panama;   Paratroopers Jump Into Welcome-Home Gathering
LEAD: Parachutes filled the sky Friday morning as nearly 2,000 soldiers parachuted to a triumphant return home after invading Panama.


Religion Notes
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor of New York will ordain a married man with four children to the priesthood today.


The U.S. and Panama;   In Tiff Over a Tie, Noriega Is Told: Come as You Are
LEAD: The secret courtroom deliberations in the case of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega are not limited to sensitive matters like national security.
There is also the question of what to wear.


Review/Dance;   'Prodigal Son' Weaves Poignancy and Motion
LEAD: Slight and fair-haired, Ib Andersen is not the prototypical hero of ''The Prodigal Son,'' a signature ballet by Balanchine set to music by Prokofiev.
The role has been defined, in part, by dark and muscled dancers.
But Mr.
Andersen's performance of the title role with the New York City Ballet on Thursday night at the New York State Theater was so poignantly realized that it was almost painful to watch at times.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufman &amp; Broad Home (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
529,896,000
267,903,000
Net inc
30,345,000
17,123,000
Share earns
.88
.63
Shares outst
34,425,000
27,296,000
Yr rev
1,265,211,000
963,225,000
Net inc
81,398,000
48,045,000
Share earns
2.44
1.76
Shares outst
32,793,000
27,263,000


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Martin Newman, a theater executive, misidentified one of his positions.
He was a former executive vice president of Century Theaters, not a former president.


Don't Forget World War II Rumanian Ferocity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Obsession in Boston: Mystery of Couple's Deaths
LEAD: The story of Charles and Carol Stuart has become an obsession here, from the drawing rooms of Back Bay to the bar stools of Revere, the working-class suburb where Mr.
Stuart grew up.


Air France Buying Into 2 Carriers
LEAD: In a move likely to trouble the European Community's antitrust regulators, Air France announced today that it would acquire control of two French airlines: Air Inter, the large French domestic airline, and Union de Transports Aeriens, a long-haul carrier.


Retail Sales Rose 0.2% Last Month
LEAD: Retail sales rose two-tenths of a percent in December, and holiday spending was the weakest since 1985, the Government reported today.
For the year, sales increased 5 percent, the slowest gain in seven years.


Dr. Jerome I. Sashin, Psychiatrist, Dies at 49
LEAD: Dr.
Jerome I. Sashin, a psychiatrist who was chairman of the research committee of the Psychoanalytic Institute of New England East in Needham, Mass., died of lymphoma on Jan. 5 at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 49 years old and lived in Boston.


Analysts Are Cautious On Effort by Campeau
LEAD: The move by the Campeau Corporation on Thursday to establish independence for its troubled American retail operations failed to generate confidence among financial analysts but gave new support to the managers of the Campeau stores.


Upheaval in the East;   Kissinger Predicts Baltic Split
LEAD: Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, said today that the Baltic republics would secede from the Soviet Union despite appeals by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. ''If he has really forsworn the use of force, then he probably cannot control events and then I think the Baltic states will break away,'' he told the BBC.


Sherwood Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwood Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,917,562
1,313,888
Net loss
969,594
4,484,514
Shares outst
13,162,131
12,005,067
6mo rev
7,559,258
5,235,382
Net loss
3,889,828
6,880,976
Shares outst
13,162,131
11,483,967


AIDS Panel Endorses Doctor for Health Post
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said last night that the ''impediment'' against naming Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr. as health commissioner had been removed by his endorsement from a diverse panel of AIDS experts, but the Mayor stopped short of announcing the appointment.


Donald F. Bowler, Investigator, 69
LEAD: Donald F. Bowler, an investigator best known for helping send the gangster Mickey Cohen to prison for tax evasion, was found dead on Tuesday at his home in Canoga Park, Calif.
The cause of death was not made known.
He was 69 years old.
Mr.
Bowler, as intelligence chief of the Internal Revenue Service for Southern California, directed the grand jury investigation in 1960 and 1961 that led to Mr.


As 2 Soviet Teammates Battle, Devils Sit Back and Smile
LEAD: A rivalry that could benefit the Devils immensely is developing between Vyacheslav Fetisov and Aleksei Kasatonov.


Why So Slow?
LEAD: Much has been said about the speed of collapse in Eastern Europe.
It is true that, like an earthquake or an avalanche, the televisual action came all of a sudden.
But it is also true that, like such natural upheavals, the dynamics that triggered the movement were building up for a long time.


Charge Cards That Pick Up the Pieces
LEAD: Now that American Express has set the pace, Mastercard and Visa are running close behind in providing charge-card programs that insure purchases against loss, damage or breakage.


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salick Health Care (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
16,432,000
11,139,000
Net inc
1,005,000
1,003,000
Share earns
.18
.18


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost ;   Reviewing Investments
LEAD:
The first quarter of the new year is a good time to review or plan personal investment portfolios.
Thus far many market strategists are making stocks the early choice as the lead component for most portfolios.
Inflation is in check and the economy is gradually slowing, lowering interest rates.
Stocks and bonds benefit from lower rates.


AIDS Doctor Is Asked Details About Needle
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego testified under persistent cross-examination yesterday that she could not remember many details of the incident when she accidentally pricked her finger with an AIDS-contaminated needle.


Buenos Aires Journal;   Carlos, Carlos, How Does Your Economy Sink?
LEAD: As President Carlos Saul Menem struggles to salvage and reform the chaotic Argentine economy, he suffers a daily dose of front-page advice and criticism from a tennis-playing friend who thinks he could do it better.


As Market Struggles, So Do Some Co-op Buildings
LEAD: At least 88 residential cooperatives with nearly 9,000 apartments in the New York City area are facing severe financial difficulties.
And the number of such co-ops is growing, causing concern among owners and in the State Attorney General's office, which monitors co-op conversions.


Northern Calloway, Actor, 41, on Stage And 'Sesame Street'
LEAD: Northern J. Calloway, who played David, the proprietor of Mr.
Hooper's store, on public television's ''Sesame Street,'' died Tuesday.
He was 41 years old and lived in Ossining, N.Y.


U.S. and Britain Near Air Pact
LEAD: Britain and the United States are near a short-term agreement to expand air services between the two countries, the British Transport Secretary, Cecil Parkinson, said today.


RJR Nabisco Leaving The PGA Tour in 1991
LEAD: The most powerful player in professional golf's money boom, RJR Nabisco Inc., will sever its major ties with the PGA Tour beginning in 1991.


After Fatal Purse-Theft, A 'Safe' Area Is Edgy
LEAD: Park Avenue at 92d Street is in a neighborhood that residents call peaceful and beautiful.
When the Brick Church preschool lets out, mothers, nannies and children crowd the sidewalk.
Doormen help tenants with grocery bags.
Elderly women stroll ''the Avenue.''


Century Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Communications Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
54,470,000
47,357,000
Net loss
15,193,000
6,648,000
Shares outst
65,269,000
65,165,000
6mo rev
107,349,000
90,960,000
Net loss
29,602,000
8,846,000
Shares outst
65,247,000
65,163,000


Upheaval in ht e East;   Pope Praises Christian Role In Collapse of Communism
LEAD: Pope John Paul II pronounced a stinging epitaph for Communism in Europe today but said the road to a world of freedom and justice was strewn with obstacles.


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canandaigua Wine (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
43,671,588
40,245,150
Net inc
1,189,837
635,877
Share earns
.28
.13
Shares outst
4,279,102
4,792,430


Moffat Communication reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Moffat Communication
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,375,000
18,515,000
Net inc
1,556,000
1,698,000
Share earns
.32
.35
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Frost Flirts With Record
LEAD: David Frost came within a stroke of the PGA Tour's 18-hole scoring record today when he shot a 12-under-par 60 in the second round of the Tucson Open.
Only a bogey on the 16th hole of his round, the seventh on the Randolph Park municipal course, prevented Frost from matching the 59 Al Geiberger shot at the 1977 Memphis


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about violence in Kashmir gave an incorrect date for India's independence.
It was 1947.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hi-Shear Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,929,000
18,699,000
Net loss
652,000
400,000
6mo rev
42,686,000
35,867,000
Net loss
690,000
b100,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


A Good Place to Act Affirmatively
LEAD: In the broadcasting field, white males are anything but an endangered species.
A decade ago blacks and Hispanics owned less than 1 percent of the nation's radio and television licenses.
Modest Federal Communications Commission programs have doubled that rate - to 2 percent.
Yet two of those programs are under constitutional attack in the Supreme Court.


Upheaval in the East: Caucasus;   Irate Azerbaijanis Seize Radio Station
LEAD: Azerbaijanis blockaded government offices and seized a radio station in a Caspian Sea port, and Georgians demanding independence drove bureaucrats from their offices in the Caucasus, according to reports in Moscow today The turmoil coincided with a visit to Lithuania by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who is trying to counter an independence drive in that


71.46 Drop Puts Dow At 2,689.21
LEAD: Stock prices tumbled yesterday amid new concerns about higher interest rates and a resurgence of inflation.
The drop followed declines in other important stock markets around the world.


Overtime: Knicks' Standard Time
LEAD: The Knicks defeated the Indiana Pacers, 101-96, in overtime tonight.


Senior Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Senior Service Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,079,449
2,263,433
Net loss
514,646
b839
6mo rev
6,344,593
4,278,414
Net loss
534,096
b67,397
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income
The company attributed the losses in part to unrealized net foreign exchange losses of $328,179 in the quarter and $339,780 in the 6 months.


Canadiens Manage a Rare Road Victory as Devil Defense Falters
LEAD: Don't tell the Devils the Canadiens are having problems playing away from home.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Rumanian Leaders Outlaw Ousted Communist Party
LEAD: Bowing to demands of thousands of irate demonstrators, leaders of Rumania's governing Council of National Salvation agreed tonight to outlaw the Communist Party and to hold a national referendum on restoring the death penalty.


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro-Catheter Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,942,160
1,997,435
Net loss
258,981
429,067


Bankruptcy: Some Hard Calculations
LEAD: A decision to file for bankruptcy requires a difficult trade-off: a company gains time, but loses autonomy.


Review/Cabaret;   Bach, Rock and Musical Comedy
LEAD: Midway through ''Two Guys and a Piano,'' the new show at the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street) on Tuesday evening, the musical comedy duo of Bill Daugherty and Robin Field broke into a suite of songs from ''South Pacific'' that illustrated their musical strengths more strikingly than anything they have done in the past.


Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wall to Wall Sound &amp; Video Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
39,538,000
32,758,000
Net loss
494,000
394,000
9mo sales
109,820,000
93,098,000
Net loss
2,255,000
891,000


IMC Fertilizer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IMC Fertilizer Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
263,200,000
310,800,000
Net inc
21,900,000
37,000,000
Share earns
.83
1.40
6mo sales
514,200,000
579,400,000
Net inc
41,900,000
68,500,000
Share earns
1.59
2.66


Stretch Limousines: Is Party Over?
LEAD: The market for stretch limousines - the new-money status symbols of the 1980's - is shrinking.


Japan Does Good, and Well
LEAD: It's a stylized performance.
The politician up for re-election dons the statesman's mask and travels abroad in search of good visuals.
But the trip to Europe by Prime Minister Kaifu of Japan is no mere ritual play for attention.
It's the clearest sign yet that Japan is ready to use its economic power for responsible political ends.


Books of The Times;   A Politician Indicted By His Associates' Wit
LEAD:
The Lone Star
The Life of John Connally
By James Reston Jr.
Illustrated. 691 pages. Edward Burlingame Book/Harper &amp; Row. $25.


Oxygen for Sale
LEAD: Portable oxygen is now being sold as a ''pick-me-up.'' Doctors say it doesn't do anything of the sort.


Pentagon Imposes a Hiring Freeze That Could Eliminate 50,000 Jobs
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney announced today that he had imposed a freeze on civilian hiring through Oct. 1, a move that Pentagon officials said would probably eliminate more than 50,000 jobs from a work force of 1.05 million civilians.


Temtex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temtex Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,323,000
12,785,000
Net inc
b265,000
189,000
Share earns
.11
.08
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $82,000, or 3 cents a share, from a tax credit.


Hurricane Relief Is Said to Skip Many Poor
LEAD: Thousands of rural poor people have been bypassed by relief efforts since Hurricane Hugo smashed into the coast, nearly four months ago, community leaders say.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ALAN MIRKEN, vice chairman of Random House is leaving that position at the end of the month.


Shuttle Astronauts Snare a Battered Science Satellite
LEAD: After a three-day chase round and round the world, the astronauts of the space shuttle Columbia caught up with a bus-size science satellite today, snared it with a robot arm and tucked it away in the cargo bay for the trip home to Earth.


LaFontaine and Islanders Filling Seats and Fueling Hopes tickets may be.
LEAD: The first time the lowly Quebec Nordiques visited the Islanders this season, on Nov. 9, the announced attendance at Nassau Coliseum was 10,307.
That included a walk-up sale of 390 tickets on the day of the game, recalled Jim Johnson, director of sales.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the most exciting bidding environments is never faced by tournament players.
It occurs in Chicago (four-deal) bridge, or in traditional rubber bridge, when both sides are vulnerable and both sides have a part score.
Consequently almost any part score may earn a vulnerable game bonus, and innocuous hands become crucial.


Six Musicians to Open Highlights in Jazz Series
LEAD: The 17th annual Highlights in Jazz series opens at 8 P.M. on Feb. 1 at New York University, Loeb Student Center, 566 La Guardia Place, with a concert by six noted musicians.


Real-Estate Investment Concern Bears Its Founder's Image
LEAD: Time Equities, the real-estate investment company whose investments in renter-occupied cooperatives have been hurt by a slow sales market, is synonymous with one individual, Francis Greenburger, 41 years old, who founded it 20 years ago.


Upheaval in the East;   Czechoslovaks Pursue Diplomatic Initiatives
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's new coalition Government is energetically exploring new avenues in foreign relations in Eastern and Western Europe and farther afield.


Corrections
LEAD: A theater review yesterday about ''The Return,'' a play by Frederic Glover at the Jewish Repertory Theater, misidentified the director in some editions.
He is Michael Bloom, not Byam Stevens.


What Brooklynites Really Miss Isn't Loehmann's, but Ebinger's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East: Arms Control;   U.S. May Revise Its Position On Concealing Missile Data
LEAD: As the Bush Administration moves toward completion of a strategic arms treaty with the Soviet Union, officials have been struggling to refine a longstanding and seemingly simple American proposal for unfettered access to data on missile tests.


First Boston To Absorb Voute Coats
LEAD: Five former Salomon Brothers executives, who last year founded a bond-trading ''boutique'' called Voute Coats Stuart &amp; O'Grady, will be joining the First Boston Corporation, the two companies announced yesterday.


Upheaval in ht e East: Bulgaria;   ACCORD IN SOFIA ON ETHNIC DISPUTE
LEAD: Government and opposition representatives reached an agreement today aimed at defusing ethnic tension between Bulgarians and Muslims.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY, 13, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


The U.S. and Panama;   Noriega Judge Orders Lawyers Not to Talk About Move of General
LEAD: In another move to tighten security in the case of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, a Federal district judge today ordered lawyers not to discuss with reporters a possible move of the defendant from downtown Miami.


Upheaval in the East: Washington;   Tough Choice for the U.S.: Baltic States or Gorbachev
LEAD: The drive for independence in Lithuania and the other Baltic states has presented the United States with a diplomatic quandary, Administration officials said today.


When the Playwright's the President, Now That's Really a Premiere
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's most prominent playwright, President Vaclav Havel, was finally able this week to see the Prague premiere of a play he wrote 16 years ago.
So were a few lucky members of the public, which packed the tiny Cinoherni theater off Wenceslas Square for four performances of ''Audience'' this week.


Langer Biomechanics Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Langer Biomechanics Group
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,363,000
3,593,000
Net inc
34,000
252,000
Share earns
.01
.10
9mo sales
9,778,000
9,690,000
Net loss
94,000
b235,000
Share earns
-
.09
b


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.12
9.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.56
8.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.44
7.41
8.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.06
8.00
9.10
30-YR.


Review/Film;   A Preppy Policeman Cast Into the Inner City
LEAD: The Beach Boys and several rap groups slug it out for supremacy in ''Downtown,'' a film that contrasts the cushy working conditions enjoyed by policemen along Philadelphia's Main Line (computer-equipped offices, freshly ground coffee beans) with those endured by their inner city counterparts (shootouts in the office practically every day).


Stanley Wilson Jailed
LEAD: Stanley Wilson, the Cincinnati Bengals running back who was banned from the National Football League for using cocaine the night before the Super Bowl last year, was arrested yesterday in Gardena, Calif., for possession of drug paraphernalia, the police said.
Wilson missed the 1985 and 1987 N.F.L.


Webster, 63, Dies; Actress and Art Dealer
LEAD: Nell Webster, an actress and art dealer, died of ovarian cancer on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 63 years old.
Miss Webster was named Gloria Caroline Gall when she was born, in New York City.
She changed her name when she became an actress.
For a decade, she appeared at clubs throughout the United


Melamine Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melamine Chemicals (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,962,000
10,215,000
Net inc
1,501,000
1,522,000
Share earns
.28
.28
Shares outst
5,454,645
5,450,000
6mo sales
18,693,000
19,508,000
Net inc
2,984,000
3,121,000
Share earns
.55
.57
Shares outst
5,455,207
5,450,000


International Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Electronics Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
985,228
710,102
Net inc
7,918
b36,516
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Review/Dance;   Of Movement for Movement's Sake
LEAD: Movement as movement was the thing for two choreographers, Randy Warshaw and Mark Dendy, in the second program Thursday night in the ''Manmade'' series.


The Little Engine That Might
LEAD: General Motors's new Impact electric car works, but the assembly line is still far off.
G.M. must first establish the car's economic viability, then develop production technology.
Even so, the prototype is a welcome demonstration that battery power has a future beyond golf carts.


At 85, Shirer Rounds Out His Story
LEAD: William L. Shirer, now 85 years old and, by his own admission, slowing down a bit, gives this illustration of what he calls his lucky habit of being in the right place at the right time.


Rochester Slaying Suspect Is Called Kind but Violent
LEAD: For Christmas, Arthur Shawcross gave one female friend a new coffee maker, and another a set of steak knives.
He baked pies and cookies.
And between the 15th and 26th of December, the police say, he killed three prostitutes, the last of 11 women he is accused of slaying since March 1988.


Canadian Home Shopping reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Home Shopping
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
12,100,000
12,500,000
Net loss
1,600,000
1,900,000
Results are in Canadian funds.


Software Services of America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Services of America Inc.  (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
233,699
3,075,361
Net loss
621,145
b94,068
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
1,019,513
3,786,227
Net loss
837,804
b88,958
Share earns
-
.04


Ford Selling Aerospace Unit As Military Spending Slows
LEAD: Facing a slowdown in military spending and continued retrenchment in the auto business, the Ford Motor Company has said it will sell its Ford Aerospace subsidiary.


Valley Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Resources Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,802,000
11,918,000
Net inc
26,500
78,000
Share earns
.01
.02


Poignant Words Add to Gifts For the Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: ''When I was warm on these past frigid December nights I heard the wind wailing the suffering of the cold and lonely people And wished I could help.''


Tide West Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tide West Oil Co.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
459,633
545,236
Net inc
103,662
7,754
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
1,564,978
1,544,275
Net inc
431,444
164,139
Share earns
.05
.02


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Printronix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
30,838,000
31,850,000
Net inc
1,052,000
b2,998,000
Share earns
.27
-
Shares outst
3,905,814
4,582,935
9mo sales
91,974,000
103,665,000
Net inc
1,682,000
b1,324,000
Share earns
.40
-
Shares outst
4,211,761
4,582,011


Upheaval in the East: The Baltics;   Nationalists in Vilnius Turn Down Soviet Call for New Secession Law
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev implored Lithuanians today to remain within the Soviet Union, warning that secession would mean economic calamity for this tiny republic, while weakening Soviet security and endangering his own position and program.


Four Are Accused of Trying to Buy Antiaircraft Missile for the I.R.A.
LEAD: Four people believed to be members of the Irish Republican Army were arrested today while trying to buy an antiaircraft missile and other weapons from undercover agents, the Government announced.


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,774,931
9,604,644
Net inc
247,169
152,209
Share earns
.06
.03
9mo sales
29,863,486
28,442,800
Net inc
673,789
608,072
Share earns
.15
.13


SPORTS OF THE TIMES
LEAD: As he lay in a ward in Harlem Hospital, with five other patients and no telephone, he said he remembered how the crowd at Madison Square Garden would chant his name: ''Wing-o!
Wing-o!'' It usually came late in the game.
He had sat at the end of the Knicks' bench, his bony knees nearly hiding his eyes, as he heard the appeal for him to play.


Tele-Metropole reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tele-Metropole
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
36,814,000
33,319,000
Net inc
371,000
3,548,000
Share earns
.05
.45
Figures for 1988 were restated.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Egypt Cotton Profits Off
LEAD: Cotton, once known as Egypt's ''white gold,'' faces another year of much lower profits in 1989-90 as farmers grow less and imports rise.
Cotton exports are expected to earn Egypt about $200 million this season, the Egyptian Cotton Authority said Thursday, down about $100 million from last season.
Egypt also expects to import 130,000 bales of United States cotton in the 1989-90 season, up from 100,000 bales the year before.


Systerm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systerm Inc.
Qtr to Nov 3
1989
1988
Sales
2,264,021
4,470,702
Net loss
b2,657,596
c80,439
Share earns
-
.01
9mo sales
8,696,186
16,529,993
Net loss
b3,713,133
c134,517
Share earns
-
.02
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $2,421,253 for the quarter and 9 months.


Lyle Wheeler, 84; Art Director Won 5 Academy Awards
LEAD: Lyle Wheeler, an art director who won five Academy Awards for such classics as ''Gone With the Wind'' and ''The Diary of Anne Frank,'' died of pneumonia on Wednesday at the Motion Picture Country Home and Hospital in Woodland Hills.
He was 84 years old.


Producer Prices Up 4.8% in '89, Most in 8 Years
LEAD: Paced by big increases for energy and tobacco, producer prices jumped seven-tenths of 1 percent in December to bring 1989 inflation by this measure to 4.8 percent, the highest rate since 1981.


EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,729,800
7,733,100
Net inc
413,200
347,500
Share earns
.17
.14
Shares outst
2,480,000
2,455,100


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
92,992,000
83,059,000
Net inc
b518,000
7,095,000
Share earns
.02
.34
9mo rev
231,014,000
200,155,000
Net inc
b7,166,000
c16,049,000
Share earns
.34
.77


Patents;   A 'Videowindow' For Teleconferences
LEAD: Two engineers at Bellcore, a research consortium owned jointly by the ''Baby Bell'' regional telephone companies, have patented a ''videowindow'' that they said makes participants in a long-distance teleconference feel as if they are in the same room.


Inside
LEAD:
Campeau Move Is Examined


Clayton Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clayton Homes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
55,340,000
53,783,000
Net inc
3,243,000
3,054,000
Share earns
.20
.19
6mo rev
118,320,000
116,161,000
Net inc
7,458,000
6,808,000
Share earns
.46
.42


Upheaval in the East;   Talks on Summit Meeting
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union will hold talks in Moscow on Feb. 6 and 7 to prepare for the June summit meeting in Washington between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the two Governments said today.


New Haven in Cup Race
LEAD: The New York metropolitan area may well be part of soccer's 1994 World Cup after all, if New Haven and the Yale Bowl can be considered part of the New York metropolitan area.


L.L. BEAN PRESENTS 'THE SHOES OF THE FISHERMAN'?
LEAD: When I first heard that Whittle Communications would publish books that carry advertising, I was aghast!
We book publishers have always boasted that of all the media we alone have not been corrupted by the advertising dollar.
We swim or sink on the quality of our editorial product, not on the trendy whims of Philip Morris or Procter &amp; Gamble.


49ers-Rams: Defenses Better Duck
LEAD: When the 49ers face the Los Angeles Rams in San Francisco today for the National Conference championship and a Super Bowl berth, the game will offer exciting offenses.


Chappaqua Symphony Shifts Direction
LEAD: ITS name and ensemble sizes have changed several times, but the Chappaqua Orchestral Association traces its tradition of fine music-making back to February 1959, and the debut of what was then the Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra.
The ''chamber'' was eventually dropped, and this season a ''symphony'' has been added, so Saturday's 8 P.M.


Building a Fire, Building a Nation
LEAD: THIS nation has a short past but a vivid one, and Americans spend a good deal of effort trying to recreate it.
I work for a magazine of American history, and all such attempts interest me, from the serene and majestic spread of Colonial Williamsburg to Walt Disney's ebullient fantasy of the Midwestern main streets of his youth.


Review/Music;   Violinist in New York Debut Recital
LEAD: The program the young violinist Yuri Vodovoz presented in his New York debut recital at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday evening was clearly intended to make a statement, demonstrating the breadth of his musical interests and the stylistic versatility of his playing.
Admirably, Mr.
Vodovoz - who was born in Odessa, immigrated to this country in 1978 and lives in Chicago - ranged widely before intermission, flanking Beethoven's Sonata in A minor for Piano and Violin (Op.


Amy Elizabeth Barbash To Marry Eric H. Sahn
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Bob Barbash of New York and Beverly Hills, Calif., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Amy Elizabeth Barbash and Eric Howard Sahn, a son of Mrs.
Arthur G. Sahn of New York and the late Mr.
Sahn.


Who's Left, Who's Right in Post-Wall Europe?;   The Failed Experiment
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Call of the Roads Brings A Driver Back Home
LEAD: ON a June afternoon my friend Sherry's driver's license arrived in the mail.
She drove over to my house, honked, and waited for me behind the wheel of her mother's white-walled, baby-blue Buick Catalina, with the motor running.
I slipped into the front seat, shivering less from the air-conditioning than the sight of her white moccasin caressing the gas pedal.


Review/Music;   War Horses by Mehta and Philharmonic Soloists
LEAD: Conceptually, one of the most laudable aspects of Zubin Mehta's tenure as music director of the New York Philharmonic has been his habit of providing his principal players, and sometimes his players below the rank of principal, with solo showcases.
The current subscription program at Avery Fisher Hall, which is a warmup to a Live from Lincoln Center telecast


Lori Ann Calvelo Weds
LEAD: At the Terrace on the Park in Flushing, Queens, Lori Ann Calvelo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel Calvelo of Brentwood, L.I., was married last evening to Keith Steven Babbitt, a son of Harvey Babbitt and Anita Babbitt, both of New York.
Rabbi Jonathan Glasser officiated.
Mrs.
Babbitt, 23 years old, is an assistant at the accounting firm of Rudolph, Cinammon &amp; Calafato in Ocean, N.J.


How People With Cancer Can Change the Quality of Their Lives;   Risk Is Everywhere
LEAD: To the Editor:


Giving the Athletes a Voice in College Sports
LEAD: Last week in Dallas, National Collegiate Athletic Association executives, university and college presidents, athletic directors and some coaches met to discuss and formulate the rules that govern college athletics.
The only constituency not represented in Dallas was, perhaps, the most important: the athletes.


Bomb Inquiry Focuses on String-Tying Machin
LEAD: Since a mail bomb killed a black Savannah lawyer in December, Federal law-enforcement officials say they have been trying to track down the source of an unusual type of string used to tie the package as well as the owner of an automatic tying machine that cinched four such parcels with identical knots.


BLOOMING WHILE THE SUN WENT DOWN
LEAD:
THE JEWS OF VIENNA IN THE AGE OF FRANZ JOSEPH
By Robert S. Wistrich.
Illustrated. 696 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $79.


Leslie Barbara CaustTo Wed David Brazda
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Caust of Lake Worth, Fla., and Somers, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Leslie Barbara Caust, and David Jerome Brazda, a son of Jane Brazda of Winchester, Va., and Jerome Brazda of Alexandria, Va.


Massachusetts Town Votes To Remove Indian Swastikas
LEAD: Officials of this seaside community near Boston have decided to remove a floor whose tiles have American Indian swastikas inlaid in them.
The floor was laid in Town Hall 66 years ago, before the Nazis adopted the ancient mystic emblem.


A FEW WORDS FROM JENNY HOLZER
LEAD: Regarding Grace Glueck's article ''And Now, a Few Words From Jenny Holzer'' (Dec. 3), I would like to draw attention to a use of words in art before this century.
In an engraving titled ''Laocoon'' (circa 1820), the artist and visionary poet William Blake crowds aphorisms pertaining to art, Christianity, Classicism and economics around a central image of the famous Hellenistic sculpture.


PEAK EXPERIENCE
LEAD: A crescent moon resting on a Pakistani mountain peak; a red dawn rising over the Serengeti Plains where young lions play; a rainbow caressing the rooftops of a Tibetan palace; a bear cub resting against its mother near Alaska's McNeil River - these wondrous images and more can be found in magnificent color in THE ART OF ADVENTURE (Collins Publishers, $45), a breathtaking pictorial essay by Galen Rowell.


POSTINGS: Hackensack Conversion;   Death of a Fox
LEAD: The 2,500-seat Fox Theater on Hackensack's Main Street, together with the 2,000-seat Oritani Theater, directly across the street, were social focal points for more than 50 years.
On weekend nights, these movie houses were the teen-age magnets that discos became in the 70's and malls in the 80's.


Stephanie A. Maxwell to Wed Jeffrey R. Binder
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Maxwell have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Stephanie Anne Maxwell, and Jeffrey Ross Binder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lou Binder.
Both families live in Teaneck, N.J.


A VINTAGE ASSORTMENT FROM NURSERY TO ROOFTOP
LEAD: The American folk art acquired by Edith and Bernard M. Barenholtz over 18 years focuses mostly on sculptural objects that are historical and exuberantly patriotic.
More than 275 of the vintage rooftop, storefront and nursery decorations that they bought are to be auctioned at Sotheby's in New York on Jan.


Somers Book Looks at the Way It Was
LEAD: SOMERS has changed greatly since it was known by the Kitchawank Indians as Appamaghpogh or Amapaugh (''freshwater fish'') and later - from 1788 until 1808 - as Stephentown, after Stephen Van Cortlandt who in 1734 owned 5,000 acres in the area.


Anna Esaki Wed To Craig S. Smith
LEAD: Anna Esaki and Craig Spencer Smith were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Quaker Meeting House in Chappaqua, N.Y., by Dr.
Bruce Gilchrist, the acting marriage officer of the Town of New Castle, N.Y.


A Battle for the Voters, and the 90's, Begins
LEAD: ELECTION 1990 is hardly uppermost in the minds of American voters.
Non-presidential elections are often seen as mere housekeeping for democracy, and the stunning changes in Eastern Europe have overshadowed domestic politics.


BEST SELLERS: January 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Viking,
$21.95.) After a writer of horror tales kills off his
pseudonym, the deceased goes on a murderous
rampage.
2
2
9
DADDY, by Danielle Steel.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-16


DATA BANK: January 14, 1990
LEAD:
Gross National Product
I Q'89
IV Q'88
Year Ago
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions
$4,076.5
$4,033.4
$4,668.7
Real G.N.P. Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
4.3
3.5
2.3
Corporate After-Tax Profits
I Q'89
VI Q'88
Year Ago
In billions, annual rate
$171.6
$173.9
$146.4


Restaurant Owner Adds Art to the Linguine
LEAD: AT 1834 Dixwell Avenue in Hamden, three Roman soldiers and a woman holding a water jug stare at the steady traffic.


Last-Gasp Foul Shots Stop Nets
LEAD: With one second left in tonight's game, Sam Bowie trembled when he heard the referee's whistle.
He knew what it meant.


If They've Won, Can Conservatives Still Be Important?
LEAD: THE transformations sweeping Eastern Europe have reverberated through the institutes and offices, the meeting rooms and magazines that, for the past decade or so, have made up the most influential body of American political thought: conservatism.
The echoes, in fact, are the sound of a victory chorus, even if the conservatives' detractors do not believe they should be the only ones to celebrate.


Fashion;   Secaucus, a Field Day for Stylish Bargain Hunters
LEAD: In the industrial meadows just west of the Hudson River, where huge semitrailer trucks feed at block-long buildings amid fields of oily heather and filthy weeds, fashion lives.


A Textbook Victory for Devils
LEAD: A display of fundamental hockey by Janne Ojanen, the rookie forward from Finland, helped the Devils gain a 5-4 triumph over the Nordiques tonight at the Colisee.


2 Deaths Are Reported In Strife in Azerbaijan
LEAD: Mobs attacked homes today in a former Armenian district of Baku, the capital of Soviet Azerbaijan, and at least two people were killed, reports from the area said.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Amityville
$200,000
56 Wood Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, basement, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $4,600.
Bay Shore
$725,000
39 Lawrence Lane
7-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 60-year-old waterfront Tudor; guest house, 3-car garage, 1.9 acres; taxes $10,904.


Beware The Lesser FSX Role
LEAD: The unfortunate truth about the FSX agreement to jointly develop a new Japanese fighter plane is that it was a compromise that ended up pleasing almost no one.
The agreement was a contravention of free trade principles, a waste of resources and an inefficient method of meeting our defense needs.
It may be that no permutation of the FSX agreement to transfer


By Letting There Be Light, a Company Remains a Namesake
LEAD: FOR about $2,600 a year, the Rogers Corporation gets a privilege accorded few corporations: the right to have its name not only on the top of its stationery, but also as its address.


Can Gorbachev Stay On if Lithuania Chooses to Leave?
LEAD: MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV has never seemed lonelier than he did last week, stumping the alienated precincts of Lithuania, pleading for the wayward republic to trust him, help him, save him, by preserving the union.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Now, while woody plants are dormant, is an excellent time to prune, especially trees and summer-blooming shrubs.
But if the plants bloom early in spring, delay pruning until immediately after bloom.
Start seed indoors of early flowering plants such as pansies.
Check coldframes to be sure young plants and seedlings are secure and their soil moist.


FICTION
LEAD:
SELF-PORTRAIT OF SOMEONE ELSE.
By Vincent Eaton. (Viking, $16.95.) Vincent Eaton's dark, angry and intense first novel uses police documents, psychological evaluations, interviews, straight narration and interior monologues to chronicle the self-destruction of Tim Buckles.
At 28, Buckles appears at first to be leading a normal life.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   GORBACHEV HINTS HE WOULD ACCEPT MULTIPARTY RULE
LEAD: In his most conciliatory comments to date on the prospect of a multiparty system, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that ending the Communist Party monopoly on power in the Soviet Union would not be a ''tragedy.''


Ex-Klan Leader Finishes Last In Bid for Senate Nomination
LEAD: Louisiana Republicans today endorsed a New Orleans State Senator for the party's nomination for the United States Senate, decisively rejecting a former Ku Klux Klan leader.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
THE ROARING '80s, by Adam Smith. (Penguin, $8.95.) In his portraits of the borrow-and-spend decade just behind us, Adam Smith looks for signs that the bubble is about to burst. ''We could not ask for a more genial, knowledgeable companion for a tour of the national financial landscape,'' Susan Lee said here in 1988.


A Bohemian Quarter In the Heart of Buenos Aires
LEAD: ON the silent paths of the Recoleta Cemetery, where marble and granite mausoleums are crowned by ornate sculptures of imploring angels, tearful Madonnas or heroes of Argentina's independence from Spain, it is difficult to imagine the burst of life just beyond the red brick walls.
Facing the graveyard, in an unusual cohabitation of life with death, is a row of deluxe restaurants, outdoor cafes and nightclubs that have cornered much of Buenos


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Aid From the West;   New Bank to Help East Bloc Revive Its Economy
LEAD: Senior officials from the leading industrial nations and Eastern Europe are to meet here on Monday to plan the establishment of an Eastern European development bank.
The bank would lead to one of the largest regional assistance efforts since the Marshall Plan.


ACTRESS AND MAN CUT IN 2 ATTACKS
LEAD: Two people, one of them the actress Viveca Lindfors, were slashed on the face within minutes of each other in separate incidents yesterday morning, apparently by members of a group of young people roaming Greenwich Village, the police said.


TALKING: Tree Care;   Winter Is the Time To Prune
LEAD: FEW external features enhance the value and attractiveness of a home more than its trees, those actually on the property as well as any street trees that might frame the setting.
A careful program of pruning - whether through a professional landscaper, in cooperation with the municipality or by one's own labors - is therefore not a luxury but an integral part of any prudent property maintenance program.


New Orleans: It's Nonstop Music
LEAD: WHAT'S this?
A New Orleans jazz hall with lace curtains?
Pale peach damask tablecloths and crisp damask napery?
Low-calorie specials on a menu printed in English and Japanese?
Unlikely as it seems, the new Palm Court Jazz Cafe on Decatur Street in the French Quarter, a neighborhood once thronged by waterfront toughs, is the latest hot spot in the birthplace of jazz.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Risotto With Seafood
LEAD: There are several kinds of short-grain rice available in Italy for making risotto.
The most common, of course, is Arborio.
It has become so popular in this country that supermarkets in many large cities carry it.


Turnpike Seen as Metaphor for America
LEAD: POSING for newspaper photos on a small hill overlooking the New Jersey Turnpike here, a Rutgers University professor turned to a colleague standing beside him.


NIBBLED AT BY NEIGHBORS
LEAD:
THE PREDATOR
By Linda Grace Hoyer.
Illustrated by Elizabeth Updike Cobblah.
109 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $15.95.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Florida Levies Drug Fund Fee On Rental Cars


LEARNING TO TAKE CALIFORNIA SERIOUSLY
LEAD: It is not true that there was no California architecture before Esther McCoy.
But there was almost no writing about it, and that made all the difference, since before Esther McCoy began her career as an architectural historian almost no one took California seriously as a place where great buildings could be made.


U.N. Secretary General Taking His Afghan Plan to Moscow
LEAD: During two days of talks in Moscow starting on Monday, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar will seek Soviet backing for a new peace initiative to end the civil war in Afghanistan, diplomats and United Nations officials say.


View Down Fifth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Richard Weiler Jr.Weds Lori S. Hill
LEAD: Lori Susan Hill and Richard Carl Weiler Jr. were married yesterday by the Rev.
J.
Ronald Miller, a Methodist minister, at the Wilson Memorial Union Church in Watchung, N.J.
The bride is a daughter of Mildred E. Hill of Scotch Plains, N.J., and Robert A. Hill of Barnegat, N.J.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr.


Or Is It Jumping the Gun?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Terri L. Newman, Lawyer, Engaged
LEAD: The engagement of Terri Lynn Newman to Steven David Bleiberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Bleiberg of Greenwich, Conn., and Sarasota, Fla., has been made known by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Nathan A. Newman of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.


Where Dueling Memos Agree: A Lockout Is Looming
LEAD: Labor negotiations between the owners and the players, which will very likely delay the start of spring training - and, conceivably, the season - have for the moment become a paper war of dueling memos.


THE FEMININE MYSTIC
LEAD:
RADICAL SPIRITS
Spiritualism and Women's Rights in Nineteenth-Century America.
By Ann Braude.
Illustrated. 268 pp. Boston: Beacon Press. $24.95.


Serene Haven of Buddhist Art
LEAD: THE road north from Chongqing, city of fog and ferries far up the Yangtze River, undulates through market towns by fish ponds, brick kilns and mulberry bushes.
Bamboos brush gray slate roofs, leathery men working in the fields hold pink umbrellas above their sweating brows, pigs are being carried to an urban fate in a special cane basket called ''pig's sedan chair,'' and heavily made-up young women in high heels by the muddy roadside call out invitations to take meals at their aromatic private cafes.


Walking on Air
LEAD: For his teammates on the Chicago Bulls, the Hornet contest was just another game.
For Michael Jordan, Friday night's match against the Hornets was a homecoming.


One Dead in Bombings in Northern Lebanon
LEAD: Three bombs exploded in Lebanon's second-largest city today, killing a person and wounding 10 others.


Who's Watching The Tube
LEAD: To the Editor:


11 Wounded in Gaza Clashes
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and wounded 11 protesters today in scattered clashes in the Gaza Strip, hospital officials said.
Two Palestinians in the area were killed by fellow Arabs, but it was unclear whether those attacks were related to nationalist politics.
The officials said that a 54-year-old man was stabbed to death today in Gaza City, but residents said he was not known as a collaborator with the Israeli authorities.


A House Fire in Jacksonville Kills 6, Including 5 Children
LEAD: Six people, including five children, died in a house fire early today after they were trapped inside by window bars intended to guard against break-ins, the authorities said.


STREETSCAPES: The Cloud Club;   Still Exciting, but Still Vacant
LEAD: THE private Cloud Club at the top of the Chrysler Building, New York's flashiest skyscraper, seemed to its early members to be an Art Deco Shangri-La.
Although it turned out to be as much banker's traditional as jazz-age modern, the club's three floors, designed by William Van Alen, constitute one of New York's most exciting spaces.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our sliding glass doors are difficult to slide.
We have vacuumed the tracks and sprayed with a silicone lubricant, but this helps only temporarily.
Any suggestions?


DATA UPDATE: January 14, 1990
LEAD:
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Nov. 89
Oct. 89
Nov. 88
New York
2,856
4,530
3,473
New Jersey
2,411
2,683
2,751
Connecticut
835
1,270
1,241
(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*2*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our sliding glass doors are difficult to slide.
We have vacuumed the tracks and sprayed with a silicone lubricant, but this helps only temporarily.
Any suggestions?


Plan for Interim U.N. Rule in Cambodia Gains
LEAD: On the eve of a new international effort to end the war in Cambodia, the United States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Britain appear close to endorsing a plan to install a temporary United Nations administration in Phnom Penh until free elections can be organized.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Tournament players occasionally find themselves playing a difficult slam bid against the clock with penalties looming if they play too slowly.
But the time pressure the declarer suffered from on the diagramed deal was of quite a different kind.


Finally, Amtrak Looks Like a Way To Run a Business
LEAD: FOR most of its 19 years, Amtrak has been regarded as a kind of lost cause.
Its trains were derided as unreliable, its service and food as primitive and its budget as a drain on the Federal treasury.
But the national railroad appears, at last, to be moving in the right direction.


In Giving to Neediest, Many Really Mean the Homeless
LEAD: ''Every year I 'meant' to send a check, but. . . .
This year, seeing so many homeless on the streets, I realized it was time,'' Barbara Dixon of Manhattan wrote in a note she sent with her $100 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


THERE'S NO JUSTICE IN WALL STREET'S FORCED ARBITRATION
LEAD: To the Editor When the Supreme Court gave stockbrokers the power to insist that aggrieved customers submit their disputes to arbitration, it accorded them something given to no other American industry. (''When Naivete Meets Wall Street,'' Dec. 3) No other industry is privileged with a dispute resolution system in which the adjudicator is not required to explain the basis of the decision and no mechanism is available for review and correction of mistakes.


Conciliatory Tone On County Layoffs
LEAD: THE confrontation between the Board of Legislators and County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke over the impact of a sharply reduced 1990 budget began to ease last week as both sides sought ways to reduce the numbers of county employees expected to lose their jobs.


Almeida Captures Grand Gestures Of 'La Juive'
LEAD: In the first two decades of this century, Halevy's ''Juive'' -the epitome of the French romantic grand opera - still loomed large on the operatic stages.
It faded from view in the 1930's until 1973, when a few performances were staged in various places for the late Richard Tucker, the opera's tireless champion.


Football Awards
LEAD: Andre Ware, the record-smashing all-American from the University of Houston, yesterday was named the winner of the ninth annual Davey O'Brien national quarterback award.
Ware, winner of the Heisman Trophy and the leader of the Cougars' run-and-shoot offense, will be honored Feb. 12 at a dinner in Fort


Sports of The Times;   How Two Trades Rehorned the Rams
LEAD: In pro football, most trades are listed quietly in ''transactions,'' not trumpeted in thick headlines.
Unlike the big trades in baseball, pro basketball and hockey, National Football League teams seldom dare to hijack another club's touted rookie quarterback or swap a running back galloping toward career records.


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: Sure.
The N.F.C. has won seven out of the last eight Super Bowls including the last five.
KENT RACKETT
Greenwich, Conn.


Peruvian Still Outraged By Invasion of Panama
LEAD: High above the presidential palace here, the flag of Panama flutters next to that of Peru.


Social Events
LEAD:
Historic Hymn


North Salem May Ban Foam Cups
LEAD: NORTH SALEM could become the first community in Westchester to ban polystyrene foam containers when village officials consider the measure later this month.
But opposition from local retailers is mounting, and the outlook for passage of the local law is uncertain.


Beth Posnack to Wed Robert M. Hecht
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Posnack of Airmont, N.Y., have made known the engagement of their daughter Beth Allyson Posnack to Robert Morris Hecht, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Hecht of Grand Rapids, Mich., and Vail, Colo.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Bridge Loans Cast Shadows On the Street
LEAD: Engineers demand firm foundations on both sides of a bridge.
Investment bankers don't have engineering degrees.
Shaky bridge loans these days have more than a few Wall Streeters quaking, and played a role in Friday's stock market tumble.
Rising interest rates and worries over inflation also played a role, as producer prices were reported to have risen 4.8 percent in 1989, the largest annual gain since 1981.


Spelling Out the Generation Gap
LEAD: ''I SPELLED eleemosynary like it was cat or dog,'' explains Echo, the national spelling champion in ''El-ee-mos-y-nary,'' the occasionally fascinating play by Lee Blessing now at Studio Theater.


Needed: Better Job by Colleges
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrAs the head of a foundation that has several programs dealing with college-bound athletes in track and field, I read William C. Rhoden's article about the challenge facing colleges to integrate the black athlete into the school community, ''Searching for a Moral Imperative,'' (The New York Times, Dec.


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: No A.F.C. team has won the Super Bowl over the last five years, but the A.F.C. holds the edge in interconference games, 54-52, over the last two years, including post-season play.
Also, in 1988 the three teams with the worst records belonged to the N.F.C. and in 1989 the two worst did.
The five most consistently bad teams over the same time period also belonged to the N.F.C.


Barbara Cooper Is Married
LEAD: Barbara Cooper and Paul T. Brensilber, Ithaca College graduates, were married last evening at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I., by Rabbi Michael Katz, who was assisted by Cantor Kalman Fliegelman.
Mrs.
Brensilber, 28 years old and a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Cooper of Dix Hills, L.I., is studying for a master's degree at the Bank Street School of Education.


FASHION: European Report -- London/Milan;   Marketing the Millennium
LEAD: In his most recent show of women's fashions, Rifat Ozbek staged a scene that shimmered with nostalgia.
Spinning above the bleachers, shooting squares of light above the spectators' heads, was a mirrored disco ball.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Budapest;   Police Spying Dies Hard in Hungary
LEAD: In a sign of how awkward the transition to a democracy can sometimes be, the Hungarian secret police admitted this week that it has been spying on registered opposition parties, just as it did when they were considered outlawed dissidents not so long ago.


A Mother's Secret Carries Into Death
LEAD: MY mother died a year ago.
A year earlier a fall caused Mamma to experience difficulty breathing.
She thought she might have broken a rib, but when she went to the doctor he discovered that she had lung cancer that had metastasized to her breast, her pelvic bone, and possibly to her liver.


On Language;   Of 'Of'
LEAD: DEAR ACE,'' BEGINSJU a note from an old friend.


A Piano Concerto Brings Ligeti Back To the Orchestra
LEAD: Now that the ethnic and geographical divisions of Eastern Europe are becoming newly familiar in this season of liberation, it is less difficult than formerly to digest the identification of Gyorgy Ligeti that opens his entry in the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians.
Here it is, exactly as it appears there, with all the diacritical marks that


Eugenia M. Middleton Is Engaged to Lars Toomre
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Middleton of Rumson, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Eugenia Matthews Middleton and Lars Toomre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alar Toomre of West Newton, Mass.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: The stock markets are open, but most banks and Government offices are closed for Martin Luther King Jr.
Day.
The Campeau Corporation's Allied and Federated retailing units are to assure a banking group, which loaned Campeau $2.34 billion, that they are solvent.
Otherwise, the group could demand substantial, immediate repayment and force the retailers into bankruptcy.


Costs of Cable: False Comparisons
LEAD: The Dec. 17 article [''Cable TV vs.
Consumers: Battleground Emerges'']  included a chart titled ''The Cost of Cable,'' which compared Cablevision's Long Island rates in 1986 (before deregulation of the cable industry) and in 1989.
The chart provided an incorrect and invalid comparison between basic cable service in 1986 and family service in 1989 on Long Island.


4 Are Killed in South Africa In Feud Among Black Rivals
LEAD: Four people were killed in fighting among gangs vying for control of black townships in Natal Province, the police said today.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Rumania;   Government in Bucharest Curbs Protests
LEAD: Amid indications that its authority is in danger of collapsing, Rumania's provisional Government restricted political demonstrations today and decided that its executive board would meet daily rather than sporadically.


Turkey Cuts Euphrates Flow, Affecting Its Neighbors


FICTION
LEAD:
THE BOOK OF MARVELS.
By Christopher T. Leland. (Scribners, $17.95.) Lila Mae Bower Pietrowsky has been having a tough time.
First there is the divorce, still a shock to a good Baptist girl, even though ''it was a miracle - an honest-to-goodness one - she'd managed to hold her marriage with Eddie together as long as she had.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Barcelona
LEAD: Barcelona is a city lover's city, a pulsating, vibrant city that mixes the fertility of the Mediterranean with the intellectual consciousness of Europe, a city of great factories and a brawny port, a citizen's city so justifiably in love with itself that posters everywhere for a campaign of cleaning building facades proclaim ''Barcelona, Make Yourself Beautiful.


Lifestyle: Sunday Lunch;   Hearty Soups to Warm Wintry Days
LEAD: There is no better antifreeze on a frigid winter day than a lusty bowl of soup.
Good soup is not that easy to find.
Many restaurants consider it something they have to offer on their appetizer lists, but they don't really put extra effort into it.


Disney, Stravinsky and 'The Sock'
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Stakes Are Rising in Poland's Gamble
LEAD: BEFORE a bold new economic program took effect on New Year's Day, Poles were unequivocally enthusiastic about its goals: to make their nation the first in Eastern Europe to trade in Communism for capitalism and to help turn Poland into a prosperous Western country.


Christa M. Carey Weds Richard Dunn
LEAD: Christa Marie Carey was married last evening to Richard Wolfe Dunn at the Marsh Chapel at Boston University by the Rev.
Neil Mullaney, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Allen Press.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Carey Jr. of Duncan, Okla.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


FICTION
LEAD:
THE GARDEN WHERE THE BRASS BAND PLAYED.
By Simon Vestdijk.
Translated by A. Brotherton. (New Amsterdam, $18.95.) Originally published in the Netherlands in 1950, ''The Garden Where the Brass Band Played'' is now being published in an able translation by A. Brotherton as part of a series of modern Dutch classics.


Bias and Recklessness Are Charged In Boston Reporting of Stuart Slaying
LEAD: The tangled Stuart murder case has been a near-obsession for this city's news organizations for the past three months, but the character and tone of their reporting coverage have prompted charges that the press has been racist, incompetent and reckless.


After Rumania, Chinese Reproach Themselves
LEAD: The success of the popular rebellion in Rumania seems to have accentuated the mood of self-reproach in the capital.
Young Chinese intellectuals wonder aloud why the Rumanians persevered, even in the face of gunfire, to overthrow the Government, while last June the Chinese protesters eventually retreated after being bloodily put down.


BASEBALL'S DESIGNATED THINKER
LEAD:
TAKE TIME FOR PARADISE
Americans and Their Games.
By A. Bartlett Giamatti.
113 pp. New York:
Summit Books. $16.95.


Scuba Diving With Sharks
LEAD: A HALF-DOZEN hammerhead sharks came straight at us when we dropped to about 20 feet below the surface.
They moved past at an angle, apparently uninterested, then disappeared into the hazy distance as we continued to sink into the blue.


Islanders Win 6th in Row
LEAD: One personal streak ended but two team streaks continued tonight as the Islanders defeated the slumping Washington Capitals, 4-2, at Nassau Coliseum.


Congress Is As Skeptical As Ever on Salvador Aid
LEAD: IF the debate over American aid to El Salvador sounds familiar, there is good reason.
Similar arguments and passions swirled round President Reagan's requests for aid to El Salvador's ruling junta in the early 1980's.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Jackson
$123,000
10 Dogwood Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; c/a, 1-car garage, family room; taxes $1,900.
Livingston
$326,405
17 Penwood Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; fireplace, 2-car garage, c/a, deck; taxes $5,457.


FSX - Japan's Last Bad Deal
LEAD: JAPAN'S defense is keyed to America's security needs, not our own, which is an anomaly that reflects our subservient relationship.
It is time for us to step out of Uncle Sam's shadow and build a military force suited to our own needs.
The place to begin is the next-generation support fighter, code-named the FSX, short for fighter support experimental.


A Careless Hunter, a Changed Life
LEAD: I AM enrolled in an adult development course that spans life crises from ages 17 through death.
In class we discuss death, and even though only 29, I sometimes find myself contemplating my own.
I think about how my own children (yet unborn) will react to my old age.
I wonder if I will outlive my husband.


Arrest in Slayings at Club
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday and charged with shooting three men, including two bystanders, outside a Manhattan nightclub early in the morning of Dec. 30, the police said.
Two of the men were killed and the third was seriously wounded.


What Top Performers Bet On
LEAD: Their bets paid off and they came out ahead in 1989.
So what are last year's top-performing mutual fund managers thinking about now?
The front page.
The ''renaissance of capitalism sweeping around the world'' makes David D. Alger think corporate price/earnings ratios will rise for well-managed American companies.


Into the Surly Skies
LEAD: THE multicolored ticket folder sits on a corner of my desk, tucked beneath two days' worth of memos and reports.
Although it's out of sight, it's not out of mind.
As much as I try to forget about it, as much as I try to avoid thinking about it, the dread never leaves my mind.
It's time for another business trip.


Sandstrom Scores The Game-Winner
LEAD: Tomas Sandstrom sat and smiled, the enigma insisting he wasn't at all made uncomfortable by the paradox.


Coming Home
LEAD: Unlike some Japanese soldiers who spent decades in the jungles of the Pacific and Southeast Asia, Shigeyuki Hashimoto (left) and Kiyaoki Tanaka knew at least that they were no longer fighting World War II.
When Mr.
Hashimoto and Mr.
Tanaka emerged from the woods last week after 45 years, they made it clear that they had stayed on after the big war to fight a smaller one.


Lifestyle;   Wanted: Pen Pals For Peace
LEAD: The letter was addressed to ''Deaz amerizan fziends.'' It was dated Nov. 28, 1989, Moscow, and signed ''Yuri.''


Another Disk Revolution In the Offing?
LEAD: Will laser be the people's choice in the 1990's? ''Laser videodisk will be to home entertainment in the 90's what the VCR was during the 80's,'' said Martin Greenwald, the president of Image Entertainment in a statement last summer.
Since Image makes disks for Orion, MGM, Disney, CBS/Fox and about 50 other companies, he is entitled to some enthusiasm.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
ART LECTURES


Margaret Young To Wed in June
LEAD: June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Faris Young of Lake Forest, Ill., for their daughter Margaret Randolph Young and J. Sargeant Reynolds Jr., the son of Mrs.
Alexander Hamilton 4th of Richmond and the late Mr.
Reynolds, a Lieutenant Governor of Virginia.


Coming to Justice?
LEAD: Ian Fleming could have written the plot.
In September 1978, Georgi I. Markov, an exiled Bulgarian writer and critic of the Communist regime, was standing at a bus stop in London when he was jabbed in the leg with an umbrella.
Four days later, he was dead, from poison apparently injected by the umbrella tip.


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: The two conferences are very close.


New Jersey Official Named To Regional Office of H.U.D.
LEAD: A new head of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's New York-New Jersey regional office was named by Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp yesterday.


A FEW WORDS FROM JENNY HOLZER
LEAD: I have no doubt that Jenny Holzer is an artist, but to think of her as a visual artist, which is the implication of her selection to represent the United States at the Venice Biennale, is to have ''proved'' finally that painting is dead.
Slowly but surely the single fixed image - the heart of so-called two-dimensional expression - has been usurped.


HER FRIENDS WERE EVERYTHING
LEAD:
BECOMING A POET
Elizabeth Bishop With Marianne Moore and Robert Lowell.
By David Kalstone.
Edited by Robert Hemenway.
Afterword by James Merrill.
Illustrated. 299 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.50.


A Break With Tradition
LEAD: I COULDN'T believe the news!
My baby daughter had just visited the pediatrician.
My wife called me at my office to render the verdict.
I was stunned.
I asked her to repeat it.
The same answer came through again, loud and clear.


Erica Buchsbaum, an Editor, To Marry
LEAD: June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Ladislav Buchsbaum of Wyncote, Pa., for their daughter Erica Ruth Buchsbaum and Dr.
Andrew C. Goldberg, the son of Anshel Goldberg of South Orange, N.J., and the late Marsha Goldberg.


Companies Are Finding Fitness Is Good Business
LEAD: A REGULAR exercise program, experts say, makes a person feel better, look better, require less sleep and possess more energy.
Fitness is ''in.'' And people who exercise are generally healthier than those who don't; healthy people spend less time with doctors and more time at work.


Short Stories Featured In Series of Readings
LEAD: Stories by Virginia Woolf, Bernard Malamud and Italo Calvino will be read at the opening of the sixth season of ''Selected Shorts: A Celebration of the Short Story,'' on Jan. 24 at 6:30 P.M. at Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
The actors Irene Worth, David Margulies and John Shea will read from Malamud's ''Idiots First,'' Woolf's ''Duchess and the Jeweler'' and Calvino's ''Adventure of a Reader.


Laura Gant Plans To Marry in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Gant of Vernon, N.J., and Amelia Island, Fla., have made known the engagement of their daughter Laura Ross Gant to Peter Cahn Lilienfield, the son of Elizabeth C. Askow of Winnetka, Ill., and the late Edward W. Lilienfield.
A May wedding is planned.


How People With Cancer Can Change the Quality of Their Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Is the Future of Television in the Numbers?
LEAD: At the outset of the new decade, the outlook for television and video is exciting but uncertain.
Great technical changes are in the offing, but the exact form of these changes is still undecided.
Several competing technical proposals for High Definition Television (HDTV) lay claim to the future, each championed by different countries and their industrial giants.


SAY GOODBYE TO THE STUFFED ELEPHANTS
LEAD: WHIPPED UP BY A SUDDEN SQUALL, THE SEA between Majuro and Mili islands in the South Pacific began lashing the small sailboat.
One of its passengers, Phyllis Rabineau, a 30-year-old senior exhibition developer who works for the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, was scared. ''I felt as if I were in a Jack London story,'' she recalls, ''where you're on a boat and everything imaginable goes wrong.


A JOURNAL OF A PLAGUED LIFE
LEAD:
DANIEL DEFOE
His Life.
By Paula R. Backscheider.
Illustrated. 671 pp. Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press. $29.95.


Serena Harding-Jones Plans to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Harding-Jones of Miami have announced the engagement of their daughter Serena Barbara Harding-Jones to William Douglas Lese, a son of Ruth E. Lese of New York and William M. Lese of New York and London.
A March wedding is planned.


Blurred and Shaky Images That Burn in the Mind
LEAD: While the photography world was busy congratulating itself last year on the 150th anniversary of the medium, and while photojournalism was being recognized as an art in several touring museum exhibitions, the public territory of still photography was quietly eroding.
World events, which still photography has long memorialized, rushed by so rapidly at decade's end that cameras seemed for once unable to keep up.


Press Is Criticized In Boston Slaying
LEAD: The tangled Stuart murder case, a near obsession for the Boston news media for the last three months, has prompted charges that the press has been racist, incompetent and reckless.
But news executives there vigorously defend the performance of their organizations.


Out-of-State Workers Finds Jobs at G.M. Plant
LEAD: IN a reprise of a role it has not played for more than a decade, the county has recently become an industrial-employment mecca, in this case providing jobs for hundreds of General Motors employees who were laid off at 12 plants nationwide.


To Mr. Floria: Words of Advice
LEAD: EVERY New Jersey governor takes office as the head of a different state.
New problems constantly demand different solutions and innovative approaches to deal with economic cycles, a changing population, shifting employment patterns and, lately, global changes that present new challenges and opportunities.


Review/Music;   Schubertiade Continues Without Mentor's Voice
LEAD: As the 92d Street Y's 10-year, chronological ''Schubertiade'' marches towards Schubert's maturity, there will be more recognizable masterpieces and more large-scale events like last Sunday's ''Teufels Lustschloss'' that burst the bonds of the intimate Kaufmann Concert Hall stage.
Nonetheless, most of the concerts in this marathon will still take place at the Y, and Thursday evening marked the first of this year's


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Postal history is a notoriously ill-defined term; philatelic journals are full of back-and-forth about what it means.
There is a long-running debate about how competitive postal-history exhibits should be judged.


Who's Left, Who's Right in Post-Wall Europe?;   That's Not Socialism
LEAD: To the Editor:


&gt;Breakfast Offerings That Stand Up to the Elements
LEAD: BREAKFAST, the health experts tell us, is the most important meal of the day But most people try to get by with cereal, juice and a cup of coffee.
This may be all very well if your morning is spent in front of a desk.
But if you plan to keep going on the ski slopes - or indeed, in any form of vigorous outdoor winter exercise - you will need something considerably more substantial.


KASPAROV BEATS DEEP THOUGHT
LEAD: IN A CROWDED AUDITORIUM, THE CHAMPION hunches over a chessboard.
He is surrounded by cameramen.
Taking refuge in himself, he pillows his jaw in his hands.
He is thinking hard in order to make himself think harder.
His opponent, also a champion, is some 300 miles away, pondering the next move, engaged in calculations on a scale too colossal for anyone in the audience to grasp.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
BATMAN - Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger star in a ''shapeless, big-screen reincarnation'' set in a ''nightmare version of megalopolis.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989.
Warner. $24.95.
Laser disk, $24.98. 2 hours 6 minutes.
Closed captioned.


Wedding Plans For Miss Pressey
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Pressey of Sag Harbor, L.I., and San Miguel de Allende, Mexico, have made known the June wedding plans of their daughter, Katharine Allen Pressey, and Jeffrey Stuart Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Rosenberg of Jericho, L.I.


The Triple Demerits in Tokyo
LEAD: Rising interest rates, a declining yen and higher oil prices are undermining the usually buoyant Tokyo stock market, hurting the stocks of large companies and sending shivers through other markets around the world.


Have Cast, Will Travel: Performing for the Love of It
LEAD: THE reason you sit down to the piano even if they all laugh is something that Bob Gemson, Dr.
Stuart Rappaport, Hayley Kobilinsky and Barbara Brand know only too well.


10 Die in Pakistani Bus Crash
LEAD: Two buses collided head on today, killing 10 people and seriously injuring 5, Pakistan's official press agency said.
The accident occurred 60 miles east of Islamabad, The Associated Press of Pakistan said.
Officials said the two buses had been speeding.


Miss Brumley to Wed Richard Morrell
LEAD: May wedding plans for Deborah Lois Brumley and Richard Warnock Morrell have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
George William Brumley of Atlanta.
Mr.
Morrell is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Warnock Morrell of New York.


BUSINESS DIARY: January 7-12
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Debt Ahead for UAL
The UAL Corporation had better learn to love debt.
Either management and the employees will load the company with debt to buy it, or the board will undertake a buyback - mortgaging the company to pay some impatient stockholders a premium.
The noisiest of these stockholders, Coniston Partners, threatens to unseat most of the board unless UAL coughs up a satisfactory payoff.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
Praise the Lord, Thrice


INSIDE
LEAD:
C.I.A. Program in Panama


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: The N.F.C.'s preeminence is reminiscent of the National Football League's superiority to the American Football League during most of the 60's, before the two leagues merged, when the Packers (winners of the first two Super Bowls) and other N.F.L. teams were considered superior to any A.F.L. team.


Margaret Monaco Is Wed in Darien
LEAD: At the Noroton Presbyterian Church in Darien, Conn., Margaret Tierney Monaco, a daughter of Geraldine S. Monaco of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and the late Albert B. Monaco, was married yesterday to Vance John Anderson, a son of Marna S. Anderson of Upper Montclair, N.J., and the late Cyrus T. Anderson.
The Rev.


A FEW WORDS FROM JENNY HOLZER
LEAD: Jenny Holzer's concoctions are interesting - but no more so than the thoughts Arsenio Hall occasionally passes on to his audience to make them go, ''Hmmmm.'' At least Mr.
Hall has taste enough not to pass off his random thoughts as art.
BOMAN DESAI
Chicago


Floating Disneyland
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: The good teams in the N.F.C. (49ers, Giants, Rams) are better than their A.F.C. counterparts (Broncos, Browns, Bills) and should win the Super Bowl.
But the bad teams in the N.F.C. (Cowboys, Falcons, Cardinals) are worse than their A.F.C. counterparts (Jets, Chargers, Patriots).
The average teams in each conference are about the same.


Seize The Decade
LEAD: TWO weeks into the 90's and I'm still writing 80-something on my checks.
At least the prognosticators have stopped trying to name the decade and wandered off in search of hemline lengths or women who love men who love themselves too much.


Ms. Linton to Marry Daniel Levinson
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Nunziato of Lincoln Park, N.J., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Lorraine Janis Linton, to Daniel Ross Levinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Levinson of Singer Island, Fla.
Ms.
Linton is also a daughter of Robert Linton of Atlanta.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.


Hints of Change as Board Convenes
LEAD: THE spirited sense of expectation that envelops the Board of Legislators when it convenes as a new body every two years was present, as usual, last Monday, with members being sworn in and leaders appointed before admiring friends and relatives.


GIVE MANAGEMENT ITS DUE, I.B.M. IS MORE THAN A QUARTERLY STATEMENT
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Stress on Communication Skills
LEAD: ''I TELL clients that their workers don't have to work harder to become productive, they have to work smarter,'' said Sybil Conrad, a Scarsdale communications consultant. ''For example, in one of my workshops, I teach employees that they can begin to work smarter by listening better.''


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Eddie and the Cruisers II: Eddie Lives
1989. International Video Entertainment. $89.95. 1 hour 46 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.
Eddie Wilson (Michael Pare) is meant to be a cross between Bruce Springsteen and Elvis Presley, a working-class rock star from New Jersey who drove his car off a bridge in 1964 and became a legend.


Costly Opinion
LEAD: After the World Cup soccer draw last month, Diego Maradona, the captain of the Argentine national team, said that he believed the pairings in the six four-team groups had been determined beforehand and that the official ceremony had been staged ''just for the fun of television watchers.''


Chronology Of Betrayal
LEAD: This is the chronology of the American betrayal of the struggle for freedom in China.
It is worth studying.
There is still a chance to recover some of America's honor.


View Down Fifth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our sliding glass doors are difficult to slide.
We have vacuumed the tracks and sprayed with a silicone lubricant, but this helps only temporarily.
Any suggestions?


Foreign Ministers Exchange Ideas and Documents


Joseph Pepe Engaged To Francine Kravetz
LEAD: The engagement of Francine Amy Kravetz to Joseph Pepe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene N. Pepe of Bronxville, N.Y., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Kravetz of Armonk, N.Y., and Pompano Beach, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Kravetz, a graduate of Boston University, is a registered representative of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in White Plains.


A Nation Tries to Decide How to Recall Martin Luther King
LEAD: THE nation will honor the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. tomorrow, the holiday that marks his birth 61 years ago.
But increasingly, the holiday is becoming a time when his admirers ponder not just the meaning of his life, but also the more delicate question of how best to carry on his work 22 years after his death.


First Lady Ends Treatment
LEAD: Barbara Bush underwent the last of 10 radiation treatments at Walter Reed Army Medical Center Friday for an eye affliction that has impaired her vision.
Doctors say they will not know for at least two months whether the radiation was effective on Graves' disease, an immune system disorder that had affected Mrs.


Mosaic Metaphor Serves Many Masters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spacecraft Sees Few Traces of a Tumultuous Creation
LEAD: First glimpses of the heavens by a new spacecraft looking for evidence of the beginning of existence have revealed an almost too perfect universe, scientists said today.


UConn Capitalizes On Seton Hall Mistakes
LEAD: The Connecticut Huskies, after dropping their first two Big East Conference games, captured their third consecutive one tonight with a 79-76 victory over Seton Hall at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


For Refugees From Southeast Asia, Adapting Is a Slow Road
LEAD: WHEN Joseph Quy Vu came to this country from Vietnam, he spent two months in a refugee camp and several more months finding a job and a place to live.
That was 15 years ago.
Now, though his children belong to local soccer and baseball teams and he has made some friends in his South Windsor neighborhood, he still finds adjusting to Western culture a difficult task.


Restarting a Balky Furnace
LEAD: PROLONGED cold weather taxes home heating equipment, thus increasing the likelihood of an unexpected shutdown.


Say 'Hair Deprived'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lee R. Jamieson,Student, Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Crawford Jamieson Jr. of Princeton, N.J., and Londonderry, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lee Reddan Jamieson, to Ronald Jerome Kane Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kane of Princeton.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Jamieson, 24 years old, expects to receive a J.D.


10 Floors for Parking Planned On Top of a Chicago Church
LEAD: For Chicago motorists and Catholic parishioners, the Old St.
Mary's Catholic Church and Self-Park facility will be a 12-story blessing: 10 floors of parking space on a two-story church.


OUR ANALGESIC CULTURE
LEAD:
THE PRESENCE OF MYTH
By Leszek Kolakowski.
Translated by Adam Czerniawski.
138 pp. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press. $19.95.


For the Capital Cathedral, a Slow Finishing Touch
LEAD: Symbolism and symmetry mean a lot in this city of monuments, memorials, diplomats and politicians.


A HIGH-STEPPING, LIGHT-FOOTED GRAPHIC ART
LEAD: ''Pierre Bonnard: The Graphic Art'' at the Metropolitan Museum is in itself a self-sufficing delight, even if it was initially overshadowed in the minds of many visitors by the temporary proximity of two big-name neighbors (Velazquez and Canaletto).
But those neighbors have now taken their leave, and we have until Feb.


On Fire, a Soviet Jet Crashes, Killing 23 People in the Urals
LEAD: A Soviet airliner with a flaming engine crashed today while attempting an emergency landing on a field in the Ural Mountains, killing 23 people, the official press agency Tass said.
Thirty people were injured, the agency said.


SOLILOQUIES, ASIDES AND SONGS
LEAD:
THE BEST AMERICAN ESSAYS 1989
Edited by Geoffrey Wolff.
Robert Atwan, series editor.
298 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields.
Cloth, $17.95. Paper, $8.95.


Montana
LEAD: To the Editor: On Nov. 12 you published a ski guide to the United States.
Imagine our surprise when a concerned individual informed us that Montana was not included.


OUT OF DE FOREST AND ONTO THE AIR CAME MUSIC
LEAD: Anniversaries aren't just sentimental occasions.
They are useful pegs for marking the position of events in the stream of time.
They give us perspective.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Larchmont, N.Y.
$555,000
7 Rockhill Terrace
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old Normandy Tudor; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, den, screened porch, patio; taxes $9,205.
Port Chester, N.Y.
$266,000
20 James Court
2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old town house; brick fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, deck; taxes $3,990.


Lisa Rieger Wed To M. W. Claman
LEAD: Lisa Rieger, a daughter of Jack (Chip) Rieger of New York and Joan Rieger of Brentwood, Calif., was married yesterday in San Francisco to Matthew Warren Claman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Claman of Dallas.
Judge Joseph Karesh of Alameda County (Calif.) Superior Court officiated at the Page Brown


For the Dollar, More Weakness
LEAD: The American dollar and the Japanese yen continued their 1990 swoon last week, as the West German mark, the Swiss franc and the Canadian dollar all gained ground.
This week could be more of the same.
The West German Bundesbank meets on Thursday, but analysts are not expecting the central bank to raise rates again.


Miss Kittredge to Wed R. P. Wastrom
LEAD: Mrs.
David Brayton Kittredge of Charlotte, Vt., has announced the engagement of her daughter Jennifer Ann Kittredge to Richard Paul Wastrom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dale Wastrom of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The bride is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Kittredge.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Kittredge, 29 years old, is a senior public-relations coordinator for Little, Brown &amp; Company in New York.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption with the Design column in The Times Magazine on Dec. 31 about a folding bicycle sold at the Design Store of the Museum of Modern Art misstated the price.
It is $595.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
KING OBSERVANCES


Guidelines on Dying Urged by Both Sides Of Case in Missouri
LEAD: A family that wants to let a comatose daughter die, and the Missouri Attorney General who opposes that request, have endorsed legislation to set up guidelines in such cases.


Campus Life: New Mexico;   Nanny Training: storytelling And Diapering
LEAD: Five days a week Catherine Gerlach is a nanny for the children of Justin and Mary Lee Collins of Santa Fe.
Ms.
Gerlach, 27 years old, is a psychology major from the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   South Norwalk Waterfront Plan Moving
LEAD: A MASTER PLAN to turn SoNo, the restored waterfront of the South Norwalk neighborhood, into one of Connecticut's prime tourist attractions is advancing with surprising brio in view of a recession-prone economy.


A Better Choice For a Ferry Terminal
LEAD: The ferryboat from Hoboken to lower Manhattan is a good idea (''Ferryboats Again Becoming a Familiar Sight Along Hudson,'' Dec. 24), but the Battery Park City terminus is a poor choice.


Drug Use by Students on Rise
LEAD: ONE in four high school seniors in Connecticut has smoked marijuana recently, a rate that significantly exceeds national levels, according to a survey by the State Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse.


POSTINGS: 3 Jim Dine Sculptures;   Venus on the Avenue
LEAD: When the former J. C. Penney building was acquired by the Tishman Speyer Trammell Crow Limited Partnership in 1988, the architectural firm of Skidmore Owings &amp; Merrill was hired to offer advice about renovating the structure and its sunken plaza on the west blockfront along the Avenue of the Americas between West 52d and 53d Streets.


Yonkers Seeks to Block Housing Plan
LEAD: Mayor Henry Spallone, buoyed by the United States Supreme Court's ruling that overturned contempt fines against four City Councilmen in the city's desegregation case, has asked municipal officials to examine the options of further legal action to prevent construction of court-ordered integrated housing.


Overnight Transformation At Midtown Welfare Hotel
LEAD: It was only 24 hours since New York City took over operations at one of the most squalid Manhattan welfare hotels, but already Glynis Slater, a 33-year-old mother of two, could see some improvement.


Campus Life: UConn;   Proposal to Close Teaching Center Is Angering Students and Faculty
LEAD: A steady reduction of services to students at the University of Connecticut, prompted by recent state budget cuts, have been greeted with murmurs of protest in the last few months.
But the most recent money-saving effort - the planned closing of the Center for Educational Innovation, which helps student teachers and university faculty members improve their teaching skills - has upset not just students, but faculty and union members as well.


Elegant Dinners in a Victorian Setting
LEAD: THE Copper Beech Inn, occupying the shade of a venerable copper beech tree on Main Street in Ivoryton, has been considered one of Connecticut's most elegant restaurants for almost 20 years.
It has survived a change in ownership, menu changes and minor tinkering and has managed to maintain its reputation for leisurely dining in restful and attractive surroundings.


EAST BERLIN DIARY
LEAD: I read Christoph Hein's article ''East Berlin Diary'' (Dec. 17), and memories of my many trips to East Germany over the years came back to me.
My first visit to East Berlin was in 1963, just 18 months after the wall was built.
My first trip to Leipzig, in East Germany, was in 1964.
After that I must have crossed Checkpoint


Review/Music;   Industrial Clankings With Guitar Backing
LEAD: Drum machines went ''boom-chucka-boom'' and singers growled and glared in a triple bill of industrial rock Thursday night at the Ritz.
Ministry, KMFDM and Controlled Bleeding all make music that draws its power from the deepest, loudest thuds the musicians and electronics can produce.
Guitar and keyboard sounds and the chanted vocals are subordinate in songs that try to turn the depersonalized sounds of assembly-line machinery into statements of personal fury and horror.


Ellin Paquette to Wed F. C. Haab Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Paquette Jr. of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Ellin Louise Paquette and Frederick Christian Haab Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haab of Villanova, Pa., and St.
Michaels, Md.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
When Wit Works Too Hard


Maps That Try to Hide Their Age
LEAD: IF the map says French Indochina, it is probably not the best one to buy for getting around in Southeast Asia.
But failing such startling evidence of age, it is difficult these days to tell how old a map in a store may be.
Copyright laws have been eased and some cartographers have been chary about saying how long it has been since a map was revised, even though it may have a fresh new design on the cover.


FROM SCOPES TO SKOKIE
LEAD:
IN DEFENSE OF AMERICAN LIBERTIES
A History of the ACLU.
By Samuel Walker.
Illustrated. 479 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I don't see any tragedy in a multi-party system if it arises and actually answers the interests of society.
We should not be afraid of it, the way the devil is of incense.''
- Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
[1:6.]


Oysters, a New Orleans Passion
LEAD: DAVID ENGERT, a 39-year-old manager of a Los Angeles computer company, traveled nearly 2,000 miles to get to his native New Orleans for the holidays.
One of the main reasons, he said: to eat oysters at the Acme Oyster House, on Iberville Street in the French Quarter.


Mixed Messages With the Seafood
LEAD: J W.'s SEA GRILL in the new Marriott Wind Watch Hotel in Hauppauge cannot decide whether it wants to be the Plaza Hotel or a Holiday Inn.


R. K. Fitts to Wed Sarah A. Watkins
LEAD: Myrna S. Watkins of Wellesley Hills, Mass., and Dr.
Mark E. Watkins of Syracuse have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Anne Watkins and Robert K. Fitts, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald D. Fitts of Penn Valley, Pa.


Arno B. FischerAnd Miss Pray To Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Sabrina Suzanne Frances Pray and Arno Bryant Fischer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arno Fischer of Greenwich, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Mrs.
F.
Richards Ford 3d of Greenwich and Malcolm S. Pray Jr. of Greenwich and Palm Beach, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.


Pope Warns on Rekindling of Rivalries in East
LEAD: Pope John Paul II today hailed the ''irrepressible thirst for freedom'' that has ''broken down walls and opened doors'' in Eastern Europe, but he warned that the rapid political changes could unleash nationalist feelings and ethnic conflicts.


WHAT YOUR BRAIN IS UP TO
LEAD:
THE REMEMBERED PRESENT
A Biological Theory of Consciousness.
By Gerald M. Edelman.
Illustrated. 346 pp. New York: Basic Books. $29.95.


As the Sun Sets Slowly in the West . . .
LEAD: Few home-grown myths have exerted a more powerful influence on popular culture than that of the American cowboy.
Pictured as a heroic loner, a visionary frontiersman, a glamorous outlaw and a man's man in movies, television, songs and cigarette ads, he has stood as an icon of American masculinity for decades, though recently his supremacy has been challenged by fictional descendants from James Bond to Luke Skywalker, and revisionist historians have set about demolishing the romanticism of the Old West.


Should Sotheby's Be Strictly Cash and Carry?
LEAD: ART collectors were euphoric when, less than a month after the Wall Street crash of 1987, Sotheby's sold van Gogh's ''Irises'' for $53.9 million, the highest price ever paid for a painting at auction.
Then, two years later, it was revealed that the auction house had given the buyer a loan amounting to half the price of the painting and was still holding the artwork as collateral.


Lisa Kerr Grimmelmann Is Affianced
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ihler F. Grimmelmann of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Kerr Grimmelmann to Dr.
Miles Oakley Bidwell Jr., the son of M. Oakley Bidwell of Nassau, the Bahamas, and the late Frances J. Mott.
A June wedding is planned.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: When Dee Topol is ready to get dressed in the morning, she plays a little game with herself: ''Who am I going to be today?''


U.S. Attorney in Miami to Take No Active Role in the Noriega Trial
LEAD: Dexter Lehtinen, the United States Attorney here, announced today that he would not take an active role in the prosecution of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, ending days of speculation over whether Bush Administration officials thought Mr.
Lehtinen was qualified to handle the case.


Restarting a Balky Furnace
LEAD: PROLONGED cold weather taxes home heating equipment, thus increasing the likelihood of an unexpected shutdown.


Bronx Arts Museum Loses One Gallery but Gets Another
LEAD: THE Bronx Museum of the Arts lost a satellite when the gallery at Krasdale Foods headquarters recently moved into the orbit of The Lehman College Art Gallery.
But the museum has since gained one at the Jewish Home and Hospital for Aged.
That institution, at 100 West Kingsbridge Road, is the complex of buildings filling the block bounded by Kingsbridge and West 190th Street on the short sides and Webb and University


A 'White Knight' Draws Cries of 'Patent Blackmail'
LEAD: Most people who have heard of Eugene M. Lang know him as the New York philanthropist who struck an imaginative deal with a class of Harlem sixth graders: If they finished high school, he would pay their college expenses.
The idea, which has been widely copied, brought Mr.
Lang national celebrity.


Ivy League Holds Its Own
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Saving the Bacon
LEAD: PORK AND I WERE NOT ON TASTING TERMS FORJU nearly 25 years.
Our disagreement had nothing to do with religion, although it did start in church.
The evening I was scheduled to play an angel in a pageant, my mother baked a big, juicy ham for dinner and I got sick as the devil.


CAN OPERA SURVIVE FRIENDS LIKE THIS?
LEAD: How comforting to know in a turbulent world that one of Western culture's most venerable traditions survives: the visionary interview granted by the freshly anointed artistic director upon taking office.
The organization changing pilots may be as formidable and unwieldy as a major opera company or as marginal as an amateur chamber orchestra.


Back Home Again With Indiana
LEAD: It makes some sense to watch the Indiana Jones trilogy backward - or more precisely, in reverse chronological order.
INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, which will be released on video at the end of the month (1989, Paramount Home Video, $24.95), begins with Indiana as a Boy Scout, before he became the world's most daring archeologist-adventurer, before he was even Harrison Ford.


A.C.L.U. Revises Its Strategy In Attempt to Mold Opinion
LEAD: After years of telling officials what they cannot do to keep guns and other weapons out of the city's troubled schools, the American Civil Liberties Union here this week adopted a completely different tack: It presented its own plan to tighten school discipline and security.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
CHARLES IVES


India's Ambassador to Washington Resigns
LEAD: Karan Singh, the Indian Ambassador to Washington and son of the last Maharajah of Kashmir, has resigned his post, it was announced today.


POSTINGS: Horse-Farm Homes;  $950,000 and Up
LEAD: Two horse farms in Columbia County, N.Y., are being developed into a group of expensive homes designed to mimic the architecture of the Hudson River Valley.
Named Tory Hill, the 550-acre project adjoins Route 22 in the hamlet of Hillsdale and is on the site of the former Sir William Horse Farms, where


Diana Fortuna, New York City Official, to Wed
LEAD: Diana Fortuna, a deputy director of the New York City Office of Management and Budget, and David Yassky, a third-year law student at Yale University, plan to be married in May.


PERSPECTIVES: Downtown Brooklyn;   Creating a Critical Mass at Metrotech
LEAD: BY a curious quirk of timing in the mid-70's, Citibank found itself building the imposing Citicorp Center project at Lexington Avenue and East 53d Street when new office construction generally in Manhattan was tomb silent.


Coming to Papa
LEAD: In a sort of artistic paternity suit, a California court last week ruled that the hit movie, ''Coming to America,'' had sprung from the mind of Art Buchwald.
The ruling obligated the Paramount Pictures Corporation, which made the movie, to live up to a contract in which the columnist and Alan Bernheim, a producer and co-plaintiff, were promised $250,000 and 19 percent of the profits from any film produced from a story idea that Mr.


Is Anybody Listening?
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD: Tennis
Noah and Steeb in Final: Yannick Noah combined subtlety and power to defeat the defending champion, Aaron Krickstein, 6-4, 7-5, yesterday and advance to the final of the New South Wales Open tournament in Sydney, Australia.
Noah, seeded No. 8, will meet Carl-Uwe Steeb of West Germany in the final today.


Inside the Department of Pain and Suffering
LEAD: ALMOST from the day it was set up in 1966 as New York City's main weapon in the war on poverty, the huge Human Resources Administration has itself been under attack.
Mayor David N. Dinkins has called running it ''the toughest job in the City of New York,'' even tougher than being Mayor.
James Dumpson, a former administrator who heads the


Sara Orenstein and David Kober Wed
LEAD: Sara Orenstein and David Matthew Kober were married last evening at the Pierre in New York by Rabbi Jerry Orenstein, an uncle of the bride, and Rabbi Saul Berman, an uncle of the bridegroom.


In 'Bull's-Eye!' the Aim Is Laughter
LEAD: This stately home was refuge for the children of Charles I during the London plague year of 1646; the house from which Lady Jane Grey set out by river for her nine days' reign as Queen of England before her beheading; the starting point for the dramatic ride to London by Henry Percy and Guy Fawkes the night before Fawkes's Gunpowder Plot was revealed - and now the house where Michael Winner directed Michael Caine and Roger Moore in scenes from Mr.


Encouraging a Healthy Life Style Is Just Good Business
LEAD: A COOLING economy in Long Island is not the only challenge facing Nassau and Suffolk County employers.
The rising cost of health insurance has become a serious drain on revenues and makes it increasingly difficult for companies to grow and compete in a chilly economic climate.


Too Old to Fly to Chicago, but Not to the Moon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Overcoming Obstacles to a Civil-Rights Chronicle
LEAD: In 1965, Henry Hampton, the executive producer of ''Eyes on the Prize,'' marched for civil rights in Selma, Ala.
Today he works in a corner office piled high with books and papers, with a view of Shawmut Avenue, a thoroughfare in this city's South End that is, in his words, ''about the only integrated neighborhood in Boston.


A DARK LENS ON AMERICA
LEAD: AT THE EDGE OF THE FRENCH QUARTER IN New Orleans, where the city's charm falls off into skid row, David Lynch is directing a scene from his new film ''Wild at Heart.'' On a scouting mission during the morning he had liked several of the people who gather here in the bars before noon, and has now decided to incorporate them into the shots.


Ticket Lottery At Meadowlands
LEAD: If you want to participate in the lottery to be able to buy tickets to the Eastern regional semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament at Byrne Meadowlands Arena March 24 and 26, you must follow this procedure:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Mosaic Metaphor Serves Many Masters
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Names And the 'Grand Word'
LEAD: The effort of state and private colleges in New Jersey to call themselves universities (''Colleges Ask to Be Called Universities,'' Dec. 3) is an example of what the 19th-century British poet and critic Matthew Arnold called ''the grand word without the grand thing.''


Carbon Paper 1, Technology 0
LEAD: Fat forms - invoices, purchase orders, bills of lading and other multipart documents that require a number of copies - are the bane of most small-business computer printers.
The cries of anguish seem to peak at this time of the year when companies start trying to print W-2 forms.
Each Federal, state and local agency wants its own copy of the wage statement that employers are required to provide to employees.


Pavlovsk
LEAD: To the Editor: Having recently returned with my wife and daughter from our first trip to the Soviet Union, and with our visit to Pavlovsk fresh in my mind, I was dismayed by several aspects of the article on the palace (''Russia's Reborn Slendor'' by Olivier Bernier, Travel, Oct. 1.


Mortgage Delinquencies Increasing
LEAD: THE slump in the New York region's real estate market, now in its third year, is increasing the financial strain on homeowners, would-be sellers and lenders alike as delinquent mortgage loans and foreclosures spread across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


&gt;Breakfast Offerings That Stand Up to the Elements
LEAD: BREAKFAST, the health experts tell us, is the most important meal of the day.
But most people try to get by with cereal, juice and a cup of coffee.
This may be all very well if your morning is spent in front of a desk.
But if you plan to keep going on the ski slopes - or indeed, in any form of vigorous outdoor winter exercise - you will need something considerably more substantial.


The Sacrament of Killing
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. WEIGHS SHIFTS IN AFGHAN POLICY
LEAD: President Bush sent a delegation of senior American officials to South Asia today to accelerate efforts to find a negotiated settlement of the war in Afghanistan.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 10 about sesquicentennial events in New Zealand misidentified the capital.
It is Wellington.


Nancy J. Rennert to Marry
LEAD: May wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron E. Rennert of North Woodmere, L.I., for their daughter, Dr.
Nancy J. Rennert, and Dr.
Lewis Berman, both residents in internal medicine at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh.
Dr.
Berman is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham Berman of Cedar Grove, N.J.


Fashion;   At Gucci, Calvin and the Rest, 50% Off Is the Norm
LEAD: If you go, be prepared to find only a few things you like and to spend what seems like years schlepping from place to place.
Hours vary from store to store, but most are open seven days a week.
On to the bargains:
Gucci


Wall of Fame
LEAD: He played only one season at Arizona State before embarking on a 21-year major league career that will land him in the Hall of Fame, but yesterday, Reggie Jackson saw his number retired by the university.
And it wasn't the number he actually wore.


Christina Maloney (Bachrach) Christina Codo Wed in Florida
LEAD: The marriage of Christina Codo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman F. Codo of Hinsdale, Ill., and Boca Raton, Fla., to Patrick Joseph Maloney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Maloney of Elizabeth, N.J., took place yesterday at the Boca Raton Hotel and Club.
Judge Thomas E. Sholts of the 15th Judicial Circuit in West Palm Beach,


Hambletonian Co-Winners
LEAD: An administrative law judge on Friday declared Park Avenue Joe and Probe co-winners of the 1989 Hambletonian, but allowed the owners of Park Avenue Joe to keep 50 percent of the purse and owners of Probe to keep 25 percent.


In Space News Conference, Astronauts Hail Their Good Catch
LEAD: With their major objectives accomplished, the astronauts of the space shuttle Columbia settled down today to work on engineering and medical experiments for the rest of the mission, which is to end next Friday morning.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Frank O'Neill's ROMAN CIRCUS (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95) may not be everybody's dish.
It may be too introspective, too literary, too novelistic.
Give it a chance.
Brilliantly written, with superb characterizations, plenty of action and a Felliniesque social setup, it is to most books of its genre what a Henry James novel is to a Horatio


'Successful People Laugh at Themselves'
LEAD: One of the few treasures to be found, every other week, in the Sunday Long Island Weekly is the Barbara Klaus column.
It never fails to put a smile on your face or a good feeling in your heart.
In our house, it almost invariably gets clipped out and shown or mailed to my office staff, friends and family.


Amy Freedman To Wed in June
LEAD: Walter G. Freedman of Chicago and Mrs.
Henri Axel Schupf of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Elizabeth Freedman to Daniel Shaw Jurkowitz, a son of Dr.
Marianne Jurkowitz Alexander of Worthington, Ohio, and the late Dr.
Lawrence Jurkowitz of Whitestone, Queens.
A


AN UNEASY WALKER IN THE CITY
LEAD:
OUR NEW YORK
Text by Alfred Kazin.
Photographs by David Finn.
224 pages. New York:
Harper &amp; Row. $35.


Thomas Fletcher, Rector, 75
LEAD: The Rev.
Thomas Fletcher, who retired in 1981 after 20 years as rector of St.
Mark's Episcopal Church of New Britain, died Friday at his home in Farmington, Conn., after a brief illness.
He was 75 years old.


Evening Hours;   A Gala With Cardin And a Party for Art
LEAD: Pierre Cardin, the self-proclaimed ''fashion capitalist,'' invited about 1,000 of his New York friends to a private party last Sunday.
It started with a cocktail reception at Mr.
Cardin's Madison Avenue restaurant, Maxim's, then went on to a performance of the Soviet rock musical ''Junon and Avos: The Hope,'' at City Center.


EAST BERLIN DIARY
LEAD: The current turmoil in Communist countries is often described as a struggle between freedom (which is assumed to require a free-enterprise economy) and Communism (dictatorship combined with a socialist economy).
Christoph Hein cuts through this confusion between political and economic issues to make it clear that democracy versus dictatorship and private enterprise versus socialism are separate issues.


State Seeks to Reduce Population of Swans
LEAD: TWO years ago, protests forced the state to drop a plan to reduce the mute swan population, but now, with an estimate of more than 1,900 swans in Connecticut, environmental officials have resurrected the proposal.


Unequal Collaborators
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Sole Issue In Cablevision Dispute
LEAD: The Dec. 24 article on cable television in New Jersey (''Towns Challenge Cable TV Companies'') contains a broad misstatement regarding Cablevision and the Madison Square Garden Network (MSG).


Restarting a Balky Furnace
LEAD: PROLONGED cold weather taxes home heating equipment, thus increasing the likelihood of an unexpected shutdown.


Campus Life: M.I.T.;   Officials Seeking Grant to Establish Course in Chinese
LEAD: Five days a week during the academic year, Andrea Li boards the No. 1 bus at the steps of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's main building for a 15-minute ride to Harvard University, where she is studying Chinese.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Congress will have to deal with several bills concerning coins in the next few months.
One will change the look of the coins.
Another will abolish the cent in favor of a new coin valued at one dollar.
Both bills are mired in controversy.
The bill to change the design on the reverse side of the coins is supported by the American Numismatic Association and by many collectors.


New in the Business Section
LEAD: New information for investors in everything from certificates of deposits to mutual funds and foreign stocks is available on Sundays in The New York Times beginning today.


All the Names Will Be New on the Nigerian Ballot
LEAD: Two years from now, if all goes as scheduled, Nigeria will have a new national legislature, 21 new state governors and a new democratically elected President.
What it does not have now are candidates for any of those jobs.


Steal Helps Redmen Stop Panthers
LEAD: Jason Buchanan stole the ball from Jason Matthews near midcourt with 4 seconds left yesterday to prevent Pittsburgh from attempting a winning shot, and the steal lifted St.
John's to a 71-70 victory over the Panthers before 10,884 at Madison Square Garden.
But a shot Pat Cavanaugh missed with 12 seconds remaining was just as crucial as the one the


Kathleen Raftery To Marry in May
LEAD: The engagement of Kathleen Ann Raftery to Dr.
John W. Danaher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Danaher of Goshen, Conn., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Raftery of Riverside, Calif.
A May wedding is planned.


Campus Life: Minnesota;   Students Debate Legal Status For Marijuana
LEAD: Students for and against the legalization of marijuana debated Thursday at the University of Minnesota, surrounded by a noisy, jeering crowd of 300 spectators.


Karen S. Temes, Nurse, to Marry
LEAD: Karen Sue Temes, a nurse in neonatal intensive care at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, and Dr.
Lewis Milrod, a fellow in behavioral neurology at Children's Hospital there, plan to marry in May.
The engagement was announced by her parents, Dr.
Lloyd Temes and Dr.
Roberta Temes, both of Manhattan Beach,


Question Of the Week;   Is the N.F.C. The Better Conference?
LEAD: Recent history says yes.
From 1984 through 1989, no N.F.C. team won its division with less than 10 victories.
But six A.F.C. teams managed to win.
In the last two seasons, four N.F.C. teams have missed the playoffs despite winning 10 games, none have done that and missed in the A.F.C.


Champagne and Chic, but Pure, Clean Mozart, Too
LEAD: The Labeque sisters, the pianists Katia and Marielle, have furthered their careers through talk shows and other publicity measures generally frowned upon by serious musicians.
They have been the subject of newspaper and magazine articles around the world.
They readily give interviews.
They play Gershwin, Scott Joplin and pop music.


Unwanted Horses Find Greener Pastures
LEAD: IT seems the quintessential Connecticut pastoral scene: a group of horses basking in the wintery sunshine, contentedly nibbling on hay.
But not long ago some of the horses were near death, having been starved and neglected, and others were destined for the slaughterhouse.
That was before Patricia Whalers of New Milford came into their lives.


Lithuania: A Land Dominated by Grasping Neighbors
LEAD: ''What was stolen must be returned.''


Style Makers;   Mariya Solomin, Soviet Fashion Editor
LEAD: ''It's bigger than our House of Fashion,'' exclaimed Mariya Solomin after a tour of Calvin Klein's workrooms and offices, which occupy six floors at 205 West 39th Street.
Mrs.
Solomin is the fashion editor of Zhurnal Mod, the Soviet Union's major fashion magazine.


Truth Can Be Stranger Than Stereotypes
LEAD: In San Francisco, we're used to the hype.


'I FELT FREEDOM IN MY BONES'
LEAD:
FORGED IN BATTLE
The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers.
By Joseph T. Glatthaar.
Illustrated. 370 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $24.95.


'Sweetie' Isn't Sugary
LEAD: Trapped in a drab, claustrophobic Sydney suburb, a dour young Australian named Kay endlessly muses about trees.
Anthropomorphic trees.
Malevolent trees.


Scuba Diving
LEAD: To the Editor: With the recent rise in the popularity of scuba diving, readers of Jane Adams's article ''Into the Void, and Back'' (Travel, Dec. 10) unfamiliar with the sport should be alerted to the possibility that the author might have been experiencing a major danger of scuba diving known as nitrogen narcosis, also called rapture of the deep, not to be confused with the bends or nitrogen saturation of the blood.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended Dec. 30
MANHATTAN
East Midtown
$621,000
250 East 40th Street
(High Point)
2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,547-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 200-sq.-ft. terrace; common charge $872, taxes $620 (Broker: M.J. Raynes)
Greenwich Village


&gt;Breakfast Offerings That Stand Up to the Elements
LEAD: BREAKFAST, the health experts tell us, is the most important meal of the day But most people try to get by with cereal, juice and a cup of coffee.
This may be all very well if your morning is spent in front of a desk.
But if you plan to keep going on the ski slopes - or indeed, in any form of vigorous outdoor winter exercise - you will need something considerably more substantial.


Isadora's Dances Take On a Life of Their Own
LEAD: A young woman in a short red tunic leaps out with a tattered flag, skips and falls ''wounded.'' Immediately, a second woman enters to take up the banner, and as she falls, two women materialize.
Five bodies lie on the ground and two more appear with raised fists, overlapping in their jumps.
On tape, the Red Army Chorus sings the ''Varshavyanka,'' a turn-of-the-century Polish-Russian revolutionary song.


Cold Warriors, From A to Z
LEAD: Ever since Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985, neoconservatives and other hard-liners have strained to find new rationales for old cold war animosities.
It hasn't been easy.
Mr.
Gorbachev doesn't fit the mold of Soviet leaders with his political and economic reforms, his unilateral force reductions, his freeing of Eastern Europe, his willingness to reveal the lies of his predecessors and now his statement that a multiparty system in his own country would not be a ''tragedy.


A Portrait Of Justice Douglas
LEAD: ''MAYBE I'm giving you too much of a wagonload, but that's your problem.'' Agitatedly sorting out the pieces of his life after a stroke, William Orville Douglas, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, recalls those words, once spoken by his father.


It's Deadline Time for George Ball
LEAD: Time is running out for George L. Ball.
The 51-year-old chief executive of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. has spent the last five years, and hundreds of millions of dollars, trying to turn a sleepy retail brokerage operation into a glamorous global investment bank.
Mr.
Ball wanted Pru-Bache to join the big leagues on Wall


Hoosiers Surprised By the Boilermakers
LEAD: Tony Jones scored 21 points as Purdue rallied from a 16-point deficit, tied cold-shooting Indiana on a basket by Ryan Berning with 35 seconds left in regulation, then beat the Hoosiers, 81-79, in overtime.


Martin Luther King: The Books Are Getting Better
LEAD: Tomorrow is the fifth official celebration of the Martin Luther King holiday, and enough time may have passed for at least a preliminary reckoning of this new national institution.
There has been a strained, showman's smile about the holiday since it sprang unexpectedly from Congress in 1983, as though in recompense for the 20-year institutional disengagement on most public issues touching race - from cities and transportation to schools.


Campus Life: Evergreen State;   School Seeks Minority Voices In Its Classrooms
LEAD: Evergreen State College has announced a new admissions policy that it hopes will increase the number of minority and handicapped students at the school, as well as add more diversity to its classrooms.


Who's Left, Who's Right in Post-Wall Europe?
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York City Clergy Hope Neighborliness Will Help Race Relations
LEAD: Religious leaders in New York are gambling that, to mend the city's racial divisions, many New Yorkers will try anything, even neighborliness.


Winning By Design: System Puts 49ers on Top
LEAD: If the San Francisco 49ers defeat the Los Angeles Rams here today and leap toward the franchise's fourth Super Bowl title, Joe Montana, Jerry Rice and Roger Craig will, once again, be applauded.
George Seifert will be praised for guiding a return trip to the Super Bowl in his first season as head coach.


U.S. to Relax Verification Proposal in Arms Talks
LEAD: In a effort to speed up the lagging conventional arms talks, the Bush Administration plans to drop its long-standing demand for permanent inspectors at airfields, ports and rail lines in Europe, officials said today.


WHEN THE MEN IN BLUE FADE INTO BLAND
LEAD: Climbing from the bottom to the top of the ratings heap during the last decade or so, NBC was adventurous, taking chances on series such as ''Miami Vice,'' ''Hill Street Blues,'' ''Cheers'' and ''The Cosby Show.'' Today, undoubtedly under pressure to stay a very profitable No. 1, the network, now owned by General Electric, has become noticeably more cautious.


Apartment Hunting And the Dog Factor
LEAD: THE easy part was selling our house.
Finding an apartment in Bronxville should have been easy, except for one problem.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our sliding glass doors are difficult to slide.
We have vacuumed the tracks and sprayed with a silicone lubricant, but this helps only temporarily.
Any suggestions?


Memory Enshrined In an Apple Peel
LEAD: THE sun, belying the thermometer's frigid reading, streamed through the panes of the kitchen window, resting on the counter where the apple sat.


About Cars;   Cadillac's Latest in Touring
LEAD: It is 6:30 A.M., a time when I am usually in suspended animation.


In Georgia Reprise, Maddox on Stump
LEAD: ''Those Spiro Agnew and George Wallace watches were pin lever movements, cheap pieces of junk,'' said Lester Maddox, proudly brandishing the watch on his wrist with its chicken leg for an hour hand and pick handle for a minute hand. ''This is a 17 jewel.''


Correction
LEAD: An article on Dec. 31 about corporations that finance programs in the public schools misidentified a corporate sponsor at the K. T. Murphy Elementary School in Stamford.
It is the General Electric Capital Corporation of Stamford, not the General Electric Company of Fairfield.


Julie Harris Makes 'Miss Daisy' Her Own
LEAD: THE national touring company of Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' which has understandably been called the Julie Harris Company for the last 15 months, is making its 28th and final stop at the Shubert in New Haven, through next Sunday, and that's all a sensible theatergoer needs to know.


Wrong Place at the Wrong Time: Stray Bullets Kill More Bystanders
LEAD: It was all over in a few seconds, but what lingers in Milord Bonny's mind is the sight of his 14-year-old grandson, sinking to his knees on a Brooklyn sidewalk.


Strickland's Spurt Rescues Knicks
LEAD: Trade Rod Strickland, keep Mark Jackson.
Trade Jackson and keep Strickland.
That kind of talk has surfaced time and again ever since the Knicks began to team the talented playmakers, their 1987 and 1988 first-round draft choices.


'Tara! Tara! Tara!'
LEAD: To the Editor:


POSTINGS: $900,000 Project;   Restoration On Madison
LEAD: The 82-year-old French Gothic apartment house at the corner of Madison Avenue and East 66th Street, often regarded as one of the most distinctive structures on the East Side, has emerged from a coccoon of scaffolding that had enveloped it during more than two years of exterior restoration.


FASHION: European Report -- Paris;   Lurching Into the 90's
LEAD: In fact, the Saint Laurent Rive Gauche collection, the final showing during a week of presentations last October for spring and summer 1990, was not only a strange, strong statement but also a compendium of the current state of fashion in general.
One must always remember that Paris is the font of most fashion directions for the rest of the world.


'Every Night Was an Opening Night'
LEAD: ''It wasn't just one opening night,'' Agnes de Mille explained recently, recalling the debut of American Ballet Theater a half-century ago. ''During that first season, almost every night was an opening night.
They had ballets by Fokine, Mordkin and Adolph Bolm.
They had premieres by Tudor and Eugene Loring.


More Trouble With Oiled Waters
LEAD: Exxon is not having a good year.
Nor is the environment.
Last March brought the Valdez oil spill.
On Christmas Eve, an Exxon refinery in Baton Rouge exploded.
And on New Year's Day, 500,000 gallons of heating oil burst through a ruptured pipe into Arthur Kill, a 13-mile stretch of water off Staten Island that is a vital breeding ground for herons and egrets.


A Blue-Chip Name Is Not Enough
LEAD: It was a dirty decade.
From check-kiting at E.F.
Hutton to insider trading at Drexel Burnham Lambert, Wall Street misbehavior was to the 1980's what bootlegging was to the 20's - the crime that defined the era.


O'CONNOR ORDAINS A MARRIED PRIEST
LEAD: Speaking just before the ordination of a married man with four children to the Catholic priesthood yesterday, John Cardinal O'Connor of New York said that the event did not augur any change in the Catholic Church's insistence that in most of its branches only men vowed to celibacy can serve as priests.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Despite repeated warnings not to take brand-new cameras on once-in-a-lifetime travel vacations, some people persist in tempting fate.


Restarting a Balky Furnace
LEAD: PROLONGED cold weather taxes home heating equipment, thus increasing the likelihood of an unexpected shutdown.


PATH and Access For the Disabled
LEAD: Daniel Censullo, chief operating officer of PATH, spoke about current and future improvements of the PATH system in the Nov. 26 New Jersey Q &amp; A. Nowhere is access to PATH for the disabled community mentioned.


Preventing Expo 2000
LEAD: To the Editor:


Regina M. Reilly To Marry in May
LEAD: Regina Mary Reilly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul W. Reilly of Locust, N.J., and Lieut.
James Roger Cochrane, U.S.N., a son of Assemblyman and Mrs.
John C. Cochrane of Brightwaters, L.I., plan to marry in May, her parents have announced.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Intelligence;   Kremlin Watchers Cope With Data Glut
LEAD: After 40 years of foraging for bits of data on the Soviet Union and its allies, American intelligence analysts are struggling to cope with a cascade of information, including Kremlin statistical reports, periodicals and word-of-mouth from foreign business travelers and military officers who can visit once-forbidden reaches.


Economic Pulse: The Oil States -- A special report:   3 States, Once Fat on Oil, Try to Break With Past
LEAD: Fearfully contemplating a future without oil, Texas, Louisiana and Oklahoma are trying to reinvent themselves.


Wilder Sworn in as Virginia's Governor


Starting Today: an expanded Business section
LEAD: The Times introduces a revised and expanded Sunday Business section today.
It includes revised financial tables, new graphical presentations of business news and new columns that report on, among other things, Wall Street, mutual funds, executive life styles, world stock markets and personal finance.


Elizabeth Leiman To Wed in March
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard M. Leiman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Leiman, to Ruben Kraiem, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Kraiem of Mexico City and New York.
A March wedding is planned.


Miss Johnson to Marry Patrick Rogers in June
LEAD: Mrs.
H.
Alden Johnson Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., has announced June wedding plans for her daughter Cynthia Cole Johnson and Patrick Joseph Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
John Rogers of Rochester.


Meg Jacobs Plans To Wed in March
LEAD: Margaret Louise Jacobs, an associate of the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter, and Samuel Allan Flax, a partner in the firm, plan to marry in March.
Ms.
Jacobs, known as Meg, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph K. Jacobs of Nashville.
Mr.
Flax is a son of Mrs.
Louis Flax of Rockville, Md., and Helena, Mont., and the late Mr.


Dentists Are Lacking A Sense of Humor
LEAD: As a faithful reader of Barbara Klaus's Long Island Sound columns from almost its inception, I was able to take her article ''Smile, Darn You Smile'' as I'm sure it was meant: a tongue-in-cheek poke at my profession containing many of the cliches about dentists that I have heard for years.
This column was certainly not one of her most humorous, but I found myself chuckling in several places.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
TRACKINGS: Composers Speak With Richard Dufallo.
By Richard Dufallo. (Oxford University, $35.) No one should require more of this book of splendid interviews.
Still, how wonderful it would be if Richard Dufallo's ''Trackings'' rekindled the old passions and rancor surrounding 20th-century music before the composers and their scores fade into the next century.


12 Cases of a Severe Lung Disease Found Among Workers at A-Plant
LEAD: Twelve people who were exposed to the metal beryllium while working at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant have contracted an incurable lung disease, according to an Energy Department study obtained by a newspaper.


Raffi Gregorian Wed in Australia To Miss Dawson
LEAD: Bernadette Dawson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
J.
Dawson of Melbourne, Australia, was married yesterday in Belgrave, a suburb of Melbourne, to Raffi Gregorian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vartan Gregorian of New York and Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Peter Carcuran performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More's Roman Catholic


SALVADOR LEFTIST IS SHOT TO DEATH
LEAD: The body of a prominent Salvadoran leftist who was reported kidnapped in Guatemala City on Friday has been found near the border, a spokesman for his political party said here today.


Why Do Students Yawn at History?
LEAD: THE past few months have certainly had more than their share of historic events.
As 1989 wound down and a new decade began, it seemed that each day brought some stunning change in the world, some major new development to interpret and discuss with my ninth-grade students in social studies.


Julie Harris Makes 'Miss Daisy' Her Own
LEAD: THE national touring company of Alfred Uhry's Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' which has understandably been called the Julie Harris Company for the last 15 months, is making its 28th and final stop at the Shubert in New Haven, through next Sunday, and that's all a sensible theatergoer needs to know.


Fashion: On the Street;   Just the Thing For Cowpokes Urban Style
LEAD: Bob Mackie, the free spirit who has designed some of Cher's most memorable get-ups, is hardly fashion's man for the masses.
But one of his recent bits of business seems to have caught on in a relatively big way.
It's a jacket with horsehead appliques that face each other, like knights on a chessboard.


It's Time For a Grandchild
LEAD: I THINK I'm ready to be a grandmother.
Lately I've caught myself exhibiting all the symptoms.
I have that feeling of wanting to hold an infant in my arms again, watch its velvet hand grip my fingers.


Rentals Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: This summer my wife and I spent 10 weeks in Britain, staying 8 of those weeks in the countryside in self-catering cottages - and they are an excellent solution, particularly for a long-term stay in a foreign country.


Mach 3 Passengers? No Simple Formula
LEAD: By about the year 2010, it may be possible for globe-trotters to fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo at two or three times the speed of sound - cutting the nine-hour trip to three or four hours - and pay only slightly more than they would for a ticket on a Boeing 747.


Lawyers' Courses Draw Fire
LEAD: A PLAN to require all practicing New York State lawyers to take continuing legal education courses has met with mixed reactions from Long Island lawyers and their county bar associations.


In A.F.C., Browns Try Once Again
LEAD: They have been joined in what seems to be a decadelong struggle: the Denver Broncos and the Cleveland Browns, bothering each other like gum on a shoe.


Press Reports Conflict on Albanian Turmoil
LEAD: Newspapers today quoted an Albanian border guard who fled the country as saying that the security forces had fired on protesters last week and that one city was in a state of ''revolution.''


Pillars of Conservatism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
West German Youth Hostels


Fighting for Your Life
LEAD: To the Editor:


If You're Thinking of Living in: Bernardsville
LEAD: LONG before the dawn of civilization the area that is now Bernardsville was a meeting ground.
There, New Jersey's two major rock formations - the red shale of southern New Jersey and the Precambrian gneiss of the north - meet, in the same area where the Great Wisconsin Glacier halted at the foot of the Watchung


China Seeks Respectability, But Painlessly
LEAD: DENG XIAOPING is gambling again.
The 85-year-old Chinese leader, who has proved an astute political oddsmaker, is betting that by ending martial law Beijing will reap economic and diplomatic benefits without risking further unrest.


Silicon Valley Is Changing Programs
LEAD: SILICON VALLEY, where it once seemed growth had no limits, is in the midst of a midlife crisis.
Faced with fierce Japanese competition and a market for personal computers that is growing more slowly than the industry's early visionaries predicted, high technology has lost some of its luster.
If boom times are to return, the valley's engineers and entrepreneurs will have to find ways to make the personal computer cheaper, more powerful and portable enough to live up to its name.


Miss Bancroft, Actress, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Bancroft of Old Brookville, L.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Sturges Bancroft, to Joseph Edward Barnes, a son of Mrs.
Harry G. Barnes Jr. of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Commander Barnes, a Navy aviator.
A May wedding is planned.


Praising 'New Mainstream,' Wilder Takes Virginia Oath
LEAD: Lawrence Douglas Wilder, a grandson of slaves, was sworn in today as Governor of Virginia in a 30-second ceremony that changed the political face of the United States.


Barroom Biology: How Alcohol Goes To a Woman's Head
LEAD: THOUGH barroom lore has long had it that women get drunk faster than men, the phenomenon has attracted little scientific attention.
Since women generally have smaller bodies than men it seemed natural to expect that they would be more quickly overwhelmed by alcohol.


STILL COMING HOME FROM VIETNAM
LEAD:
THESE GOOD MEN
Friendships Forged From War.
By Michael Norman.
Illustrated. 310 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $19.95.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Tin Pan Alley;   Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein Is Moving to Broadway
LEAD: THE cacophony of Tin Pin Alley has long been stilled, but enough of the music industry remains on Broadway to have lured the Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein organization from Madison Avenue after four decades on the East Side.


Broadway Stars Step Into the Breach
LEAD: WHEN a weeklong tour of ''Stardust,'' a Broadway-bound musical portrait of the four decades from the 1920's through the 50's, at Bushnell Memorial Hall in Hartford was canceled, into the breach stepped Lucie Arnaz, Donna McKechnie and Michael Maguire, to present ''On Broadway,'' from Tuesday through next Sunday.


State to End New York City Corruption Office
LEAD: Seventeen years after it was established to uproot corruption in New York City's criminal-justice system, a state investigative agency is going out of business.


Campus Life: Trinity;   Residents Enjoy Having Dormitory Just for Freshmen
LEAD: In an effort to provide an academic environment without the customary dormitory distractions - like noise, rowdiness and other behavior deemed inappropriate by college officials - Trinity College has created an experimental freshmen dormitory that includes a basement classroom.
Kristina B. Dow, the college's director of residential services, said


2 Die as Ambulance Carrying Mother Teresa Loses Control
LEAD: The brakes failed on an ambulance in which Mother Teresa was riding today, and two people were killed when the runaway vehicle hit them, the police said.
Mother Teresa was not hurt.


Creaking Floors, Sleeping Children
LEAD: THERE are not many sights more ridiculous than a 40-year-old father crawling out of a sleeping toddler's bedroom.
On my knees, moving one hand at a time, I try to leave the room without making a sound.
Putting a child to bed will unwind even the most assertive and confident parent.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
12
THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen
King. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.) Continuing the horror
story begun in ''The Gunslinger.''
2
9
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sidney Sheldon.
(Warner, $5.95.) A struggle between the Spanish
Army and Basque separatists.


To Get Ahead, Consider a Coach
LEAD: A few years ago Alix Kane, then a self-described ''lowly peon'' in the Guardian Life Insurance Company of America's human resources department, was charged with helping to set up a training program.
She and her boss asked Roger Flax, a behavior coach, to hold seminars on behavioral change.


JoAnne, Allison and a Cruel Promise
LEAD: Neither JoAnne Johnson, 19, nor Allison Atlas, 20, has very long to live - not unless they receive bone marrow transplants that might defeat their leukemia.
But JoAnne is black and Allison is Jewish, which means they can't look to the National Marrow Donor Program's registry for help.
Neither can most of the 9,000 Americans who might benefit from transplant surgery.


Drug Arrest Disrupted C.I.A. Operation in Panama
LEAD: Nine months before American forces invaded Panama, a covert Central Intelligence Agency program to support political opponents of General Manuel Antonio Noriega ended abruptly after the Drug Enforcement Administration arrested one of the Panamanians involved, according to Government officials.


Newly Prosperous, Broadway Offers Rich Soil for Satire
LEAD: Rex Harrison and Glynis Johns were on stage in their Broadway play, ''The Circle,'' but the music was from ''Gigi'' and something was very, very wrong.
The two stars seemed to be having memory problems as they sang the following:
REX: We met at nine.
GLYNIS: We met at eight.
REX: I was on time.


Q and A
LEAD:
Co-op Fire Damage


Want a Hit? Don't Flunk Marketing
LEAD: Robert de Niro and Dustin Hoffman, arguably the two greatest film actors of their generation, went belly-up at the box office this Christmas.
But Chevy Chase and Sylvester Stallone, who can be found elsewhere on the great acting spectrum, made out just fine.
What happened?
It wasn't a direct consequence of the films themselves, since all four vehicles in which these actors appeared were disappointing.


Lifestyle;   Pushing On in Spite of the Flu
LEAD: Gretchen L. Mergenthaler caughtthe flu over Christmas weekend, and throughout the following week she sneezed, coughed, sipped orange juice and breathed through her mouth when she slept.
Her ears hurt so much that ''when I went outside, it felt like two anvils hit me in the side of the head,'' she said.


DESPERATELY SEEKING SOMEONE
LEAD:
DYING YOUNG
By Marti Leimbach.
278 pp. New York: Doubleday. $17.95.


A Vale of Tears, and Anger: Anti-Indian Militancy Is on the Rise in Kashmir
LEAD: The relatives and friends of Mustaq Ahmed Khan, a 22-year-old man killed this week in a skirmish between the police and Muslim militants, were filled with anger.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Not so many years ago, if anyone came into a chess club and asked, ''Would you like to see the brilliant game I played against the computer?'' he would have been laughed out of the place.
But what was surely one of the most imaginative games in the American Open Tournament, Nov. 23-26 at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Long Beach, Calif., was won by a human against one of several computers entered.


Hudson River Quilt Going Under the Gavel
LEAD: IN 1969, a needlework expert named Irene Preston Miller decided to do something for the Hudson River.
It was ''deteriorating,'' the Croton-on-Hudson resident said, and she thought a quilt based on river scenes might draw attention to the Hudson's attributes and motivate people to protect it.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


New Running Game
LEAD: Some politicians learn the intricacies of politics by studying political science, others by working in political campaigns.
Dave Cowens is learning the hard way.


Take It Away, Cleveland
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Array of Spices in Istanbul
LEAD: IF you walk along the right bank of the Golden Horn through the maze of street vendors, porters and all kinds of vehicles, then turn south just opposite the Galata Bridge, you enter a world of pungent Oriental spices, medicinal herbs and essences, some very familiar, others quite unfathomable.


More Talented Than We Knew
LEAD: To the Editor:


&gt;Breakfast Offerings That Stand Up to the Elements
LEAD: BREAKFAST, the health experts tell us, is the most important meal of the day.
But most people try to get by with cereal, juice and a cup of coffee.
This may be all very well if your morning is spent in front of a desk.
But if you plan to keep going on the ski slopes - or indeed, in any form of vigorous outdoor winter exercise - you will need something considerably more substantial.


ALL ABOUT/Minivans;   Zippy Hybrids Win a Place in the Family Driveway
LEAD: For sheer inventiveness, there is little in the automotive world to rival theVoyager III, the Chrysler Corporation's vision of the ultimate minivan.
As a whole, it resembles a bulbous, stretched-out van.
It has two engines and four rear wheels.
With the flip of a few switches and levers - voila! - the van separates into two parts: a three-seat urban commuter car and a rear module that can be parked until needed.


Dumont Journal;   Homeless Shelter Plan Raises Moral Question
LEAD: A PROPOSED shelter for homeless people on the grounds of a Roman Catholic church here has left a neighborhood and parish bitterly divided and raised a moral question: Do property values supersede the observance of Christian values?


Mosaic Metaphor Serves Many Masters
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I.R.R. Should Recognize Long Beach's Ties to New York
LEAD: IF you are one of those individuals who derive pleasure in life from swimming against the tide, it's hard to think of a better place to do it than Long Beach.


A POET'S POLAND
LEAD: I WAS HERE, AFTER 60 OR SO YEARS, in the northeastern corner of Poland, at the house of my adolescent vacations.
The manor still stood, though it had been remodeled into apartments for workers in Poland's Forestry Service.
What had been the park was now an impassable tanglewood descending to the lake shore, with no trace remaining of the paths.


Hers;   Working on The Mechanics
LEAD: ARE YOU CRAZY?'' friends in New York had said. ''Why on earth would you want to do such a thing?''


Sports of The Times;   Were Jackson and Barkley Halted in Time?
LEAD: All around them, Mark Jackson and Charles Barkley can observe people lined up buying lottery tickets.
They can see the state of Oregon taking book on their performances.


IN DEFENSE OF NUCLEAR POWER.    YES IT IS CLEAN - AND NOT A SOURCE FOR WEAPONRY
LEAD: To the Editor:


JPW RAP MOVES TO TELEVISION'S BEAT
LEAD: Ask most pundits about rap music, and they'll describe it as rude, jumbled noise.
A few others may consider it million-selling post-modernism in audible form - songs as mix-and-match collages that treat the history of recorded music as a scrapheap of usable rubble and, often, trade narrative and logic for a patchwork of bragging, storytelling, speechifying and free-form rhymes.


Ms. McAndrew To Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Patricia Mary McAndrew and Martin J. MacCormack has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McAndrew of Short Hills, N.J.
Mr.
MacCormack is a son of David McCormack of Washington and Jean Walsh MacCormack of Bethesda, Md.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Radicals Fought The Color Bar
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


In Name Only?
LEAD: The Cleveland Browns know they want to beat the Denver Broncos today when the two teams meet to decide the American Football Conference championship.
Cleveland Brown isn't so sure.
That's because Brown, a public transportation worker who lives in Littleton, Colo., just outside Denver, cannot decide whether to pull for the team he has rooted for since moving to


THE SINS ARE AMERICAN, NOT JAPANESE
LEAD: To the Editor:


Works in Progress;   A Lot of Hot Air
LEAD: THE LAST TIME RICHARD BRANSON and Per Lindstrand tried something like this they nearly died.
In 1987, the pair became the first people to cross the Atlantic Ocean in a hot-air balloon. ''There was a rather hairy ending,'' Branson says of the touchdown on the coast of Northern Ireland. ''The explosive bolts that were meant to fire and get rid of the balloon didn't fire.


Campeau Bankers Are Posing Some $2.3 Billion Questions
LEAD: Only two years ago, banks were lining up to lend money to Robert Campeau and earn the rich fees that they expected would flow from helping the Canadian real estate mogul buy one of the nation's most vaunted retailers, Federated Department Stores.


Inquiry Is Sought of New York Insurance Bureau
LEAD: State Comptroller Edward V. Regan has accused the agency overseeing insolvent New York insurance companies of fraud and mismanagement, and has called for the State Inspector General to investigate.


Diane L. dePalma To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. dePalma of Pittsburgh and Los Angeles have announced the engagement of their daughter Diane Lynn dePalma to Hans W. Lange Jr., the son of Mr.
Lange of Pittsburgh and Stratford, Conn., and Melissa Lange of Knoxville, Tenn.
A June wedding is planned.


Helen Laupheimer, Student, Engaged
LEAD: Mrs.
William E. Zabel Jr. of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and John D. Laupheimer of London have made known the engagement of their daughter Helen Huston Laupheimer to Kenneth Edward Ramonat, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
E.
Ramonat Jr. of Harvard, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.


Salvadoran President Announces Arrests of 8 in Killing of 6 Jesuits
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani today announced the arrest of a colonel, two lieutenants and five lower-ranking soldiers in the slaying of six Jesuit priests in November.
He said another soldier was being sought in the killings.


'Native Inspiration,' A Departure for the Griswold
LEAD: FOR almost a century, Florence Griswold's mansion, at 96 Lyme Street in Old Lyme, has been closely associated with Impressionism - first, as the boardinghouse where the artists themselves stayed, but more recently as a museum specializing in their work. ''Native Inspiration,'' the museum's current show, is therefore a departure since it incorporates artists from movements preceding, paralleling and following


Hoyas' Power Too Much for DePaul
LEAD: Alonzo Mourning scored 26 points and Mark Tillmon added 21 today to lead undefeated Georgetown to a 74-64 victory over DePaul.


William M. Freeman Dies at 76; Ex-Financial Writer for The Times
LEAD: William M. Freeman, a business and financial news reporter, columnist and editor for The New York Times from 1932 until his retirement in 1976, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 76 years old and lived in Cambridge, N.Y.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
47,800,000
43,600,000
Net inc
14,800,000
10,400,000
Share earns
.77
.54
Yr rev
187,900,000
173,900,000
Net inc
59,300,000
42,300,000
Share earns
3.07
2.19


Excerpts From a Speech by Gorbachev Before the Lithuanian Communists


W. Rhys Jones, Physician, 95
LEAD: Dr.
W.
Rhys Jones, a former president of the medical staff and director of obstetrics and gynecology at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J., died of a heart ailment on Jan. 2 at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 95 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.


King's Birthday Today
LEAD: Today is the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.


Shuttle Astronauts Pass the Halfway Point


James V. Delaney, Property Director, 28
LEAD: James V. Delaney, an assistant acquisitions director for New York City's Division of Real Property, died of cancer Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 28 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Schuster Buys Janus
LEAD: Simon &amp; Schuster said last week that it had acquired Janus Book Publishers Inc., a textbook company based in Hayward, Calif.
The terms were not disclosed.
Janus publishes textbooks under the Janus and Alemany Press imprints.
Simon &amp; Schuster said it would combine the Janus imprint with two other educational units, Fearon Education and the Quercus Corporation.


Sports of The Times;   Joe Montana: Cleaner Than a Surgeon
LEAD: MOST of his 49er teammates had the look of little kids who had been playing in Candlestick Park's muddy slick grass.
They had mud on their scarlet jerseys, mud on their golden khaki pants.
But as Joe Montana stood in the 49er locker room after yesterday's 30-3 dissection of the Rams, his pants had only a thin smudge along the right thigh (as if he had dried his passing hand there) and another smudge along the red stripe down his left leg.


Business Scene;   Are True Profits Falling or Rising?
LEAD: CORPORATE profits are in decline.
Company after company is reporting sinking net income and the trend seems certain to continue, given the weak economy.
But there are several ways to measure profitability and some show American business to be in not such bad shape.


IP Timberlands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IP Timberlands Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
64,000,000
41,000,000
Net inc
37,000,000
21,000,000
Share earns
.73
.55
Yr rev
230,000,000
206,000,000
Net inc
128,000,000
113,000,000
Share earns
3.05
2.56


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amsouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,210,000
20,178,000
Per share
.05
.83
Year net inc
63,168,000
79,804,000
Per share
2.60
3.30
The company said latest quarter figures reflected a special provision for loan losses of $21 million and a $4 million reduction of inventory value of foreclosed properties, which weree announced in November 1989.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary by The Associated Press on Tuesday about Temple H. Buell, a Denver architect and developer, referred incompletely to a philanthropic venture.
In the 1960's Mr.
Buell announced a $25 million donation to Colorado Women's College, which renamed itself Temple Buell College.
The money was to be presented posthumously, but other donors, apparently unaware of this, stopped contributions.


Petroleum &amp; Resources reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum &amp; Resources (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
322,866,019
248,370,688
Share earns
31.09
24.84
Shares outst
10,384,600
9,997,584
Assets represented net assets.
Share earnings for latest period is after capital gain distributions of $1.20 paid in 1989 and $29,895,000 stated value $1,575 convertible preferred stock outstanding.


Dreco Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreco Energy Services
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,065,000
9,033,000
Net inc
388,000
323,000
Share earns
.08
.06
Results are in U.S. dollars.
The company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange.


NASA Losing 30-Year Monopoly In Planning for Moon and Mars
LEAD: The White House is reaching beyond NASA in a search for new ways to advance the nation's manned space program, challenging a near monopoly the agency has held for more than three decades.
It is doing so mainly out of frustration with the agency's high cost estimates for space ventures.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   An Agency As Depicted On a TV Hit
LEAD: MYSTICAL and manipulative, Miles Drentell is every advertising person's nightmare: an agency boss who speaks in epigrams, pits copywriters against art directors and has a god complex that rivals that of a minor deity.


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Dollar Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
206,783,342
171,771,349
Net inc
5,985,589
5,419,653
Share earns
.22
.20


Weapons Plant Workers Contract a Lung Disease
LEAD: Twelve people who were exposed to the metal beryllium while working at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant have contracted an incurable lung disease, according to an Energy Department study obtained by a newspaper.


The Marketing Of a Legend
LEAD: SECRETARIAT, the legendary Triple Crown winner who died in October at the age of 19, earned $1.3 million in his brief but brilliant racing career and perhaps $50 million in his 16 seasons at stud.


Review/Television;   'Unspeakable Acts': Sex Abuse in Day Care
LEAD: Sexually abused children: few subjects lend themselves more notoriously to cheap exploitation.
On television, the social nightmare has been explored in movies and on talk shows, many of them clearly more interested in sensationalism than in illumination.
At least one talk host has brought on young victims and, clearly with ratings in mind, encouraged them to go into excruciating details in front of the cameras.


In Refugee Community, Killings and a Healing
LEAD: Any day now, Ing Khorn and her husband, Phoun Nam, are expecting a baby - a girl, they hope, to fill the void left when their 6-year-old daughter was killed a year ago by a deranged gunman who raked a schoolyard here with assault rifle fire.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,026,000
c1,896,000
Per share
.51
.48
Year net inc
b8,801,000
c8,516,000
Per share
2.19
2.12
b-After extraordinary credits of $652,000, or 17 cents a share, for the quarter and $2,716,000, or 68 cents a share, for the year.


Tensions Rise in Salvador After Arrests
LEAD: The arrest of four officers and four soldiers in the slaying of six Jesuit priests has aggravated tension in the military and in the governing party of President Alfredo Cristiani, diplomats said today.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
23,260,000
20,341,000
Per share
1.04
.92
Year net inc
85,448,000
76,684,000
Per share
3.84
3.48
All figures have been restated to reflect the acquisition of First National Bank of Cudahy, Wisc.


A 10-Point Guide To Attempting a Running Streak
LEAD: Not every runner can tolerate the stress of daily workouts.
If you feel you can, keep the following suggestions in mind.
Keep a diary of your running as a source of motivation.
Establish a minimum mileage requirement.
Most streakers run at least two or three miles every day.
Know your pace so you can compute distance when running on unfamiliar routes.


Bridge
LEAD: When the world team championships were played in Perth, Australia, in September the American and Canadian players constantly found themselves having to counter the Multi, a convention that is barred in almost all events controlled by the American Contract Bridge League.


Baltics + Z - F.S.R.
LEAD: To their credit, the unreconstructed roundheels of The New York Times editorial pages gave extended space recently to an anonymous hard-line analysis, signed ''Z,'' that has caused a fearsome fluttering in the dovecotes.


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,462,000
5,502,000
Per share
.53
.64
Year net inc
19,003,000
18,331,000
Per share
2.23
2.16


CAMPEAU BANKERS ARE SAID TO AGREE TO NEW DEADLINE
LEAD: The bank syndicate that lent $2.34 billion to the American retailing subsidiaries of the Campeau Corporation has decided to give them four more days to meet a deadline for providing assurances that their operations are solvent, banking and retailing executives said yesterday.


Regional Ticket Lottery
LEAD: If you want to participate in the lottery to be able to buy tickets to the Eastern regional semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament at Byrne Meadowlands Arena March 24 and 26, you must follow this procedure:


President Is Appointed At Beal Securities Firm
LEAD: M. R. Beal &amp; Company, a securities firm in New York that is owned by women and members of minority groups, has named Diana L. Taylor president.
Ms.
Taylor was among the founders of the firm in June 1988. she said that so far, helping run her own business has been fun, because the firm's success has surpassed the founders' hopes.


Heat an Opponent In Australian Open
LEAD: More than five years after John McEnroe won his last Grand Slam title, he is not fooling himself about his chances of winning another in the heat of the Australian Open, which starts Monday.


Cairo Journal;   For Women Only: A Train Car Safe From Men
LEAD: When the idea was first put into effect on Cairo's rapid transit system, some said it would mean the creation of a kind of harem on wheels.
Others said it just wouldn't work.


Panel Stresses Productivity In Budget Fight
LEAD: New York City should increase the productivity of municipal workers by using more one-officer police cars, closing underused firehouses and introducing one-worker garbage trucks among other measures, a private budget-monitoring group urged in a report released yesterday.


Review/Art;   Black Artists' Work Exhibited 'Against the Odds'
LEAD: An exhibition that does honor to the Newark Museum, and to the museum profession in general, is ''Against the Odds: African-American Artists and the Harmon Foundation,'' which opens Monday.
In the context of a museum in which American art of the 19th and 20th centuries is memorably well covered in the permanent collections, ''Against the


Carolina Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b2,116,000
c330,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Included a $2,358,000 charge related to accrued tax liability.
c-Net income


Motorola Completes Shifts in Top Ranks
LEAD: Motorola Inc., a leading maker of pagers and cellular telephones, has completed a long-planned management transition, with George M. C. Fisher succeeding Robert W. Galvin, son of the company's founder, as chairman.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 14, 1990:
MONDAY
Central &amp; Sth West Corp
Russ Togs Inc
Southern Co.
TUESDAY
Citicorp
DuPont E I Demours &amp; Co
Hartmarx Corp
Hawaiian Elec Inds Inc
Honeywell Inc
Teco Energy Inc
K Mart Corp
Lehman Corp
Loews Corp
Southrn Ind Gas &amp; Elec Co


Adams Express reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adams Express (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
550,091,129
455,825,580
Share earns
18.35
16.11
Shares outst
29,982,939
28,295,508
The latest share earnings is after capital gain distributions of $1.36 a share paid in 1989.


In Each Corner, a Changed Challenger
LEAD: THE policeman appeared at dinner time at Gerry Cooney's training camp in Scot-run, Pa.
Gil Clancy, the trainer, was finishing his meal when the uniformed visitor asked him to step outside.


State Street Boston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
28,062,000
24,281,000
Share earns
.76
.68
Shares outst
36,931,000
35,791,000
Yr net inc
104,032,000
92,348,000
Share earns
2.84
2.51
Shares outst
36,657,000
36,843,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: FRANCES LEHMAN LOEB and her family have given time and money to many things, including Lewisohn Stadium, Adele Lehman Hall at Barnard College, the Children's Zoo and the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park, and the Loeb Student Center at New York University.


Fierce Football Battle Involves TV Rights
LEAD: Negotiations for the rights to ''Monday Night Football,'' which ABC has owned for 20 years, are expected to be the most hotly contested portion of the television rights deal that executives of the National Football League are now informally discussing with broadcast and cable television networks.


MINERS THREATEN NEW SOVIET STRIKE
LEAD: The Siberian miners who started a nationwide coal strike last summer say they are likely to resume their walkout, in defiance of a Government ban, because life remains miserable for their families despite the Kremlin's promise of improvements within six months.


OUST COMMUNISTS, SOFIA CROWD YELLS
LEAD: More than 50,000 people sang, cheered and shouted anti-Communist slogans today in a demonstration demanding more radical democratic reforms and a fair deal in elections this year.


Software Developer's Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Developer's Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,930,000
2,564,000
Net inc
214,000
77,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Shares outst
2,083,000
1,641,000
9mo sales
14,051,000
7,471,000
Net inc
419,000
278,000
Share earns
.20
.17
Shares outst
2,082,000
1,641,000


Car Reported Stolen Leads Jersey Police On a 60-Mile Chase
LEAD: A car reported stolen in Pennsylvania led the New Jersey State Police on a cross-state chase, reaching speeds of more than 115 miles an hour, that began in Trenton yesterday morning and ended with the car crashing at a roadblock near the Holland Tunnel in Jersey City.


Lift Manufacturing Ban on Phone Companies;   Trans-Soviet Cable
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rage Over a Gas Pipeline Appears to Cool in Connecticut
LEAD: When Hank Dutton moved to this rural, one-stoplight town two decades ago to start a 20-acre hobby farm, he never figured on sharing his prized back pasture with a 24-inch-wide natural-gas pipeline.


Bulls-Knicks Is No Rematch
LEAD: The last time the Knicks saw Michael Jordan was last May 19 at noisy Chicago Stadium in the sixth game of their Eastern Conference playoff semifinal.
Rick Pitino was the Knicks' coach and Doug Collins was the coach of the Chicago Bulls.
The Knicks relied heavily on pressure defenses and the Bulls on


Investors Defy Risks to Start Publishing Houses
LEAD: The large publishers are worried about eroding profit margins, and the small publishers worry about cash flow and getting their books into stores.
So it may be difficult to imagine why anyone would consider starting a book publishing company.


VMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VMX Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,479,000
11,436,000
Net inc
b1,004,000
c435,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
24,039,000
22,724,000
6mo rev
28,334,000
20,679,000
Net inc
b1,623,000
c1,430,000
Share earns
.07
-


Man Held in Death Of Mutilated Wife
LEAD: The husband of a Brooklyn woman whose dismembered body was found burning on a deserted Bronx street turned himself in Saturday and was charged with murder, the police said.


First Derby Prep to 16-1 Shot
LEAD: Run Turn, a 16-to-1 shot who began his career as a $30,200 claimer, pulled away from seven rivals today to score a surprising 4 1/4-length victory in the $110,700 Tropical Park Derby at Calder Race Course.


New Government Starts To Put Panama on Track
LEAD: Slowly, sometimes painfully, the new civilian Government here has begun grappling with the problems of getting post-Noriega Panama up and running again.


Liberty National Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,409,000
8,218,000
Per share
.85
.77
Shares outst
11,030,000
10,710,000
Year net inc
33,171,000
28,901,000
Per share
3.07
2.76
Shares outst
10,798,000
10,488,000


How to Honor Dr. King
LEAD: If the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. were alive, how might he view the state of black America?
It's presumptuous to say, but there are some clues in the legacy of his achievements that America honors today.


Review/Dance;   Stephen Petronio Company In 2 Small-Scale Works
LEAD: Stephen Petronio's choreography has been described as kamikaze ecstasy.
And that about sums up the quality and look of ''Surrender II (Part 1)'' and ''Close Your Eyes and Think of England,'' works by Mr.
Petronio that were performed by his company on Saturday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street), as part of the Man


Metro Matters;   Housing Project Poses Quandary: Is It Affordable?
LEAD: It was, Mayor Edward I. Koch declared at City Hall, ''probably the single most important announcement in the last five years made here in this room.''


Foreign Acquisitions by Hong Kong
LEAD:
1987
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation
Completed acquisition of 100 percent of Marine Midland Bank in U.S. for an undisclosed price.
Acquired 14.9 percent of Midland Bank in Britain for an undisclosed price.
1988
Semi-Tech Microelectronics (Far East) Ltd.
Acquired Consumer Distributing Co., which has stores on the East Coast, for $110 million in May.


Bill Auction Is Delayed Because of Holiday
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues this week is confined to tomorrow's auction of three- and six-month bills.
The auction, normally held each Monday, will be delayed because today is Martin Luther King Day.
Late Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 7.49 percent, while the six-month bill was bid at 7.44 percent.


Venezuela Eases Rule
LEAD: Venezuela's economic cabinet has agreed to ease regulations on foreign investment.


Harleysville National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harleysville National Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,083,581
1,187,677
Per share
.54
.59
Year net inc
b5,039,243
4,505,684
Per share
2.52
2.26
b-Included extraordinary charges of $391,944 for the quarter and $619,444 for the year, for Pennsylvania Bank Shares tax.


Man Behind 'Gypsy' Prefers Now to Then
LEAD: Arthur Laurents wrote the book for the Broadway musical ''Gypsy,'' which opened in 1959 and which starred Ethel Merman.
He also directed the current revival, which opened to critical acclaim this season at the St.
James Theater and which stars Tyne Daly.
And he has no doubts about which he prefers.


Electro Rent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro Rent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
27,252,000
28,880,000
Net inc
1,844,000
2,215,000
Share earns
.44
.46
Shares outst
4,192,000
4,812,000
6mo rev
53,929,000
58,263,000
Net inc
3,547,000
4,388,000
Share earns
.85
.89
Shares outst
4,192,000
4,958,000


A Painful Ending for Kosar
LEAD: He had limped slowly off the field as someone else's celebration began.
The small piece of rubber that had been taped to the base of the index finger on Bernie Kosar's right hand was no longer necessary to help him try to throw a football.


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Z-EM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
18,833,000
18,340,000
Net inc
1,544,000
1,995,000
Share earns
.19
.25
6mo sales
40,004,000
35,393,000
Net inc
3,645,000
3,633,000
Share earns
.45
.45


3 LATIN LANDS JOIN U.S. IN A DRUG PACT
LEAD: The United States and three cocaine producing nations, Bolivia, Colombia and Peru, tentatively agreed today to include military units from each country in a stepped-up war on drugs.


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Four Goals for MacLellan: Brian MacLellan scored four goals and Sergei Makarov got the tie breaker with 8 minutes left yesterday as visiting Calgary ended the Chicago Blackhawks' unbeaten string at six games with a 6-4 victory.
MacLellan, who had just 3 goals in 33 previous games this season, got the first 3 last night, achieving his fifth career hat trick and his second four-goal game.


Parker Drilling Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Drilling Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
32,601,000
24,681,000
Net inc
b2,602,000
c9,902,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $4,212,000 from subsidiary debt settlement.


Homer G. Bishop, 57, Commander Of Firefighters in New York City
LEAD: Fire Chief Homer G. Bishop, the highest-ranking commander among New York City's uniformed firefighters, died early yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old and lived in Middle Village, Queens.


Editors' Note
LEAD: A chart on Saturday with an article about New York apartment cooperatives facing financial difficulties listed co-op corporations that had complained to the State Attorney General that their sponsors were no longer making their maintenance payments.


Met-Coil Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Met-Coil Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
15,084,000
17,442,000
Net inc
369,000
634,000
Share earns
.15
.32
Shares outst
2,476,000
2,006,000
6mo rev
27,807,000
31,649,000
Net inc
436,000
745,000
Share earns
.18
.36
Shares outst
2,481,000
2,059,000


Barnett Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
64,998,000
57,533,000
Per share
1.03
.92
Shares outst
63,480,638
62,404,667
Year net inc
256,655,000
227,577,000
Per share
4.07
3.65
Shares outst
63,084,368
62,298,962


Rangers Beat Flyers in Overtime, 4-3
LEAD: Ken Wregget, the goaltender for the Flyers, never saw the shot.
As for the Rangers, it was a shot that before last night they had seen perhaps only in their wildest dreams.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atlas Corp., Denver, a mining company, appointed Francis M. Ricci chief financial officer.


Mount Everest Not for Experts Only
LEAD: IT'S easy to find ways to stay fit these days.
But the opportunity to face the ultimate measure of physical fitness, nature itself, comes less frequently.


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,323,614
1,025,829
Net inc
233,483
b456,028
Share earns
.24
-
9mo rev
3,261,004
2,995,252
Net inc
511,239
b477,643
Share earns
.52
-


'Fourth of July' Unfair to Syracuse Police, Some Residents Say
LEAD: A group of Syracuse residents led by a State Senator and former anti-war protester yesterday criticized the recently released film ''Born on the Fourth of July'' for what they say is an unfair and inaccurate depiction of their city police.


Hong Kong Extending Its Reach
LEAD: After enjoying extremely rapid growth in this territory, many large Hong Kong companies are looking abroad to find new sources of profits.
But instead of going north to China, as they used to, many are reaching far in other directions.


U.S. Restricts Valley Federal
LEAD: The Valley Federal Savings and Loan Association has been declared a ''troubled institution'' by the Federal Office of Thrift Supervision and ordered to stop all new lending and investment.
Valley Federal, based in Van


Buchwald Ruling: Film Writers vs. Star Power
LEAD: Art Buchwald's victory in court against Paramount Pictures cheered writers, who frequently complain that they are not given proper credit for their part in a movie's success.


Zavitz Technology reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zavitz Technology
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,769,573
10,164,846
Net loss
b201,374
c581,606
Share earns
-
.07
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $76,026, or 1 cent a share.
c-Net income


Computer Stunt Helped Security, Witness Says
LEAD: In a twist in the trial of the former Cornell University graduate student accused of crippling a nationwide computer network, a prosecution witness has testified that the rogue program the defendant released resulted in improved security on his computer systems.


Belzberg Family Enters Bidding for Koor
LEAD: The wealthy Belzberg family of Canada, known for its takeover forays, has become the latest bidder for Koor Industries, offering to buy Israel's troubled industrial concern for $130 million.


New Parks Commissioner Has Opportunity to Do a Lot of Good
LEAD: To the Editor:


NORIEGA LAWYERS OBJECT TO PHOTO
LEAD: Those who have any doubts about the identity of the country's best-known prisoner have only to pick up a newspaper, magazine or turn on the television for a mug shot of a chastened looking Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Europe Taking a Lead in Growth
LEAD: The benefits already flowing from the European Community's continuing effort to create a single market by 1992 and the changes in Eastern Europe are prompting economists to predict that Western Europe's economic growth will exceed that of the United States in the 1990's.


A CEAUSESCU SON TO BE TRIED SOON
LEAD: The trials of Nicolae Ceausescu's older son, of Communist cronies and of members of the Securitate police force are expected to begin this week, Rumanian state television said today.


SI Handling Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SI Handling Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Sales
4,311,000
5,823,000
Net inc
106,000
148,000
Share earns
.07
.10
9mo sales
12,366,000
17,227,000
Net inc
251,000
422,000
Share earns
.17
.29


The Dinkinses Try Their New Mansion On for Size


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Ad Scene;   Retailers Run Into Trouble And Newspapers Feel Pinch
LEAD: NEWSPAPER executives are paying close attention as the Campeau Corporation struggles to keep Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and its other department stores out of bankruptcy.


Cleanup of Oil Winding Down In Arthur Kill
LEAD: The cleanup of more than 500,000 gallons of heating oil pumped through a leaky Exxon pipeline into the Arthur Kill has begun to wind down, state and Coast Guard officials said yesterday.


Reporter's Notebook;   Amid the Jealousies, a Suspicion That the U.N. Works
LEAD: ''A dangerous place'' - that was how Daniel Patrick Moynihan described the United Nations when he served there as the United States representative in the mid-1970's, a time of ferocious East-West rivalry.


Southern National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern National Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,900,000
6,400,000
Share earns
.34
.32
Yr net inc
23,800,000
21,300,000
Share earns
1.19
1.06
Share earnings have been restated to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split in the form of a 50-percent stock dividend on June 30 and figures were also restated to reflect the Oct.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ALISON LELAND, the widow of Mickey Leland, the Texas Congressman, had twins yesterday in Atlanta.
The night before, she accepted a Salute to Greatness award from the Martin Luther King Center for Non-Violent Social Change, on behalf of her late husband.


A Needed Revolution
LEAD: On the anniversary of Martin Luther King's birthday, those who have grown complacent about the racial situation in America can find plenty of evidence - if they'll look - that his work is not finished, and nowhere less so than in education.


Laurence J. Peter Is Dead at 70; His 'Principle' Satirized Business
LEAD: Laurence J. Peter, who climbed the best-seller lists with a book meant to satirize ladder climbers everywhere, died Friday at his home in Palos Verdes Estates, Calif.
He was 70 years old.


American List Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American List Corp (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,683,809
1,234,413
Net inc
617,949
391,283
Share earns
.22
.14
9mo rev
5,255,966
4,205,960
Net inc
2,051,569
b1,542,355
Share earns
.74
.55


Banner Names President
LEAD: Banner Industries appointed Emanuel J. Fthenakis as president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Fthenakis will also continue as chairman and chief executive of Fairchild Industries, which Banner acquired last summer.
The company also said it had appointed its vice chairman, Samuel J. Krasney, to the position of chairman and chief executive of Banner's aerospace distribution group.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There were leaflets all over the square, calling for the Armenians to be driven from the city.
They listed the addresses of Armenian houses and apartments.''
-Nazim Ragimov, on ethnic violence in Baku, Azerbaijan. [A8:5.]


Coghlan Rolls in Comeback
LEAD: The test came with about 60 meters to go.
Three laps before, in his first 3,000-meter race of the indoor season Friday night, Eamonn Coghlan had moved from third to second and now was chasing down the leader, Graeme Fell, the Canadian steeplechase champion.


Bryn Mawr Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bryn Mawr Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
916,000
993,000
Per share
.85
.91
Year net inc
4,077,000
3,634,000
Per share
3.76
3.35


City National Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* City National Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b59,111,000
b49,312,000
Per share
1.86
1.61
Shares outst
31,814,370
30,585,708
b-Included non-recurring net income of $3,424,000 and $1,929,000, for the latest and year-ago periods, respectively.


U.S. Acknowledges Arrest of Agent
LEAD: United States officials confirmed today that the Soviet Union had arrested an American agent working deep within the Soviet bureaucracy, and expressed mild surprise that the Russians had made public his capture.


Philip Morris Fills Key Post
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies said it has appointed Geoffrey C. Bible as president and chief administrative officer of its Kraft General Foods Group.
Mr. Bible succeeds Michael


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article in the Sports section yesterday about the lottery for tickets to the N.C.A.A.
Eastern Regional tournament at the Meadowlands gave incorrect dates for the mailing of ticket requests.
The requests must be postmarked no earlier than Jan. 14 and no later than Jan. 21.


Market Place;   Investors Relish Bet Against Japan
LEAD: AMERICAN investors may buy Japanese cars, but they don't like Japanese stocks.


More Than Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


JAPAN STILL WARY OF LOANS TO CHINA
LEAD: Despite the lifting of martial law in Beijing last week, Government officials say Japan is not prepared to resume talks on arranging $5.6 billion in loans suspended after the Chinese crackdown in Tiananmen Square in June.


Pickens Suing Japan Concern
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens is carrying his Japanese corporate battle to court with a lawsuit to gain access to the financial books of the Koito Manufacturing Company, the auto parts maker of which he is the largest shareholder, a lawyer for Mr.
Pickens said Friday.


49ers and Broncos Go Marching Into the Super Bowl;   Denver Wins, 37-21, As Elway Sparkles
LEAD: Three years ago, when the Denver Broncos beat the Cleveland Browns for the American Conference championship and a Super Bowl berth, they avoided defeat at the end of regulation time with what became known as the Drive.
Two years ago in the championship game, the Broncos saved a victory over the Browns by recovering what became known as the


Ziegler Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,630,000
9,859,000
Net inc
1,432,000
1,676,000
Share earns
.54
.57
Yr rev
34,807,000
36,331,000
Net inc
3,149,000
3,509,000
Share earns
1.18
1.15
Shares outst
2,676,311
3,060,019


U.S. Not Told of Salvador Plot
LEAD: Officials at the Defense and State Departments said today that there was no evidence that a United States military officer had advance knowledge of the plan to kill six Jesuit priests in El Salvador.


In Berlin, Kohl Nearly Walks Into Political Confrontation
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany made a surprise private visit to East Berlin today and almost bumped into one of his chief political adversaries.


Vertex Communications Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vertex Communications Corp.
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,378,000
4,600,000
Net inc
434,000
315,000
Share earns
.13
.10


Philips Deal Is Stopped
LEAD: Philips Industries, a Dayton-based manufacturer, said Friday that a planned merger for $24 a share, or $672 million, with a unit of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company would not go through as scheduled because of problems with financing.


Outdoors: Winter Travel, Step by Step
LEAD: IF a desire to wander in the winter woods has been growing within you, snowshoes might be the way to go.


William G. Phillips, Lobbyist, 66
LEAD: William G. Phillips, a lobbyist and former Congressional aide, died of heart failure Saturday at his office near the Capitol.
He was 66 years old and lived in Potomac, Md.


Town &amp; Country Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Town &amp; Country Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
137,201,469
65,912,909
Net inc
6,569,204
4,939,452
Share earns
.53
.47
Shares outst
12,403,803
10,602,590
9mo sales
331,298,010
146,707,798
Net inc
3,799,847
6,700,528
Share earns
.32
.65


David Wells MacEachron, 66, Ex-Leader of the Japan Society
LEAD: David W. MacEachron, who retired last year as president of the Japan Society after leading the nonprofit group for 15 years, died of colon cancer on Saturday at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 66 years old.


Gamez Wins In Debut
LEAD: With his veteran opponents unable to apply any pressure, Robert Gamez, a PGA Tour rookie, coasted over his home course to a four-stroke victory today in the Tucson Open.


American Medical Internaional reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Internaional (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
728,229,000
646,757,000
Net loss
53,669,000
b440,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income
The company said latest quarter figures included non-recurring costs of about $128.2 million relating to IMA Holdings Corp.


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commerce Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,452,000
6,440,000
Per share
.60
.52
Year net inc
28,197,000
24,056,000
Per share
2.26
1.91


Second Thoughts on Open Borders
LEAD: In West Germany as in East Germany, the euphoria of last year's grand German reunion has given way in the new year to some hard reassessments, tough politicking and even anxiety.


Shelton Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelton Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
284,000
665,000
Per share
.25
.57
6mo net inc
571,000
929,000
Per share
.50
.79


Hong Kong Can Give Boat People Asylum
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boyfriend Confesses To Woman's Killing
LEAD: The boyfriend of a 22-year-old woman who disappeared in November confessed to her strangulation after her remains were discovered, the Suffolk County police said yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Michael Fromowitz has been appointed regional creative director for Backer Spielvogel Bates Asia.


DFSoutheastern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DFSoutheastern Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,918,000
3,398,000
Share earns
.63
.73
Yr net inc
11,378,000
9,714,000
Share earns
2.45
-
The company said there is no comparable share earnings information available for full year 1988.


Companies
LEAD: A bank syndicate extended a deadline for Campeau's retailing operations.
The American and Japanese banks, which are owed $2.34 billion, gave Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores until Friday to provide assurances that the nine department store chains they own are solvent, banking and retailing executives said.


Review/Television;   Recalling the Pursuit of a Still-Elusive Prize
LEAD: In the mid-1960's, the civil rights movement, which had seemed on a victorious course, was dramatically split.
Black Muslims, drawing support from inner-city ghettos, where hard conditions had not been alleviated by the triumphs in the courts, brought to the field a new antiwhite militancy that stirred many young blacks.


Ruth Michelson Weds David A. Kahan
LEAD: Ruth Leah Michelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Avram Michelson of Brookline, Mass., and David Alan Kahan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Kahan of Brookline, were married yesterday at Congregation Mishkan Tefila in Newton, Mass.
The ceremony was performed by the bride's grandfather Rabbi Avraham Freedman, assisted by Rabbi Gershon Gewirtz and Cantor Aryeh


Foreman 253 1/4 And Cooney 231
LEAD: On the stage of the Circus Maximus Theater at the casino Caesars Atlantic City, the fighters for a bout billed as ''The Preacher and the Puncher'' weighed in tonight.


Review/Music;   A Glimpse of Azerbaijan
LEAD: Nisim Nisimov came to New York to visit relatives, but when the World Music Institute found out he was in town, it booked him for the concert he played Friday night at the Washington Square Church.


49ers and Broncos Go Marching Into the Super Bowl;   San Francisco Routs Rams, 30-3
LEAD: It was billed as a battle for California bragging rights, as the real Super Bowl between the real heavyweights of pro football.
But in the end, it was simply another display of San Francisco's mastery and might as the 49ers toppled the Los Angeles Rams by 30-3 here today before a Candlestick Park record crowd of 64,769 and claimed the National


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BB&amp;T Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,300,000
10,500,000
Per share
.58
.55
Year net inc
44,200,000
38,700,000
Per share
2.29
2.05


Collaborative Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collaborative Research Inc.
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Revenue
2,090,000
3,930,000
Net loss
185,000
419,000


Suspend Shanahan, Nordiques Urge
LEAD: Brendan Shanahan, an integral part of the Devils' top line, faces a suspension from the league for a high-sticking major penalty he drew in Saturday night's 5-4 triumph over the Nordiques in Quebec City.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Five Star Chevrolet/Geo Dealers Association of Pennsylvania, southern New Jersey and Delaware to Demaine, Vickers &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., with a budget of $6 million.


Case Against Bank May Shed Light on Noriega's Finances
LEAD: The Federal case against a Luxembourg bank charged with money laundering has opened a window on the international finances of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, prompting bank lawyers to threaten to detail the financial relationship between the former Panamanian leader and the United States.


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Dairy Queen (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
54,988,490
51,981,714
Net inc
4,444,998
3,586,130
Share earns
.48
.38
Shares outst
9,361,084
9,530,733
Yr rev
255,028,667
243,229,272
Net inc
23,290,899
20,115,774
Share earns
2.48
2.09
Shares outst
9,404,442
9,613,505


First Financial Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
354,000
377,000
Per share
.31
.33
6mo net inc
714,000
705,000
Per share
.62
.61


Pennview Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennview Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
191,000
202,000
Per share
.38
.41


Review/Music;   Mozart to Neo-Baroque, By Boston Chamber Players
LEAD: Alice Tully Hall, which bills itself as the home of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, played host on Saturday evening to the Boston Chamber Music Society.
Founded in 1981, evidently on the model of the Lincoln Center group, this society, too, is a malleable and somewhat unwieldy constellation of instrumentalists (a dozen, including three violinists and three pianists), but it is certainly no tired imitation.


The Pentagon Pool, Bottled Up
LEAD: The invasion of Panama offered the first true test of the Pentagon's system for giving journalists access to live combat.
The system failed.
More precisely, the Pentagon failed the system.
It is the President's job to make it work.


Trump Group To Raze Hotel
LEAD: Donald J. Trump said Saturday that he and his partners will raze the Ambassador Hotel, where Robert F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, to build a large commercial and residential complex.


Dalfen Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dalfen Ltd.
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,053,767
6,229,668
Net inc
b36,111
b5,196
Share earns
.03
-
b-Included extraordinary credits of $17,347, or 1 cent a share, for the latest quarter and $9,227 for the year-earlier period.


Washington Talk;   Scoring Political Points On Social Security Tax
LEAD: Despite Republican claims, Federal taxes over all were not cut in the Reagan-Bush years.
But Democrats have failed to persuade voters of that, or to call attention to the way the mix of taxes has changed.


Provident Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,400,000
5,900,000
Per share
.57
.75
Shares outst
7,657,000
7,797,000
Year net inc
18,500,000
16,200,000
Per share
2.40
2.08
Shares outst
7,655,000
7,797,000


Lift Manufacturing Ban on Phone Companies
LEAD: To the Editor:


I.R.S. Has Plan to Prevent Misconduct by Its Workers
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has announced a series of actions intended to prevent misconduct by its senior employees.


Fonar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fonar Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,563,000
15,556,000
Net inc
b159,000
b1,116,000
Share earns
.01
.05
b-After extraordinary tax benefits from tax loss carryforwards of $64,000 for the latest first quarter and $434,000, or 2 cents a share, for year- ago period.


Cleanup of Waste Site Criticized by Residents
LEAD: The Industrial Excess Landfill, an aptly named pit that sits amid Amish farmhouses and suburban homes, is packed with chemicals that are contaminating underground water and tainting the air in this semirural community.


Florio Plans An Assault On Poverty In the Cities
LEAD: Governor-elect James J. Florio envisions an aggressive administration that will experiment with new approaches to protecting the environment and begin an assault on urban poverty.


Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,520,000
b2,244,000
Share earns
-
.61
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,690,313
6mo net loss
3,419,000
b4,247,000
Share earns
-
1.15
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,690,313


U.S. Foundations Seek an East Bloc Role
LEAD: American foundations and research groups are playing an active role in shaping Eastern Europe's transition to free markets, even helping to draw up an economic action plan for the next Hungarian Government.


Nellcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nellcor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
33,997,000
31,826,000
Net inc
3,403,000
3,136,000
Share earns
.23
.22
Shares outst
14,910,000
14,450,000
6mo rev
64,299,000
60,850,000
Net inc
5,887,000
6,136,000
Share earns
.40
.42
Shares outst
14,798,000
14,495,000


Two Auto Makers Agree To Build Cars in Hungary
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and the Suzuki Motor Company have agreed to set up production plants in Hungary.


Review/Concert;   Music of Afghanistan With Indian Influences
LEAD: As part of the New Americans series of the World Music Institute, Ezzatullah Mojaddidi, an Afghan now living in California, came to New York City on Saturday night and rocked Washington Square Church.
Playing the dutar, a giraffe-necked 14-string lute, and accompanied by a group of musicians, Mr.
Mojaddidi turned in a raucous, improvisatory performance that had the audience clapping along.


43 Die in Fire at Spanish Discotheque
LEAD: An electrical fire broke out in a discotheque here early today, giving off poisonous smoke that killed 43 people and injured 3 others, officials said.


2 Children Are Killed In a Suspicious Blaze
LEAD: Two children died last night in a fire dubbed suspicious by officials here, a police spokeswoman said.


Question Box
LEAD:
100 in Both Leagues


Review/Pop;   Lambada, Would-Be Craze by Way of Paris
LEAD: The pop version of lambada, a prefabricated dance craze hoping to happen, arrived in New York when Kaoma performed at the Palladium on Friday night.
Kaoma - a Paris-based group that includes musicians from Brazil, Africa, the Caribbean and France - has sold four million copies of its single ''Lambada'' since its release in Europe last summer.


U. of Michigan Fights the Taint of Racial Trouble
LEAD: Three years ago, the University of Michigan was wrenched by a series of racial incidents that threatened its reputation for social tolerance and liberalism.


International Data Group
LEAD: International Data Group, a provider of information technology services, said Friday that it had formed a division, the IDG Book Company, to publish books on computer technology.
The new company will be based in Mountain View, Calif.
International Data, which has annual revenues of $500 million, is based in Framingham, Mass.


RIVAL SHIITES NEAR TRUCE IN LEBANON
LEAD: Warring Muslim Shiite factions are close to an agreement to end three weeks of large-scale fighting in southern Lebanon, the spirtual mentor of the Iranian-backed Party of God said today.


SOVIET AZERBAIJAN IN ETHNIC TURMOIL
LEAD: The southern Soviet republic of Azerbaijan has erupted in civil violence, leaving at least 25 people killed in the capital city, Baku, and several towns in disarray, official reports and residents reached by telephone said today.


Rise in Rates Is Expected To Continue
LEAD: The unexpected run-up in interest rates that began the week before Christmas probably has not yet run its course, but analysts and market participants said the market's current malaise could represent an opportune time to buy fixed-income securities.


U.S. Soldiers Detain Cuban
LEAD: American soldiers briefly detained the Cuban ambassador today, officials said.
It was the second time the envoy, Lazaro Mora Secades, was stopped and searched since the Dec. 20 American invasion to oust Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The Cuban Embassy has given refuge to the general's family.


Baybanks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baybanks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,788,000
c23,368,000
Per share
.43
1.47
Year net inc
b63,144,000
c88,534,000
Per share
3.95
5.57
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,165,000, or 7 cents a share, from non-recurring gains on the acquisition of loans from Yankee Bank and the sale of Cirrus to Mastercard.


Comprehensive Care Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comprehensive Care Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
37,401,000
54,745,000
Net loss
b4,015,000
c3,093,000
Share earns
-
.30
Shares outst
10,174,000
11,901,000
6mo rev
81,418,000
107,972,000
Net loss
b8,687,000
c4,701,000
Share earns
-
.48
Shares outst
10,170,000
11,937,000


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
27,671,000
26,088,000
Per share
.71
.68
Shares outst
39,033,000
38,406,000
Year net inc
108,318,000
91,103,000
Per share
2.79
2.41
Shares outst
38,841,000
37,853,000


Puberty Rite for Girls Is Bitter Issue Across Africa
LEAD: In the sprawling cattle country of southwestern Kenya, a 12-year-old girl walked bravely along a dirt track, swathed in a brightly colored cloth and carrying an open black umbrella.
Shilling notes dangled from her headgear, framing her face, as village people dressed in tree branches clapped and sang to her.


Review/Concert;   The Juilliard and Beethoven: Lasting Musical Symbiosis
LEAD: In 43 years of existence, the Juilliard String Quartet has developed a highly varied repertory.
Yet to the general public it remains best known for its periodic traversals of two standard bodies of literature, the 16 quartets of Beethoven and the six of Bartok.
According to the program the Juilliard gave the first complete Beethoven cycle in New York in 1948-49, and has since played all 16 works more than a hundred times around the world.


Dr. Markowitz Becomes Bride
LEAD: Dr.
Marian Paula Markowitz and Dr.
Alan David Haber were married yesterday at the Harrison (N.Y.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Arnold Turetsky.


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Empire State (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
12,504,000
9,291,000
Per share
1.75
1.28
Shares outst
7,117,000
7,265,000
Year net inc
b41,251,000
44,458,000
Per share
5.73
6.02
Shares outst
7,199,000
7,385,000


Glanville to Coach Falcons
LEAD: Jerry Glanville, who won games and lost his job with the Houston Oilers, became coach of the Atlanta Falcons today.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* River Forest Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,024,000
3,661,000
Per share
.52
.47
Year net inc
15,948,000
13,954,000
Per share
2.09
1.72


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CHRISTOPHER MORRONGIELLO has won a 1990 Marshall scholarship for two or three years of study at the British university of his choice.
He is the first lutanist, and only the eighth musician, to receive the award, established in 1953.
The competitive scholarship is considered comparable to a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford.


As Before, Blazers Stop Nets
LEAD: Tonight was another occasion on which Buck Williams was happy he no longer plays for the Nets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners has moved to 20 West 43d Street in Manhattan.


Broncos, 49ers in Super Bowl
LEAD: The intuitive, unpredictable John Elway will lead his Denver Broncos against the cool, cerebral Joe Montana and his San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIV.


Choice Drug Systems Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Choice Drug Systems Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,864,978
4,060,596
Net loss
b198,278
53,182
9mo sales
14,495,514
11,654,498
Net loss
b116,206
227,739
b-Included provisions of $55,000 for the quarter and $90,000 for the 9 months, for expenses related to an incompleted and terminated acquisition.


TCBY Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCBY Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
32,588,000
25,174,000
Net inc
6,209,000
4,726,000
Share earns
.23
.18
Yr rev
144,600,000
97,963,000
Net inc
29,493,000
19,794,000
Share earns
1.10
.75


King's Son, in Yonkers, Rebukes City's Officials
LEAD: Martin Luther King 3d, the eldest son of the slain civil rights leader, said today that it was a ''shame and disgrace'' that the City of Yonkers was still battling low-income housing 22 years after Congress passed the Fair Housing Act.


Dallas Radio Station Sale
LEAD: Shamrock Broadcasting Inc. in Burbank, Calif., the private investment arm of the Roy E. Disney family, said this week that it had agreed to sell its Dallas radio station, KMGC-FM, to Cook Inlet Partners L.P. for $22 million.


Attacks in Peru Drive Out Foreigners
LEAD: The killing of two French sightseers in Peru's Andean highlands on Friday highlights how terrorist attacks are forcing a wide withdrawal of foreign aid workers, archeologists and tourists from remote areas of this country's mountainous interior.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Automobile Sales ... Early Jan.
Business Inventories ... Nov.
Wednesday
Merchandise Trade ... Nov.
Industrial Production ... Dec.
Capacity Utilization ... Dec.
Thursday
Housing Starts ...


Amid the Boos and Scuffles, It's Order on the Court!
LEAD: ALONZO MOURNING walked across the Civic Arena floor one night last week and nodded sheepishly at John Clougherty, an official working the game between Georgetown and Pittsburgh.
Then the 6-foot-10-inch Mourning, who towers over Clougherty by more than a foot, smiled at him in much the same way he might smile when he meets a new girlfriend's father:


A Fishing Watch
LEAD: rrA watch for fishermen has been designed to keep track of tides and temperatures as well as time. rrTimex has developed a timepiece called the Hooks.
The watch is made with a thermometer for reading air or water temperature.
The face of the watch has a ring for estimating tidal changes.
By adjusting the bezel to a known tide, you can read the time at which to expect the next tide.


About Face. . . .
LEAD: FOR someone who ran the fastest 100-meter and 200-meter sprints in women's track last year, Dawn Sowell had a surprisingly cavalier attitude toward the starting blocks, those adjustable metal footplates sprinters push off from to begin a race.


Moscow Reports the Capture Of a Longtime American Spy
LEAD: A senior Soviet diplomat who passed defense secrets to United States intelligence for almost 30 years has been sentenced to death in Moscow.


Prescription Drugs Cheaper in Europe
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It was an eventful weekend for TOM LANDRY, the legendary coach of the Dallas Cowboys for 29 years until he was dismissed last February by JERRY JONES, the team's new owner.


A New Hands-On Manager For New York City Transit
LEAD: When Alan F. Kiepper took over Houston's troubled mass transit system in 1982, he frequently visited the bus barns at 4 A.M. so he could personally diagnose the problems that were keeping vehicles from hitting the streets on time.


Review/Television;   In His Debut as Host, Koch Plays Alphonse to Dinkins's Gaston
LEAD: Everybody knows you have to get up pretty early in the morning to outtalk Edward I. Koch.
Now you have to get up early to hear and see him, too.
At 8 A.M. yesterday, the former mayor made his debut as a television talk-show host.
The weekly one-hour program, ''Channel 2 News Sunday Edition With Jim Jensen and Ed Koch,'' offered as its first guest Mayor David N.


About 100 Reported Missing After Bangladesh Ferry Sinks
LEAD: A ferry carrying about 150 people sank tonight in a river outside Dhaka, and about 50 passengers reportedly swam to shore, the police said.


Motive Remains a Mystery In Deaths That Haunt a City
LEAD: After dinner at a restaurant last September, a close friend says, Charles Stuart complained that he had noticed something about his pregnant wife, Carol, that he had never seen before, ''that she had the upper hand'' in their marriage.


Michael Fuchs, Mover Who Led Archives, 78
LEAD: Michael Fuchs, the president of Whitehall Business Archives, a pioneer in the storage of corporate records, died of a heart attack on Friday at St.
Clare's Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Molinari Sworn As New Leader
LEAD: ''Staten Island today has become a dirty island.
It's something I'm not proud of.''


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,506,000
14,823,000
Net inc
3,047,000
2,044,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
9,851,000
8,230,000
9mo sales
53,286,000
41,446,000
Net inc
8,484,000
5,366,000
Share earns
.90
.66
Shares outst
9,509,000
8,190,000


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Domco Industries
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,404,000
28,996,000
Net loss
2,356,000
635,000
Yr sales
107,612,704
108,791,219
Net loss
4,730,662
1,378,292
The company said results in the latest quarter and year included about $3 million in writeoffs.


Review/Theater;   'Jonquil,' the 3d Play in a Saga of Black History
LEAD: With harshness as well as equanimity, Charles Fuller's ''Jonquil'' reveals the obstacles to full emancipation in the South immediately after the Civil War.
Through a voting rights episode in a small South Carolina community, the author views the Reconstruction period as one of the uglier chapters in the nation's history.


Intech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 8
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 8
1989
1988
Sales
3,779,000
2,692,000
Net inc
156,000
b77,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
10,412,000
9,537,000
Net inc
41,000
27,000
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Net loss


60 Gunmen Seize Tourists, Destroying Homes in Corsica
LEAD: About 60 masked gunmen burst into a vacation camp on this island today and held tourists at gunpoint while they set off explosives to destroy vacation homes.


Mid- and Low-Income Minorities in Decline on College Rolls
LEAD: The percentage of low- and middle-income black and Hispanic youths entering college from high school declined sharply in the past decade, the American Council on Education reports.


Lift Manufacturing Ban on Phone Companies;   Environmental Bonus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Runners Keep in Step As Time Marches On
LEAD: WHILE cross-training and easy-does-it running will continue to mark fitness programs in the 1990's, there are still individuals who run every day and prosper from it.
At this time of year, that approach comes under scrutiny because January is when some runners pledge to run every single day without a voluntary break.


NBS National Benefit Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBS National Benefit Services
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
891,869
846,184
Net loss
141,910
208,183
6mo rev
1,762,572
1,691,696
Net loss
276,193
491,538


INSIDE
LEAD:
New Soviet Strike Likely
The Siberian miners who started a nationwide coal strike last summer say they are likely to resume their walkout.
Page A8.
Old African Rite Persists
For 10 years now, groups of African and European women have been campaigning to end the circumcision of girls in Africa.


Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,851,000
2,651,000
Share earns
.41
.38
Yr net inc
11,346,000
10,544,000
Share earns
1.62
1.51


First Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
69,046,000
62,122,000
Per share
.99
.90
Shares outst
69,876,000
69,078,000
Year net inc
268,973,000
244,251,000
Per share
3.87
3.62
Shares outst
69,512,000
67,472,000


School Spurs Alumni Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: Some lessons imparted by a school and its teachers last for decades.
Many letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund from graduates of the Horace Mann School in Riverdale, recall the impact of William J. Nagle, who taught Latin and Greek there from 1911 to 1952 and was head of the classical languages department.


Federal National Mortgage Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
237,200,000
152,700,000
Share earns
.90
.64
Yr net inc
807,300,000
506,700,000
Share earns
3.14
2.14
The company said all share earnings results reflected a 3-for-1 common stock split approved in September 1989.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-11
Violence has erupted in Azerbaijan, the southern Soviet republic, leaving at least 25 people killed in the capital city, Baku.
Azerbaijani mobs are reportedly roaming the city's Armenian quarter, committing pogroms and atrocities.
Page A1


The Editorial Notebook;   Flavors of Capitalism
LEAD: Free trade is best, everyone agrees, but what should the United States do when its partners distort trade by closing their markets or targeting special industries for support?
The answer is a subject of hot debate, as demonstrated anew in a study group commissioned by the Twentieth Century Fund, a New York research foundation.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Debut for Agency
LEAD: Danza, Schulman &amp; Glennon Advertising is making its national advertising debut with a series of print ads for ''J.UK.
Lasser's Your 1990 Income Tax,'' a book published by the Prentice Hall trade division of Simon &amp; Schuster Inc.
Illustrated by Robert Weber, a cartoonist for The New Yorker, the ads list some expenses that are deductible, like hair transplants, and some that are not, like entertainment during fishing trips.


Egypt Cotton Profits Off
LEAD: Cotton, once known as Egypt's ''white gold,'' faces another year of much lower profits in 1989-90 as farmers grow less and imports rise.
Cotton exports are expected to earn Egypt about $200 million this season, the Egyptian Cotton Authority said last week.
That compares with about $300 million earned last season.


Key to Sears Turnaround: Patience
LEAD: Despite widespread pessimism over the prospects of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, some industry experts think the nation's largest retailer has bottomed out and will eventually become the turnaround story of retailing in the 1990's.


Books of The Times;   Lives Made No Better by Counterfeit Cash
LEAD:
Ordinary Money
By Louis B. Jones
345 pages. Viking. $18.95.


Airlines Give Break To Business
LEAD: A year after announcing tighter restrictions on many discount fares used by business travelers with an eye toward increasing revenue, the nation's airlines have been quietly giving large companies a break.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
154,200,000
b258,100,000
Per share
.81
1.38
12mo net loss
1,275,000,000
c1,001,800,000
Per share
-
5.38
b-Included the recognition of $240 million of Brazilian interest income.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


A Capital Race: See Barry Run Hard
LEAD: Although he continues to be dogged by speculation that he is finished politically, Marion S. Barry Jr. is forging ahead with plans to run for a fourth term as Mayor of the District of Columbia.


Frugal Sprinklers Pay For L.I. Utility's Loss
LEAD: Beatrice and Jerry Franklin conserved water all summer.
They never let the faucet run needlessly; they were stern about the dishwasher.
And instead of keeping their sprinkler system on a timer, they controlled it by hand.


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,506,000
14,823,000
Net inc
3,047,000
2,044,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
9,851,000
8,230,000
9mo sales
53,286,000
41,446,000
Net inc
8,484,000
5,366,000
Share earns
.90
.66
Shares outst
9,509,000
8,190,000


2 Named at Plain Dealer
LEAD: Alex Machaskee, vice president and general manager of The Plain Dealer, has been promoted to publisher of the Cleveland newspaper, and Thomas H. Greer, executive editor, has become editor.
The appointments were announced Sunday by Thomas Vail, who had been president, editor and publisher and now becomes president and chairman.


Old Kent Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
22,005,000
21,662,000
Per share
.83
.83
Year net inc
85,379,000
77,114,000
Per share
3.23
2.95


49ers' Nice Guy Finishes First
LEAD: The road that George Seifert has traveled to Super Bowl XXIV has been full of anonymity, a road laden with smoldering fires that he has watered with an unassuming nature and a keen sense of exactly what place he says he believes his ego belongs and how much his inner satisfaction is his greatest reward of all.


Nursing Home Is Denied Fees In Coma Case
LEAD: A state judge has ruled that a Long Island nursing home cannot collect fees of more than $100,000 for continuing to care for a comatose woman whose family wanted life-sustaining treatment stopped.


Mother Teresa Wasn't Riding In Ambulance, the Police Say
LEAD: The police say they mistakenly reported over the weekend that Mother Teresa was riding in an ambulance involved in a fatal accident.


Lindsay Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindsay Manufacturing (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
27,544,000
28,151,000
Net inc
2,260,000
2,533,000
Share earns
1.10
1.22


Carbide Defends Bhopal Settlement
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation said a $470 million settlement for victims of the industrial disaster in Bhopal, India, was binding even though the country's new Government had disavowed it. ''There is simply no basis for overturning it,'' said Joseph E. Geoghan, Union Carbide's vice president and general counsel.


Vivigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vivigen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,541,000
1,694,000
Net inc
319,000
246,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Yr rev
9,080,000
5,812,000
Net inc
1,636,000
822,000
Share earns
.64
.34


Research Effort Is Financed
LEAD: The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation has given a $2.97 million grant to establish a research consortium of five universities to explore the competitiveness and economic performance of the United States, foundation officials said last week.
Faculty members from the


Streptococcal Infections Are Rising in U.S.
LEAD: Serious streptococcal infections, including strep throat and rheumatic fever, are on the rise and have re-emerged as a public health problem, Federal health officials say.


Cost Cuts Announced By Apple
LEAD: Facing a possibly protracted slowdown, Apple Computer Inc. said today that it would begin a number of cost-cutting measures.
These measures include a reduction of employees at the company's headquarters in Cupertino, Calif.; a revised profit-sharing plan; less frequent salary increases, and the elimination of company cars for executives.


Human Genes Turn Plants Into Factories For Medicines
LEAD: SCIENTISTS are inserting human genes into plants and turning the plants into miniature factories that can produce large quantities of useful human proteins.


Campbell Soup's New Chief Offers Strategy for Growth
LEAD: In an energetic first day in office, David W. Johnson, the Campbell Soup Company's new president and chief executive, outlined his plans to revitalize the big food company, pledging to maintain its independence and to increase profits by curbing costs and possibly pruning operations.


Identifying Schools Most in Need Is First Step to Helping Them
LEAD: To the Editor:


Man Charged in Cake Death
LEAD: A man was charged Sunday in the death of a 3-year-old girl who apparently suffocated when she was force-fed a chocolate cake, the police said.
Frank F. Johnson, 46, of Baton Rouge, was accused of murder in failing to help the girl, Myra Griffin, when the incident occurred on Dec. 21, Officer Jeff Wesley said.


Gordon Jackson, an Actor, at 66; Hudson in 'Upstairs, Downstairs'
LEAD: Gordon Jackson, an actor known to millions of television viewers as Hudson, the archetypal butler in the popular series ''Upstairs, Downstairs,'' died on Sunday in Cromwell Hospital in London.
He was 66 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed, but Mr.
Jackson's agent, Michael Anderson, said the actor had been ill for a short time before being hospitalized.


Autrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autrex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,664,000
6,031,000
Net loss
b1,667,000
c678,000
Share earns
-
.12
Yr sales
23,197,000
17,610,000
Net loss
b1,097,000
c1,418,000
Share earns
-
.25


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
A First for Price as Cleveland Wins
Mark Price recorded the first triple-double of his pro career with 25 points, 12 assists and 11 rebounds as the Cleveland Cavaliers defeated the San Antonio Spurs, 92-89, yesterday in Richfield, Ohio.
Price made six of nine 3-point shots for the Cavaliers, who set a team record by hitting 10 long-range shots in 22 attempts.


Mubarak Saves Life of a Sudanese
LEAD: A quick trip by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt here last month apparently persuaded the governing Sudanese junta not to hang a physician found guilty by a military tribunal of fomenting a strike.


U.N. Official Views Africa
LEAD: African economies improved slightly in 1989 but failed to keep up with population growth, and on average Africans became worse off, an economist said today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMISSION ON TRADE LAW - WORKING GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL CONTRACT PRACTICES - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.m.


Landmark Graphics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Graphics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,096,000
10,187,000
Net inc
1,305,000
1,400,000
Share earns
.15
.18
Shares outst
8,897,000
7,618,000
6mo rev
25,427,000
19,394,000
Net inc
3,132,000
b2,614,000
Share earns
.37
.39
Shares outst
8,591,000
6,676,000


Jackson Opens a Drive for Capital Statehood
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson immersed himself deeper in this city's politics today by opening an office to push for statehood for the District of Columbia.


Cornell Names Coach
LEAD: Jim Hofher, the quarterback coach at the University of Tennessee, was named yesterday as head football coach at Cornell, where he played quarterback from 1975 to 1978.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
335,975
b252,989
Per share
.05
.04
Shares outst
4,030,720
3,298,879
Year net inc
915,286
b803,523
Per share
.09
.13
Shares outst
4,046,598
2,949,902


With Notes of Charm, Children Help Neediest
LEAD: Children tend to give smaller gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund than adults.
They have, after all, just their allowances, earnings from household chores or holiday and birthday gifts to draw from.
But the wishes they express are eloquent and direct.


Symbol Stock Falls
LEAD: Symbol Technologies Inc.'s stock lost nearly one-third of its value yesterday after the company said fourth-quarter earnings would be below Wall Street estimates.
Symbol's shares tumbled $5 to finish at $10.50, a loss of 32.3 percent, the biggest percentage loss on the New York Stock Exchange.
The Bohemia, L.I., company, which makes bar-code reading equipment, said it expected to report fourth-quarter earnings of 5 cents a share, well below Wall Street's forecast of about 30 cents a share.


Lawyers for Noriega to Seek His Release on Bail
LEAD: In a reversal of legal tactics, lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega said today that they would argue that their client be freed on bail.


Key Tronic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Tronic Corp.
Qtr to Dec 16
1989
1988
Sales
34,533,000
32,296,000
Net inc
763,000
659,000
Share earns
.09
.08
6mo sales
67,070,000
63,092,000
Net inc
1,153,000
410,000
Share earns
.14
.05


Florio's Bright and Loyal Inner Circle
LEAD: The top advisers James J. Florio will bring with him when he is sworn in as governor of New Jersey on Tuesday are known for having many of the same traits as their boss: intelligence, loyalty, liberal instincts and reputations as tough political operatives.


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,011,000
952,000
Per share
.47
.44
Year net inc
3,882,000
3,592,000
Per share
1.80
1.66


Employee Benefit Plans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Employee Benefit Plans Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,363,945
15,869,652
Net inc
b1,543,680
c63,872
Share earns
.29
.01
Shares outst
5,285,000
3,860,000
6mo rev
40,166,819
31,270,649
Net inc
b2,049,188
c462,027
Share earns
.44
.12
Shares outst
4,648,000
3,860,000


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
238,324,000
207,804,000
Net inc
9,125,000
b1,898,000
Share earns
.63
-
6mo sales
405,673,000
378,440,000
Net inc
1,835,000
b9,431,000
Share earns
.13
-


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ALTHEA WETHERBEE, a Long Islander, finished the Tenneco Marathon in Houston on Sunday, the oldest woman to do so.
But her son, Lieut.
Comdr.
JAMES D. WETHERBEE, fell asleep before he heard the news.
Commander Wetherbee is currently orbiting the earth as pilot of the space shuttle Columbia.


Heating Oil Drops Sharply As Weather Turns Warm
LEAD: Heating oil futures prices tumbled yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange as unseasonably warm weather spread across the country, easing demand for home heating fuel.


4 Men Convicted in Drug Case
LEAD: Four men were convicted today in a major drug smuggling operation, but 16 other defendants in the 2 1/2-month-long trial were found not guilty.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Advertising column of Business Day on Thursday about a new product assignment for the Isidore &amp; Paulson advertising agency misstated the agency's relationship to two Kraft General Foods cereal accounts.
It handled only the introduction of the cereals, Crispy Critters and Honey Bunches of Oats.


Nicaragua Watchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Celanese Canada Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celanese Canada Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
99,900,000
113,300,000
Net inc
11,900,000
12,400,000
Share earns
.86
.90
Yr sales
396,600,000
407,200,000
Net inc
48,300,000
48,900,000
Share earns
3.49
3.53


G.I.'s and Envoys Sparring in Panama
LEAD: Although American military officials say it is business as usual, a low-intensity war of nerves is still raging around the Cuban, Nicaraguan and Libyan embassies here, as well as the homes of the Peruvian and Vatican ambassadors to Panama.


Chase Manhattan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Manhattan Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
175,000,000
c275,000,000
Per share
1.47
2.93
Year net loss
b665,000,000
cd1,059,000,000
Per share
-
11.55
b-Included total $1.26 billion third quarter after-tax provision, which included a possible additional to reserves for possible credit losses relating to Chase's extension of credit to LDCS, an $85 million after-tax charge relating to real estate assets in Chase's


Joint Venture for Memory Chips Officially Declared Dead
LEAD: U.S.
Memories, a ground-breaking attempt by American computer companies to cooperate in producing memory chips, was officially declared dead today by its organizers.


Petitions Filed for a Vote on Casinos in Ohio
LEAD: Petitions calling for a statewide vote to authorize casino gambling in as many as eight cities in Ohio have been filed with the state, seven months after a proposal to allow casinos in just one city died in the State Legislature.


Review/Dance;   A Feeling of Family as Ballet Theater Turns 50
LEAD: American Ballet Theater celebrated its 50th birthday on Sunday night at the Metropolitan Opera House with a gala performance that was a grand affair - focused, unusually, on superb dancing from its present members rather than on cameo appearances from alumni in retirement.


First Capital Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Capital Corp. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
28,057,470
27,524,492
Per share
2.86
2.80


Data Translation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Translation Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
9,953,000
11,016,000
Net inc
478,000
1,026,000
Share earns
.15
.33
Shares outst
3,091,000
3,076,000
Yr sales
41,984,000
38,680,000
Net inc
2,435,000
2,662,000
Share earns
.78
.86
Shares outst
3,128,000
3,087,000


Chrysler Layoffs
LEAD: Faced with slumping auto sales, the Chrysler Corporation of Canada said it would lay off about 1,000 workers at its assembly plant in Bramalea, Ontario, for five weeks starting immediately.
The plant makes the Eagle Premier and the Dodge Monaco.
Earlier this month, Chrysler announced it would lay off 1,200 workers at its Jeep plant in Brampton, Ontario, and 2,100 workers at its van plant in Windsor, Ontario.


Foreman Wins in 2d Round and Sends Cooney Into Retirement
LEAD: George Foreman, an evangelical preacher from Humble, Tex., smote an opponent tonight.


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   BULGARIAN PARTY LOSES DOMINANCE
LEAD: This country today became the last of the Soviet Union's East European allies to strip the Communist Party of its dominant role, following the others in a halting transition to multiparty democracy.


'Junk Bond' Prices Little Changed
LEAD: The long-awaited bankruptcy filing by two of the Campeau Corporation's primary subsidiaries had little effect on prices in the high-yield ''junk bond'' market yesterday.


U.S. Memories: Too Short
LEAD: An unusual cooperative venture with the apt name of U.S.
Memories has failed to raise the necessary funds from American computer companies to go into the business of making memory chips.
A major opportunity to guard against future pressure from Japanese competitors thus seems to have been frittered away.


DMI Furniture Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMI Furniture Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
12,601,000
12,861,000
Net inc
692,000
1,171,000
Share earns
.12
.19
The company said share earnings assumes conversion of convertible stock into common.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the aftermath of a shooting spree that killed Cambodian refugee children last year in Stockton, Calif., misstated the number of Southeast Asian children injured.
Of the 29 who were hurt, 21 were Southeast Asians.


Mad Dashes to Cash the Stores' Checks
LEAD: When Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation announced last week that they would issue checks to pay suppliers for more than $100 million in merchandise, some suppliers went to great lengths to try to cash those checks before the stores could file for bankruptcy.


Europe Wary On New Ties
LEAD: The European Community told the six European Free Trade Association nations today that it would not be pushed into a hasty agreement on closer ties.


Jobless Rates: A Correction


Marilyn Neale, Executive, 37
LEAD: Marilyn Neale, a vice president of Ruder Finn &amp; Rotman Inc., the public relations firm, died on Sunday of breast cancer at her home in Manhattan.
She was 37 years old.


Judge Quickly Assumes Active Role in the Stores
LEAD: In signing five orders yesterday morning, a Federal bankruptcy judge in Cincinnati quickly showed how involved he would be in the operations of one of the world's largest retailing empires.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article in SportsMonday this week about the ticket lottery for the N.C.A.A.
Eastern Regional basketball tournament misstated the dates for the event, the ticket price and the method of payment.
The semifinals of the tournament will be played on March 22 and the final on March 24.
Tickets cost $43 each plus a $2 fee for each order.


Beijing Journal;   Stilled by the Unthinkable, a Singer Tries His Voice
LEAD: Like a thick carpet of snow, silence has settled over China.
In muffled voices, among friends, some people still mock their leaders and dream of change, but despite the lifting of martial law last week they are quiet in public, or they are in jail.


TRC Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRC Cos. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,767,296
10,060,081
Net loss
1,004,132
b428,938
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
5,430,543
3,373,779
6mo rev
20,717,638
19,280,513
Net loss
244,925
b800,309
Share earns
-
.24
Shares outst
5,526,025
3,301,431


American Air Plans Fare Rise
LEAD: American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, said yesterday that it was again raising air fares to cover the higher cost of jet fuel.


Selvac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selvac Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,622,000
4,070,000
Net inc
b540,000
c540,000
Share earns
.03
.04
Shares outst
14,034,000
10,702,000
6mo sales
10,775,000
5,847,000
Net inc
b809,000
c801,000
Share earns
.05
.06
Shares outst
13,850,000
10,635,000


Montreal Bank's Head Young, Conservative
LEAD: The Bank of Montreal finished installing a young management team yesterday by naming Matthew W. Barrett, 45 years old, as chairman to succeed W. D. Mulholland, who is retiring at age 63 after eight years in the post.


Cool Layers of Simplicity for Summer
LEAD: ''This is the way I'm going to work next summer,'' said Donna Karan as she slipped into an oversize short black poplin dress lightly fitted to the body with a drawstring just below the waistline.
Under it she wore a T-shirt and stretch tights.


Study for War Changes With Europe
LEAD: As the faculty of the Naval War College at Newport, R.I., sat in a conference room puzzling over what changes are needed in their curriculum to respond to the dramatic events unfolding in Eastern Europe, 50 generals and admirals from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization were playing an annual war game next door.


O'Toole's Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Toole's Group
Qtr to Dec 3
1989
1988
Revenue
8,227,854
5,335,903
Net inc
333,475
179,633
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
7,710,613
7,192,949


Parker Drilling Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Drilling Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
32,601,000
24,681,000
Net inc
b2,602,000
c9,902,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $4,212,000 from subsidiary debt settlement.


Mutual Funds Top $1 Trillion
LEAD: United States mutual funds went over $1 trillion in assets for the first time last week, but they may have dipped right back under that figure, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


2 Florida Players Are Suspended
LEAD: Florida's senior center, Dwayne Schintzius, the Gators' leading scorer with a 19.1-point average, faced a felony charge today after a weekend fight at a fraternity house and was suspended indefinitely along with another player by Coach Don DeVoe.


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSR Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,850,000
5,388,000
Net inc
54,000
49,000
Share earns
.03
.02
6mo rev
9,842,000
10,701,000
Net inc
193,000
165,000
Share earns
.10
.08


First Team Sports Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Team Sports Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
721,885
294,057
Net inc
31,004
b67,481
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
2,558,152
1,301,955
Net inc
319,162
b60,479
Share earns
.12
-
b-Net loss


Painting Slashed at Modern
LEAD: A Marcel Duchamp painting in the museum of Modern Art was slashed late last month, museum officials confirmed yesterday.


Huskies Jump Out Early And Upset Orangemen
LEAD: Chris Smith and Tate George scored 17 points apiece as Connecticut led almost the entire way tonight and beat Syracuse, 70-59.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Sunday headed ''Jobless Rate in the Region,'' about three southern oil-producing states, mislabeled the yearly bars showing unemployment rates.
A corrected version appears today on page A18.


Seton Hall Plagued by Turnovers
LEAD: Frantz Volcy wears a Band-Aid on each elbow, covering wounds the Seton Hall forward has received during games in recent weeks.


To Help New Democracies, Cut Aid to Israel, 4 Others
LEAD: It's always a little risky to predict history's verdict on contemporary events.
But even from today's sometimes shortsighted perspective, it is safe to declare 1989 as one of the watershed years of the 20th century - the year in which Communism collapsed and the long dormancy of freedom suddenly and dramatically blossomed in places from Poland to


Chase Profit Off in Period; Loss for Year
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, parent of the Chase Manhattan Bank, reported yesterday that fourth-quarter profits fell 36.4 percent and that it had a loss for the year.


Intech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 8
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 8
1989
1988
Sales
3,779,000
2,692,000
Net inc
156,000
b77,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
10,412,000
9,537,000
Net inc
41,000
27,000
Share earns
.01
.01
b-Net loss


Upheaval in the East;   Dole Asks Bush to Switch Aid to East Bloc
LEAD: The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, is urging that United States foreign aid be reallocated to Eastern European countries and Panama.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   Angry Crowds of East Germans Ransack Offices of Spy Service
LEAD: Crowds of angry protesters invaded the 3,000-room state-security headquarters today, destroying files and furniture in a show of popular frustration with the pace of change.


Review/Concert;   John Carewe Conducts Mahler's 7th
LEAD: A big musical reputation in one country does not always transfer effectively to another.
The young English conductor Simon Rattle, for example, in various appearances in this country, has failed to receive anything like the acclaim he almost invariably amasses at home.


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* King World Productions (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
168,352,000
136,520,000
Net inc
33,520,000
b31,293,000
Share earns
1.33
1.23
Shares outst
25,260,329
25,345,204
b-Included an increase in income of $2,905,000, or 11 cents a share, from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes.


Joseph S. Clark Is Dead at 88; Ex-Mayor and Reformist Senator
LEAD: Joseph S. Clark, a reform-minded politician who in 1951 became Philadelphia's first Democratic Mayor in 67 years and who went on to serve two terms in the United States Senate, died Friday at his home in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
He was 88 years old and had been in declining health in recent years.


Belichick Interviewed
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals yesterday interviewed Bill Belichick, the Giants' defensive coordinator, for the team's head-coaching job.
The 37-year-old Belichick is the third person to be interviewed so far by the Cardinals' general manager, Larry Wilson.


Fiscal Restraint Urged by Wilder
LEAD: Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder called for fiscal conservatism today in his first State of the Commonwealth speech as the first black elected governor in the nation.


Anti-Apartheid Veterans Are Reunited


How Knicks Beat Clock And Bulls
LEAD: When Bob Billings resumes his regular job as principal of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Grammar School in Scarsdale, N.Y., today, his students may want to look at him with new respect.


Cause of Bus Accidents
LEAD: Traffic congestion, not drugs or alcohol, is the primary cause of public transit bus accidents in the Municipal Railway System in San Francisco, researchers at the University of California at Berkeley report.


Struck Dumb by the Incredible: 1-800-NOTHING
LEAD: In an age of instant communication, when entire encyclopedias of information are transmitted over telephone lines in minutes and businesses count on getting through to far-flung offices in seconds, the loss of telephone service is unthinkable.


Riverside Journal;   New Reign For Queen Of Hotels In West?
LEAD: Riverside gave the world the navel orange, but not even the fruit has defined this locality like the Mission Inn, the gaudy, sprawling hotel created by Frank Augustus Miller, an entrepreneur.


New Producer for 'Today'
LEAD: NBC News announced today that Tom Capra would become executive producer of the ''Today'' show on Jan. 29, replacing Marty Ryan.
The change is part of an overhaul of the top-rated morning program, which has already added a senior executive in charge of the program, Dick Ebersol, and a new co-host, Deborah Norville.


Men at 65: New Findings On Well-Being
LEAD: THE secret of emotional health among older men is not a successful career, a happy marriage or a stable childhood, new findings suggest.
It lies instead in an ability to handle life's blows without passivity, blame or bitterness.


Housing Police Ask Merger With New York Force
LEAD: The head of the union that represents New York City housing police officers called yesterday for a merger of that force with the city's Police Department.


Imagine Being in the Other Person's Shoes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Koor Halts Debt Payments
LEAD: Koor Industries suspended payments today on its $1 billion debt, and its chairman resigned in protest against plans to sell the group.


United's Pilots Working on Deal
LEAD: The leaders of the United Airlines pilots' union said their governing body will meet Jan. 24 to put together an employee stock ownership plan to buy the UAL Corporation, the carrier's parent.
The meeting is a day before UAL's board is to receive a recapitalization plan from its bankers.


Western Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Microwave
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,256,000
2,818,000
Net loss
360,000
404,000
Yr sales
9,711,000
11,039,000
Net loss
884,000
764,000


Brooke of Devils Overcomes Comparisons With Broten
LEAD: Bob Brooke was aware comparisons with Aaron Broten would be unavoidable when he joined the Devils earlier this month from Minnesota in exchange for the popular forward.


In the Ebb and Flow Of Ancient Glaciers, Clues to Next Ice Age
LEAD: THE climatic history of the last half-million years is largely a history of ice and cold, punctuated every 100,000 years or so by brief, glorious intervals of unusual warmth called interglacials.
If nature takes its course, scientists say, the current interglacial - the one in which human civilization developed - should begin to end within the next 2,000 years or sooner.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Taking a Step Back From Anarchy
LEAD: There was a moment last Friday night when it appeared that an angry mob of several thousand was dictating policy in the capital to the frightened provisional leadership of this country.
At the same time, army generals were taking command in the cities of Timisoara and Iasi.


Our Towns;   In Greenwich, Teen-Agers Want Their Own Room
LEAD: For four years, Emily Rosen, who is 17 years old and a senior at Greenwich High School, has been trying to get a teen center built in this pleasant Fairfield County town of 60,000.


Publishers Honor Editor Of Good Housekeeping
LEAD: What is bad for network television is good for magazines, said John Mack Carter, and that means magazines are feeling pretty good. ''I don't see publishers going out now with the fear they had a few years ago,'' said the editor in chief of Good Housekeeping, who will be honored tonight by the Magazine Publishers of America with its highest honor, the Henry Johnson Fisher


Medical Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Dynamics
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
959,100
714,300
Net inc
217,900
b275,900
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
2,558,408
1,799,830
Yr rev
3,543,100
3,054,000
Net inc
60,900
b484,800
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,558,408
1,799,830


Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Federal S &amp; L Assn (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,520,000
b2,244,000
Share earns
-
.61
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,690,313
6mo net loss
3,419,000
b4,247,000
Share earns
-
1.15
Shares outst
3,719,596
3,690,313


Chess
LEAD: If you aren't doing well in one tournament, try another, preferably at the same time.


Loan Spree Seems Over
LEAD: The money was easy, and there was confidence that companies would never stop rising in value.
Some people who had gone deeply into debt to buy companies had become very rich, and others were determined to follow.


Middlebury to Require Women in Fraternities
LEAD: Fraternities at Middlebury College must admit women or close, the school's trustees voted Saturday.


Petroleum &amp; Resources reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Petroleum &amp; Resources (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
322,866,019
248,370,688
Share earns
31.09
24.84
Shares outst
10,384,600
9,997,584
Assets represented net assets.
Share earnings for latest period is after capital gain distributions of $1.20 paid in 1989 and $29,895,000 stated value $1,575 convertible preferred stock outstanding.


James A. Clark Jr., 69, Air Ace and Executive
LEAD: James Averell Clark Jr., a World War II fighter pilot who led a varied career in business after the war, died of a stroke on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old.


Deals
LEAD:
BASEBALL
ATLANTA (NL) - Agreed to terms with Charlie Leibrandt, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Agreed to terms with Danny Jackson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
DETROIT (AL) - Agreed to terms with Cecil Fielder, first baseman-designated hitter, on a two-year contract and Ed Romero, infielder, and Tracy Jones and Larry Sheets, outfielders, on one-year contracts.


TSS Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSS Ltd.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
70,790
4,750
Net loss
1,135,568
306,623
6mo rev
120,563
4,750
Net loss
2,291,448
692,498


After Months of Unsubtle Hints, Cuomo to Seek a Hold on Tax Cut
LEAD: After months of dropping all-but-delicate hints, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on Tuesday will formally recommend suspending the next phase of the state's income-tax cut, aides to the Governor said today.


Optek Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Optek Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 27
1989
1988
Sales
13,773,006
15,657,753
Net loss
281,303
bc685,720
Share earns
-
.21
Yr sales
57,569,026
28,777,060
Net inc
1,017,582
b1,302,014
Share earns
.31
.41


G.E. Shutdown
LEAD: Because of slowing orders, the General Electric Company plans to close its factory here for the week of Jan. 22-26, idling nearly 1,700 workers.
The factory makes residential electricity meters.
The drop in orders reflects slowness in the construction industry, a G.E. spokeswoman said.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
47,800,000
43,600,000
Net inc
14,800,000
10,400,000
Share earns
.77
.54
Yr rev
187,900,000
173,900,000
Net inc
59,300,000
42,300,000
Share earns
3.07
2.19


Where Savings Crisis Hits Hard
LEAD: This overbuilt city, only a few years ago an illustration of solid growth in the West, has now become a clear example of the difficulty the Government faces in selling the vast real estate holdings it has acquired in the savings and loan crisis.


By Design;   Hats Floppy and Flexible
LEAD: You could just as easily stuff them into your pocket as pull them onto your head.
That is one of the nice features of the rakish but casual hats spotted around town.
Made of soft fabrics like velvet, wool or rayon ribbon, they can be put on any old way.
Floppy and flexible, they adjust to the whims of the wearer.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Banc One Corp., Columbus, Ohio, said it would extend until the end of January its acquisition of MCorp's failed Texas bank from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.


Charles Rex Jr. Weds Miss Bothamley
LEAD: Elizabeth Anne Bothamley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Merrill Bothamley of Newport Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to Charles Gordon Rex Jr., a son of Betty Soubricas of Fairfield, Pa., and the late Mr.
Rex.
The ceremony was performed in New York at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Christopher Maloney, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.


Raychem Chief Foresees No 'Giant Revolution'
LEAD: The Raychem Corporation said yesterday that Robert J. Saldich had been named president and chief executive, effective April 1.
Based in Menlo Park, Calif., Raychem manufactures products for the aerospace, automotive, electronics and telecommunications industries.


Triton Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triton Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
69,993,000
42,630,000
Net loss
b6,089,000
13,167,000
6mo rev
135,109,000
95,979,000
Net loss
b10,787,000
18,222,000
b-Included tax credits of $43,000 and $198,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The cataclysmic changes we have seen in Eastern Europe, in China and South Africa since last year have deep roots in this very pulpit.''
- Coretta Scott King, at the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta.
[B4:1.]


Nicaragua, Altering Policy, Keeps Out Some Journalists
LEAD: Apparently revising its longstanding policy allowing easy access for foreign journalists, the Sandinista Government has begun denying and delaying visas for journalists trying to cover the campaign for national elections here Feb. 25.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
14,162,000
12,256,000
Per share
.77
.63
Year net inc
59,000,000
49,033,000
Per share
3.12
2.46


American Bionetics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bionetics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
817,317
914,606
Net loss
b525,350
345,955
Shares outst
15,412,053
15,342,938
6mo sales
1,481,668
2,002,715
Net loss
b1,083,335
720,307
Shares outst
15,411,236
15,287,771


Careers;   Recruiting Trends for The Decade
LEAD: THE growing trend of companies' hiring outside managers is expected to be a leading trend of the 1990's, Richard M. Ferry of Korn Ferry International, the largest management recruiting firm, said recently.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Tagliabue Considering New Draft Rules
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the National Football League, said yesterday that he was leaning toward changing N.F.L. draft rules to permit some players who still have college eligibility to turn pro.


NBD Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBD Bancorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
66,464,000
61,518,000
Per share
.92
.87
Year net inc
258,808,000
227,156,000
Per share
3.59
3.21
Per share earnings have been adjusted to reflect the 3-for-2 stock split in June 1989.


Fielder Rejoins Majors And Signs With Tigers
LEAD: In 1988, Cecil Fielder batted .230 and hit 9 home runs in 74 games for the Toronto Blue Jays.
Then he left the major leagues and played in Japan last year.
Now he is coming back to the majors - with the Detroit Tigers - and he is coming back a lot wealthier.


How to Fulfill the Promise of Malta
LEAD: Halve the U.S. and Soviet strategic nuclear arsenals.
Slash both sides' chemical weapon stockpiles to 20 percent of current U.S. levels.
Cut Warsaw Pact and NATO conventional forces in Europe to equal levels below those now maintained by NATO.


ECI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ECI Environmental (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
6,530,000
3,825,000
Net inc
406,000
8,000
Share earns
.12
-
The company attributed its improved earnings to higher-than-expected revenues at its Northern California operations, continued growth in its Burbank office, and the fact that efforts to improve abatement program efficiencies and cost controls resulted in pretax margins in excess of 15 percent.


Stock Sale By Shearson
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc., which is trying to increase its capital by $850 million, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell $75 million of preferred stock to affiliates of a private investment banker, Hellman &amp; Friedman.


Humphrey Is Hurting, But He Wants to Play
LEAD: In that brief period between the initial satisfaction of winning a conference championship and the start of serious preparations for the Super Bowl, Bobby Humphrey of the Denver Broncos faced an additional complication at the end of his rookie season.


The Breed Lives On
LEAD: Not all European Stalinist heads have rolled.
As a French commentator said, Georges Marchais's advantage is that he is not in power so he can't be brought down by hundreds of thousands demonstrating in the streets.


U.S. Can Help Soviet Private Entrepreneurs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Davox Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,599,000
11,521,000
Net inc
178,000
bc1,596,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
5,325,000
5,117,000
Yr sales
36,301,000
36,278,000
Net loss
2,043,000
c3,430,000
Shares outst
5,169,000
5,081,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about the relationship between cocaine use and traffic fatalities in New York City included a scientist's incorrect figure in some copies, on the extent of cocaine use.
A 1986 survey by the State Division of Substance Abuse Services reported that 11 percent of New Yorkers between 18 and 25 had used cocaine within the previous six months, not that 11 percent of the entire population used cocaine regularly.


Capitals Will Try Another Murray
LEAD: The Washington Capitals dismissed Bryan Murray as their coach yesterday and replaced him with his brother, Terry Murray.


Canadian Satellite Communiations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Satellite Communiations Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,906,000
8,631,000
Net inc
1,702,000
711,000
Share earns
.17
.07
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Rorer Is In Talks To Merge
LEAD: The Rorer Group Inc. said yesterday that it was negotiating with a company that might acquire 68 percent of Rorer's stock for cash and stock rights.
The deal, if completed, values the drug company at $73 a share, or $2.3 billion.


Investor Cools On Bond Bid
LEAD: A little-known investor, Jeff Reynolds, said Friday that he would probably withdraw his proposal to buy a majority stake in Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd., the ailing Australian business empire.


Manville Venture
LEAD: Manville International B.V. and the Belgian-based Recticel have formed a partnership to make and market foam insulation products in Europe.
Manville International is a subsidiary of the Denver-based Manville Corporation.
Recticel is a subsidiary of the Societe Generale de Belgique, which is based in Brussels.


Study of Acid Rain Uncovers a Threat To Far Wider Area
LEAD: A HUGE Federal study has found that acid rain has turned many lakes and streams acidic not only in the Northeast but also in other areas of the East and parts of the Midwest, including northern Florida, the Appalachians and the New Jersey Pine Barrens.


Octel Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Octel Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,835,000
20,435,000
Net inc
4,413,000
2,852,000
Share earns
.26
.19
Shares outst
17,161,000
15,182,000
6mo rev
59,030,000
38,396,000
Net inc
8,133,000
5,470,000
Share earns
.49
.37
Shares outst
16,707,000
14,938,000


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,745,000
4,098,000
Per share
.53
.38
Year net inc
20,356,000
12,172,000
Per share
1.89
1.13


Robert-Mark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robert-Mark Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,331,000
1,401,000
Net loss
486,000
455,000
Shares outst
4,588,000
4,338,000
9mo rev
3,617,000
4,806,000
Net loss
1,572,000
820,000
Shares outst
4,504,000
4,338,000


Egypt Said to Routinely Use Torture Against Its Prisoners
LEAD: An Egyptian human rights group charges that torture and sexual abuse of prisoners has become so widespread that it ''now appears to be a matter of policy by security forces'' holding those detained both for political and nonpolitical reasons.


Ihsan Abdel Kuddous, An Egyptian Writer, 71
LEAD: Ihsan Abdel Kuddous, an Egyptian journalist, novelist and short-story writer, died last Thursday after suffering a stroke.
He was 71 years old.
Mr.
Abdel Kuddous, whose works were translated into several languages, also wrote regular syndicated columns in Cairo's Government-owned newspapers and magazines.


Ecolab Buyback
LEAD: Ecolab Inc., which markets cleaning and maintenance services, repurchased about 1.8 million of its shares for $55.3 million, or $30.75 a share, from the Carlyle Group and its affiliates It said Carlyle had agreed not to buy more Ecolab shares or otherwise try to influence Ecolab.
Ecolab said that under its buyback program it had bought back about 2.4 million shares for about $72 million.


Patterns
LEAD:
A Markdown for Me, Too


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
110,034,511
100,053,805
Net inc
8,820,732
7,894,568
Share earns
.39
.35
6mo sales
217,537,880
197,293,254
Net inc
18,429,416
16,566,593
Share earns
.82
.74


Sudbury Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sudbury Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
124,609,000
125,689,000
Net loss
1,763,000
b1,941,000
6mo sales
244,652,000
242,729,000
Net loss
3,293,000
b5,855,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $303,000, or 2 cents a share, and $318,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively; the 6 months also included a loss of $4,596,000 from an adjustment in accounting.


State-O-Maine Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State-O-Maine Inc.  (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,182,203
31,289,488
Net inc
2,628,497
2,651,979
Share earns
.53
.54
Shares outst
4,994,530
4,886,621
9mo rev
75,438,929
58,772,676
Net inc
5,081,776
4,574,063
Share earns
1.02
1.07
Shares outst
4,993,758
4,283,930


On 59th St., The Topic Is a Hot One
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation's decision to put its American department stores into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings was topic No. 1 on both sides of the counters at Bloomingdale's yesterday.


Scientists Learn to 'Listen' for Avalanches
LEAD: AVALANCHE warnings can be improved by using special microphones that detect low-frequency sounds from more than 50 miles away, a research team has reported.


South Carolina Coach Courts Local Players
LEAD: South Carolina has not had a player from the New York City area make a significant contribution since Mike Doyle of the Bronx averaged 12.6 points in 1979-80.
It is noteworthy because of the legacy of Frank McGuire.


Business and Health;   Health Insurers' Changing Role
LEAD: HEALTH-INSURANCE executives say their business has changed radically in the last two years in the nation's struggle with double-digit growth in medical spending.
Many insurers say their traditional work of assuming risks has been eclipsed by services to help their customers' health dollars go further.


CAMPEAU INVOKES BANKRUPTCY CODE FOR ITS BIG STORES
LEAD: The American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation filed for court protection from creditors yesterday, saying they had debts of about $7.5 billion.


South Carolina National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
14,297,000
13,464,000
Per share
.66
.62
Year net inc
59,176,000
54,515,000
Per share
2.73
2.51


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MILOVAN DJILAS, the dissident Yugoslav writer, flies to Moscow from Belgrade today as the guest of the Soviet journal Literaturnaya Gazeta.
In a conciliatory mode, the Russians have invited him to participate in a round-table discussion of Moscow's break with Yugoslavia more than 40 years ago, the very break that he helped precipitate.


A Storybook Development With an Uncertain Ending
LEAD: When Federal regulators seized control of New Jersey's largest savings institution last month, one of the troubled properties that came with it was Port Liberte, a storybook development of sumptuous town houses rising above lazy canals on the cluttered waterfront here.


5-Nation Panel Considers U.N. Role in Bringing Peace to Cambodia
LEAD: With France calling for action to prevent the Khmer Rouge from returning to power, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council met here today to analyze a plan to involve the United Nations in bringing peace to Cambodia.


Grey Advertising Gets Wonder Bread Account
LEAD: Wonder Bread will now be pitched by Grey Advertising.
The Continental Baking Company, the subsidiary of the Ralston Purina Company that bakes Wonder, has consolidated its bread line at Grey, which already handles the Home Pride, Oatmeal Goodness and Beefsteak Rye brands.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: WILLIAM J. GRINKER, until last October the head of the New York City Human Resources Administration under Mayor Edward I. Koch, is leading a study of drug-treatment programs in a project financed by the Twentieth Century Fund and several other foundations.
Mr.
Grinker, 54, once a senior program officer at the Ford Foundation, will explore existing treatment alternatives, research and methods of disseminating information.


Desperation Shot Lifts Knicks Over the Bulls
LEAD: Trent Tucker accomplished the impossible yesterday.
With a tenth of second left on the Madison Square Garden clock, the Knicks' guard caught an inbounds pass, turned and let fly a high-arcing 26-footer that hit nothing but net and gave the Knicks a 109-106 victory over the Chicago Bulls.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-13
A state of emergency in Azerbaijan has been declared.
The Kremlin ordered troops to help contain ethnic hostilities in the southern Soviet republic.
Open armed combat was reported.
Page A1
The American spy in Moscow who has been sentenced to death was apparently one of the most important recruits ever to serve American intelligence, U.S.


Review/Theater;   A Surgeon's Crisis of Faith In a Marsha Norman Work
LEAD: Marsha Norman's ''Traveler in the Dark'' aims to be a play about a crisis of faith but becomes an unresponsive argument between a skeptic and a believer.
The work is didactic when it needs to be humanizing, single-edged when it should be at its most penetrating.
First presented in 1984 at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., ''Traveler in the Dark'' is having its New York premiere at the York Theater Company.


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherry Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
55,734,000
51,347,000
Net inc
277,000
750,000
Share earns
.06
.17
9mo sales
153,475,000
161,126,000
Net loss
3,928,000
b5,063,000
Share earns
-
1.12


Coors Enters Bottled Water Market
LEAD: For the first time since Prohibition, the Adolph Coors Company is selling a nonalcoholic beverage.
The new product is called Coors Rocky Mountain Sparkling Water.


Din of Assembly-Line Justice in New York
LEAD: A din filled courtroom 941 at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn the other day as Justice Nicholas Coffinas looked down from the bench.
Before him was a spindly young man who had been caught with an unregistered pistol.
Minutes before, an admitted burglar had his turn before the judge.
Then had come a purse snatcher, a man accused of selling drugs and a man charged with splitting another man's lip in a street brawl.


Pacific Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,033,000
610,000
Per share
.53
.23
Year net inc
7,431,000
3,542,000
Per share
2.24
1.33
The latest year's per share earnings adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split in March 1989.


Trident 2 Missile a Success In 4th Test From Submarine
LEAD: The crew of a nuclear-powered submarine sent a Trident 2 missile aloft today in the fourth consecutive successful test flight for the Navy's newest and most powerful weapon.


Opera Is Ready for a Comeback in the Amazon
LEAD: Battling tropical termites and jungle humidity, workers and engineers are bringing this city in the heart of the rain forest ever closer to realizing its perennial dream of once again hearing opera in the Amazon.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cogeco Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
29,572,000
25,686,000
Net inc
1,840,000
1,169,000
Share earns
.16
.15
Shares outst
9,237,324
7,567,369
Results are in Canandian dollars.


Bridge
LEAD: Two players from Schenectady, N.Y., who have won World Team titles, captured the Regional Knockout Team title in Port Chester, N.Y., on Sunday.


Dollar and Gold Mostly Up In Light Trading on Holiday
LEAD: The dollar rose against most major foreign currencies yesterday in light trading, as holidays in Japan and the United States sharply reduced worldwide activity.


16 Hurt in Nevada Plane Crash
LEAD: A commuter plane crashed while trying to land in a snowstorm today, injuring all 16 people on board, officials said.


Grand Valley Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grand Valley Gas
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
25,524,000
21,292,000
Net inc
388,000
325,000
Share earns
.08
.06
6mo rev
47,364,580
41,436,142
Net inc
805,262
522,332
Share earns
.15
.10


Frederick's of Hollywood Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frederick's of Hollywood Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
21,647,000
17,417,000
Net inc
407,000
150,000
Share earns
.11
.04
Shares outst
3,745,000
3,725,000
Year-ago shares outstanding adjusted to reflect two 3-for-2 stock splits effective March 17, 1989, and Aug.


Hong Kong and Britain Faulted on Boat People
LEAD: Amnesty International sharply criticized Hong Kong and Britain today for what it said were policies that put Vietnamese boat people who deserved to be treated as political refugees at risk of being returned to Vietnam to face persecution.


Nation Honors Dr. King on 61st Anniversary of His Birth


Automatic Data reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automatic Data (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
414,039,000
409,478,000
Net inc
49,950,000
43,970,000
Share earns
.68
.59
6mo rev
817,396,000
805,615,000
Net inc
87,010,000
78,410,000
Share earns
1.19
1.04
Shares outst
73,221,000
75,205,000


Sea Containers Units Are Target of New Bid
LEAD: Temple Holdings Ltd., whose takeover bids have been rejected by Sea Containers Ltd., offered yesterday to buy certain Sea Containers units for more than $967 million.


EXPERTS DIAGNOSE TELEPHONE 'CRASH'
LEAD: Engineers at A.T.&amp;T. tentatively concluded last night that the telephone system crashed because of a fault in a new signaling system, a part of the telephone network that helps complete long-distance calls.


In, Out and Over; Trend Industry Looks Back at the 90's
LEAD: Janet Jackson will be in, Michael Jackson will be out.
Cellular telephones will be everywhere, until they are replaced by flip-top, hand-held ''personal communicators'' in ''Star Trek'' style.


Rite Aid Trial Scheduled
LEAD: Charges that the Rite Aid Corporation and its president bribed a member of the Ohio Board of Pharmacy will be heard in a trial set to begin April 16, officials of Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court have said.
Judge Lillian J. Greene had previously set a tentative trial date of Jan. 15.
Rite Aid and its president, Martin Grass, have been charged with bribing Melvin L.


Court Blocks a Newsletter From Printing Ernst Article
LEAD: The Atlanta newsletter that in May broke the story of the merger of Ernst &amp; Whinney and Arthur Young, two large accounting firms, has been temporarily blocked by the surviving firm from publishing an article on the merger in its January issue.


Marjorie Van Ness, 75; Served on Farm Board
LEAD: Marjorie Schuyler Van Ness, the first woman to be appointed to the New Jersey Board of Agriculture, died on Saturday at her horse farm in Raritan Township in Hunterdon County.
She was 75 years old.


Number of Grade I Stakes Reduced
LEAD: For the last three years, a very small band of racing critics has complained that the American racing calendar is bloated with second-rate or redundant races masquerading as Grade I events.
Finally, the people who assign the roman numerals to the year's most important races have listened, agreed and acted.


Sixers Sign Lloyd
LEAD: Lewis Lloyd, who was waived by Houston after having been reinstated at the beginning of season from a suspension for substance abuse, has signed a 10-day contract with the Philadelphia 76ers.
Lloyd, a 30-year-old forward, averaged 7 points in three games this season with the Rockets before being waived Dec.


Upheaval in the East: Siberia;   Miner Guards Flame of a Rustic Past
LEAD: Over the hard Siberian horizon beyond the frozen river, legions of families must wait in the city 10 years or more on a Government list simply to move from their one-room apartments to a two-room existence in the soulless tenement towers of Communism.


Dinkins Says an Increase In Property Taxes Is Possible
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, in his strongest statements yet on the prospect of new taxes to balance New York City's budget in the coming fiscal year, said yesterday that higher property taxes were a real possibility.


Georgia Gulf To Recapitalize
LEAD: The Georgia Gulf Corporation, which has been trying to fend off corporate raider Harold C. Simmons, said today that its board had approved a debt-financed recapitalization plan that would give stockholders a one-time cash payment.


Off-Duty Israeli Soldier Is Stabbed in Jerusalem
LEAD: An off-duty Israeli soldier was stabbed as she walked along a narrow street in Jerusalem's Old City today, and 30 Palestinians were detained for questioning, the police said.


'Smart' Typewriter May Be an Intelligent Choice
LEAD: THE caller said his old electric typewriter had finally given up the ghost, and he wanted to know what kind of personal computer to buy to replace it.
He said he wrote 10 or 20 business letters a week, along with an occasional brief report.
His daughter would also use it to write her school papers.


Upheaval in the East;   An Abundance Of Hired Guns
LEAD: A senior East German Government official gave a detailed report today on the history and scope of the Office of State Security.


Morton International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morton International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
407,728,000
349,038,000
Net inc
33,387,000
31,146,000
Share earns
.69
.65
6mo sales
762,519,000
670,648,000
Net inc
59,380,000
64,113,000
Share earns
1.23
1.34


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
34,225,000
38,644,000
Net inc
2,746,000
2,769,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Shares outst
8,808,497
9,153,549
9mo sales
103,578,000
119,005,000
Net inc
7,967,000
7,972,000
Share earns
.90
.87
Shares outst
8,886,140
9,158,787


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
N.A.
8.06
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.49
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.44
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
8.06
N.A.
30-YR.


The Editorial Notebook;   After the Election: Surprise!
LEAD: Remember David Dinkins, candidate?
He was the indecisive one, so bad at making decisions that even some supporters predicted he'd be merely a ceremonial mayor while those around him did the heavy lifting.
Now look.
Mr.
Dinkins announced, just two days into the job, that because of budget problems, the city would have to delay hiring 1,800 police officers.


Sandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandy Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,838,358
8,236,211
Net inc
48,931
b274,688
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss
Results for year-ago quarter were affected by costs associated with restructuring.


Beirut Government, Facing Rivals, Asks U.S. Arms
LEAD: The Syrian-backed Government of President Elias Hrawi is seeking weapons from the United States to build up its military strength against Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Maronite Christian officer who leads most of the country's armed forces, according to Government officials here.


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,522,000
5,566,000
Per share
.70
.57
Year net inc
27,141,000
21,197,000
Per share
2.87
2.19


Risk of High Blood Pressure Is Same for Sexes by Age 55
LEAD: By 55 years old, women are as likely as men to have high blood pressure, and more than half of American women that age have high cholesterol levels, the American Heart Association has reported.


Shuttle Is Troubled Briefly By Phantom Sensor Signals
LEAD: The astronauts on the space shuttle Columbia pursued a series of experiments today after their sleep was interrupted by an alarm signaling a brief problem with a navigation system.


U.S. Can Help Soviet Private Entrepreneurs;   Don't Listen, Lithuania
LEAD: To the Editor:


French Airline Deal Inquiry
LEAD: The European Community's Executive Commission said today that it would investigate Air France's planned takeover of the private French airline U.T.A. to see if it violated the community's laws on monopolies.


Patricia Clark Greene, Volunteer, 64
LEAD: Patricia Clark Greene, former president of the Rehearsal Club, a low-cost residence for women in the performing arts, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center after a long illness.
She was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


SALVADOR EVIDENCE ESCAPED U.S. ENVOY
LEAD: The American Ambassador to El Salvador recently suggested that six Jesuit priests there might have been killed by leftist guerrillas wearing Salvadoran military uniforms, a member of Congress said today.
The Ambassador was unaware of evidence already available to the United States Army implicating


Stocks End Broadly Lower; Dow Off 19.84
LEAD: Stocks fell broadly yesterday in slow trading as many investors observed the Martin Luther King Day holiday.


Four Executives Guilty in $52 Million Fraud
LEAD: Four New York area businessmen pleaded guilty on Friday to Federal charges of using their furniture business to defraud 400 investors of $52 million.


For Man With a Dream, A Humbling Nightmare
LEAD: The financial and legal troubles facing the Campeau Corporation's American retailing units are undoubtedly a personal humiliation for Robert Campeau, the French Canadian entrepreneur whose debt-burdened dream was to own a national chain of shopping malls housing prestigious stores.


Mexico Calls Slain U.S. Drug Agent a Trafficker
LEAD: In a bitter manifestation of growing tension with the United States over cooperation in fighting drug trafficking, Mexico's Government-owned television network has accused an American drug agent who was slain here of having been part of a major cocaine smuggling ring and of having used his position to blackmail drug dealers and enrich himself.


McEnroe Displays Top Form And Gains
LEAD: John McEnroe, showing his old artistry and a renewed commitment to reach the top of the tennis world again, gave a virtuoso performance today in his first-round match at the Australian Open.


Festival of Foreign TV At Museum of Broadcasting
LEAD: Award-winning programs from abroad, most of them never broadcast in this country, are the focus of the New York World Television Festival opening today at the Museum of Broadcasting at 1 East 53d Street.


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
68,461,000
66,534,000
Per share
1.13
1.10
Shares outst
60,674,935
60,553,709
Year net inc
263,320,000
233,202,000
Per share
4.35
3.84
Shares outst
60,569,661
60,748,624


Upheaval in the East;   Albania Denies Unrest Reports
LEAD: The President of Albania today dismissed reports of unrest in his country and accused neighboring Yugoslavia of trying to stir up trouble.


Computer Failure Disrupts A.T.&amp;T. Long Distance
LEAD: Millions of people were unable to make long-distance calls yesterday after the American Telephone and Telegraph Company suffered a major failure in the computer program that operates its new long-distance switching equipment.


Inside
LEAD:
New Age: Hold the Ice
The next ice age is expected to begin within 2,000 years.
But scientists say global warming may alter the course of nature.
Science Times, page C1.
A Peaceful, Uneasy Feeling
Military instructors are finding that with East-West tensions easing, war games aimed at the Soviets are growing increasingly irrelevant.


Newspaper on Space
LEAD: A new four-color weekly newspaper devoted to news about the business and politics of space began publishing today after three months of preview issues.
Space News is a publication of the the Times Journal Company of Springfield, Va.
The company also publishes Army Times, Navy Times, Air Force Times, Federal Times, Defense News and Journal Newspapers in suburban areas of Washington.


King Holiday Observances Point Out Both Pain and Triumphs
LEAD: In a day dominated as much by the pain of the present as the triumphs of the past, the nation yesterday marked the fifth anniversary of the Martin Luther King Jr.
National Holiday on what would have been his 61st birthday.


23 Are Killed as Jet Crashes South of Costa Rican Capital
LEAD: A twin-engine commuter airplane carrying 23 people crashed into a mountain in driving rain shortly after takeoff near here this morning, killing all aboard, officials said.


Unusual Microbe, Once Dismissed, Is Not Taken More Seriously
LEAD: EVIDENCE suggests that a mysterious microbe, whose discovery three years ago was dismissed as a finding of no significance, can cause disease among AIDS patients and even kill people not infected with the AIDS virus.
Laboratory tests hint that several antibiotics could control the microbe, but this and other findings need to be confirmed.


Q&amp;A


Upheaval in the East: Espionage;   Spy Reported in Soviet Hands Was a Top Agent, U.S. Says
LEAD: Donald F., the senior Soviet diplomat whose 30-year career as a spy for the United States was disclosed in the Soviet press on Sunday, was one of the most important recruits to serve American intelligence, current and former Government officials said today.


RSCG Group Extending Its Reach
LEAD: CONTINUING its transformation from a small, creative Paris advertising agency to an international marketing-services conglomerate, RSCG Group S.A. yesterday offered to buy one of the world's largest sales-promotion companies, KLP Group P.L.C. of Britain.


Sagan Urges Clerics to Join To Save Globe
LEAD: CARL SAGAN, a professor of astronomy and director of the Laboratory for Planetary Studies at Cornell University, appealed yesterday for religion and science to join hands in preserving the global environment.
He was joined in his appeal by 22 well-known scientists.


Todd-AO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Todd-AO Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
5,833,000
4,779,000
Net inc
91,000
32,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
4,024,223
3,883,052


Strikers Disrupt British Ford Plants
LEAD: More than 1,000 workers at three Ford Motor Company Ltd. plants in Britain began wildcat strikes today, two days before their unions and the auto maker were scheduled to resume contract negotiations.
The company said the strikes had disrupted work at an engine plant in Bridgend in Wales and at two assembly plants in Halewood in northwestern


Lexington Precision Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexington Precision Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
19,184,000
12,791,000
Net loss
360,000
b641,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
36,944,000
25,549,000
Net loss
965,000
b2,979,000
Share earns
-
.74


NCR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,788,000,000
1,804,000,000
Net inc
147,000,000
149,000,000
Share earns
2.02
1.85
Shares outst
72,900,000
80,700,000
Yr rev
5,956,000,000
5,990,000,000
Net inc
412,000,000
439,000,000
Share earns
5.38
5.33
Shares outst
76,600,000
82,400,000


Merrill to Cut 3,000 Jobs
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company will cut about 3,000 jobs in 1990 that will include another round of layoffs at the nation's largest brokerage, officials said yesterday.


Montana-Elway Matchup
LEAD: Although the championship game of the National Football League is known as the Super Bowl, it has rarely been super.
It has often been a blowout, and it may be a blowout when the San Francisco 49ers meet the Broncos on Jan. 28 in New Orleans.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE CAMPEAU FILING
Campeau's American retailing operations filed for bankruptcy protection, saying they had debts of about $7.5 billion.
The filing will enable Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores to keep their 260 department stores open while plans are made to stock merchandise, reschedule debt payments and reorganize the company, perhaps selling some divisions.


Amtrak Presses Northeast Strategy, But Riders and Rivals Seem Unfazed
LEAD: With Amtrak nearing profitability, its managers are looking to several areas to push the railroad into the black, and one of their best hopes is the market now dominated by the Washington-to-New York air shuttles.


Hachette Signs A Soviet Deal
LEAD: Hachette S.A., a leading French publisher, said today that it had signed a deal late last month with Progress Publishers of the Soviet Union that will allow unknown Russian authors to be published for the first time in the West.


Senator's Troubles Test Minnesotans' Tolerance
LEAD: In a state that likes to think of its politics as especially clean and genteel, Minnesota Democrats see special opportunities in Senator David Durenberger's problems.


Market Place;   Manager Favors Depressed Bonds
LEAD: CLOSED-END bond funds have been an out-of-favor investment category shunned by many analysts for the last six months.
But while others have been selling these funds, Thomas J. Herzfeld Advisors of Miami has been buying them since mid-December.
In Mr.
Herzfeld's view, they offer the best bargains in the closed-end market these days.


Blind Rape Victim Identifies Suspect by Scent and Touch
LEAD: A blind woman has identified a 14-year-old boy as the person who allegedly raped her by smelling his cologne and touching his hands, the police say.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
17,644,000
14,378,000
Net inc
189,000
b534,000
Share earns
.15
.45
Shares outst
1,217,164
1,176,739
9mo rev
49,470,000
41,698,000
Net inc
246,000
b955,000
Share earns
.20
.81
Shares outst
1,217,164
1,176,739


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,323,614
1,025,829
Net inc
233,483
b456,028
Share earns
.24
-
9mo rev
3,261,004
2,995,252
Net inc
511,239
b477,643
Share earns
.52
-


Neogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neogen Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,631,000
1,494,000
Net inc
320,000
b115,000
Share earns
.08
-
6mo rev
3,026,000
2,849,000
Net inc
111,000
b293,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Death Toll in Bangladesh Ferry Disaster Could Exceed 100


U.S. IS SAID TO LAG IN SCHOOL SPENDING
LEAD: The United States spends relatively less on elementary and secondary education than do 13 other industrial countries, according to a report made public today.


Americans Still Trade Real Estate for Beads
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b122,900,000
c137,300,000
Per share
1.77
2.07
Year net inc
b358,700,000
c513,100,000
Per share
5.10
8.20
b-After extraordinary credits of $7.8 million, or 11 cents a share, for the quarter and $23.6 million, or 36 cents a share, for the year.


Books of The Times;   The Story of How ABC Plunged From the Mountain
LEAD:
Beyond Control
ABC and the Fate of the Networks
By Huntington Williams
Illustrated. 290 pages. Atheneum. $19.95.


For Shoppers, Shopping as Usual
LEAD: Yesterday's bankruptcy filing by Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores should have no effect on customers.


F.B.I. Agent Remains Silent In Racial Harassment Case
LEAD: An agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and another main witness have cited their Fifth Amendment right to silence in refusing to answer questions about a black agent's allegations of racial harassment.


Fries Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fries Entertainment Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
21,326,000
9,311,000
Net inc
1,452,000
b426,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
4,825,014
4,908,000
6mo rev
30,651,000
18,285,000
Net inc
81,000
b808,000
Share earns
.01
-


Nellcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nellcor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
33,997,000
31,826,000
Net inc
3,403,000
3,136,000
Share earns
.23
.22
Shares outst
14,910,000
14,450,000
6mo rev
64,299,000
60,850,000
Net inc
5,887,000
6,136,000
Share earns
.40
.42
Shares outst
14,798,000
14,495,000


Communications Transmision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Transmision Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
96,900,000
107,900,000
Net loss
15,100,000
6,700,000
6mo rev
196,500,000
220,300,000
Net loss
26,500,000
8,600,000
The company said consolidated losses for fiscal 1990 included 100 percent of the loss reported by the company's subsidiary, ALC Communications Corp.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., New York, named James Ednie and Rosemary Johnson senior vice presidents.
Kurt Feuerman, Philip W. Friedman and Nicholas P. Heymann were appointed managing directors.


Mexico and Banks Said To Close Financing Gap
LEAD: Mexico and its bankers have agreed on how to cover the $300 million shortfall in their landmark deal under which most of the banks involved will reduce the value of the country's existing debt by 35 percent, according to bank and Mexican officials.


Boeing, Japanese In Talks About Jet
LEAD: The Boeing Company said it might give three Japanese aerospace companies a larger share in a new version of its 767 jetliner. ''Boeing continues to have ongoing discussions on an exploratory basis with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Fuji Heavy Industries,'' said Dick Schleh, a


Basic Beyond Simple
LEAD: FOR anyone who wants to learn something about programming, it would be hard to find an easier or more cost-effective source than ''Learn Basic Now,'' a book-disk combination at $39.95 from Microsoft Press.


N.B.A. Frowns on Duel
LEAD: A National Basketball Association official has been quoted as saying the league will not sanction a proposal for a $1 million one-on-one duel between Michael Jordan of the Bulls and Magic Johnson of the Lakers.


Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia;   Prague and Moscow Begin Talks on Soviet Pullout
LEAD: Talks between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union began here today on the Czechoslovak request for a withdrawal of all Soviet troops by the end of the year.


Auditors Not to Blame For Thrifts Crisis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East: Azerbaijan;   GORBACHEV ISSUES EMERGENCY DECREE OVER AZERBAIJAN
LEAD: The Soviet Union declared a state of emergency in parts of Azerbaijan tonight and ordered army, navy and K.G.B. security forces to help contain ethnic hostilities that officials portrayed as verging on civil war.


Review/Television;   Life Since the Intifada, As Viewed by Israelis
LEAD: Whatever else it does or fails to do, ''A Search for Solid Ground'' lets viewers know from the start what they are getting.
The hourlong documentary, at 8 tonight on Channel 13, carries the subtitle ''The Intifada Through Israeli Eyes.'' It opens with a statement that no Palestinians have been interviewed and that this program offers the perspective of mainstream Israelis on the Palestinian uprising, or intifada, which began in December 1987 in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
612,000,000
569,000,000
Net inc
39,000,000
34,000,000
Share earns
.33
.28
Shares outst
94,100,000
94,400,000
Yr rev
2,549,000,000
2,512,000,000
Net inc
319,000,000
356,000,000
Share earns
3.06
3.43
Shares outst
94,200,000
94,600,000


Troubled 'Annie 2' Closing Out of Town; Revisions Planned
LEAD: ''Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge'' is not coming to Broadway this season, its producers announced yesterday.
Instead, they are hoping to bring a revival of the original ''Annie'' to Broadway in the spring.


Mission West Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mission West Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,479,000
4,387,000
Net loss
70,000
c488,000
Share earns
-
.32
Yr rev
10,964,000
9,974,000
Net inc
b146,000
1,596,000
Share earns
.10
1.06


Disaster Aid for Florida
LEAD: President Bush today declared part of Florida a major disaster area from the freeze last month that devastated citrus and other crops.
John Herrick, a White House spokesman, said the declaration covers the counties of Broward, Collier, Dade, Hendry, Lee, Monroe and Palm Beach.
It makes those left without jobs by the freeze eligible for unemployment compensation and other Federal assistance.


Temple Loses Two
LEAD: Duane Causwell and Joseph Robinson of the Temple basketball team have been declared academically ineligible.
Causwell, a senior from Cardozo High School in Queens, was the Owls' starting center and was averaging 11.3 points, 8.3 rebounds and 4 blocked shots a game.
Robinson, a freshman from Philadelphia's Central High School, joined the team as a walk-on.(


Bank South Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank South Corp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
14,648,000
12,680,000
Per share
.43
.37
Shares outst
34,055,459
33,665,158
Year net inc
48,103,000
43,431,000
Per share
1.42
1.28
Shares outst
33,924,827
33,880,388


Hispanic People Victimized More by Crime, Study Shows
LEAD: Hispanic Americans were more likely than others to be victims of violent crimes, particularly robbery, in the seven years ending in 1986, the Justice Department reports.


General Microwave Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Microwave Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,178,323
4,564,635
Net inc
154,210
57,735
Share earns
.11
.04
9mo sales
15,642,511
14,354,806
Net inc
79,761
19,190
Share earns
.06
.01


44 Injured in Italian Theft
LEAD: A holdup went awry today when an explosive that robbers planned to used to blast open a safe went off prematurely, injuring 44 people in a crowded post office, the police said.
Among the wounded were retirees lining up to receive their monthly pension payments, the police said.


Herbert B. West, 73, Ex-President Of the New York Community Trust
LEAD: Herbert Buell West, a retired foundation president and a former advertising executive, died of abdominal cancer on Sunday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 73 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN and his companion, PATTI SCIALFA, are expecting a baby, The Associated Press reports.
A spokeswoman for Columbia Records confirmed the report, but did not say whether the couple would marry.
Ms.
Scialfa was Mr.
Springsteen's backup singer.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption with the television listings yesterday about Gordon Parks misstated his contribution to the ballet ''Martin.'' He wrote the music; the choreographer was Rael Lamb.


Aim Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aim Telephone (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
12,158,000
12,582,000
Net loss
204,000
b308,000
Share earns
-
.06
9mo rev
B
37,694,000
34,819,000
Net inc
217,000
857,000
Share earns
.04
.16


Disney Outlines Plans for Florida
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company's chief executive, Michael Eisner, announced plans to expand Disney's three Florida theme parks and said a fourth would be added during the 1990's.
Mr.
Eisner declined to provide details about the new park.


To Our Readers
LEAD: Some prices for stocks traded on the New York and American stock exchanges, as well as for stock options, may not reflect the final close in the tables beginning on Page D11 because of a telephone company circuit failure in New York that interfered with delivery of the markets data to The Associated


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Home for Rock-and-Roll


No Headline
LEAD: RESTAURATEURS across the country have seen the future and it is cheap.
Or at least less expensive.
While the best restaurants with opulent appointments, large staffs and high-priced food will always have their place, many have seen customers move on to less expensive food and more casual surroundings.


A Talk With Takeshita: Japan's Former Leader Denies He's Still in Charge
LEAD: Seven months after resigning in one of the worst scandals of Japan's postwar era, former Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita winces when it is suggested that he continues to wield as much power as ever, perhaps even more power than the current occupant of his old job.


EATING WELL
LEAD: SONOMA COUNTY, one of the most prolific food-growing regions in northern California, may be unique in one respect.
The menus in the very best restaurants offer diners a limited but appealing selection of dishes that promote a healthy heart.


2 Foreign Bank Units Plead Guilty to Money Laundering
LEAD: In the first Federal case of money laundering against a large international bank, two principal units of the Luxembourg-based Bank of Credit and Commerce International agreed today to plead guilty to reduced charges and to forfeit $14 million.


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,176,766,000
1,181,407,000
Net inc
80,879,000
bc21,102,000
Share earns
1.06
-
Shares outst
76,115,000
74,760,000
Yr rev
4,606,286,000
4,699,517,000
Net inc
242,991,000
c155,750,000
Share earns
3.19
2.04
Shares outst
75,829,000
74,854,000


A World Drug Court Could Try a Noriega
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-13
A United Nations role in Cambodia to administer the nation and supervise free elections was endorsed by the five permanent members of the U.N.
Security Council, a move that reflects a shift in China's position on U.N. involvement.
Page A1


Strategic Planning reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Strategic Planning (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
13,154,815
9,406,687
Net inc
352,671
b1,606,437
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss
In the latest quarter, the company said it accrued $1,000,000 for legal, accounting and investment banking services related to its planned merger with Marsh &amp; McLennan's TBS Group Inc.


Young Team at the Top Has Big-Time Troubles
LEAD: It has been a trying season for the basketball team rated No. 1 in many preseason polls.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcor Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
37,496,000
35,005,000
Net inc
b1,132,000
388,000
Share earns
.16
.06
Shares outst
7,104,000
6,990,000
6mo sales
80,939,000
74,064,000
Net inc
b4,460,000
1,892,000
Share earns
.63
.27
Shares outst
7,086,000
6,991,000


Settlement Reached on Home for Retarded
LEAD: In a landmark housing discrimination case, a Federal district judge today approved a settlement allowing the construction of a home for retarded people in Chicago Heights, a suburb of Chicago.


Review/Television;   Prince Pronounces on State of Architecture
LEAD: Who thinks that architecture isn't a fit subject for television?
Not Prince Charles, surely.
Tonight, he will appear on Public Broadcasting Service stations nationwide (at 10 P.M. on Channel 13) in ''H.R.H.
Prince Charles: A Personal View of Architecture,'' a film produced last year for the BBC.
The hourlong program is precisely what it claims to be: the Prince, as both writer and star, chats, converses and pronounces on the state of architecture as he sees it.


Off-Duty Officer Shot in Head While Washing Car
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was shot and critically wounded as he washed his car on a Brooklyn street yesterday afternoon, the police said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Prudential Switches to Marschalk
LEAD: IN a blow to one British-owned American advertising agency and a boost to another, the Prudential Insurance Company of America yesterday withdrew its $60 million account from Backer, Spielvogel, Bates and awarded it to Lowe Marschalk.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
BALTIMORE (AL) - Agreed to terms with Joe Orsulak, outfielder, and Jay Tibbs, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
BOSTON (AL) - Agreed to terms with Wes Gardner, pitcher, and Rich Gedman, catcher, on one-year contracts.
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Agreed to terms with Mike Witt, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Writing Children's Textbooks: Too Many Cooks?
LEAD: Kate McMullan is not sure just what snapped on the day she decided to stop writing school textbooks.


Bush Salutes Project Residents for Anti-Drug Efforts    At right was Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp. (AP)


A Mongoose In a Beret And Goatee
LEAD: After only 1 minute 57 seconds of the second round, the Puncher turned out to be the Preacher.
George Foreman's right hand convinced Gerry Cooney into ''getting on with the rest of my life.'' And now the heavyweight champion from another era, who just turned 41 years old, who clubbed the title from Joe Frazier in Jamaica in 1973 and was rope-a-doped out of it by Muhammad Ali in Zaire in 1974, is suddenly being hyped as an eventual opponent for Mike Tyson somewhere down the road to millions.


First City Bancorp of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp of Texas (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
29,100,000
25,200,000
Per share
1.20
1.05
Shares outst
18,800,000
17,500,000
Year net inc
112,200,000
66,100,000
Per share
4.66
2.73
Shares outst
18,300,000
17,200,000


A New Way to Attack Illness With Drugs
LEAD: Capitalizing on new tools in molecular research, large drug manufacturers and about a dozen start-up companies are racing to develop drugs that combat illness by controlling the molecular switches that govern human cells.


Temple Drops Causwell
LEAD: Duane Causwell, who was Temple's starting center, has enrolled at the Community College of Philadelphia, according to Temple officials.
Charles Theokas, Temple's athletic director, said the athletic department was told Sunday that Causwell had been dismissed from Temple's College of Health, Physical Education and Recreation and Dance.


First Virginia Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Virginia Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
16,542,000
15,757,000
Per share
.79
.75
Year net inc
67,374,000
60,940,000
Per share
3.20
2.90


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Bank of America, San Francisco, named Gary J. Matus senior vice president and manager of its media and entertainment industries unit.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about the rise of Vaclav Havel to the presidency of Czechoslovakia misstated the country's system for dividing high offices between Czechs and Slovaks.
A conference last year between the Government and the opposition agreed that the President must be a non-Communist Czech since the Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, was a Communist Slovak.


Early-Month Vehicle Sales Up Sharply
LEAD: Sales of cars made in the United States jumped by 29.8 percent in early January compared with a sluggish period a year ago, as buyers took advantage of factory incentives and flocked to showrooms after an absence of several months.
Light-truck sales also surged, rising by 22.8 percent.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Fred Berger, a former vice chairman of Hill &amp; Knowlton, has been named a deputy director for external affairs of Partnership for a Drug-Free America.
Bernie Gross is leaving BBDO, where he was a senior vice president, to become deputy director of communications, and Ginna Sulcer was named deputy director for creative development and research.


Radiation Risk Hardly Below Regulatory Concern
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rowan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
49,956,000
54,847,000
Net loss
12,413,000
bc10,460,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
72,141,000
72,031,000
Yr rev
226,264,000
216,685,000
Net loss
33,777,000
c31,601,000
Shares outst
72,098,000
71,999,000


U.S. Halves Dosage for AIDS Drug
LEAD: The Federal Government yesterday halved the recommended dose of AZT, the only drug approved for the treatment of AIDS, after concluding that the lower dose was just as effective and caused fewer dangerous side effects.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD: 4688, the Horse The celebration of the Chinese New Year 4688, the Year of the Horse, begins on Jan. 27.
For a preview this Saturday, Howard Goldberg, who runs Adventure on a Shoestring tours, will lead a walking tour of Chinatown and explain the celebrations.


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,316,845,000
1,184,652,000
Net inc
99,329,000
84,362,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Shares outst
211,100,418
205,350,418
Yr rev
4,804,852,000
4,394,692,000
Net inc
542,137,000
528,586,000
Share earns
2.62
2.57
Shares outst
206,878,500
205,350,418


Jets' Hunt Goes On
LEAD: Dick Steinberg, the Jets' new general manager, has met with Floyd Peters, the defensive coordinator of the Minnesota Vikings, in the team's search for a head coach, the Jets said yesterday.


U.S. to Ease Passport Curbs on Visitors Infected With AIDS Virus
LEAD: The Federal Government is easing, but not eliminating, restrictions on the freedom of people infected with the AIDS virus to enter the United States, and will no longer use a stamp on passports to indicate the holder is infected with the virus, Federal officials said today.


Reveille for Sophomores
LEAD: Space flight, once the most glamorous of enterprises, has become about as interesting as a crew of furniture deliverers at work.
And as the flights have lost their glamour, an associated tradition that once seemed amusing - the morning wake-up call to the astronauts - has become annoying.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   USA Today Selects Babbit
LEAD: USA Today has named the new office of Babbit &amp; Reiman in New York, a spunky, creative boutique with headquarters in Atlanta, to handle its advertising account.


Universal Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Foods Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
224,326,000
187,690,000
Net inc
13,354,000
10,848,000
Share earns
.53
.44
Shares outst
25,206,000
24,827,000


WINE TALK
LEAD: Call it mont-ra-SHAY or MOAN-ra-shay: however you pronounce it, Montrachet, at 239 West Broadway (White Street) in TriBeCa, has been a hit since it opened five years ago.


Parker's Real Service
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Late Foul Shots Lift St. John's Past Villanova
LEAD: Jayson Williams scored 13 points and Jason Buchanan made two crucial free throws with 48 seconds left to help St.
John's beat Villanova by 64-58 tonight in a Big East Conference match.


6-Goal Capital Rally Stops Devils
LEAD: Playing with an overdose of emotion and intensity to impress their new coach, the Washington Capitals ended an eight-game losing streak tonight with a 9-6 triumph over the Devils.


Drawing by the (Ethnic) Numbers
LEAD: Irene Trivas, an artist, stopped accepting assignments to illustrate children's readers four years ago, partly out of frustration over publishers' efforts to ''be everything to everybody,'' as she put it.
Here is her account of the instrucitons she received for one book:


SOVIETS' RESPONSE GETS U.S. SUPPORT
LEAD: The Bush Administration today openly endorsed President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's use of troops to quell ethnic fighting between Armenians and Azerbaijanis in the southern Soviet Union.


Notre Dame Prevails Against Rutgers, 74-69
LEAD: Notre Dame and Rutgers, two teams that figured to be in more prominent positions at this juncture of the college basketball season, offered little indication tonight that the preseason predictions were accurate.


Chronicle
LEAD: Once the most prominent figure in the Arab oil world, SHEIK AHMED ZAKI YAMANI cut a colorful figure with his lavish life of private jets, many residences and perfect French suits.
He was abruptly dismissed as Saudi Arabia's oil minister by King Fahd in 1986 in a disagreement on oil-price policy.


Newsletter To Publish Ernst Report
LEAD: The editor of Accounting Today said yesterday that his newsletter would publish in its Feb. 5 issue what he believes to be the confidential document that Ernst &amp; Young went to court to block another newsletter from publishing.


Fernandez Acts to Oust District Head
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday ordered the removal of the superintendent of Community School District 9 in the Bronx, which has been troubled by charges of corruption and mismanagement for several years.


Security Pacific Chief Decides to Step Aside
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest banking company, said yesterday that Richard J. Flamson 3d had stepped aside as chief executive at the age of 60 and had been replaced by Robert H. Smith, who formerly headed the company's major bank subsidiary.


Chip Maker's Net Improves
LEAD: The Advanced Micro Devices Corporation today reported improved earnings for the fourth quarter and the year.
The company said sales of its core products remained strong through the quarter, but with intense price competition.


CBS Programmer's Goals: New Talent and No. 2 Spot
LEAD: Citing a need for CBS to ''romance'' the best producers and actors in Hollywood, Jeff Sagansky has charted a course for CBS Entertainment that he believes will carry the network back to prime-time leadership by the time his five-year contract as president of that division expires.


Laws Aim to Turn Off Ear-Splitting 'Boom' Cars
LEAD: Acting on citizens' complaints, states are beginning to take action against the latest violation of the social contract: the boom car.


Alloys Expanding the Use of Plastics
LEAD: rrThe Monsanto Company's chemical division has created a variety of plastic alloys that it says are harder and more resistant to shattering, high temperatures and hazardous chemicals.


Noriega's Party Wants a Role Again
LEAD: Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's Government may be history, but his civilian political party - at least part of it, anyway - is still around.
In fact, four members of the party faithful emerged from seclusion today and announced that they had decided to become the loyal opposition.


Economic Scene;   Blue-Collar Blues: Who Is to Blame?
LEAD: ARE you better or worse off than you were four years ago, asked Ronald Reagan in 1980.
But George Bush's image-makers chose not to press the rhetorical point in his Presidential campaign, and for good reason.


A Pragmatist Is Selected by Campeau
LEAD: G. William Miller, the new chairman and chief executive of Federated Stores Inc., has a dazzling resume in business and Government, but he has never run a giant retailing concern.


Maxtor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxtor Corp.
Qtr to Dec 24
1989
1988
Revenue
123,947,000
91,425,000
Net inc
5,507,000
767,000
Share earns
.26
.04
Shares outst
21,020,000
19,768,000
9mo rev
349,499,000
253,250,000
Net inc
12,467,000
3,822,000
Share earns
.60
.19
Shares outst
20,853,000
19,966,000


Carbon Monoxide Kills Five In a Colorado Springs Home
LEAD: Carbon monoxide fumes from a furnace killed a woman and four children a week after they moved into their home here.


Man Who Made Threat On a Plane Is Arrested
LEAD: A man claiming he had a bomb took over an America West airliner late today and demanded to be flown to Cuba, but he was arrested soon after the plane made an emergency landing in here, the police said.


Fresh Start for Campeau in U.S.
LEAD: G. William Miller, an investment banker and businessman who was Treasury Secretary and chairman of the Federal Reserve Board during the Carter Administration, yesterday was named chairman and chief executive of the American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation.


Review/Theater;   'Macbeth,' Its Lessons Ever Apt And Ever New, With Raul Julia
LEAD: That indelible image of Nicolae Ceausescu's lifeless body lying on the ground could be the final scene in a modern-dress staging of ''Macbeth.'' The earlier images of Ceausescu and his partner in dictatorship, his wife, Elena, staring down a military tribunal could also be taken from Shakespeare's tragedy, as could the entire Rumanian nightmare of a married couple's lust for autocratic power at any brutal price.


Loyola Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loyola Capital Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,599,000
1,789,000
Per share
.52
.36
Shares outst
4,981,420
5,014,408
Year net inc
10,461,000
10,331,000
Per share
2.08
2.06
Shares outst
5,029,709
5,012,655


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartmarx Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
347,907,000
309,888,000
Net inc
4,105,000
15,335,000
Share earns
.21
.82
Yr sales
1,296,993,000
1,174,314,000
Net inc
17,410,000
38,015,000
Share earns
.89
2.03
Shares outst
19,567,000
18,727,000


Review/Theater;   A Minimalist 'Othello' Focuses on the Play
LEAD: It is something of a mystery why so many directors, often intelligent and talented ones, feel the need to find some gimmick to make the plays of William Shakespeare palatable to the doltish groundlings who make up a modern theater audience.


Market Place;   First Boston's Losses on Campeau
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation emerged yesterday as by far the largest unsecured creditor of the two principal retailing subsidiaries of the Campeau Corporation, but the investment banking firm insisted its actual exposure was far less than the $526.3 million that the bankruptcy filings stated it was owed.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo &amp; Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
158,500,000
136,000,000
Per share
2.95
2.45
Year net inc
601,100,000
512,500,000
Per share
11.02
9.20
The company said earnings in the fourth quarter and the year 1989 benefited from increased net interest income, which primarily results from an increase in domestic loans.


Some 'Fiftysomething' Achievers Are Neither Silent Nor Male
LEAD: To the Editor:


Europe's Military Chiefs Meet In a Step to Reduce Tensions
LEAD: The military chiefs of 35 countries, including the United States and the Soviet Union, sat down together at the same table for the first time today at an extraordinary seminar intended to reduce tensions in Europe.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: IN this age of fettuccine with radicchio and goat cheese, foie gras ravioli and exotic risottos, the notion of serving spaghetti with meatballs seems downright primitive.


Trace Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trace Products (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
6,137,000
5,667,000
Net inc
468,000
b83,000
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
9,480,000
9,742,000
9mo sales
18,730,000
18,006,000
Net inc
1,029,000
b2,212,000
Share earns
.11
.23


PRAGUE HONORS MARTYRED STUDENT
LEAD: In an act as symbolic as Jan Palach's self-immolation 21 years ago, the people of Prague today renamed Red Army Square for the student who burned himself to death to protest what the Soviet occupation in 1968 had done to his country.


N.F.L. Draft Lures Star Junior at Alabama
LEAD: Keith McCants, a junior linebacker who won all-America recognition last season at the University of Alabama, said yesterday that he would pass up his final year of eligibility to enter the National Football League draft in April.
He said his main motive was financial security.


A Price on Their Heads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Positive Sign for Gooden
LEAD: Dwight Gooden, the right-handed ace of the Mets' pitching staff, underwent another magnetic resonance imaging test on his right shoulder yesterday.
The club said early indications were that the shoulder was continuing to improve.


Lomax Retires
LEAD: Neil Lomax, the Phoenix Cardinal quarterback who sat out last season with degenerative arthritis in his left hip, announced his retirement from the N.F.L. yesterday.


GREATER U.N. ROLE IS URGED TO SETTLE CAMBODIA CONFLICT
LEAD: The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council called today for the United Nations to administer Cambodia and supervise free elections there.


Chronicle
LEAD: ISAAC ASIMOV barely made it to his own party last night.
The prolific author slipped out of the cooperative-care unit at Tisch Hospital, where he has been in treatment for several days.


New York Region and the Budget: School-Aid Proposal Is Big Change
LEAD: Like most aspects of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposed budget, the line items that most affect New York City and its suburbs are what Assembly Speaker Mel Miller called ho-hum - neither greatly enhanced nor greatly diminished from last year's appropriations.


Rochefort Returns
LEAD: Norman Rochefort returned to the Rangers yesterday and was to play his first National Hockey League game in almost a year tomorrow, against the Penguins in Pittsburgh.


Grand Met Buying 2 Liquor Stakes
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British food and liquor giant, said its International Distillers and Vintners unit would buy a 49 percent stake in the French liquor company Remy Martin et Cie S.A. and a 19 percent holding in Cointreau et Cie S.A.
Grand Met is buying the stakes from the Max Cointreau family.


U.S. Postpones Deploying Ships Near Colombia
LEAD: The Administration has postponed plans to deploy an aircraft carrier battle group off the coast of Colombia to help prevent drug shipments from Latin America to the United States, Administration officials said today.


Review/Opera;   Popular High-Decibel Delights of 'La Gioconda'
LEAD: ''La Gioconda'' is not the worst opera ever written, far from it.
The competition is too stiff even to allow Ponchielli's melodrama of lust and treachery in 17th-century Venice to contend for that distinction.
It certainly is, however, one of the crudest musical efforts to keep a place in the repertory for more than a century, going toe-to-toe with the best Mozart, Verdi and Wagner could offer.


Mellon Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,000,000
48,000,000
Per share
-
1.05
Shares outst
36,546,000
28,892,000
Year net inc
b210,000,000
c65,000,000
Per share
4.01
-
Shares outst
34,145,000
28,618,000


Jeff Alexander, 79; Composer for Screen
LEAD: Jeff Alexander, a composer who worked in radio, television and motion pictures for more than 50 years, died of cancer on Dec. 23 at his home on Whidbey Island in Washington.
He was 79 years old.


Georgia Gulf's Plan Is Backed
LEAD: The head of the company that controls 9.9 percent of the stock of the Georgia Gulf Corporation, the Atlanta-based chemicals maker, said he would support a recapitalization plan announced Monday by the Georgia Gulf board.


Lee Goldstein, Composer, 37
LEAD: Lee Goldstein, a conductor of operas and musical-theater pieces and a former composer in residence at the Lyric Opera of Chicago, died on Friday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Chicago.
He was 37 years old.


157 More Request Salary Arbitration
LEAD: Kevin Mitchell, the San Francisco Giants slugger who was considered the best player in baseball in 1989, reached the $2 million salary plateau yesterday.
The agreement kept him out of salary arbitration, but 157 other players, including Jose Canseco, Will Clark, Paul Molitor and Bo Jackson, filed for arbitration on a record-setting day.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Club Med Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
100,160,000
91,084,000
Net inc
775,000
b1,597,000
Share earns
.05
-
Yr rev
468,817,000
412,423,000
Net inc
21,098,000
8,770,000
Share earns
1.50
.62


Northern California Jolted
LEAD: An earthquake shook a sparsely populated area in Northern California today but no injuries or major damage was reported, the United States Geological Survey said.
The epicenter was off the Pacific Coast, about 50 miles southwest of Eureka.
A spokesman for the earthquake center here said the tremor, which measured 5.3 on the Richter scale, was unrelated to the major earthquake that shook the San Franciso Bay area last Oct.


For Every Five Young Women, Six Young Men
LEAD: SOCIAL myth: There are not enough young men for all the young women looking for boyfriends or husbands.


Blue Chips Lead Rebound; Dow Up 23.25
LEAD: Blue-chip stocks rose strongly yesterday on sharply higher volume, as the stock market bounced back from two losing sessions.


Shaw Cablesystems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Cablesystems
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,059,000
20,677,d000
Net inc
3,301,000
2,090,000
Share earns
.14
.09
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Aristech Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aristech Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
222,600,000
258,500,000
Net inc
15,100,000
34,900,000
Share earns
.43
.97
Shares outst
32,481,721
36,211,680
Yr sales
996,400,000
1,065,200,000
Net inc
82,100,000
b188,200,000
Share earns
2.36
5.04
Shares outst
33,248,299
37,269,979


Leader of Opposition Returns to Nicaragua
LEAD: The leading opposition presidential candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, returned to Nicaragua today and was apparently in good health after receiving treatment in the United States for a broken right knee.


Renowned Renoir to Be Auctioned in May
LEAD: Pierre Auguste Renoir's 1876 depiction of an open-air dance hall in Montmartre, ''Au Moulin de la Galette,'' will go on the auction block in New York on May 16, Sotheby's announced yesterday.


Roseanne's Tough Act: Is It Too Harsh?
LEAD: Is the ubiquitous Roseanne Barr in danger of losing it?
Is she about to carry her tough-guy persona a little too far and thereby alienate the audience she once charmed with her impudent bulk and nasally quips?
True, her weekly sitcom still hangs up there at the top of the television ratings, often in the No.


Briton Pledges Hong Kong Changes
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary wound up a four-day visit here today, saying Hong Kong wanted to see the pace of democratic changes quickened as the colony moves toward its return to Chinese control in 1997.


Review/Rock;   Aerosmith: Power Ballads and Double-Entendres
LEAD: Advice to underrated rock bands: Stick around, keep your sense of humor, and if you're lucky, what once sounded secondhand will turn out to be classic.


Fluke (John) Manufacturing (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fluke (John) Manufacturing (A)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
57,919,000
58,576,000
Net inc
3,483,000
3,466,000
Share earns
.49
.39
Shares outst
7,090,315
8,920,023


G.E. to Build A Powerful New Engine
LEAD: Anticipating rising demand for large jetliners with only two engines, GE Aircraft Engines, a subsidiary of General Electric, said yesterday that it would build the world's most powerful commercial jet engine.


UJB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UJB Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
24,470,000
28,546,000
Per share
.54
.63
Shares outst
44,008,000
43,415,000
Year net inc
118,540,000
116,075,000
Per share
2.62
2.58
Shares outst
43,785,000
43,113,000


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b784,000,000
c747,000,000
Per share
-
2.19
Year net inc
498,000,000
1,858,000,000
Per share
1.16
5.36
b-Included a provision of $1 billion for possible LDC credit losses and a charge of $68 million to restructure the United Kingdom equities business.


Southeast Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeast Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
15,272,000
b24,933,000
Per share
-
.79
Shares outst
32,779,000
29,925,000
Year net inc
80,460,000
75,303,000
Per share
2.42
2.35
Shares outst
31,597,000
29,633,000


Boy, 12, Is Fatally Shot In Queens Apartment
LEAD: A 12-year-old boy was fatally shot while playing in his Queens apartment last night when a gun owned by a 17-year-old youth apparently misfired, striking the boy in the chest, the police said.


Magnetek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magnetek Inc.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
250,021,000
229,586,000
Net inc
5,925,000
2,396,000
Share earns
.25
.09
Shares outst
23,508,000
18,064,000
6mo sales
487,661,000
456,798,000
Net inc
11,186,000
6,021,000
Share earns
.46
.25
Shares outst
23,513,000
17,969,000


Southeastern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeastern Public Service Co.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
54,946,000
52,956,000
Net inc
1,859,000
1,263,000
Share earns
.16
.11
9mo rev
162,129,000
159,418,000
Net inc
3,559,000
b2,394,000
Share earns
.30
.20
Shares outst
11,655,000
11,655,000


Centrust Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centrust Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b97,300,000
2,700,000
Year net loss
b119,500,000
c50,100,000
Per share
-
3.82
b-Included a charge of about $42 million to record a writedown to lower of cost or market value on $258 million principal amount of certain corporate debt securities that mature after June 30, 1994, but may not be held by the bank after that date under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) of 1989.


Real Estate;   A New Face For Stretch Of Fifth Ave.
LEAD: AN accelerating building boom is changing the face of Fifth Avenue between the New York Public Library and the Empire State Building, an internationally famous area that had started to lose its luster.


Basil D. Henning, 79, Resident Master at Yale
LEAD: Dr.
Basil Duke Henning, an educator, author and the resident master of Saybrook College at Yale University for 29 years, died Monday at Yale University Health Services Center in New Haven after a long illness.
He was 79 years old and lived in New Haven.


MDS Health Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDS Health Group Ltd.
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
224,557,000
205,923,000
Net inc
10,890,000
13,371,000
Share earns
1.25
1.55
Results are in Canadian funds.


Ex-State Dept. Officer Takes Job at Fujitsu By MARTIN TOLCHIN
LEAD: In what United States negotiators consider a major loss, the State Department officer who helped develop the negotiating strategy with Japan on high- technology issues ranging from semiconductors to space stations has joined Fujitsu Ltd., a Japanese electronics conglomerate.


Book Notes
LEAD:
With Vaclav Havel


India Edwards Dies; Advocate of Women In Politics Was 94
LEAD: India Edwards, former vice chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, who worked to advance the role of women in politics, died Sunday at Fircrest Convalescent Hospital in Sebastopol, Calif.
She was 94 years old and lived in Greenbrea, Calif.


Rorer Details Value of Merger
LEAD: The Rorer Group Inc., a maker of pharmaceuticals, said that a merger plan it is discussing with another company would value Rorer at $3.14 billion.
Rorer, based in Fort Washington, Pa., said it had authorized 43 million shares of common stock, including only 32 million shares outstanding, two bond issues that would convert into 10.2 million, and shares held by an employee stock ownership plan.


Slovenia Seeks Party Change
LEAD: Slovenia's party leadership demanded today that Yugoslavia's ruling League of Communists transform itself into a loose coalition of regional communist parties.
The proposal is to be discussed at a national party congress scheduled for Saturday, the state Tanjug news agency reported.


Chronicle
LEAD: The show doesn't always go on.
Succumbing to the flu, ANTHONY HEALD and NATHAN LANE, the two leads of ''The Lisbon Traviata,'' did not appear last night at the Promenade Theater in Manhattan.
Because both actors have the same understudy, the performance was canceled.


New York City Real Estate's Value Rising by 10.8%
LEAD: The taxable value of real estate in New York City will rise to $77.7 billion in the fiscal year beginning July 1, an increase of 10.8 percent over the current year's figure, tentative city figures showed yesterday.


Opposition's Talks With Communists in Sofia Off to a Rough Start
LEAD: The first round of talks between ruling Communist officials and members of the Bulgarian opposition began today.
But they quickly hit a snag, with the opposition demanding access to news media and office space and the Communists, who still maintain near-total control, asserting that they were being confronted with ultimatums and grandstanding.


Egyptian in Washington for Talks To Revive Stagnant Peace Process
LEAD: The Egyptian Foreign Minister flew to Washington today carrying what diplomats called an appeal to the United States to continue its newest Middle East peace effort.


Ceausescu's Burmese Twin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Treasury Issues Move Downward
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell further and short-term bill rates shot higher yesterday as market participants sold securities in the aftermath of another big drop in prices on Japanese financial markets.


St. John's Defeats Villanova


Chronicle
LEAD: As national chairman of President Bush's first Presidential Inaugural Anniversary Gala, HENRY R. KRAVIS has been in Washington beating the bushes for money.


Officials' Handling of Suspects in Boston Killing Prompts Questions
LEAD: Nearly two weeks ago, the Suffolk County District Attorney held a news conference to announce that Charles Stuart had become the focus of the investigation into the killings last autumn of his wife and unborn child.


Kopeck Capers
LEAD: Not the least of Mikhail Gorbachev's problems is the Soviet Union's unbalanced budget.
To trim the deficit, he is taking a substantial bite out of military spending, and otherwise looking for small savings wherever he can find them.


Fear Grows That Ethiopia Will Bar Relief to Famine-Stricken Area
LEAD: Concern is growing over the reluctance of the Ethiopian Government to allow relief agencies to distribute food to the four million to five million people facing starvation in northern areas of the country, relief officials and American legislators say.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Lowe's U.S. Head
LEAD: The Lowe Group of Britain has appointed Adelaide Horton to the new position of chief operating officer of its American unit, Lowe Group USA.
She was formerly a senior vice president at Chiat/Day/Mojo.
The Lowe Group's roster of agencies includes Lowe Marschalk.


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwell International (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,885,000,000
2,869,000,000
Net inc
145,800,000
160,000,000
Share earns
.59
.62
The company said its fiscal first quarter was adversely affected by lower interest income and higher interest expense, which together reduced earnings by 5 cents a share, compared to the first quarter of last year.


Israeli Inflation Up in '89
LEAD: Consumer prices rose by 20.7 percent in Israel in 1989 despite an austerity program aimed at reducing inflation, the Government said Monday.
The increase compared with a rise of 16.4 percent in 1988 and 16.1 percent in 1987.
The Government said prices rose 1.1 percent in December, compared with 1.3 percent in November and 1.6 percent in December 1988.


Former Lion Sentenced
LEAD: Reggie Rogers, a former Detroit Lion convicted of negligent homicide, was sentenced yesterday in Pontiac, Mich., to up to two years in prison for the deaths of three teen-agers in a 1988 traffic accident involving the vehicle he was driving.


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
60,271,000
54,513,000
Per share
.93
.85
Shares outst
60,448,000
61,425,000
Year net inc
238,049,000
206,285,000
Per share
3.67
3.25
Shares outst
61,435,000
61,123,000


New Faces Revive Old Dispute on Merging 3 Police Forces
LEAD: A combination of fiscal pressures, union shakeups, management changes and political realities has reinvigorated one of the oldest disputes in New York City government: should the nation's largest city have a single police force?


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Lemieux Extends Point Streak
Rob Brown scored two goals and Mario Lemieux extended his point-scoring streak to 34 games last night to lead the Pittsburgh Penguins past the visiting Philadelphia Flyers, 4-3.
The Flyers are 0-5-3 in their last eight games.
The Penguins won for the fifth time in six games.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
894,975,000
727,340,000
Net inc
122,700,000
85,801,000
Share earns
.64
.46
Shares outst
192,130,000
184,757,000
Yr rev
3,126,833,000
2,874,769,000
Net inc
391,021,000
452,922,000
Share earns
2.07
2.51
Shares outst
188,778,000
180,437,000


Charles A. Anderson, Geologist, 87
LEAD: Charles A. Anderson, a former chief geologist of the United States Geological Survey, died of Alzheimer's disease today in Pomona, Calif.
He was 87 years old.


Jack Ashby, 78, Dies; Kaiser Steel Executive
LEAD: Jack L. Ashby, an investment banker and a retired president of the Kaiser Steel Corporation, died Jan. 7 at Children's Hospital in San Francisco, where he had been taken after a short illness.
He was 78 years old.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
259,600,000
254,400,000
Net inc
26,900,000
35,200,000
Share earns
.55
.73
Yr rev
998,200,000
953,600,000
Net inc
b110,100,000
130,900,000
Share earns
2.27
2.72


Abilene Journal;   Centennial Lifts Spirit Of Ike's Hometown
LEAD: Dorothy Lehman was only 17 years old when a Life photographer caught her and some fellow students snake dancing through Abilene streets, a moment that captured the spirit of Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower's first Presidential victory.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Jan. 6 about the coming marriage of Susan Eisenhower and Roald Z. Sagdeyev, a Soviet scientist, referred incorrectly to the institute where he does research.
It is the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J.


Centuries of Strife Between 2 Groups
LEAD: Antagonism between Azerbaijanis and Armenians is longstanding, caused by religion, nationalism, territorial friction and other factors, experts at United States universities said in interviews this week.


2 Commuter Railroads Begin to Test for Drugs
LEAD: The Metro-North Commuter Railroad began random drug tests of its employees yesterday under a Federal mandate, a railroad spokesman said.


G.M. Orders Ad Slowdown
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has ordered its divisions to cut or delay media advertising spending by 25 percent as part of its cost-cutting efforts, the company said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the sale of the Mister Donut franchise operation by its parent, the International Multifoods Corporation of Minneapolis, to Dunkin'


Japan Promises More Economic Aid for Hungary
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan promised increased economic aid to Hungary today as he completed a 10-day trip in which Japan's largess made him a big hit in Eastern Europe and its huge trade surplus made him a big target in Western Europe.


New Wyse Models
LEAD: Wyse Technology Inc. said it had added to its product line the first in a series of Unix systems for the midrange multi-user computer market.
The new computers include the Wyse Series 9000I, which supports symmetric processing and is based on the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor.
The family of computers supports up to 128 users.


From Dictatorship to Revolt, Rumanian Defends a House
LEAD: There are nine bullet holes in the walls and ceiling of Venera Darian's bedroom in the residential district of northern Bucharest where she has lived for most of her 89 years.


Georgia Pacific Seeks New Nekoosa Board
LEAD: The Georgia Pacific Corporation, which is engaged in a battle to win control of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation, said yesterday that it had begun to solicit proxies to remove Great Northern's board at a special shareholders meeting.


Brainard Cheney, Novelist, 89
LEAD: Brainard Cheney, the author of five novels set in the swamp country of Georgia, died at a nursing home Monday after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


Rights Gains Reversed In Korea, Group Finds
LEAD: A two-year trend of human rights improvements in South Korea has been reversed, Amnesty International, the international human rights group, said today.


'Geezer' Setting Sights On Tyson
LEAD: It was 2 in the morning, and on the fourth floor of Caesars Atlantic City, just down the hall from his room, the Geezer still had himself an audience.


A.T.&amp;T. Pinpoints Cause of Phone Disruption
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it had traced the huge disruption in long-distance service that occurred Monday to a single computer program that malfunctioned and caused a chain reaction in the network.


President Is Selected At Citibank and Parent
LEAD: Richard S. Braddock, for many years a key executive in Citicorp's highly profitable consumer banking business, yesterday was named president of Citicorp and its main subsidiary, Citibank.


James Heffernan, Photographer, 79
LEAD: James Heffernan, a retired photographer for the New York City Fire Department and for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, died of colon cancer on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 79 years old and lived in Jackson Heights, Queens.


New York State Food Policy
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Northern Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
32,400,000
42,100,000
Per share
1.79
2.59
Shares outst
17,274,011
15,500,983
Year net inc
113,200,000
109,300,000
Per share
6.23
6.61
Shares outst
16,968,228
15,437,775


Harvard Gets Offense Back on Right Track
LEAD: Earlier in the season, while Harvard struggled and its shots did not go into the goal, the veteran coach, Bill Cleary, remained patient.
His squad was so talented, he said, it would right itself in time.


Fund and C.D. Yields Drop
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were down for the week ended yesterday.
Analysts said conflicting signals on the state of the economy had slowed the decline in yields and could keep them near current levels.


Moscow Dispatches 11,000 Troops to Azerbaijan
LEAD: The Soviet Government airlifted 11,000 army and internal police troops today to the embattled regions of Azerbaijan, where armed bands of Armenian and Azerbaijani militants were reported still locked in conflict.


Calling All Bankruptcy Lawyers . . .
LEAD: This morning at 8:30 sharp, a swarm of lawyers and journalists descended on the Federal Bankruptcy Court here to get the first public look at the mounds of documents in the Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing of the Campeau Corporation's American retailing operations.


Orange-Co reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange-Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
24,401,000
38,722,000
Net loss
1,774,000
b1,854,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
10,202,000
10,320,000
b-Net income


Linseman-Poulin Trade
LEAD: Ken Linseman, who began his National Hockey League career with Philadelphia in 1978, returned to the Flyers yesterday when the Boston Bruins traded him for Dave Poulin in an exchange of 31-year-old centers.


Sales Increase by 0.7%; Inventories Up by 0.5%
LEAD: Business sales and inventories rose in November, but economists said slower sales in December would probably mean weaker numbers for that month.


'One New Jersey'
LEAD: What George Bush deprecates as ''the vision thing'' is, in the hands of James Florio, vision, and it does credit to the voters who chose him as New Jersey's new Governor.
His success at realizing it will depend on fiscal good luck and his stomach for hard choices.


Fuji Is Seeking Rest of Subaru of America for $149 Million
LEAD: Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., the Japanese maker of Subaru cars, said today that it had offered to buy the half of Subaru of America it does not own.


Ruth Bunzel, 91, Dies; Taught Anthropology
LEAD: Ruth L. Bunzel, a retired adjunct professor of anthropology at Columbia University, died Sunday at St.
Vincent's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, after a long illness.
She was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Seventh Avenue Suppliers Are Breathing a Little Easier
LEAD: Only the most perceptive and dedicated shopper would have found Bloomingdale's lacking in goods yesterday.
And on Seventh Avenue, there was a sense of relief one day after the American retailing units of the Campeau Corporation filed for bankruptcy, with suppliers getting ready to ship goods normally to such stores as Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Jordan


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Deadline Extension
LEAD: The deadline for entries to the 1990 One Show has been extended to Feb. 9, from Jan. 31, because of a water main break on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan that temporarily closed the club's office on 18th Street.


The Reagan Boom - Greatest Ever
LEAD: Almost everyone knows that the greatest depression the U.S. ever had was in the 1930's.
It was known as the Great Depression, and its infamy merits a separate section in economics textbooks.
But what was its counterpart?
When did our greatest economic expansion occur?


Rollins Environmental ServFices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Environmental ServFices Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
45,894,000
36,979,000
Net inc
6,063,000
b2,729,000
Share earns
.10
.05
Shares outst
60,338,000
60,454,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,064,000.


Cuomo Proposes More Anti-Drug Spending, but the Legislature Is Wary
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed adding more than $250 million to the $1 billion a year the state already spends on anti-drug programs.
But several of his top aides, citing bureaucratic delays and community opposition to drug-treatment centers, conceded that they would not be able to spend all of the money in the coming year.


Options Board Re-elects Head
LEAD: Karsten Mahlmann was re-elected chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade in a rare contest for the job, exchange officials said tonight.


BOND HEARING HELD FOR NORIEGA ALLY
LEAD: A former Panamanian military commander charged in the drug trafficking case of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega was portrayed by character witnesses at a bond hearing today as a family man who deserves bail.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising Addenda
LEAD: *
Livingston &amp; Co., a Seattle advertising agency that also has a San Francisco office, has agreed to acquire Melmon Tawa &amp; Partners, an agency in Palo Alto, Calif., with about $6 million in billings.


Loudon Bows Out OF 'Annie' Revival'
LEAD: Dorothy Loudon will not take part in a planned revival of the musical ''Annie,'' her agent, Lionel Larner, said yesterday.


Graf And Lendl Coast
LEAD: Steffi Graf, playing in slow motion compared with her rapid-fire practice with Boris Becker, easily advanced to the third round of the Australian Open today, beating the 17-year-old American Erika DeLone, 6-1, 6-2.


Syntrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Syntrex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 27
1989
1988
Revenue
11,076,570
14,633,425
Net loss
1,188,033
323,054
Shares outst
7,425,754
7,333,242
Yr rev
43,719,216
57,015,060
Net loss
6,605,516
b5,418,127
Shares outst
7,404,459
7,416,704


Supreme Court to Consider An Antitrust Suit by States
LEAD: At the urging of the attorneys general of a majority of the states, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states can bring Federal antitrust suits charging energy producers with illegal price-fixing.


18 Tourists Killed in Brazil
LEAD: At least 18 Argentine tourists, including 4 children, died today when their bus overturned near the southern Brazilian city of Porto Alegre, radio reports said.
The bus had left the town of Trenque Lauquen in Argentina on Sunday loaded with tourists bound for the coastal Brazilian town of Camboriu when it flipped on its side before dawn, the reports said.


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
39,600,000
70,400,000
Per share
.37
.66
Year net inc
256,200,000
296,900,000
Per share
2.40
2.76
The company said fourth quarter results were affected by several non- recurring and other unusual expenses totaling $42 million pre-tax, or 25 cents a share, after tax.


Pinnacle West Names Chief
LEAD: The Pinnacle West Capital Corporation said today that it had appointed Richard Snell chairman, president and chief executive of Pinnacle West and chairman of the Arizona Public Service Company, its utility subsidiary.


Paris Journal;   Piecing Together a Boulevard's Broken Dreams
LEAD: Standing in the Place de la Concorde and contemplating the Champs-Elysees as it sweeps past gardens and palaces toward the Arc de Triomphe, who would want to dispute its claim to being the world's most elegant promenade?


Orange Juice Prices Spurt On Gloomy Import Report
LEAD: Prices of orange juice futures rose sharply yesterday after a report that Brazil expects to export 450,000 metric tons of frozen concentrate to the United States this year, an amount that might not meet United States demand.


T.W.A. Sells Jets To Raise Cash
LEAD: Trans World Airlines Inc. said it had sold 11 jumbo jets for $210 million to two leasing companies to raise cash and reduce its large debt, company officials said.
It was the second time in less than a month that the airline had announced the sale of assets.
On Dec. 18, it said it planned to sell its Chicago-London route and related assets to American Airlines for $195 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Campeau Situation


Healy Stops 51 Shots in Shutout as Islanders Win 7th in Row
LEAD: Glenn Healy, the Islander goalie, grabbed many pucks tonight with his glove hand, juggled some once or twice, and stopped a few with his stick and pads.


About New York;   Poverty Loses When Roberto, 3, Reads This 'R'
LEAD: Roberto F., the 3-year-old in the red turtleneck, studied the object he had been asked to identify. ''Pencil,'' he said.


For Neediest, Gifts to Honor A New Mayor
LEAD: The inauguration of a new mayor in New York City and the hope that his administration will bring better times to the impoverished have inspired several gifts to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Breast Implant Safety
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Books of The Times;   Why Liberals and Their Beliefs Will Rise Again
LEAD:
The Resurgent Liberal (And Other Unfashionable Prophecies)
By Robert B. Reich
303 pages. Times Books. $19.95.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:


Florio Takes Office and Calls Auto-Insurance Session
LEAD: Pledging leadership that is ''disciplined, tough, persistent and honest,'' James Joseph Florio took the oath of office as the 49th governor of New Jersey today and immediately called for a special session of the Legislature next Monday to solve the problem of high automobile insurance rates.


2 Miguels Stride Boldly in Wine-Making
LEAD: NO one has ever accused the Torres wine-making family of lacking boldness.


White House Hopes to Still The Siren Song of a Tax Cut
LEAD: Concerned that a proposal to cut Social Security taxes could turn into a political quagmire, top White House officials have been conducting an intensive campaign to keep conservative Republicans from endorsing an enticing idea in an election year.


Corrections
LEAD: An illustration with the Personal Health column on Jan. 4 about cross-country skiing depicted a technique improperly.
In the basic motion, as the column said, when one leg is forward, the opposite arm is also forward, pushing off with the pole.


Northwest and Delta Match $12 Surcharge for Fuel Cost
LEAD: Northwest Airlines and Delta Air Lines matched American Airlines yesterday in adding a $12 surcharge on every round-trip ticket to help cover the rising cost of fuel.


Bridge
LEAD: The New Jersey Bridge League lost one of its leading players and most colorful personalities when Frank Burstein of Springfield, N.J., died Friday at the age of 56 after heart surgery.
He is survived by his wife, Phyllis, a past president of the league.


Archer Daniels Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer Daniels Midland (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
132,166,000
100,373,000
Share earns
.46
.36
Shares outst
282,434,000
280,745,000
6mo net inc
249,335,000
191,674,000
Share earns
.88
.69
Shares outst
281,907,000
279,467,000


Mr. Dole Milks a Miniature Cow
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole has never been shy about sounding a clanging alarm in the middle of policy debate.
He did so again on the Op-Ed page yesterday.
Mr.
Dole urged that foreign aid funds be shifted from favored clients like Israel and Egypt to the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, and to other countries where freedom has ''suddenly and dramatically blossomed.


Talks on Bank to Aid the East Bloc End in Dispute
LEAD: An East-West meeting on establishing a development bank to help Eastern Europe's troubled economies ended today with some dispute over whether the bank's lending should be limited to only the private sector.


Mary DuBois Schwarz, Board Member, 79
LEAD: Mary DuBois Schwarz, a board member and secretary of the Union Theological Seminary, died on Saturday at the Mary Manning Walsh Nursing Home in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.


Stoneridge Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stoneridge Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
24,401,000
38,722,000
Net loss
1,699,000
252,000
Year-ago quarter results included a pretax gain of $1.8 million from the disposition of real property.


Simmons Raises Lockheed Holding
LEAD: Harold C. Simmons, the Dallas financier, has raised his stake in the Lockheed Corporation to 17.9 percent from 16.9 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Simmons did not amend his previous statement that he has no immediate plans to take over the military contractor, which is based in Calabasas,


Adolph O. Krisch, Hotel Owner, 73
LEAD: Adolph Oscar Krisch, a founder of what became the largest Holiday Inn franchise in the United States, died at his home Thursday, apparently from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head, a medical examiner said.
He was 73 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Jan. 9 about card shuffling misstated the value of 52 factorial, or 52 X 51 X 50, etc.
It is approximately 0.8 X 10 to the 68th power.


Lessons
LEAD: Shortly after the doors of the Ramon Emeterio Betances School opened at 7 A.M. one recent day, Margarita Albibal arrived with her two daughters.


Older Than Forks, Safer Than Knives
LEAD: THIS is a plea for chopsticks.
Chopsticks for pasta.
Chopsticks for string beans.
Chopsticks for french fries.
Chopsticks for grilled chanterelles.
Indeed, chopsticks for just about anything, except perhaps a thick hunk of meat.
I have one friend who even uses them to eat ice cream.


Dinkins Again Delays Picking A New Health Commissioner
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins has again postponed his appointment of a health commissioner for New York City while attempts are made to resolve persistent criticisms of the leading candidate, Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr.
Despite Dr.
Myers's national reputation as an advocate on AIDS issues and his endorsement Friday by a panel of New York City AIDS experts, he has been dogged by controversy over his record in his current post as Indiana's Health


East Berlin Faults Opposition on Raid
LEAD: The East German police asserted today that protesters who raided State Security headquarters on Monday had caused millions of dollars in damage, and they said the opposition group New Forum was partly to blame for the incident.


Jack DiGiovanni, 54, A Financial Executive
LEAD: Jack L. DiGiovanni, financial director of The New York Times circulation department, died yesterday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center after a short illness.
He was 54 years old and lived in Oradell, N.J.


Russell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
203,849,000
151,428,000
Net inc
21,565,000
17,468,000
Share earns
.52
.44
Yr sales
687,954,000
531,136,000
Net inc
64,735,000
53,765,000
Share earns
1.57
1.36


Knicks Off on a Perilous Road Trip
LEAD: ''The dog days of January are upon us,'' Paul Silas, the Knicks' assistant coach, proclaimed after the victory Monday over the Chicago Bulls at Madison Square Garden.


Rostropoviches Regain Their Soviet Citizenship
LEAD: The cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich and the soprano Galina Vishnevskaya have had their Soviet citizenship restored 12 years after the Government took it away, Tass reported today.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: WHEN Peggy Rosen boarded the downtown IRT local at 72d Street, she noticed a fur-lined leather glove fall to the floor just as a well-dressed man rose and prepared to exit.
Having lost countless gloves, scarfs, umbrellas and other accessories to the city's transportation system, Ms.
Rosen could not ignore the incident.


Excerpts From Florio Speech: 'New Ideas Preserve Old Ideals'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the text of Gov.
James J. Florio's inaugural speech today:


CUOMO PROPOSES AUSTERITY BUDGET WITH MORE TAXES
LEAD: Saying that ''there is a huge gap between what we want to spend and what we can afford to spend,'' Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo presented an austere budget today that would increase state spending by the lowest rate in more than a decade and would force cuts in dozens of state programs.


Court Takes Price-Fixing Case
LEAD: Urged by state attorneys general, the Supreme Court agreed to decide if states can bring Federal antitrust suits charging energy producers with illegal price-fixing.
Page D1.


Review/Film;   A Cerebral and Sexual Look At Character and Emotion
LEAD: Alain Tanner, the Swiss director of ''La Salamandre,'' ''In the Middle of the World'' and ''Jonah Who Will Be 25 in the Year 2000,'' has been one of the most securely cerebral of European film makers.
Like Eric Rohmer, with whom he otherwise has little in common, Mr.
Tanner makes films about people who think and talk and argue about matters of importance, often at cross-purposes and sometimes for little ultimate effect.


FOES OF PRETORIA GATHER IN ZAMBIA
LEAD: After nearly 30 years of guerrilla struggle, many of the top figures in South Africa's most powerful black nationalist group, the African National Congress, have gathered here this week to discuss the possibilities of ending white rule by negotiations.


Astronauts Keep Busy Aboard the Space Shuttle


Text of the U.N. Declaration On the Conflict in Cambodia
LEAD: Following is the text of a declaration on Cambodia issued here today at the end of a two-day meeting of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council - the United Sates, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France:


Colonel Held in Salvador Ordered Killings of Jesuits, Cristiani Says
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani said today that a colonel arrested in the killing of six Jesuit priests had ordered the slayings and that two lieutenants had named him in their confessions.


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meditrust (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,732,000
13,484,000
Net inc
5,580,000
4,981,000
Share earns
.35
.32
Yr rev
71,601,000
45,897,000
Net inc
21,515,000
16,807,000
Share earns
1.37
1.17


A Superhuman Collapse;   A.T.&amp;T.'s Troubles Show How Computers Defy Understanding Even When They Fail
LEAD: The failure of American Telephone and Telegraph Company's long distance switching system on Monday is a warning of the troubling vulnerability of the nation's complex computer networks to unpredictable breakdowns, either accidental or deliberate, computer scientists said yesterday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We didn't live up to our own standards of quality.
We didn't live up to our customers' standards of quality.
It's as simple as that.''
- Robert Allen, the chairman of A.T.&amp;T. [B7:2.]


R. Peter Nyquist, Administrator, 31
LEAD: R. Peter Nyquist, a physicians' assistant and administrator of the AIDS Team at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, died of complications of AIDS on Jan. 9 at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 31 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Vitalink Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitalink Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,302,000
11,176,000
Net inc
4,358,000
b4,612,000
Share earns
.31
.40
Shares outst
14,061,000
11,627,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,386,000, or 12 cents a share, which represented net gain on sale of discontinued operations; and also included an extraordinary credit of $1,018,000, or 9 cents a share, from a tax credit.


U.S. WILL EXAMINE A METAL'S EFFECTS
LEAD: The Department of Energy announced today that it planned to conduct a study to determine the effects of beryllium, a toxic metal, on thousands of workers in nuclear weapons plants exposed to the substance, The Energy Department designated a special panel, which is already looking into how well the department is assessing the health of its workers, to help design the study on beryllium.


Aristech Gets Bid
LEAD: The Aristech Chemical Corporation's stock rose $5.50, to $24.625, on the New York Stock Exchange today, after the company said it had received a cash bid of $26 a share, or $845 million, from a group that includes Aristech's chairman, Thomas Marshall, and the Mitsubishi Corporation of Japan.
The Pittsburgh-based company has virtually ignored a previous offer of $25 a share made in October by Jon Huntsman, a Salt Lake City investor.


State Dept. Endorses Dole's Call For More Flexibility in Foreign Aid
LEAD: The State Department today endorsed a call by Senator Bob Dole to give the Administration greater flexibility in allocating foreign aid.
But it stopped short of saying, as the Senate Republican leader did, that some money now designated for Israel, Egypt and other large aid recipients should be redirected to Eastern Europe and


A Clockwork Inauguration, With an Ad Lib for Honesty
LEAD: James J. Florio has been called a ''hands on'' official so often since his election in November that the words almost seem part of his name.
And his inauguration as Governor today can only add to his reputation for detail.


About Education
LEAD: Education research too often ignores the people it claims to serve -the children and teachers.
So says J. Myron Atkin, a professor of education and teacher of science at Stanford University, where he was dean of the Graduate School of Education from 1979 to 1986.


Kimberly-Clark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimberly-Clark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,463,100,000
1,391,100,000
Net inc
110,600,000
94,700,000
Share earns
1.37
1.18
Yr sales
5,733,600,000
5,393,500,000
Net inc
423,800,000
378,600,000
Share earns
5.26
4.71
Shares outst
80,600,000
80,400,000


Iran Asks Soviets to Respond With Caution
LEAD: Iran, expressing concern about violence across its border in the Trans-Caucasus region of the Soviet Union, urged Moscow today not to use force in the area.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Japan's Ex-Leader Speaks
Former Prime Minister Noburo Takeshita of Japan, in his first interview since resigning seven months ago over an influence-peddling scandal, denied that he is running the country from behind the scenes.
Page A3.
Lower Dose for AIDS Drug
The Government halved the recommended dose of AZT, the only approved drug for AIDS.


Arson Blamed As Fire Kills 4 In Brooklyn
LEAD: A 33-year-old woman and three of her children were killed early yesterday morning when a fire set by an arsonist consumed a rickety frame building in Brooklyn where at least four families lived and worked, the police and fire officials said.


Voluntary Agencies Part of Foster Care's Solution, Not Problem
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tax Cuts: No, Yes, Maybe, No
LEAD: These are some comments made over the years by Gov.
Mario M. cuomo as he has changed his position on the four-year-tax-cut:
Jan. 20, 1987: ''We must resist being deceived by a dramatic sounding tax cut now that will next year produce the need for a tax increase of Draconian spending cuts.


Hillenbrand Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillenbrand Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Revenue
308,764,000
275,381,000
Net inc
20,229,000
17,414,000
Share earns
.55
.47
Yr rev
1,138,327,000
963,254,000
Net inc
74,952,000
69,742,000
Share earns
2.02
1.86


Parents Face the Music for Truants
LEAD: Three parents who let their daughters skip school for a rock concert have volunteered to serve detention time in the principal's office in place of their children.


Florio Takes Office as New Jersey Governor


Everyday Dish That's a Classic
LEAD: POT-AU-FEU, the French boiled meat and vegetable dish, was the classic winter Sunday lunch of my youth.
Then, lunch was the biggest meal of the day and dinner usually consisted of leftovers from lunch with fruit and cheese.


Japan to Keep Its Auto Quota
LEAD: Japan will continue to voluntarily restrict exports of passenger autos to the United States to 2.3 million cars a year in the coming year, trade officials said today.


Security Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
191,700,000
169,500,000
Per share
1.59
1.46
Shares outst
115,300,000
112,100,000
Year net inc
740,600,000
638,900,000
Per share
6.26
5.59
Shares outst
113,800,000
111,000,000


Robert Campeau's Special Genius
LEAD: Any corporate executive can figure out how to file for bankruptcy when the bottom drops out of the business.
It took the special genius of Robert Campeau, chairman of the Campeau Corporation, to figure out how to bankrupt more than 250 profitable department stores.
The dramatic jolt to Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Jordan


No Plan for Skating Into Sunset
LEAD: They are such good friends, and with one project after another, they are now virtually inseparable.
One could easily get the wrong impression.


Advanced Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
285,255,000
248,055,000
Net inc
11,822,000
bc34,104,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
81,922,000
80,312,000
Yr sales
1,104,606,000
1,125,855,000
Net inc
46,052,000
c19,316,000
Share earns
.44
.11
Shares outst
82,048,000
80,845,000


Dollar Mixed in Dull Session While Gold Prices Weaken
LEAD: The dollar was mixed in lackluster trading yesterday amid few developments to affect the currency markets.


Doctor Blames Error by Intern For AIDS Case
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego acknowledged yesterday that she knew of no witnesses to corroborate her version of how she accidentally stuck her finger on a syringe needle that had been used to draw blood from an AIDS patient.


A Day to Forget
LEAD: There are some mornings so lousy that you know the rest of the day is going to stink.


Exxon Executive on Arthur Kill Is Retiring
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation announced yesterday that Edward T. DiCorcia, the vice president in charge of domestic refineries, will retire on Feb. 1.
The announcement came two weeks after the company summoned Mr.
DiCorcia from its headquarters in Houston to oversee the company's response to a leak of more than 500,000 gallons of heating oil into the Arthur


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 12
Jan. 5
Jan. 13
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.6
6.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
214.9
209.9
234.4
Distillate stocks
108.4
106.3
123.9
Crude imports, daily
6.2
5.7
5.2
Product imports, daily
2.7
2.4
3.2
Crude stocks
345.1
342.2
324.2
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.9
87.1
85.6


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Akzo N.V., Arnheim, the Netherlands, a chemical company, said it would discontinue its two joint ventures with Kollmorgen Corp., Simsbury, Conn., and had set up a new joint venture with AMP Inc., Harrisburg, Pa., a maker of electrical and electronic connectors.
The new joint venture will acquire the business of Additive Products Co., one of the joint ventures of Akzo and Kollmorgen.


Intel Profit Up Sharply
LEAD: The Intel Corporation today reported strong gains in earnings and revenue for the fourth quarter ended Dec. 30.
Revenue for the year was a record, but 1989 earnings declined from last year's level.


Koop Backs Bill to Set Drug Testing Standards
LEAD: A Senate bill to set Federal standards for private companies that test employees for drug use would provide consistency and eliminate lawsuits, Dr.
C.
Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General, and other supporters of the legislation said today.


Housebuster Wins Handily At Gulfstream Park Opener
LEAD: Housebuster, an unproven but awfully quick 3-year-old, scored a handy 2 1/4-length victory today in the $65,000 Spectacular Bid Stakes on opening day at Gulfstream Park.


Court Takes Up Molestation Issue: Child's Fears vs. Suspect's Rights
LEAD: In two cases with national implications for child abuse prosecutions, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide what steps states may take under the Constitution to shield young victims of sexual abuse from facing their suspected assailants.


Manufacturers Hanover reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b62,000,000
c210,000,000
Per share
.82
4.00
Year net loss
b518,000,000
d952,000,000
Per share
-
18.27
b-Included for the quarter $35 million after-tax charge resulting from a fraud at the firm's Geneva, Switzerland branch; a $69 million after-tax gain from sale of 60 percent interest in CIT Group; a $57 million after-tax charge relating to refinancing country portion of Manufacturers


Robert Burritt Hiatt, A Surgeon, Dies at 72
LEAD: Robert Burritt Hiatt, a surgeon and teacher, died of cancer on Saturday at Kennebec Valley Medical Center in Gardiner, Me.
He was 72 years old and lived in Dresden, Me.


Dukakis Says Harm Of Presidential Bid Was Unanticipated
LEAD: In his final State of the State speech, Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis said tonight that he had not anticipated the damage his Presidential campaign would have on Massachusetts and his family.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Thursday about the founder of the Reece School in Manhattan, a private school for children with emotional and learning disabilities, misidentified her.
She was Ellen Steele Reece.


Citicorp Has Deficit In Quarter
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, announced yesterday that it lost $784 million in the fourth quarter of 1989, as it set aside $1 billion in reserves to cover losses on its loans to less developed countries.


Czechoslovak-Soviet Meeting About Troops Adjourns Early
LEAD: Talks with the Soviet Union about withdrawing the 70,000 to 75,000 troops it has stationed here since 1968 proved more difficult than expected today, and they were adjourned until early next month in Moscow, the Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry said.


Citicorp to Cut 215 Jobs at Unit
LEAD: Citicorp said today that it would cut 215 jobs in a reorganization of its money-losing Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers equities unit.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Oracle Corp., to Chiat/Day/Mojo San Francisco, for its data-base management systems and software, with a budget of $8 million to 10 million.


Contrasts on Chips;   As a Joint Venture Collapses in U.S., Japanese Companies Act Like a Cartel
LEAD: The contrast was striking: On the day last week when American electronics companies decided to abandon their cooperative venture to make computer chips, their competitors in Tokyo had already moved in lockstep.


Bulls Protest Tucker's Shot
LEAD: The National Basketball Association said yesterday that it had been notified by the Chicago Bulls that they intended to protest the Knicks' 109-106 victory Monday at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks won the game on a 3-point basket by Trent Tucker with one-tenth of a second remaining.


The Punishment: To Knit
LEAD: A few people convicted of misdemeanors in Marquette County have been handed knitting needles and told by a local judge, Patricia Micklaw, to knit away their debt to society.
With yarn donated by a church, the offenders are knitting afghans, scarves, mittens and the like for the needy.


At Last, Dawn for Cambodia?
LEAD: There seems, finally, to be the promise of life in the Killing Fields.
If all goes well, the Khmer Rouge fanatics who slaughtered more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's will, under a plan sponsored by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, be denied control of Cambodia.


Eye Drops and Soda Make Federal Drug Tests Too Easy to Beat
LEAD: To the Editor:


AMR Net Falls 66.7% In Quarter
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, yesterday reported sharply lower earnings in the fourth quarter mainly as a result of rising fuel costs.


Turning the Tables
LEAD: ''The Republicans,'' Ronald Reagan once declared, ''are the party of July Fourth and the Democrats are the party of April 15.''


Brainard Cheney, Novelist, 89
LEAD: Brainard Cheney, the author of five novels set in the swamp country of Georgia, died at a nursing home Monday after a long illness.
He was 89 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The new president of Johns Hopkins University is DR.
WILLIAM C. RICHARDSON, the provost of Pennsylvania State University.
Dr.
Richardson will begin work July 1.


Arafat Denounces Arab Dealings With Israel Over Palestinian Issue
LEAD: Signaling frustration within the Palestinian leadership with the stalemated Middle East peace process, Yasir Arafat denounced today what he described as ''Arab impotence to stand up to Israeli arrogance.''


New York Life Names Successors to Leader
LEAD: The New York Life Insurance Company, one of the nation's largest life insurers, yesterday named a new management lineup to take charge on Aug. 1.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Painted Concrete


Southmark Files Plan To Keep Savings Unit
LEAD: The Southmark Corporation, the troubled Texas real estate and financial services concern, filed a plan of reorganization in United States Bankruptcy Court today that would allow it to keep its troubled savings and loan institution, the San Jacinto Savings Association in Houston.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


Ex-Official Is Defended
LEAD: The State Department today defended a former officer who helped develop negotiating strategy with Japan on high-technology issues and left on Jan. 1 to join Fujitsu Ltd., a Japanese electronics conglomerate.


Capital Gains Tax Cut Would Promote Fairness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chicago Merc Re-elects Chief
LEAD: John T. Geldermann was re-elected today as chairman of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
He was not challenged in his bid for a second consecutive one-year term.


Richter Is Bringing Life to a Lackluster Season
LEAD: Mike Richter, his entire body having wound up in the net in his attempt to keep the puck from doing the same, stared out through the cage of his goaltender's mask into the lights and applause of Madison Square Garden.
One of the sport's singular moments - a penalty shot - had become just another of his multiple successes.


Dollar Ends the Day Mixed After Trade Deficit Report
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday as an unexpected widening of the nation's trade deficit had an unsettling effect on foreign-exchange trading.


Republic New York Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b93,800,000
d50,000,000
Per share
2.92
1.49
Year net inc
c24,000,000
169,700,000
Per share
.04
5.01
b-Included a pre-tax gain on the sale of an option to purchase real estate of $51.2 million.


G.O.P. Blurs Focus on Abortion, To Dismay of Some Party Faithful
LEAD: Republican leaders have begun a subtle operation to recast their party's approach to abortion in the 1990 elections, and the effort is already stirring concern in the party's anti-abortion wing.


Upheaval in the East;   Kohl Says Germans Don't Want Border Debates
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany said today that the Germans had no intention of setting off a debate about borders that could undermine peace in Europe.


Earnings Fall 74.8% At I.B.M.
LEAD: Ending a difficult year on a disappointing note, the International Business Machines Corporation reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter net income fell 74.8 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.


3 Men Accused of Violating Computer and Phone Systems
LEAD: The Federal Government today charged three men in California with engaging in a widespread pattern of breaking into Government and telephone company computers and obtaining classified information from a military computer.


Panama's New Chief to Ask U.S. Aid
LEAD: Panama's new civilian President said today that he would go to Washington ''as soon as possible'' to ask for emergency economic aid, including $200 million for a public-employment program and $40 million to rebuild homes destroyed in the invasion that toppled Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Secret Ernst Document Discusses Profit Split
LEAD: The partners of Ernst &amp; Whinney will take home roughly 65 percent of all profits that they earn jointly with Arthur Young for the next three years, while Arthur Young's partners will share the rest, according to a confidential document that was circulated among the two accounting firms' partners before their union in


Sudan Government Can Restore Liberties
LEAD: To the Editor:


Exxon Sends Documents on Leak to E.P.A.
LEAD: Responding to an ultimatum by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency to explain what caused the leak of more than 500,000 gallons of oil into the Arthur Kill, Exxon delivered a box containing several hundred pages of documents to the agency yesterday.
The delivery forestalled, for at least a day, any fines against the oil company.


H.U.D. Is Ending an Insurance Program That Lost a Billion
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp today ended a Reagan Administration program in which private lenders committed the Government to insuring mortgages.


High Prices Prompt Gifts for Neediest Cases
LEAD: Sometimes a price tag is the impetus for a donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Liberty National Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,409,000
8,218,000
Per share
.85
.77
Shares outst
11,030,000
10,710,000
Year net inc
33,171,000
28,901,000
Per share
3.07
2.76
Shares outst
10,798,000
10,488,000


First Tennessee National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
12,757,000
13,900,000
Per share
.81
.88
Year net inc
28,790,000
52,343,000
Per share
1.82
3.34
The company said its latest quarter results were reduced by one-time charges of $4.2 million from the restructuring of several bank operations and by the loan loss provision.


Prices for Petroleum Drop After Report on Inventories
LEAD: Oil and gasoline futures prices fell yesterday after an industry report showed an increase in United States stocks of petroleum products after several weeks of declining supplies.


Oil in Arthur Kill: Publicity and Peril for Urban Marsh
LEAD: Donald Decker, a big truck driver with a fondness for chickens and house cats, first noticed the birds along the slow, muddy waters of the Arthur Kill and mentioned them to a bird-watcher friend.


Hearing Set on Effort to Subpoena Reagan
LEAD: A Federal judge today ordered a hearing in connection with John Poindexter's effort to subpoena former President Ronald Reagan as a witness at Mr.
Poindexter's trial.


Metro Matters;   State-City Ties: Albany Panel Takes First Steps
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo may be guilty of some sins of omission in his proposed budget, but not of commission.


Bush Aide Is Sent to Manila To Dramatize U.S. Support
LEAD: President Bush sent a senior foreign policy adviser to the Philippines today to dramatize the Administration's strong support for the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino.


The Big Stick
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Sharp Shooting Helps Celtics Win
Visiting Boston made its first 25 free throws last night in beating the Orlando Magic, 133-111.
Boston never trailed.
After the teams traded baskets in the first minute of the game, Boston went on a 12-point run.
Ed Pinckney was the only Celtic to miss a free throw, with 4 minutes 17 seconds left in the game, as the Celtics came within one of their team record of 26 in a row.


Turnovers Hurt Duke In Loss to the Tar Heels
LEAD: North Carolina's intense defense and Rick Fox's 19 points led the Tar Heels to a stunning 79-60 victory over Duke tonight in an Atlantic Coast Conference game.


Multibank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,354,000
8,376,000
Per share
.47
.90
Year net inc
21,688,000
26,892,000
Per share
2.33
2.90


Steel Imports Decline
LEAD: Steel imports in November fell 13 percent from October's level, and represented 18.9 percent of the domestic supply, the American Iron and Steel Institute said today.
The November imports came to 1.49 million tons, compared with 1.7 million tons in October and 1.8 million tons in November 1988, the institute reported.


Time for a Danube Basin Common Market;   Cold War Not in Vain
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nagasaki Mayor Is Shot in Attack
LEAD: The Mayor of Nagasaki, who has received numerous death threats from right-wing groups over his suggestion that the late Emperor Hirohito bore some responsibility for World War II, was shot in chest today by a lone gunman in front of the City Hall in his home city.


Where 21 Youths Died, Lawyers Wage a War
LEAD: There is a comforting mythology about tragedy, in which grief brings strength to survivors and builds bonds among neighbors.


The Writing on the Wall Foretells an Adventure
LEAD: EAT your heart out, Norman Mailer.


Yuzuru Abe, 73, Dies; Headed Steel Company
LEAD: Yuzuru Abe, a Japanese steel industry executive, died of liver failure on Sunday at his home in Tokyo.
He was 73 years old.


Home Improvement
LEAD: BEFORE wallboard, paneling or accoustical tile can be attached to finished and sometimes to unfinished walls and ceilings, a grid of narrow wooden strips called furring usually must be applied.
They provide smooth, flat surfaces to fasten the new material to, and to support it.


A Not-So-Ebullient Bazaar for New TV Shows
LEAD: The city known for letting the good times roll seemed a natural setting for an industry unsurpassed in its love of gleeful excess.
Yet this meeting of the National Association of Television Program Executives, an annual gathering where local television station executives gamble on buying the next Oprah Winfrey or ''Wheel of


First American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
17,422,000
3,365,000
Shares outst
23,075,000
23,008,000
Year net inc
4,236,000
30,441,000
Per share
.18
1.32
Shares outst
23,041,000
22,996,000


3 Nights of Love Songs For St. Valentine's Day
LEAD: A trio of concerts for St.
Valentine's Day is to begin on Feb. 12 at 8 P.M. at the Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South.
Al Carmines, a composer and former minister at the church, and David Vaughan, a dance historian, are to sing love songs from the turn of the century to the 1940's; Mr.


Calendar: Showing Antiques, Gardens
LEAD: 67 Strong, Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 66th Street; 212-665-5250.


Dr. Y. C. James Yen Is Dead at 96; Led International Self-Help Group
LEAD: Y. C. James Yen, founder of a movement to combat illiteracy, poverty and hunger in developing countries on three continents, died of pneumonia yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 96 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Gorbachev in Danger, Kennan Says in Testimony
LEAD: George F. Kennan said today the economic and political problems boiling over in the Soviet Union have put President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in ''danger,'' but he is not likely to be replaced in the near future because his troubles are so acute that even his rivals may not want his job.


3 Held as Thugs Who Used Vans To Rob Women
LEAD: Three men have been charged in a series of assaults and purse snatchings in New York City in which vans were used as getaway vehicles, the police said yesterday.





First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
15,679,000
15,046,000
Per share
.47
.46
Year net inc
62,634,000
58,235,000
Per share
1.90
1.77


Soviet Wheat Purchase
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought an additional 525,000 metric tons of United States wheat at subsidized prices for delivery in March under a long-term grain-supply agreement, the Agriculture Department said today.
The wheat was sold by four private companies, which will receive subsidies under the department's Export Enhancement Program.


The Who Are Among Latest to Enter the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame


Trade Gap Widened in November
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit grew in November to $10.5 billion, the biggest monthly gap of 1989, the Commerce Department reported today.


Bond Corp. Offer Is Dropped
LEAD: A young entrepreneur who said he was seeking control of the Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd. without explaining how he would finance his $197 million bid or address the Australian conglomerate's immense debt said on Tuesday that he had abandoned the offer.


Valley National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
12,824,000
b18,720,000
Per share
-
.95
Year net loss
149,227,000
b67,316,000
Per share
-
3.41
b-Net income


Newark Prize: Winner Keeps His Car
LEAD: Parking a car on the streets of Newark has become such a gamble that Mayor Sharpe James conducted a drawing today to give away 1,750 anti-car-theft devices and increase residents' odds of keeping their cars.


Society for Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,281,000
9,641,000
Per share
.44
.81
Year net inc
b46,009,000
33,260,000
Per share
3.86
2.80
b-After extraordinary gain of $14,529,000, or $1.22 a share, from sale of all credit card receivables and accounts and loss from accelerated amortization of goodwill.


Bowie Leads Way As Nets Top Bullets
LEAD: If the Nets had lost tonight, nobody would have wanted to spend much time around Bill Fitch.
The Nets' coach spent 10 minutes shouting at his team following its loss to Portland on Sunday.
Then on Tuesday, Fitch put his club through a grueling three-hour practice.


PRAGUE DISMAYED AT TROOP TALKS
LEAD: A Czechoslovak official said today that negotiations with the Soviet Union on withdrawal of its forces stationed here by the end of this year may have been slowed by Moscow's preoccupation with domestic political problems.


Mobile Phone System for Beijing
LEAD: L. M. Ericsson, the Swedish telecommunications company, and Pacific Link Communication Ltd., a Hong Kong-based company in which Millicom International Inc. has a 28 percent stake, are giving a mobile phone network to the city of Beijing.


Noah and McEnroe Dazzle Just Like They Once Did
LEAD: Yannick Noah is back in all his glory and threatening to crash a party that seemed reserved for the usual big names in tennis.


Inquiry Looks At Bush's Son
LEAD: Federal regulators are scheduled to meet on Thursday to determine whether Neil Bush, the President's son, violated Federal banking laws as a board member of a Colorado savings and loan institution that became insolvent.


3 Cases Raise Questions on Boston Police Methods
LEAD: The Boston Police Department, whose methods are already under intense scrutiny in the Charles Stuart case, also faces questions about its handling of two other cases: the 1988 shooting death of a detective and the fatal stabbing of a 19-year-old student this week.


Holiday Inn Sale Backed
LEAD: Shareholders of the Holiday Corporation approved a plan to sell the Holiday Inn hotel system to Bass P.L.C. of Britain for $2.2 billion.
Bass is acquiring 55 owned or leased properties as well as franchise agreements, joint venture agreements and management contracts covering 1,400 Holiday Inn hotels in North America.


Shanahan's Strange Season
LEAD: The players were gone from the Denver Broncos' training complex on their day off.
The sun had gone down, and the telephones, which not so long ago had been ringing steadily with talk about another Bronco Super Bowl, were very nearly silent.
But outside, in the darkness, after another session in the video room, Mike


Review/Television;   Enter Poirot, Ever the Natty Narcissist
LEAD: ''Mystery'' has finally apprehended Hercule Poirot, Agatha Christie's best known detective.
In the nine-part series that begins tonight at 8 on Channel 13 and at 9 on Channel 49, the nattily turned-out little egoist is played by David Suchet, exuding superiority from the shine of his pomaded hair to the sheen of his spats.


Burmese Ban Top Opposition Candidate
LEAD: The most popular opposition leader in Myanmar, formerly Burma, was disqualified today from running in elections scheduled for May, Western diplomats said.


Personal Health
LEAD: Your eyes may or may not be windows to your soul, but your fingernails can reveal a lot about your habits and your health.


From Art of Marbleizing To Southwest Samplers
LEAD: Folk Art Studies, Folk Art Institute, 61 West 62d Street; 212-977-7170.


Lee Goldstein, Composer, 37
LEAD: Lee Goldstein, a conductor of operas and musical-theater pieces and a former composer in residence at the Lyric Opera of Chicago, died on Friday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Chicago.
He was 37 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Some people go into orbit about their birthdays, but CAPT.
DANIEL BRANDENSTEIN was in orbit on his.
The commander of the space shuttle Columbia celebrated his 47th birthday Tuesday, when he was awakened to ''Danny Boy'' and a rendition of ''Happy Birthday,'' taped by staff members at the Johnson Space Center in


Three-Year Extension For Shula Reported
LEAD: Don Shula, the Miami Dolphins' coach, has agreed to a three-year contract extension, The Palm Beach Post reported yesterday.
Shula's current contract expires in six weeks.


Max Gordon, Daily Worker Editor, 79
LEAD: Max Gordon, who was city editor of The Daily Worker when he broke with the Communist Party in 1956 and who later was a medical writer for Purdue-Frederick, a pharmaceutical company, died of a heart attack Monday at the West Boca Raton (Fla.) Medical Center.
He was 79 years old and lived in Boca Raton.


Mr. Cuomo, at Least, Is Serious
LEAD: He might have started sooner, but Gov.
Mario Cuomo has now faced up directly to the harsh fiscal reality facing New York.
There will be debate about details of his austere new state budget but taken as a whole, it represents a serious response to a chill fact: Tax revenues are in sharp decline.


Groupe Bull Plan On Zenith Division
LEAD: Groupe Bull, the French computer company that bought the computer business of the Zenith Electronics Corporation late last year, said yesterday that it would keep the Zenith operation a separate division with its own identity.
Bull said it would keep Zenith's headquarters in Schaumburg, Ill.


Upheaval in the East;   Gorbachev Is Backed On Azerbaijan Combat
LEAD: Expressing deep concern over the latest tumultuous ethnic conflict to unsettle their country, many Soviet citizens voiced overwhelming support today for the decision by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to send troops to control violent fighting in parts of Azerbaijan.


Detectives Seek Leads in Officer's Shooting
LEAD: Detectives investigating the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Brooklyn on Tuesday night were left with more questions than answers yesterday as the officer remained in a coma at Kings County Hospital Center, police officials said.


Appeal Filed By Art Dealer In Mosaics Case
LEAD: An Indianapolis art dealer has asked an appeals court to reverse a court order directing her to hand over four rare Byzantine mosaics from the sixth century to the Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus, court records showed today.


Perfect Record Restored
LEAD: The Illinois High School Association today restored the 14-0 record to the basketball team at Martin Luther King Jr.
High School in Chicago.
But a player the association declared ineligible will stay that way.


Conrail Sets $1.3 Billion Buyback
LEAD: For months, takeover talk has been driving up the stock price of the Consolidated Rail Corporation.
Yesterday, the railroad company, known as Conrail, moved to defend itself by announcing plans to spend about $1.3 billion to buy back more than a third of its outstanding shares.


Dominion Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
23,908,000
21,066,000
Per share
.62
.54
Shares outst
37,853,290
38,326,201
Year net inc
94,078,000
83,048,000
Per share
2.45
2.14
Shares outst
37,786,832
38,172,577


Review/Recital;   An Evening Of Miscellany For Piano By Mozart
LEAD: A large audience was on hand for Richard Shirk's all-Mozart piano recital on Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Mr.
Shirk is on the faculties of the Manhattan School of Music and the Mannes College of Music, and he has performed regularly as both a soloist and a chamber music player since he won the Leschetizky


First of America Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
27,397,000
31,674,000
Per share
1.29
1.61
Shares outst
17,715,747
16,698,290
Year net inc
122,877,000
106,929,000
Per share
5.88
5.41
Shares outst
17,735,010
16,217,026


Review/Music;   At Frick, Chamber Works Performed in a Chamber
LEAD: Public performances of chamber music these days seldom take place in chambers of the size for which much of the music was crafted, and when they do, adjustments are necessary.
Accustomed to having to project into the void of a small or even large concert hall, performers must scale down their sound a bit, and listeners, used to straining to hear a wee distant sound, must prepare for the immediacy and sheer volume of the close encounter.


The Shack as Art and Social Comment
LEAD: IN large, vibrant drawings, color photographs and evocative small wood structures, all set against the stark white walls of a SoHo art gallery, Beverly Buchanan celebrates the lowly shacks of the South in a new show.
The 30 pieces by Ms.
Buchanan, a 49-year-old artist who lives in Athens, Ga., will be on view through Feb.


85 Candles for Backer Of Fly Fishing Center
LEAD: Friends and admirers of Lee Wulff have planned a gala birthday party for him Feb. 10 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.


Bogota Statement Claims to Offer A Surrender by the Drug Cartels
LEAD: A message that purported to come from Colombia's drug trafficking cartels said today that the Government had won in the war on drugs and offered to halt illegal activities in exchange for an amnesty.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I didn't want a lawyer.
I said, 'The first lawyer who can bring my daughter back, I'll hire.'


Greece Says Albanian Will Visit on Jan. 26
LEAD: The Greek Government has announced that the Albanian Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Sokrat Plaka, would visit Athens on Jan. 26.


Edward Strong, 88, Berkeley Chancellor At Time of Turmoil
LEAD: Dr.
Edward W. Strong, chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley in the early 1960's, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Berkeley.
He was 88 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CARL A. CAPASSO's troubles continue.
His ex-wife, NANCY R. CAPASSO, continued her bitter legal war yesterday by filing a $70-million Federal civil suit against him and others under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.


Review/Theater;   The Details of Daily Life, Surrealistically
LEAD: Although ''Casa,'' Denise Stoklos's new performance piece at La Mama, bills itself as a comedy, it could just as accurately be called a mystery.
In her one-hour play, this Brazilian director, performer and writer, who calls her physically sparse, mimelike style of drama essential theater, heads a cast of eight actors, including her two children, who act out rituals of daily life in surrealistic caricature.


Silber of Boston University Enters Massachusetts Race
LEAD: Saying his role as a political outsider was an asset, John Silber, the president of Boston University for 19 years, declared today that he would seek the Democratic nomination for Governor of Massachusetts.


PNC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,466,000
119,108,000
Per share
-
1.28
Shares outst
93,960,000
91,861,000
Year net inc
377,440,000
460,427,000
Per share
3.98
4.98
Shares outst
93,635,000
91,243,000


Correction
LEAD: An obituary on Friday about Dudley Field Malone, a theatrical agent and manager, misidentified a position held by his father, who bore the same name.
He was Assistant Secretary of State under President Woodrow Wilson, not Assistant Secretary of the Navy under Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Capital Gains Tax Cut Would Promote Fairness;   1040 Lottery Drawbacks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Missouri Executes Man in Slaying of His Girlfriend
LEAD: A man who was convicted of killing his girlfriend was executed by injection early today, becoming the the 121st nationwide since 1976, when the Supreme Court allowed states to restore the death penalty.


Earnings Rise At Ameritech
LEAD: Ameritech, the Chicago-based telephone holding company for Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin, today reported a 7.1 percent rise in its earnings in the fourth quarter.


Harper's Season Ends
LEAD: Ron Harper of the Los Angeles Clippers will be sidelined for the rest of the season because of a severe injury to his right knee, the National Basketball Association team said yesterday.


Lebanon General Shuts Paper
LEAD: The Christian general who is fighting for control of Lebanon has closed a newspaper for violating an order of his affecting reports on the Lebanese Government.


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Florida Banks (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b639,000
14,277,000
Per share
.04
.84
Year net inc
39,456,000
48,889,000
Per share
2.48
3.08
b-After charge for restructuring and voluntary early retirement plan of $7.6 million.


Florio to Continue Freeze on State Spending
LEAD: Jim Florio's first public announcement as Governor today declared that his administration would continue a state spending freeze as a first step toward addressing a growing budget shortfall.


Washington at Work;   In Bush's White House, the Press Secretary Is the One With the White Hat
LEAD: Marlin Fitzwater is pulling hats out of a closet.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Pioneer Inc., Orlando, Fla., the parent company of American Pioneer Savings Bank, said it would sell certain assets and operations of its Catalina Homes Inc. and Jonathon Group Inc. units for $65.7 million to Catalina Homes Acquisition Ltd., a Florida limited partnership.


Critic's Notebook;   How Set Design Can Bolster or Sabotage, and 2 Heroes of the Art
LEAD: In a newsletter published recently by the League of New York Theaters and Producers, Aldo Scrofani, an executive with Jujamcyn Theaters, tells an archetypal theatrical anecdote. ''When Anne Bancroft previewed in 'Golda' at the Wilbur Theater in Boston, an early morning fire destroyed the set and just about everything on stage,'' he reminisces.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
Fron '88
Aluminum Co. of America
$ 164,700,000
-24.7
Ameritech
331,700,000
+7.1
AMR Corp.
38,900,000
-66.7
Anacomp Inc.
(177,600,000)
-
Burlington Resources
49,000,000
-4.3
Cincinnati Bell Inc.


Islanders Win Again, Earning Share of First
LEAD: In a giddy locker room tonight, the Islanders were trying to put into words their feelings about an improbable and stunning reality.
As a result of an astonishing seven-week surge, they are in first place in the Patrick Division, tied with the Devils.


Westinghouse Net Up 29.8%
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its net income rose 29.8 percent in the fourth quarter as nearly all its main business units posted gains in operating profits.


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MNC Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
59,359,000
49,262,000
Per share
.95
.84
Shares outst
62,520,000
59,894,000
Year net inc
212,566,000
182,249,000
Per share
3.45
3.14
Shares outst
61,470,000
57,490,000


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
107,000,000
427,400,000
Year net inc
2,400,000
b310,000,000
b-Net loss
The 1988 periods included results of Central Bancorp since Dec. 2, 1988.
First Bank said the results for 1988 included losses of $506.3 million resulting from the decision to sell a significant portion of its investment securities.


Moynihan's Right, but. . .
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan recently advanced a proposal to reduce Social Security payroll taxes by $55 billion in 1991 and corresponding amounts in later years, thereby moving the Social Security system closer to pay-as-you-go financing.
Such a change of policy, however, would damage the economy.


Upheaval in the East;   At Conference, Soviet General Sees Changes in Warsaw Pact
LEAD: A senior Soviet military official said today that political change sweeping Eastern Europe would require a major reorganization of the Warsaw Pact, but he stressed that the military alliance would continue to exist.


U.S. CUTS BACK TRIP QUAYLE WILL MAKE IN LATIN COUNTRIES
LEAD: Lingering anxiety among Latin American nations over the American invasion of Panama has forced the Bush Administration to limit a diplomatic mission by Vice President Dan Quayle by putting off trips to Mexico and Venezuela, Administration officials said today.


Meeting Narrows Gap Between U.S. and Japan
LEAD: Shintaro Ishihara, the Japanese economic nationalist who argues that the resentment in a declining America of his country's growing economic success is largely rooted in racism, crossed swords here today with a Congressman from Detroit.


Foster Placement by Skin Shade Is Charged
LEAD: In an effort to place hundreds of abused and neglected children into foster care each week, New York City has resorted to distributing them to private foster-care agencies on the basis of gradations of skin color and hair texture, a report charged yesterday.


Corestates Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corestates Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
50,737,000
47,160,000
Per share
1.28
1.20
Year net inc
198,686,000
b179,479,000
Per share
5.03
4.50
b-Before payment of $2,905,000 in preferred dividends.


Rig Count Slips in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United states dropped by 10 last week, to a total of 1,019, Baker Hughes Inc. reported on Monday.
The count, which dropped for the fourth consecutive week, remains above the 840 rigs recorded a year earlier.
Baker Hughes's rig count, a widely watched industry index of drilling activity, reflects the number of rotary rigs exploring for oil and gas as of last Friday.


Books of The Times;   Vidal's Remaking of the American Myth
LEAD:
Hollywood
By Gore Vidal
437 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Star Who's a Face in a Crowd
LEAD: HANDSOME he is not.
His appearance is distinguished by owlish glasses, a fixed, goofy grin and a knit cap topped with a red pompon.


Alcoa Profit Falls 24.7%
LEAD: Hurt by the slowdown in the nation's industrial economy, the Aluminum Company of America said today that its fourth-quarter earnings fell 24.7 percent, and the report sent its stock tumbling.


First Commercial Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancorp (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,203,000
3,371,000
Per share
1.10
.82
Shares outst
4,785,000
4,118,000


Review/Comedy;   Comic Safari: Five Hours On the Trail Of Laughs
LEAD: Comedy, more than any other entertainment form, tends to be treated like the show-business equivalent of fast food.
All that's needed to produce it is a microphone, a brick wall and a ready supply of comics with 20 minutes of humorous chatter.


Close to Home
LEAD: A FRIEND has given me a picture book titled ''Tiffany Parties.'' I suspect somebody gave it to him, and I plan to pass it on to a third person, a neighbor who is beside herself with excitement.
She can hardly wait, she says, and will keep it right next to a treasured biography of Elsie de Wolfe Mendl.


Levi Strauss Closing Plant
LEAD: Levi Strauss &amp; Company said today that it will close one of three sewing plants in San Antonio in April and lay off 1,100 workers.


INSIDE
LEAD:
H.U.D. Halts Insurance


Duke Paper Scolded
LEAD: Believing they had been invited to meet the Duke varsity basketball team, 10 members of the sports staff of The Chronicle, the Duke student newspaper, accepted an invitation from Coach Mike Krzyzewski to visit the team locker room Monday.


Small Study Challenges Role of Oat Bran in Reducing Cholesterol
LEAD: The value of eating oat bran has been challenged by a small study that found oat fiber no more effective in lowering people's cholesterol levels than foods made from low-fiber refined wheat flour, which produced far fewer unpleasant side effects.


Dinkins Searches for a Health Chief, but Finds a Dilemma
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, whose cautious reliance on advisers has generally served him well, is facing a thorny issue because he relied on advisers to screen candidates for health commissioner, and their recommendation has deeply divided some of the Mayor's strongest supporters.


Production Climbed 0.4% In December
LEAD: Industrial production rose a strong four-tenths of a percent in December, bolstered by abnormally cold weather and the end of a strike at the Boeing Company, the Federal Reserve Board reported today.


Fernandez Plans to Act Against Brooklyn Board
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has decided to move against a Brooklyn school board that voted to replace its superintendent with a principal who has been linked to elective politics, school officials said.


In 2 Shows, Rooms of Whimsy
LEAD: IN two furnishings shows in New England - one in Providence, R.I., the other in Cambridge, Mass. - whimsy prevails.


Murdoch Units Shift Officials
LEAD: The News Corporation, the worldwide media company controlled by Rupert Murdoch, and its United States subsidiary, News America Publishing, have reorganized their top ranks.


Connecting Consumer and Product
LEAD: A STARK photograph shows a father and son sitting in the living room, the son watching TV, the father facing away.
It is part of a series of advertisements that depict families in crisis.
Public service ads for a family counseling center, perhaps?
Promotions for ''thirtysomething''?
No.
They are the latest ads for


An Alliance For All Europe
LEAD: As the new decade begins, Europe heads the surprise list.
In contrast to the Europe of the early 1980's, the Western system is now clearly ascendant.
But Eastern Europe's broad yearnings to duplicate the success of the West, especially its economic success, are not the same as a triumph of Western values, as some too readily proclaim.


$5 Billion Bailout Bond Sale Is Set
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the bailout of the nation's savings and loan industry, will sell $5 billion of 40-year bonds next week, the Treasury Department announced yesterday.


Man Taken Into Custody After Foiled Hijacking    Airline employees said Mr. Gonzalez-Gonzalez seemed agitated before the flight but told ticket agents he was nervous about flying and worried about a sick relative. (AP)


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
26,581,000
24,977,000
Per share
.52
.49
Year net inc
107,978,000
98,055,000
Per share
2.11
1.93
Per share earnings reflected 15 percent stock dividend paid in July 1989.


Shifts at W. B. Doner
LEAD: Following the death two weeks ago of its founder, W. B. Doner, W. B. Donor &amp; Company has formally established operating committees in its Detroit and Baltimore offices.
The committees, whose members had conferred with Mr.
Doner, will be headed by Herb Fried, the agency's chairman and chief executive.


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
13,906,000
12,148,000
Per share
.51
.46
Shares outst
27,103,000
26,424,000
Year net inc
61,644,000
53,010,000
Per share
2.30
2.08
Shares outst
26,767,000
25,516,000


Nerve Protein Raises Hope for Paralyzed
LEAD: Using a genetically engineered protein, Swiss researchers have succeeded in getting nerves in severed spinal cords in rats to grow again.
The finding could ultimately lead to new clinical treatments to repair nerves damaged from accidents, strokes and a wide variety of degenerative nervous system diseases.


The Boss Lauds a Champion Sleeper
LEAD: In response to a note to President Bush asking for some comments about Marlin Fitzwater, the President typed this note in the White House study.
The Scowcroft Award that he mentions is named after the national security adviser, who likes his Oval Office naps.
The award is given to the White House official who can fall asleep in the most embarrassing situation with no remorse.


Foyt in V8 Campaign
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, the leading winner in Indy-car racing, will be part of the Chevrolet Indy V8 engine program in 1990.
The announcement was made yesterday in Detroit.


Sumitomo Bank of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of Calif.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,330,000
6,680,000
Per share
1.14
.95
Shares outst
8,213,743
7,040,165
Year net inc
33,980,000
24,450,000
Per share
4.37
3.48


CUBA LOSES ALLURE FOR NICARAGUANS
LEAD: For the last 10 years, Managua's hottest New Year's party has been given by the Cubans, celebrating the anniversary of the revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power in 1959 and inspired the Sandinistas' own uprising two decades later.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-17
Vice President Quayle's coming visit to the Latin American region will have a more limited itinerary than planned because of lingering anxiety among Latin American nations over the invasion of Panama, the Administration said.
Page A1
Panama's new chief to ask U.S.


Dirty Money, Dingy Justice
LEAD: Money launderers don't get their hands dirty.
They barely handle the cash that buys the drugs.
What they do is take the proceeds of drug sales and run them through as many transfer accounts as it takes to make the money look legitimate.
They don't poison American children; they merely bankroll the poison.


Hungarian Security Chief Said to Have Resigned
LEAD: The chief of state security has resigned after allegations that his agency illegally monitored opposition activities, the Hungarian press agency said today.


Upheaval in the East;   Rumanian Leaders Cancel a Vote On Banning the Communist Party
LEAD: Reversing itself for the second time in five days, the provisional Government of Rumania canceled a referendum today on banning the Communist Party and on restoring the death penalty.


Main Foes of Apartheid Appear Split
LEAD: Leading figures in South Africa's black nationalist movement began a meeting here today amid signs that they are divided over ways to respond to the increased flexibility of the Pretoria Government under President F. W. de Klerk.


Syracuse Will Kick Off
LEAD: Southern California, the Rose Bowl winner, and Syracuse, an Eastern independent, will open the 1990 college football season in the eighth annual Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium in late August, organizers said today.


U.S. Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Trust (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,380,000
5,651,000
Per share
.44
.56
Year net inc
30,718,000
30,621,000
Per share
3.07
3.00
U.S.
Trust said its year-ago fourth quarter results reflected a $2 million reduction of income taxes recorded in the 1988 quarter related to the sale of Advanced Information Service Co.


Chrysler Recalls 625,000 Cars and Trucks
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation announced today that it plans to recall about 625,000 cars and light trucks to replace a faulty valve cover and valve cover gasket, a move that could cost the auto maker more than $50 million.


NBC Interested in Keeping Up With Joneses
LEAD: Of all the fighters at the 1988 Olympics, Roy Jones Jr. was regarded as the most talented.


Review/Music;   'Vespri Siciliani' in Concert, Conducted by Eve Queler
LEAD: ''I Vespri Siciliani'' (1855) is a sweeping historical pageant that has never quite established itself in the repertory as securely as some other middle-period Verdi masterpieces.
Like ''Don Carlo,'' it taps the vast resources of the French grand-opera tradition, and like that later score, it would be ideally heard in its original


Israel Has Mixed View On Tide of Soviet Jews
LEAD: As Soviet Jewish immigrants arrive in Israel at a rate now exceeding 1,000 a week, Israeli officials acknowledge that they have still not devised a plan for handling the mass immigration, and construction of even the first new apartment to house the immigrants is months away.


COLOMBIAN ADMITS DRUG CONSPIRACY
LEAD: A Colombian who prosecutors say ran a network to help drug traffickers hide the source of their money pleaded guilty today to his part in a $32 million worldwide money laundering case.


Sales Tax on Religious Goods Upheld
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that states may apply their general sales taxes to religious organizations' sales of religious books and articles.


Isabel Beck, Gynecologist, 91
LEAD: Dr.
Isabel Beck, a gynecologist and a pioneer in the field of family planning, died Tuesday at her home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She was 91 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Things may be looking up for the troubled Detroit Symphony Orchestra.
Last August, its members voted to take a 10 percent pay cut to keep the orchestra alive.
Earlier, the Michigan Legislature withheld nearly $1.3 million in aid, threatening to picket concerts if the orchestra did not hire more black musicians.


Yvon C. Dihe, Advertising Executive, 49
LEAD: Yvon C. Dihe, an advertising agency executive and a fashion industry publicity director known for his extravagant presentations, died of complications of AIDS yesterday at Doctor's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens First Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,459,000
9,060,000
Per share
.44
.43
Year net inc
37,190,000
31,451,000
Per share
1.73
1.48


Singapore Orders Jets From U.S.
LEAD: Encouraged by recent alliances with American and European airlines, Singapore Airlines said it had placed an order for 30 Boeing B747-400's for $5.5 billion and 20 McDonnell Douglas MD-11's for $3.1 billion.


Review/Art;   Black Images of the Past: Servile, Subhuman
LEAD: ''Facing History: The Black Image in American Art, 1710-1940'' is an exhibition that no thinking person can walk through without feeling a measure of both sorrow and anger.
The 100 or so paintings, sculptures and drawings gathered at the Corcoran Gallery of Art testify to a racism so ingrained in the American consciousness that artists - the overwhelming number of whom were white, but some of whom were black - thought nothing about stereotyping blacks as ''grotesque buffoons, servile menials, comic entertainers or threatening subhumans,'' writes Guy C.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: FOR many children, a transfer from one school to another can seem an overwhelming challenge that not only tests their academic skills but also forces them to re-evaluate who they are and where they fit in the world.
The changes in their lives and relationships can lead to feelings of isolation and failure or to feelings of greater competency and higher self-esteem.


Foxmoor Files For Protection
LEAD: Dylex Ltd. said today that its subsidiary the Foxmoor Speciality Stores Corporation had filed in New York for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Stocks Drop on Low Earnings Reports
LEAD: Stocks fell broadly yesterday after disappointing earnings reports and some futures-related trading quelled a midmorning rally.


HONG KONG FACING REFUGEE LAWSUIT
LEAD: An international legal effort has been organized to challenge the way this colony screens Vietnamese boat people to determine which ones are genuine refugees fleeing persecution and which ones are illegal immigrants who must return home.


Lawrence C. Freer Jr., Executive, 69
LEAD: Lawrence Clayton Freer Jr., a business executive, died Saturday at Palm Beach Regional Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., where he had lapsed into a coma after liver failure.
He was 69 years old and lived in West Palm Beach.


For Pregnant Athletes, Reassurance on Exercise
LEAD: For active athletes who become pregnant, new evidence offers reassurance that vigorous exercise does not damage the fetus.


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
92,561,000
87,548,000
Per share
.70
.67
Year net inc
362,868,000
340,188,000
Per share
2.77
2.61


Buenos Aires Journal;   Where the Perons Lived, Inertia Has a Monument
LEAD: From its commanding location overlooking the estuary of the Rio de la Plata, the immense shell of Argentina's unfinished national library threatens to become a relic for future archeologists to ponder over.


Ford Strike Vote
LEAD: Union leaders rejected a two-year pay offer from the Ford Motor Company Ltd. and called a strike vote for next week.
Ford's latest offer was a 10.2 percent pay increase in the first year and a choice between 8 percent, or the inflation rate plus 2.5 percent in the second year.
It was rejected during talks at the company's London offices.


Fleet-Norstar Fincl Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet-Norstar Fincl Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
92,368,000
87,643,000
Per share
.83
.79
Year net inc
371,346,000
335,829,000
Per share
3.34
3.07


Market Place;   Georgia-Pacific Expected to Win
LEAD: THE protracted battle between the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation and its unwanted suitor, the Georgia-Pacific Corporation, continues to play in the companies' board rooms, as well as in the courts.
There will be a special meeting of Great Northern shareholders on March 2 to resolve a number of issues.


O'Connor Asks Legislative Votes on Abortion
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor said today that the Legislature should vote on anti-abortion bills, even if the bills lack the support to become law.
He sharply criticized legislative leaders for suggesting that there was no need to vote on such measures, including one that would require parental consent for a minor's abortion.


Greenwich Rejects Building Teen-Agers' Center by a Park
LEAD: A plan to build a center for teen-agers over a parking lot adjoining a town park on Greenwich Harbor was rejected early today by the Representative Town Meeting by a vote of 105 to 89.


Don't Stop There
LEAD: The 1980's were full of useful innovations, as low tech as the Snugli infant carrier and as high tech as the magnetic resonance imaging that gives sharp pictures of the inside of the body.
But in some respects, it was a decade in which innovators didn't go far enough.


Greater Reliance on Foreign Oil Feared as U.S. Output Tumbles
LEAD: America's oil production suffered its biggest single-year decline ever in 1989, falling by more than half a million barrels a day, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.


All-Star Game Will Compete With N.B.A. on TV
LEAD: The return of the National Hockey League to a major, over-the-air, American television network will face major competition in the ratings.


Integra Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integra Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
17,300,000
b18,400,000
Per share
-
.73
Year net inc
35,600,000
66,400,000
Per share
1.42
2.62
b-Net income


Bozell Revamping
LEAD: Bozell yesterday announced a restructuring of its European operations.
Roger Neill, the deputy chairman of WCRS Worldwide, now part of Eurocom WCRS Della Femina Ball Ltd., will join Bozell as chief executive of Bozell Europe, effective Feb. 15.
Winston Fletcher, chairman of DFSD Bozell in London, was appointed chairman of Bozell Europe.


Review/Theater;   A Magical Journey Through Life, Love and Art
LEAD: Pierre Corneille, France's first great ''L'Illusion Comique'' a strange and capricious ''monster'' of a play.
Coming from the man who is best known as the author of the heroic ''Le Cid,'' it is certainly an oddity - a fanciful comedy on the subject of love, paternity and the art of theater itself.


Uriel G. Foa, Psychologist, 73
LEAD: Uriel G. Foa, a social psychologist and professor emeritus at Temple University, died of an aortic aneurysm Monday at Osteopathic Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 73 years old and lived in Penn Valley, Pa.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.18
9.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.68
8.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.54
8.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.15
8.18
9.03
30-YR.


Another for Montana
LEAD: The Maxwell Football Club of Philadelphia yesterday named Joe Montana the winner of the 31st annual Bert Bell Award as this season's outstanding professional football player.


Political Leaders in Greece Agree to Elections by April
LEAD: Greek political leaders agreed today to hold elections by early April, the third attempt in 10 months, to try to resolve political and economic crises and to allow American military bases to stay for at least another six months.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
ECONOMY
U.S. oil production suffered its biggest single-year decline in 1989, falling by more than half a million barrels a day, the American Petroleum Institute reported.
Imports surged to make up for the drop in domestic oil production.
As a result, the nation's dependence on imported oil rose to a near-record 46 percent of demand, the highest level in more than a decade.


Japan Foreign-Aid Program May Finance U.S. Projects
LEAD: The Government-owned Export-Import Bank of Japan, whose principal mission is to help heavily indebted third world countries build their economies with low-interest loans, is contemplating its first loans to an industrialized country: the United States.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Agreed to terms with Max Venable, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
OAKLAND (AL) - Agreed to terms with Dave Stewart, pitcher, on a two-year extension through 1992.
PITTSBURGH (NL) - Agreed to terms with Scott Ruskin, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
SEATTLE (AL) - Agreed to terms with Bill Swift, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


First Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,811,000
3,618,000
Per share
.75
.72
Year net inc
15,233,000
14,140,000
Per share
3.01
2.80


William White, Lawyer, 75
LEAD: William White, a Philadelphia lawyer, died Monday at a nursing home in Haverford, Pa., after a long illness.
He was 75 years old and lived in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


In a Month For Books, 3 Welcome Volumes
LEAD: JANUARY is the slack time in my gardening year, and never more so than this year.
Prolonged and bitter cold during most of late November and December killed back the heaths I usually count on for mid-winter bloom.


Talking Deals;   East Germany As Capitalist
LEAD: A EUROPEAN manufacturer of printing presses and auxiliary equipment was unhappy with the performance of its American sales and service agent.
So it decided to buy the distributor to gain direct control of its operations in the United States.


PERES PLANS VISIT TO CAIRO FOR TALKS
LEAD: At the invitation of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, Shimon Peres, the leader of the Israeli Labor Party, is to visit Cairo early next week for talks about the stalled efforts to hold negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian delegations.


Upheaval in the East;   Coal Miners in Poland Strike for Higher Pay
LEAD: More than 6,000 coal miners are on strike for higher pay in southern Poland, and the Finance Minister met today with a delegation of miners to discuss their demands, according to the official press agency.


Ameritrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
27,700,000
26,100,000
Per share
.74
.69
Shares outst
37,338,200
37,325,000
Year net inc
115,900,000
103,500,000
Per share
3.11
2.62
Shares outst
37,221,400
39,475,500


Bridge
LEAD: Many of the world's best players from 12 countries, including the United States, will be busy in Western Europe for the rest of this month.
The Staten Bank World Top Pairs competition begins today in the Hague.
A week later, the circuit moves to London, where The Sunday Times Pairs, a tournament with a great tradition, has been revived after a nine-year hiatus.


Home Loan Banks' Bonds Are Priced
LEAD: A $1.76 billion financing by the Federal Home Loan Banks was priced yesterday at par through various securities dealers.
Maturities available to investors include one year, three years, five years and ten years.


First Interstate Sets Changes at the Top
LEAD: First Interstate Bancorp said yesterday that Edward M. Carson, its president, would become chairman and chief executive.
He will assume the position on June 1, after the retirement at age 65 of Joseph J. Pinola, who has led the Los Angeles-based banking company for 12 years.


Net Up 56.8% At Microsoft
LEAD: Despite a broad-based slowdown in the personal computer market, the Microsoft Corporation today reported its best financial results ever.


Household Finance Prices Certificates
LEAD: The Household Finance Corporation, a unit of Household International Inc. and one of the largest issuers of home equity loan securities, yesterday priced a total of $903 million in certificates that are backed mostly by home equity loans.


Jury in Molest Case Says It Is Deadlocked
LEAD: Jurors have reached verdicts on 52 counts of molestation of children who attended the McMartin Pre-School, but they said today that they are deadlocked on the remaining 13 charges in the nation's longest criminal trial.


Housewares New and Biodegradable
LEAD: Mindful that growing numbers of Americans are concerned about pollution, housewares manufacturers are increasingly turning out products that they say are environmentally safe.
The proof was at the 91st National Housewares Show, which ended today after a three-and-a-half-day run at the McCormick Place exposition center here.


U.S. Arts Endowment Names Two Officials
LEAD: Two administrators with the National Endowment for the Arts in Washington have been named directors of programs at the endowment.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As Willy Loman in ''Death of a Salesman,'' DUSTIN HOFFMAN earned great accolades.
Tuesday night, he threw a verbal bouquet to the man who made it possible.


'Perking Pot' Theme Back at Maxwell House
LEAD: Joining a long list of American advertisers who are waxing nostalgic, Maxwell House coffee is reintroducing the ''Perking Pot'' theme song that it all but abandoned in 1975.


Mel Most, Correspondent, 75
LEAD: Mel Most, a former foreign correspondent and public-relations agent, died of a heart attack on Jan. 6 at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Alsy Corp., Hicksville, L.I., a maker of portable lamps, named John M. Eikenberg chairman, president and chief executive.
He succeeds Sy Stewart as chairman and Al Gindel as president.
Mr.
Stewart and Mr.
Gindel retired.


Gilding Comes of Age Once More
LEAD: THE gilded age is back. ''People are into opulence, 18th-century furniture, fabric with fringe and sumptuous living, and they like gilding,'' said Maryalice Huggins, who has been restoring and gilding furniture for eight years at her shop, Antique Conservation Inc. in Greenwich Village.


Joe Alex Morris, 85, a Journalist And a Biographer of Rockefellers
LEAD: Joe Alex Morris, a journalist and author who specialized in foreign affairs and biography, died of pneumonia Tuesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He also had homes in Guilford, Conn., and Vineyard Haven, Mass.


S.I. Port Loses Its Linchpin, A Battleship
LEAD: The battleship Iowa, which was to have been the linchpin of the new naval center on Staten Island, will be mothballed later in the year, Pentagon officials say.
That leaves open the question of what vessels will be based at the $300 million base that is taking shape in the shadow of the Verrazano-Narrows


Warminster Journal;   Gloom Vanishes in Harmonica Magic
LEAD: Under the paper dinosaurs, apple trees, turtles and snowmen hanging from the ceiling of Room 32, Jim Prushankin is tapping his foot, smiling and throwing out compliments like handfuls of confetti to a circle of second-graders who are learning to play ''When the Saints Go Marching In'' on the harmonica.


Upheaval in the East;   TOUGH TERMS END A DEAL IN GDANSK
LEAD: Workers hailed a Polish-born heir as a savior when she offered to buy the shipyard where Solidarity, the independent labor union, was born.
But when she made her terms clear, the deal unraveled.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,290,000
10,035,000
Per share
.55
.49
Year net inc
42,974,000
38,677,000
Per share
2.10
1.88


Morgenthau Opposes Legalization of Drugs
LEAD: Pledging ''swift and certain punishment'' for all drug offenders, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan came out strongly yesterday against recent proposals to legalize drugs.


Negotiators for Owners and Players Ready to Zero In on Numbers
LEAD: In 1981, the players struck the baseball season in June.
In 1985, the players struck in August.
In 1990, the owners are prepared to stage a pre-emptive strike of their own.


Not Quite June in January, but It Will Do


Centrust Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centrust Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Net loss
b97,300,000
2,700,000
Year net loss
b119,500,000
c50,100,000
Per share
-
3.32
b-Included a charge of about $42 million to record a writedown to lower of cost or market value on $258 million principal amount of certain corporate debt securities that mature after June 30, 1994, but may not be held by the bank after that date under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) of 1989.


Animal Rights Groups Vow Suit to Save Monkeys
LEAD: Animal rights advocates said today that they would go to court to try to prevent the killing of several monkeys that have been the focus of a national debate over the treatment of research animals.


Knicks Come Up a Bit Short In Yet Another Close Game
LEAD: The Knicks tried tonight to repeat last Saturday night's script and beat the San Antonio Spurs for the second time in five nights.


Upheaval in the East;   Troops Seek to Calm Azerbaijan; Soviets Debate Cause of Violence
LEAD: Soviet troops tried to impose martial law in Azerbaijan today as the country began to debate the causes of a blood bath that seemed both unthinkable and inevitable.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
29,049,000
28,482,000
Per share
1.76
1.72
Year net inc
77,613,000
112,031,000
Per share
4.65
6.78


First Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,397,000
3,825,000
Per share
.57
.50
Year net inc
17,055,000
13,472,000
Per share
2.21
1.75


Jay Stuart Haft, Marine Supplier, 62
LEAD: Jay Stuart Haft, co-founder of the Jay Stuart Haft Company, died of leukemia on Monday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 62 years old and lived in Longboat Key, Fla.


The Budget As Politics
LEAD: At first blush, it does not look like an election-year budget.


Yields Post A Decline
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week that ended yesterday.


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
38,615,000
34,939,000
Per share
.78
.71
Year net inc
150,782,000
123,913,000
Per share
3.05
2.52


U.S. Asks Exxon for $20 Million To Assess Spill Damage in Alaska
LEAD: Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. asked the Exxon Corporation today to provide $20.4 million more to help assess the damage to Alaska's Prince William Sound caused by oil spilled from the Exxon Valdez last March.


U.S. Judge Sets Noriega Trial for Week of March 5
LEAD: A Federal judge today set the week of March 5 as a target date for starting the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and five co-defendants on charges of trafficking in drugs.


L.I. Baymen Resist Shellfishing Ban
LEAD: A battle between state officials and the baymen of eastern Long Island over closing rich shellfishing waters has erupted.
The issue is not polluted seas, but the number of state inspectors available to test the waters.


Mexicans React Furiously to an NBC Drug Series
LEAD: In a matter of days, the joint war against drug trafficking conducted in this country by Mexico and the United States has been transformed into what Mexico's Attorney General today called ''a war of paper and images,'' with Americans and Mexicans lobbing salvos at one other through the press and television, and each accusing the other of being in league with drug dealers.





Time for a Danube Basin Common Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


Namibia Integrates Its Schools in Step Toward Independence


Japan to Retain Auto Quota
LEAD: The Japanese Government said today that it would retain its ceiling on car exports to the United States in an effort to defuse trade tensions.
But in Detroit, the General


Consolidated Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Rail Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
823,000,000
904,000,000
Net loss
b81,000,000
c78,000,000
Share earns
-
1.13
Yr rev
3,411,000,000
3,490,000,000
Net inc
b148,000,000
306,000,000
Share earns
2.17
4.44


Grand Juries Can Defend Rights of the Accused
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carter Wallace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter Wallace Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
134,540,000
125,295,000
Net inc
12,438,000
11,127,000
Share earns
.82
.73
Shares outst
15,245,000
15,177,000
9mo sales
410,596,000
386,053,000
Net inc
40,572,000
36,019,000
Share earns
2.67
2.37
Shares outst
15,202,000
15,175,000


U.S. IS RELEASING INVASION CAPTIVES
LEAD: American military officials announced today that out of a total of 5,300 Panamanians detained for questioning since the United States invasion last month, nearly all had been freed as of this week.


Marie Vale, Government Aide, 46
LEAD: Marie Vale, a Republican fund raiser and a former government aide, died of leukemia on Tuesday at the New York University Medical Center.
She was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Wariness Over Computer Indictment
LEAD: The Federal Government's announcement that a man had obtained classified military data from a computer drew skeptical reactions today from some computer security experts.


Economic Scene;   Behind the 80's Takeover Spree
LEAD: THE bankruptcy filing this week by Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores, the American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation of Canada, has raised anxieties about what will happen to the economy if the wave of debt-financed takeovers, leveraged buyouts and managerial buybacks of the 1980's should crash in the 1990's.


Rebirth of Plant May Help Shoreham
LEAD: Contemplating a post-nuclear era, the purchasers of the idle Shoreham reactor on Long Island today toured a failed nuclear project here that is about to emerge as a huge gas-fired electric plant.


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
458,132,000
367,472,000
Net inc
b48,999,000
c51,163,000
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
147,518,000
149,899,000
Yr rev
1,715,062,000
1,796,880,000
Net inc
b458,140,000
c72,079,000
Share earns
3.06
.46
Shares outst
149,036,000
150,225,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Once, BILLY JOEL wanted to be a history teacher.
But making records is ever more rewarding, so he will enter the classroom on tape.


Apple Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
1,493,383,000
1,405,137,000
Net inc
124,840,000
140,452,000
Share earns
.96
1.10
Shares outst
129,496,000
127,547,000


FCS Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FCS Laboratories Inc.
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,287,220
5,052,039
Net loss
568,213
461,167


Missouri Executes Man Convicted in Slaying of His Girlfriend
LEAD: A man who was convicted of killing his girlfriend was executed by injection early today, becoming the the 121st nationwide since 1976, when the Supreme Court allowed states to restore the death penalty.


George Peck, 58, Dies; Theology School Head
LEAD: The Rev.
George Peck, president of the Andover Newton Theological School in Newton Centre, a village in Newton, Mass., died of a heart attack Wednesday at his home in Little Compton, R.I.
He was 58 years old.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Financial Services
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,342,000
b1,976,000
Share earns
1.42
1.20
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $408,000, or 25 cents a share, from a tax loss carryforward.


Prices of Wheat and Cattle Shift as Plains Get a Storm
LEAD: Wheat futures prices dropped and cattle futures climbed yesterday as an intense winter storm system muscled into the Southern Plains, bringing badly needed moisture to the winter wheat crop and slowing livestock marketings.


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,618,000
13,544,000
Net inc
669,000
414,000
Share earns
.27
.17
9mo rev
58,424,000
32,572,000
Net inc
1,796,000
1,056,000
Share earns
.73
.44


Crossland Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crossland Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
31,737,000
b68,659,000
Year net loss
191,698,000
bc15,267,000
b-After a loss of $89.5 million from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for the quarter and year.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clorox Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
295,575,000
272,075,000
Net inc
27,017,000
b24,367,000
Share earns
.49
.44
Shares outst
55,315,000
55,325,000
6mo sales
662,510,000
602,539,000
Net inc
72,928,000
b66,883,000
Share earns
1.32
1.21
Shares outst
55,375,000
55,292,000


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,959,000
4,913,000
Net inc
608,000
495,000
Share earns
.21
.17
9mo sales
21,496,000
13,950,000
Net inc
1,770,000
1,274,000
Share earns
.60
.43


World Record Unlikely for Bile
LEAD: It's unlikely that Abdi Bile will run a world indoor record time in the mile at the Sunkist Meet on Friday night or earn the $100,000 bonus that goes to anyone who does.


Franklin H. Middleton, Banker, 83
LEAD: Franklin H. Middleton, a retired New York banker, died of kidney failure on Wednesday at the Fort Myers (Fla.) Care Center.
He was 83 years old and lived in Fort Myers.


Inland's Net Drops by 63%
LEAD: Inland Steel Industries said yesterday that its fourth-quarter profits plunged 63 percent, reflecting its higher costs and eroding profits in its service center business, which buys steel and shapes it to customer specifications.


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,316,845,000
1,184,652,000
Net inc
99,329,000
84,362,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Shares outst
211,100,418
205,350,418
Yr rev
4,804,852,000
4,394,692,000
Net inc
542,137,000
528,586,000
Share earns
2.62
2.57
Shares outst
206,878,500
205,350,418


A Second Newspaper Is Shut by Lebanese General
LEAD: Gen.
Michel Aoun closed a second daily newspaper in the Christian sector today, barred publications from the Muslim part of Beirut and said journalists who did not agree with his policies should leave the country.


Bulgarian Party Leader Is Under House Arrest
LEAD: Todor Zhivkov, the ousted Communist Party leader, was put under house arrest today, charged with inciting ethnic hostilities and misuse of Government property and money, Bulgarian State Radio announced tonight.


1 Killed as Eastern Jet Rams a Small Plane on an Atlanta Runway
LEAD: An Eastern Airlines jetliner landing here tonight collided with a twin-engine aircraft that had just touched down, killing one person and injuring another aboard the smaller plane, officials said.


U.S. Growth Forecast
LEAD: The United States economy will grow by 2.5 percent to 3 percent in 1990, with one-third of the gain fueled by exports, according to study released Wednesday by the Conference Board. ''Although relying on exports to foreign markets is something new for the United States, it will become a permanent feature of the 1990's,'' said Gail Fosler, chief economist of the New York-based business research group.


Judge Strikes Down Law Forcing Release of College Tests
LEAD: A Federal judge has ruled that New York's truth-in-testing law, which requires standardized testing services to release questions and answers from their examinations, is unenforceable because it conflicts with Federal copyright law.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
ON ICE FOR 50 YEARS


Apple Net Falls 11.2% in Period
LEAD: Amid a broad-based slowdown in the personal computer market, Apple Computer Inc. today reported an 11.2 percent decline in earnings and a 5.7 percent gain in revenues for its first fiscal quarter, which ended Dec. 29.


Mayor Who Faulted Hirohito Is Shot
LEAD: The Mayor of Nagasaki, who broke one of the nation's most sensitive taboos by saying a year ago that Emperor Hirohito bore some responsibility for World War II, was shot today, and the police arrested a 40-year-old ultranationalist.


Phillips to Take A Write-Down
LEAD: The Phillips Petroleum Company will take a $280 million after-tax write-down on its offshore California investments that will cause the company's fourth-quarter earnings to plunge, company officials said.
The investments include the oil-rich Point Arguello field off Santa Barbara, which could hold as many as 500 million barrels of oil.


American Air's Route Changes
LEAD: Faced with a shortage of planes, American Airlines juggled its international routes to add new distinations and postponeothers on its trans-Atlantic routes to Europe.


Consumer Prices Up 4.6% in '89
LEAD: Consumer prices climbed four-tenths of 1 percent last month, the same as in November, the Labor Department reported today.
Increases quickened for fuel oil and natural gas, while food prices and medical care rose more slowly than in the previous month.


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lennar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
140,153,000
130,289,000
Net inc
8,868,000
8,779,000
Share earns
.88
.88
Yr rev
440,316,000
429,407,000
Net inc
28,093,000
27,620,000
Share earns
2.80
2.78


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
136,159,000
64,297,000
Per share
1.30
.69
Shares outst
101,022,000
86,104,000
Year net inc
447,069,000
252,471,000
Per share
4.62
2.90
Shares outst
92,492,000
85,210,000


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,475,000,000
2,428,000,000
Net inc
322,000,000
249,000,000
Share earns
.79
.59
Shares outst
406,714,000
420,572,000
Yr rev
9,593,000,000
9,483,000,000
Net inc
1,242,000,000
1,188,000,000
Share earns
3.02
2.81


Persian Folk Music
LEAD: Reza Derakhshani, a performer on the tar and the sehtar, two varieties of Iranian lute, will perform Persian folk music at the Uris Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Sunday afternoon at 2:30.
Mr.
Derakhshani's ensemble includes Kamran Rouhani on the tar; Arieh Aghajani on the santur, a hammered dulcimer; Kamran Hatami on the kamancheh, a fiddle, and Behzad Allahyar on the daff, a drum.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co. of America (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,761,100,000
2,700,100,000
Net inc
b164,700,000
c218,700,000
Share earns
1.88
2.47
Yr sales
11,161,500,000
9,935,600,000
Net inc
b944,900,000
d861,400,000
Share earns
10.67
9.74


Baseball Wouldn't, Would It?
LEAD: Great baseball weather in the East this week.
For the last few days, you could have held a World Series game without needing Bowie Kuhn's long johns.
And there wasn't even an earthquake.


White House Says a Drop In Interest Rates Is Justified
LEAD: In an unusual public comment for the Bush Administration on Federal Reserve policy, the White House said today that current economic conditions justified lower interest rates.


Marsh Is Accused
LEAD: Terry Marsh, a national hero who worked as a firefighter during the day and trained at night while holding the International Boxing Federation junior-welterweight crown, was charged yesterday with attempted murder in the shooting last November of his former manager, Frank Warren.


Ralston Purina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ralston Purina (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,881,200,000
1,681,100,000
Net inc
130,300,000
b202,700,000
Share earns
2.03
2.99
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $71,300,000, or $1.05 a share, from discontinued Van Camp Seafood operations.


Digital Down; Tandem Off
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation reported sharply lower earnings today for its second fiscal quarter ended Dec. 31.
The results were below analysts' already pessimistic estimates, sending its shares down $5.875, to $82, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Kraft General Foods Gets a New President
LEAD: Jeffrey C. Bible, an Australian by birth who has worked throughout Philip Morris's far-flung tobacco operations, has a major new assignment on the food side of the giant Philip Morris Companies.


Sankyo Buys Drug Maker
LEAD: The Sankyo Company, Japan's second-largest pharmaceutical concern, agreed today to acquire a majority interest in the privately held Luitpold-Werk Group, a drug maker and distributor based in Munich, West Germany.


TV Weekend;   Michael Caine Takes His Turn at 'Jekyll and Hyde'
LEAD: In films like ''Dirty Rotten Scoundrels,'' Michael Caine is adept at playing charming con men.
On television, though, he has taken to exploring seriously the darker side of Victorian society.
Last year, he played the Scotland Yard inspector pursuing the vicious serial killer in ''Jack the Ripper,'' directed by David Wickes.


Profit Outlook At Times Co.
LEAD: The New York Times Company said yesterday that it expected to report earnings of 83 cents to 88 cents a share from continuing operations in 1989.
In 1988 the company reported earnings from continuing operations of $2 a share.


Draft Changes Are Discussed
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the National Football League, and Richard D. Schultz, the executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, met for 90 minutes yesterday, discussing ways to accommodate underclassmen who seek to be drafted by the N.F.L.


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Boston (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,600,000
82,700,000
Per share
.08
1.18
Shares outst
71,171,000
66,763,000
Year net inc
70,400,000
322,300,000
Per share
.80
4.66
Shares outst
70,436,000
66,135,000


French Agree to Buy Rorer for $3.14 Billion
LEAD: The Rorer Group Inc. said yesterday that it had signed a preliminary agreement with Rhone-Poulenc S.A., the chemical company owned by the French Government, to merge with Rhone-Poulenc's pharmaceutical operations.
Rorer said the deal valued its stock at $73 a share, or $3.14 billion.


At the&gt; Movies
LEAD:
After 'Glory'


Health Chief Assails A Tobacco Producer For Aiming at Blacks
LEAD: The nation's top health official, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, expressed outrage today at the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for ''deliberately and cynically'' test-marketing a cigarette aimed primarily at blacks, and he assailed the company as ''promoting a culture of cancer.''


The Long Road Back for a Disgraced Patrician
LEAD: At the Center for Constitutional Rights, Mahlon F. Perkins Jr. is something of an oddball.
Among its young, polyglot legal staff, he is a 71-year-old patrician, who looks and speaks like Robert Frost.
His colleagues wear beards or blue jeans; he favors herringbone trousers.
They like rock music; he watches birds.


Panama-Latin Ties Linked to a Pullout
LEAD: Although President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle are opening a round of diplomacy to bolster the Panamanian Government, Administration officials said today that it was unrealistic to expect formal recognition by major countries in the region until the United States invasion force is withdrawn.


Washington Talk;   Rethinking Priorities on Foreign Aid
LEAD: All through 1989, experts and commentators kept saying that the tumult in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was going to change politics and priorities all over the world.


3 Tied for Lead in Bob Hope Classic
LEAD: Peter Jacobsen's bogey on the last hole cost him sole control of the second-round lead today in the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''THE SNOW QUEEN,'' a show by Puppetworks, noon on Saturdays and 1 and 3 P.M. on Sundays, through Feb. 25, at the group's theater, 287 Third Avenue, at Carroll Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Children, $4; adults, $5.
Information: (718) 834-1828.
''WINTER FOLK CONCERT,'' a program by Margaret MacArthur and her son Dan MacArthur, who are to present folk music from New England and Kentucky, 8:30 P.M.


New York High Court Bars Forced Care to Save a Life
LEAD: New York State's highest court today expanded the individual's right to refuse lifesaving medical care, ruling that the state could not compel treatment, even though it argues that a child's interests would be harmed by the death of a parent who refused such treatment.


Underage Casino Gambler In '87 Case Is Guilty Again
LEAD: A 20-year-old whose father described her as a ''poster child for compulsive gambling'' was fined $750 today for underage gambling.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
135,516,000
111,401,000
Net inc
6,030,000
5,763,000
Share earns
.58
.56
Shares outst
10,422,000
10,342,000
6mo sales
271,185,000
223,080,000
Net inc
12,508,000
11,765,000
Share earns
1.20
1.14
Shares outst
10,413,000
10,332,000


Borland International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borland International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,211,000
23,648,000
Net inc
3,218,000
874,000
Share earns
.24
.07
Shares outst
13,429,000
12,242,000
9mo rev
78,444,000
64,637,000
Net inc
7,620,000
b4,888,000
Share earns
.60
-
Shares outst
12,710,000
11,692,000


Corrections
LEAD: A television review on Wednesday about ''H.R.H.
Prince Charles: A Personal View of Architecture'' misstated the date of its nationwide showing by the Public Broadcasting Service.
It was Dec. 11.


Cambodia Peace Effort: A Bit More Realism
LEAD: After an important but limited two-day meeting on Cambodia in Paris this week, diplomacy on this complicated issue appears to have finally moved off dead center.
But no one is ready to say that the Cambodian conflict is about to be solved, only that a bit more realism is being applied by the proxy powers.


Chicago Bonds
LEAD: The Chicago Park District of Cook County, Ill., is offering $50 million in general obligation capital improvement bonds to the public through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Yields on the tax-exempt issue include 6 percent in 1991, 6.40 percent in 1995, 6.85 percent in 2000 and 7.10 percent in 2005.


International Business Mahines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,462,000,000
20,002,000,000
Net inc
591,000,000
2,347,000,000
Share earns
1.04
3.97
Shares outst
575,900,000
590,800,000
Yr rev
62,710,000,000
59,681,000,000
Net inc
3,758,000,000
5,806,000,000
Share earns
6.47
9.80
Shares outst
581,100,000
592,400,000


BankAmerica Broke $1 Billion Profit Mark in '89


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Trumpet and All


Industrial Funding reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Funding (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,247,000
7,552,000
Net inc
1,476,000
1,273,000
Share earns
.26
.23
Yr rev
38,235,000
26,134,000
Net inc
5,003,000
4,383,000
Share earns
.89
.78


Lemieux Gets 2 To Even The Score


Health Post Candidate: 'Impressive' or 'Slick'?
LEAD: The Indiana Health Commissioner, Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr., is often described by his supporters as ''impressive'' - smart, hardworking and charming.


Rock Hall of Fame Opens The Gates to Pop Artists
LEAD: From the stage of the Waldorf-Astoria's Grand Ballroom, Ray Davies of the Kinks surveyed the music-business crowd assembled for the fifth annual Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremonies. ''Rock-and-roll has become respectable,'' he said, gazing at all the tuxedos (including his own) and formal gowns.


Peruvian Rebels Are Said to Have Massacred 39 Peasants


Digital Equipment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,184,795,000
3,179,506,000
Net inc
155,402,000
279,579,000
Share earns
1.25
2.20
Shares outst
124,813,013
127,111,940
6mo rev
6,315,985,000
6,121,305,000
Net inc
306,185,000
502,953,000
Share earns
2.44
3.90
Shares outst
125,290,571
129,036,762


Atlantic Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Group Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,679,019
9,152,407
Net loss
38,826
b7,783
Shares outst
2,593,176
2,637,774
6mo sales
17,376,071
17,803,097
Net inc
65,095
c45,656
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
2,600,284
2,650,322


U.S. AGENTS ARREST WASHINGTON MAYOR ON DRUG CHARGES
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., who over the past several years has repeatedly denied allegations that he used drugs, was arrested tonight at a downtown hotel on a narcotics charge by local and Federal law officers, the United States Attorney's office said.


Our Towns;   Disease Closes Homeless Center And Fear Lingers
LEAD: It was on a Wednesday afternoon a little over two weeks ago when Judy Moriarty, an advocate for the homeless who works at a nonprofit agency here called Gateway Communities, walked up to the door of a soup kitchen and shelter for the homeless on West Main Street.
She was going to pick up some meals for homebound AIDS patients too sick to come to the shelter themselves.


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
270,000,000
265,000,000
Per share
1.21
1.36
Shares outst
207,058,000
183,185,000
Year net inc
1,103,000,000
726,000,000
Per share
5.19
3.79
Shares outst
197,685,000
174,938,000


Union Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,737,900,000
1,582,100,000
Net inc
166,800,000
b187,400,000
Share earns
1.64
1.65
Yr rev
6,492,100,000
6,067,600,000
Net inc
594,500,000
b643,900,000
Share earns
5.62
5.65


Chemical Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
95,900,000
c288,500,000
Per share
1.04
4.66
Shares outst
74,300,000
58,800,000
Year net loss
b482,200,000
d753,600,000
Per share
-
12.02
Shares outst
67,700,000
57,600,000


Maker of Documentary That Attacks G.M. Alienates His Allies
LEAD: Michael Moore knew he was tramping on some pretty big toes when he selected the General Motors Corporation and its chairman as his foils for the documentary ''Roger and Me.'' But Mr.
Moore, the former editor of Mother Jones magazine, never dreamed he might also alienate onetime ideological allies, including the United Auto Workers union and the dean of G.M.


A.J. Ross Logistics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A.J. Ross Logistics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,273,775
15,943,988
Net inc
b1,977,148
550,290
Share earns
.14
.04
b-Included after-tax gain of $1.9 million, or 14 cents a share, from sale of its epoxy coating operations and related property, plant and equipment in Bath, Pa.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CRAIG WASHINGTON, the Congressman-elect from Houston, was held in contempt of court there on Tuesday.
He neglected to appear as the defense attorney in a five-year-old manslaughter case.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,146,711,000
1,043,571,000
Net inc
102,975,000
b461,644,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
427,345,000
409,386,000
Yr rev
8,588,264,000
7,645,748,000
Net inc
900,628,000
b62,127,000
Share earns
1.90
-
Shares outst
420,940,000
401,775,000


Sale Accord Set For British Bank
LEAD: The owners of Yorkshire Bank P.L.C. agreed to sell the regional bank to National Australia Bank for the equivalent of $1.65 billion.
Under terms of the deal, which must be approved by British regulators, National Australia Bank, one of Australia's big four commercial banks, will pay $1.6 billion in cash plus interest.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CHICAGO (AL) - Agreed to terms with Dan Pasqua, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY (AL) - Agreed to terms with Kurt Stillwell, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
MILWAUKEE (AL) - Agreed to terms with Mike Felder, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
OAKLAND (AL) - Named Walter J.


Molex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Molex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
146,356,000
143,959,000
Net inc
14,170,000
b8,364,000
Share earns
.57
.33
6mo rev
289,521,000
282,317,000
Net inc
28,879,000
b24,068,000
Share earns
1.15
.95


Contract Talks Stalemated Between Mets and Strawberry
LEAD: The Mets introduced their three new players and two new coaches yesterday, and predicted they would help revive the glory found and lost in the 1980's.
But they also admitted they were consternated behind the scenes by a problem that's escalating into a crisis for the 1990's: they are stalemated in negotiations with Darryl


G.O.P. Chiefs Meet to Plan a Strategy on Abortion
LEAD: The Republican National Committee opened its winter meeting today with a determination to avoid any public confrontation over abortion, while holding a series of private briefings over how to deal with the issue in 1990.


Review/Film;   Two Sisters Too Odd for Anyone Else
LEAD: ''Sweetie'' was shown as part of the 1989 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 6, 1989.
The Australian film opens today at Lincoln Plaza 1, Broadway and 63d Street.


Phoebe Dunn, 75
LEAD: Mrs.
Dunn, who was 75, specialized in photographing children and was one of the early users of color film for advertising layouts.
Her photographs appeared on the huge Kodak screen on the Grand Central Terminal concourse.
She took the photographs for ''The Little Animals,'' a series of best-selling children's books in the 1960's for which another daughter, Judith


American Capital ManageFment &amp; Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital ManageFment &amp; Research Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,300,000
23,950,000
Net inc
5,160,000
5,240,000
Share earns
.21
.22
Shares outst
24,381,000
24,368,000
Yr rev
101,810,000
99,200,000
Net inc
19,800,000
23,320,000
Share earns
.81
.96
Shares outst
24,377,000
24,367,000


European Assembly Urges Grant to Armenia
LEAD: The European Parliament urged the European Community today to grant emergency aid to Armenia and the Nagorno-Karabakh region in Azerbaijan, but did not specify an amount.


Trouble Goes to Hawaii For 'Murder in Paradise'
LEAD: ''Murder in Paradise,'' tonight's ''NBC Movie of the Week,'' is about the burned-out New York City cop of the week.
Charlie Raski can be encountered at 9 P.M. beach-bumming and bar-boozing in Hawaii.
His problem is that he still wakes up sweating to nightmares about a murderer who killed his wife and eight other people back home with a nylon stocking and painted their faces, too.


Soviets Said to Withdraw Fighters and Bombers From Vietnam Base
LEAD: The Soviet Union has withdrawn all of its MIG-23 fighter planes and about half of its TU-16 bombers from its base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, Pentagon officials said today, in a move the officials said would reduce Soviet military abilities in Southeast Asia.


2d Thoughts On Bank Deal
LEAD: Bank of New York Company executives are hinting that they are reconsidering the previously agreed-to acquisition of the Northeast Bancorp, a Shelton, Conn., company.


Ferranti Talks End
LEAD: Ferranti International P.L.C., the beleaguered British military electronics group, said in a statement that Thomson-CSF had ended talks on a possible bid for Ferranti.
Thomson has been considering the possibility of making a general offer for Ferranti, which is seeking a rescue from the effects of a reported fraud involving a United States unit.


Starts of Housing at Lowest Level Since '82
LEAD: Housing construction slumped in 1989 to its lowest level since the 1982 recession, the Government said today, but many analysts said further decreases in mortgage rates should improve the situation slightly in 1990.


On Land and in Air, Kennedy Delays Persist
LEAD: Even as Kennedy International Airport embarks on a $3 billion redevelopment, airline officials warn that the plan does not address congestion, especially on the expressways leading to the airport, that threatens its position as the nation's premier international gateway.


Student Testifies His Error Jammed Computer Network
LEAD: Several hours after creating a secret software experiment, a suspended computer science student recalled today, he returned to his terminal at Cornell University, to discover that his program had gone awry and was jamming a nationwide network of computers.


Scientists Use Gravity To 'See' Invisible Matter
LEAD: Astronomers are developing an ingenious way to use a gravitational phenomenon of the heavens to reveal the presence of the mysterious invisible matter believed to constitute the bulk of the universe.
This may lead them to an understanding of forces that shape galaxies, clusters of galaxies and even larger cosmic agglomerations.


Diner's Journal
LEAD: Ambassador Grill


Earnings Data Released By Deloitte &amp; Touche
LEAD: Partners at both Deloitte Haskins &amp; Sells and Touche Ross were earning nearly a quarter of a million dollars a year on average before the two firms merged last year, Deloitte &amp; Touche disclosed yesterday.


Crown Crafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Crafts Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
27,023,000
23,014,000
Net inc
1,886,000
1,586,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Shares outst
6,893,388
6,793,402
9mo sales
76,735,000
66,448,000
Net inc
5,158,000
4,655,000
Share earns
.74
.69
Shares outst
6,951,247
6,753,844


Being Young and Black Was Suspicious Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,694,000,000
2,610,000,000
Net inc
107,000,000
163,000,000
Share earns
1.05
1.61
Yr sales
10,882,000,000
10,255,000,000
Net inc
497,000,000
616,000,000
Share earns
4.90
6.07


Fidelity National Fincl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity National Fincl Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
46,498,000
40,873,000
Net inc
2,464,000
1,949,000
Share earns
.72
.52
Shares outst
3,402,034
3,777,714
Yr rev
162,975,000
134,466,000
Net inc
5,025,000
2,464,000
Share earns
1.42
.64
Shares outst
3,542,909
3,849,966


Shuttle Set to Return After Escaping Erratic Spin
LEAD: Faulty navigational commands from the ground sent the space shuttle Columbia into an erratic spin last Wednesday, but the astronauts, roused from their sleep, brought the craft safely under control and then prepared for their scheduled return to Earth this morning.


Auctions
LEAD: The huge Americana auction Wednesday to Jan. 27 at Sotheby's is to include some remarkable examples of silver and porcelain tableware made for colonists and post-Civil War tycoons.
The sale of more than 1,490 lots will also offer porcelains, prints, genre paintings, ancestor portraits, folk art and furniture.


FDP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FDP Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,688,693
4,059,453
Net loss
53,835
b260,950
Share earns
-
.07
Yr rev
14,651,497
14,012,385
Net loss
100,201
b831,315
Share earns
-
.23
b-Net income and the year included a gain of $324,191 representing the cumulative effect of a change in accounting for income taxes.


SOVIET TROOPS BOGGED DOWN BY AZERBAIJANIS' BLOCKADES OF RAILROADS AND AIRFIELDS
LEAD: Soviet troops were apparently bogged down by widespread obstruction today, including airfield and railroad blockades, sabotage, hostage-taking and civil disobedience, as they tried to control the violence in Azerbaijan.


Met Officials Visit Rumania To Help With Damaged Art
LEAD: Rumania's National Museum of Art, severely damaged in last month's popular uprising, was visited today by two senior officials of the Metropolitan Museum of Art who said they wanted to see whether American art institutions could help in the restoration.


First Boston Chief Executive Is Shifted to New Position
LEAD: In a move that reflects troubles emanating from its financial exposure to the Campeau Corporation's retailing operations, the First Boston Corporation yesterday removed William E. Mayer as its chief executive and named him head of a new merchant banking subsidiary.


Celebrity Twist to Savings Failure
LEAD: In the current savings industry crisis, the collapse of Colorado's Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association would stand out even if one of its former directors were not Neil M. Bush, a son of the President.


Review/Art;   Contemporary Works From Africa
LEAD: ''Contemporary African Artists: Changing Tradition,'' opening on Sunday at the Studio Museum in Harlem, is important.
It comes at a time of increasing openness to art outside Europe and the United States, and in a careful, measured way, it lays groundwork and builds bridges others can use.
Eye-opening exhibitions will follow.


Soviet Press Disrupted By Republic's Violence
LEAD: The Soviet public is receiving only incomplete news reports on the violence raging in the southern Soviet Union as editors in Moscow are asserting that the problems of coverage are similar to those involved in reporting foreign conflicts.


Capital Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Associates Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
44,443,000
33,172,000
Net inc
372,000
1,816,000
Share earns
.04
.19
6mo rev
81,007,000
60,895,000
Net inc
529,000
2,636,000
Share earns
.06
.28


Continental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b58,000,000
c114,000,000
Per share
-
1.94
Year net inc
147,000,000
316,000,000
Per share
2.06
5.19
b-After loss from discontinued operations of $80.4 million represented loss from business held for sale (First Options of Chicago Inc.)


ARCO Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ARCO Chemical Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
606,000,000
745,000,000
Net inc
75,000,000
134,000,000
Share earns
.78
1.39
Yr rev
2,663,000,000
2,700,000,000
Net inc
405,000,000
494,000,000
Share earns
4.22
5.00


Consolidated Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 20
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 20
1989
1988
Sales
23,956,781
22,251,783
Net inc
1,283,859
1,133,297
Share earns
.31
.28
Share earnings reflected a 10 percent stock dividend paid Jan. 2.


Grand Juries Can Defend Rights of the Accused;   Who Made It So?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
231,100,000
130,500,000
Net inc
21,300,000
b42,100,000
Share earns
.16
.31
Shares outst
134,748,000
134,613,000
Yr rev
1,147,700,000
599,700,000
Net inc
193,600,000
b196,400,000
Share earns
1.44
1.46
Shares outst
134,698,000
134,621,000


Washington Criticized for Identifying Army Informant in Salvador Killings
LEAD: While Salvadorans and diplomats here continue to debate what motivated President Alfredo Cristiani to announce the arrest of military men in connection with the killings of six Jesuit priests, almost as much curiosity has been aroused by another aspect of the case: why was the officer who provided information about the suspects detained, publicly identified and presumably exposed to reprisals?


Ruskin Spear, 78; Painter of Portraits Was Often Satirical
LEAD: Ruskin Spear, who painted realistic and often satirical portraits of famous Britons, died on Tuesday at his home in the Hammersmith section of London after a short illness.
He was 78 years old.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
208,165,000
202,182,000
Net inc
b17,468,000
c18,171,000
Share earns
1.97
2.04
6mo sales
347,277,000
335,029,000
Net inc
b21,167,000
c21,510,000
Share earns
2.39
2.41


Biopharmaceutics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biopharmaceutics (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,183,544
1,404,752
Net loss
b973,428
c715,828
Shares outst
8,285,850
7,985,850
Yr sales
7,341,224
4,951,689
Net loss
b1,076,576
c1,580,763
Shares outst
8,229,600
7,985,850


Bank of New York Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New York Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
106,619,000
54,738,000
Per share
1.44
1.17
Year net inc
50,742,000
213,033,000
Per share
.27
5.61
The bank said the latest year net was affected by a special addition of $600 million to the allowance for loan losses, recorded in the third quarter.


Review/Dance;   'Crossing the Line,' a Suite Rooted in Black History
LEAD: Alfred Gallman has absorbed the lessons of his years as a student at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Center and as a dancer with the Fred Benjamin Dance Company.
And he has used them to create something of his own, judging by a performance by Mr.
Gallman's Newark Dance Theater on Wednesday at the Joyce Theater as part of the Man-Made festival, in a program shared with the Deja Vu Dance


INSIDE
LEAD:
Soviet Force in Vietnam Cut
Pentagon officials said Moscow had reduced its aircraft at Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, an American-built installation that has become Moscow's largest overseas naval base.
Page A6.
Testing Law Overturned
A Federal judge overturned a New York law requiring standardized testing services to release the questions and answers from exams.


Gold Search in Portugal
LEAD: The Consolidated Ramrod Gold Corporation of Canada has won the right to explore for gold in Portugal, energy officials said today.
The deals involve more than 500 million escudos, about $3 million, and reflect growing interest in Portugal's mineral wealth, the officials said.


Reynolds Metals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,554,900,000
1,483,700,000
Net inc
133,800,000
139,900,000
Share earns
2.26
2.61
Shares outst
59,000,000
53,700,000
Yr revenue
6,211,100,000
5,618,600,000
Net inc
532,700,000
482,000,000
Share earns
9.20
9.01
Shares outst
57,900,000
53,500,000


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdisco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
458,000,000
374,000,000
Net inc
25,000,000
23,000,000
Share earns
.60
.55


Tandem Computers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
436,519,000
392,285,000
Net inc
30,735,000
31,295,000
Share earns
.29
.32
Shares outst
107,033,000
99,105,000


Doctor With AIDS Is Expected to Live For a Year of Less
LEAD: As Dr.
Veronica Prego listened with tears in her eyes, a medical professor testified yesterday that the AIDS-stricken doctor probably has a year or less to live.


Investor Denies Gdansk Deal Is Dead
LEAD: An aide to Barbara Piasecka Johnson denied yesterday that the Polish-American heir's proposed purchase of the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk was unraveling and said that she remained eager to invest in the birthplace of the Solidarity movement.


Review/Film;   Sex and So Many Characters In a Comedy by Almodovar
LEAD: Pedro Almodovar approaches comedy the way others approach nuclear fission: with confidence that if enough particles bombard one another with sufficient energy, sooner or later something is bound to explode.
His characters collide wildly, furiously, comically and, although the frenzy of their interactions sometimes conceals this, more or less at random.


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Intensive Care (OTC)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
57,438,000
27,712,000
Net loss
2,606,000
b2,482,000
Share earns
-
.26
b-Net income
The company said net income for both periods included a pretax fourth quarter charge of $8,827,000 for closing costs and the writedown of certain assets related to the company's home dialysis business.


Doubleday Names New President
LEAD: Stephen Rubin, the publisher and editor in chief of adult books at Bantam Books, was named president and publisher of Doubleday yesterday.
He replaced Nancy Evans, who resigned.


In a West German Camp, Those Who Lost Hope for Change
LEAD: Thomas Dierkes had marched in each of the weekly Leipzig demonstrations.
He had defiantly chanted ''We are the people!'' at the old East German Government.
And he had celebrated when the Berlin wall came down.


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
63,606,000
56,176,000
Net inc
3,700,000
2,747,000
Share earns
.43
.32
Shares outst
8,626,000
8,527,000
9mo rev
185,010,000
160,199,000
Net inc
10,183,000
5,054,000
Share earns
1.18
.59
Shares outst
8,608,000
8,542,000


Bruno's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bruno's Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
642,920,000
569,814,000
Net inc
b15,232,000
c11,932,000
Share earns
.19
.15
6mo sales
1,174,094,000
1,037,176,000
Net inc
b28,038,000
c25,907,000
Share earns
.35
.32


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We must resist the unworthy efforts of the tobacco merchants to earn profits at the expense of the health and well-being of our poor and minority citizens.
This trade-off between profits and good health must stop.
And it will stop if, around the country, our citizens rise up and say, 'Enough - no more!


Hungary Seeks Withdrawal Of Soviet Forces in Two Years
LEAD: Hungary called today for the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from its territory by the end of 1991 as part of the reduction of conventional forces in Europe currently being negotiated here by NATO and the Warsaw Pact.


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,930,000
15,731,000
Net inc
2,486,000
2,117,000
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
16,841,000
16,855,000
6mo sales
35,741,000
30,587,000
Net inc
4,945,000
4,317,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Shares outst
16,749,000
16,890,000


International Research &amp; Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Research &amp; Development Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,150,161
6,479,080
Net inc
1,142,320
1,250,821
Share earns
.20
.22
Shares outst
5,725,910
5,708,350
Yr rev
26,695,218
22,685,225
Net inc
4,455,405
3,554,449
Share earns
.78
.63
Shares outst
5,731,801
5,622,649


Rangers in 'Hot' Pursuit of Nicholls
LEAD: The Rangers, having dropped hints for the last two weeks that they were close to making a major trade, could well complete a deal by the weekend that would land Bernie Nicholls of the Los Angeles Kings.


Ending of H.U.D. Program Seen as Blow to Developers
LEAD: Several housing experts warned today that the Government's decision to end a housing insurance program managed by private lenders could result in long delays in obtaining mortgages for private low- and moderate-income apartment buildings.


Profits at Pfizer Are Down 5.9%
LEAD: Pfizer Inc., the New York-based pharmaceutical company, reported yesterday that its net income fell 5.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 1989 as a stronger dollar hurt sales overseas.


Rumanian Princesses Return Home


Dining Out Guide: Pasta
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Arqua
** (April 24, 1987), 281 Church Street (334-1888) - The chef who owns and runs this stylish TriBeCa restaurant seems to have a poetic streak, as evidenced by some lyrical pasta compositions.


Cigna to Buy Equicor In $777 Million Deal
LEAD: The Cigna Corporation, the insurance holding company, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $777 million in cash to buy Equicor from the Hospital Corporation of America and the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, the joint owners of Equicor.


Changes to Cut Pillsbury Jobs
LEAD: In a move to improve the operating efficiency of its Pillsbury Inc. division, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. today announced a $140 million plant modernization program that will result in the elimination of up to 1,300 jobs as outdated production operations are closed.


Leonard Forfeits Crown
LEAD: If Sugar Ray Leonard fights again, it won't be as a champion.


Review/Film;   Underground Creatures and Dread Events
LEAD: ''Tremors'' is a jokey attempt to re-create the pleasures of those post-World War II B-pictures about commonplace creatures - ants, worms, flies, whatever - that, through some horrible mistake (usually related to radiation), become voracious giants.


U.N.'s Secretary General Agrees To Accept Invitation to Albania
LEAD: The United Nations Secretary General has agreed in principle to visit Albania, the last bastion of Stalinism in Europe and a nation accused of serious human rights abuses, diplomats and United Nations officials said today.


Relief Groups to Cross Rebel Lines in Ethiopia
LEAD: The Ethiopian Government has decided to let church-run relief agencies deliver food aid to one million people threatened by famine in a rebel-held northern province, the Archbishop of Canterbury said today.


Ex-Danbury Mayor's Trial: Extortion Tale Unfolds
LEAD: When a former mayor of Danbury, James E. Dyer, was indicted on extortion and racketeering charges last year, few believed that his trial would include testimony as titillating as allegations of payoffs in restaurant restrooms, cash hidden between the pages of The Wall Street Journal and illegal deals cut over coffee in City


On Stage
LEAD:
The Right Space


Prodigy at 8, Winner at 21
LEAD: Less than 48 hours after shocking the golf world by winning the first tournament he had ever entered as a PGA Tour professional, Robert Gamez's bliss was disturbed by a frightening voice that filled the California desert with a dark vision of his future.


Filion Driver of the Year
LEAD: Herve Filion, who won a world-record 814 races and passed the 12,000 mark in career victories, was named Driver of the Year for 1989.
The award was the 10th for Filion from Harness Tracks of America, which has 43 members in the United States and Canada.
Filion got 92 points.
John Campbell was second with 80.(


Anacomp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anacomp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
172,251,000
116,987,000
Net loss
b177,572,000
c8,842,000
Share earns
-
.22
Yr rev
648,883,000
417,948,000
Net loss
b168,650,000
c43,585,000
Share earns
-
1.10


Darnell to Notre Dame
LEAD: Gary Darnell was named defensive coordinator at Notre Dame yesterday after a half-season as interim coach at Florida and a successful stint there leading the Gators' defensive unit.


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,585,500,000
2,368,000,000
Net inc
38,900,000
116,700,000
Share earns
.57
1.93
Shares outst
63,100,000
59,200,000
Yr rev
10,479,600,000
8,824,300,000
Net inc
454,800,000
476,800,000
Share earns
7.16
7.92
Shares outst
62,900,000
59,000,000


Bear, Stearns Files Unit Trust Plans
LEAD: Bear, Stearns &amp; Company said yesterday that it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the first in a series of unit investment trusts intended to provide tax-free income for New York residents.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Popular Video From Colombia
LEAD: Although corporations are the primary purveyors of video news releases, the most-watched release last year was produced by the Government of Colombia.


Dispute Results in Changes In Rules for Antiques Show
LEAD: The Winter Antiques Show, now in its 36th year, has fewer dealers than in memory - 67, compared with 73 a year ago.
But there are also seven new dealers in the fair.


Hawaii Journal;   Aboriginal Authenticity To Be Decided in a Vote
LEAD: Ruby Keahaaina McDonald spends much of her day here in the Office of Hawaiian Affairs trying to figure out who is a native Hawaiian and who is not.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
269,159,000
238,434,000
Net inc
b17,458,000
d19,109,000
Share earns
.46
.48
Shares outst
37,906,000
39,640,000
9mo rev
823,697,000
751,643,000
Net inc
c70,766,000
d59,522,000
Share earns
1.87
1.50
Shares outst
37,877,000
39,592,000


Leading Backers Turn From Applicant for Health Post
LEAD: The tortured search for a New York City health commissioner took another twist yesterday as two major gay-rights groups and the expert who nominated the leading candidate withdrew their support for him.
Mayor David N. Dinkins met last night with members of his search committee but did not reach a decision on the appointment.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baton Broadcasting
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
54,313,389
50,602,362
Net inc
7,377,427
b7,605,610
Share earns
.27
.28
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $330,690, or 2 cents a share.
Year-ago results are restated to reflect the sale of the assets and operations of the Graphics Products Group.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
953,542,000
1,037,065,000
Net inc
6,708,000
57,539,000
Share earns
.09
1.63
Shares outst
34,849,000
33,902,000
Yr sales
4,146,698,000
4,068,015,000
Net inc
119,697,000
b262,078,000
Share earns
3.15
7.39


Westinghouse Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,651,000,000
3,648,000,000
Net inc
b270,000,000
d208,000,000
Share earns
1.85
1.43
Yr rev
12,844,000,000
12,500,000,000
Net inc
c922,000,000
823,000,000
Share earns
6.31
5.66
Shares outst
146,200,000
145,500,000


Union Camp Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
676,017,000
685,641,000
Net inc
62,208,000
78,460,000
Share earns
.90
1.14
Shares outst
68,866,212
68,793,039
Yr sales
2,761,337,000
2,660,918,000
Net inc
299,400,000
295,146,000
Share earns
4.35
4.25
Shares outst
68,836,229
69,433,734


Review/Pop;   Black Rock Coalition Sunders Stereotypes
LEAD: Over the last four years, the Black Rock Coalition, an organization of more than 30 bands that was created to support black musicians playing rock-related music, has slowly but surely been attacking pervasive social problems in the music industry.
By regularly presenting concerts featuring groups that defy musical categorization and the racial stereotyping that goes with it, it has exposed an ugly way of thinking that has been intertwined with the marketing, consumption and criticism of music.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
Soviet troops in Azerbaijan were apparently bogged down by widespread resistance, including airfield and railroad blockades, sabotage, and civil disobedience, as they tried to control the violence there.
Page A1


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Controls (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,070,800,000
860,400,000
Net inc
28,300,000
30,800,000
Share earns
.67
.84


Microsoft Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microsoft Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
300,431,000
209,882,000
Net inc
74,476,000
47,485,000
Share earns
.125
.85
Shares outst
59,357,000
55,896,000
6mo rev
535,592,000
386,275,000
Net inc
124,064,000
84,067,000
Share earns
2.13
1.50
Shares outst
58,268,000
55,986,000


The Right-to-Die Dilemma, Answered
LEAD: The tragic case of Nancy Cruzan, the 32-year-old woman whose family contests the state of Missouri's refusal to let her die, seems headed for a settlement.
It can't be a happy ending, for Nancy is in a vegetative state, caused by an auto accident seven years ago.
But even as her case awaits the Supreme


Provena Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,012,441
7,435,696
Net inc
b899,692
261,024
Share earns
.35
.10
Shares outst
2,584,974
2,602,633
Yr sales
34,253,669
31,276,497
Net inc
b1,080,817
798,511
Share earns
.42
.31
Shares outst
2,585,510
2,608,565


Metropolitan Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Circuits (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 25
1989
1988
Sales
5,149,000
5,640,000
Net loss
b591,000
c1,059,000
Shares outst
2,516,644
2,516,119
9mo sales
16,151,000
21,778,000
Net inc
b3,433,000
cd2,162,000
Share earns
1.36
-
Shares outst
2,516,644
2,514,504


Stone &amp; Webster Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
65,442,000
81,645,000
Net inc
1,579,000
11,411,000
Share earns
.10
.75
Shares outst
15,155,000
15,230,000
Yr rev
287,208,000
324,127,000
Net inc
20,797,000
41,179,000
Share earns
1.37
2.71
Shares outst
15,161,000
15,220,000


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jacobs Engineering Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
211,535,000
165,344,000
Net inc
3,295,000
2,055,000
Share earns
.60
.40
Shares outst
5,491,273
5,137,513
The company said the latest period included income of $518,000 from the sale of marketable equity securities.


Drug Barons in Plea to Bush
LEAD: The Medellin drug trafficking ring freed another kidnap victim today and repeated its pledge to release all hostages and abandon the illicit drug trade.


Lexicon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexicon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,832,216
3,748,669
Net loss
b272,382
b321,012
Shares outst
7,682,064
7,464,844
b-After income of $32,545 for the latest first quarter and a loss of $242,700 for year-ago period, both from discontinued operations.


Bush After a Year: Approval Near Top


Heldor Industries reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heldor Industries (AMEX)
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
91,226,000
96,962,000
Net loss
4,043,000
b656,000
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Grand Juries Can Defend Rights of the Accused;   Augment Crime Lab
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fight Over Tax Cut Heats Up As Bush and Moynihan Dig In
LEAD: An emerging battle over whether to cut Social Security taxes heated up today with President Bush sharply criticizing the proposed cut while the author of the proposal, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, said he would not budge.


KLA Instruments Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLA Instruments Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,199,000
41,453,000
Net inc
2,503,000
2,816,000
Share earns
.14
.16
6mo sales
83,365,000
80,238,000
Net inc
5,057,000
5,651,000
Share earns
.28
.32


Schwab (Charles) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schwab (Charles) Corp.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
149,700,000
102,200,000
Net inc
6,100,000
b600,000
Share earns
.22
.02
Yr rev
553,200,000
392,200,000
Net inc
18,900,000
7,400,000
Share earns
.68
.27


Southern Calif Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Calif Edison (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,619,730,000
1,538,925,000
Net inc
118,796,000
106,630,000
Share earns
.54
.49
Shares outst
218,465,000
218,454,000
Yr rev
6,904,386,000
6,252,719,000
Net inc
778,241,000
761,831,000
Share earns
3.56
3.49
Shares outst
218,463,000
218,332,000


American Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,383,000,000
1,232,000,000
Net inc
177,044,000
160,315,000
Share earns
.91
.83
Yr rev
5,140,000,000
4,841,000,000
Net inc
628,917,000
626,843,000
Share earns
3.25
3.24


High Cholesterol Poses Heart Risk in Older Men, Study Says
LEAD: Older men whose cholesterol levels are above normal face an increased risk of developing coronary heart disease, according to new findings from a large, ongoing study.


Network Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Equipment (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,025,000
35,537,000
Net inc
5,658,000
4,177,000
Share earns
.39
.30
Shares outst
14,588,000
13,855,000
9mo rev
141,538,000
97,953,000
Net inc
15,694,000
11,327,000
Share earns
1.09
.82
Shares outst
14,415,000
13,849,000


Approval of Bush, Bolstered by Panama, Soars in Poll
LEAD: As he completes his first year in office, George Bush, helped by overwhelming support for the invasion of Panama, stands higher in the public's approval than any President has at an equivalent point in his administration since John F. Kennedy, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.


An Israeli Rights Group Fights for Palestinians
LEAD: Dedi Zucker did not expect that founding the only Israeli organization that monitors human rights abuses in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip would help bring threats to his life by angry Jewish mobs.


Review/Art;   18 Works of an Evolving Rothko, a la Francaise
LEAD: The Pace Gallery's latest look at Mark Rothko's achievement is a selection of 18 transitional canvases from 1946-48 that cast the painter in a new role, a role more openly hedonistic and flawed than the Rothko of Abstract Expressionist fame.
These abstract paintings glow with intimations of Rothko's maturity: the saturated colors, the soft-edged forms that push those colors toward the eye.


Texaco's Profit Declines 3%; Environmental Costs Cited
LEAD: Texaco Inc. said its fourth-quarter earnings declined 3 percent, partly because of a $355 million charge for environmental improvement programs.


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
61,100,000
55,900,000
Per share
.65
.60
Year net inc
237,000,000
211,200,000
Per share
2.52
2.26


Clemson Drops Ford With $1 Million Deal
LEAD: Danny Ford, armed with a $1 million settlement from Clemson, resigned under pressure today, ending an 11-year coaching tenure that attracted national prominence and a National Collegiate Athletic Association inquiry.


Sovran Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
72,586,000
68,098,000
Per share
1.21
1.15
Shares outst
60,041,000
59,113,000
Year net inc
269,175,000
243,062,000
Per share
4.49
4.09
Shares outst
59,967,000
59,426,000


Osicom Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osicom Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,073,000
31,108,000
Net loss
375,000
1,988,000
9mo sales
66,417,000
78,957,000
Net loss
2,629,000
1,518,000


Ecuador Court Orders Arrest Of Ex-President Over Funds
LEAD: The Supreme Court today ordered the arrest of former President Leon Febres Cordero on charges of embezzling public funds in a case that arose from accusations against his son-in-law.


Lattice Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lattice Semiconductor Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
10,203,000
5,365,000
Net inc
1,896,000
542,000
Share earns
.21
.07
Shares outst
8,912,000
7,632,000
9mo rev
25,745,000
15,354,000
Net inc
4,124,000
1,505,000
Share earns
.50
.21
Shares outst
8,202,000
7,330,000


Nationalism at Its Nastiest
LEAD: Azerbaijan is no Lithuania.
True, resurgent nationalism arouses people in the Caucasus just as it arouses the Baltic republics.
But there the comparison ends - and the trouble for Moscow begins.


Airlines Urged to Hide Bomb Threats
LEAD: The Bush Administration will urge airline industry officials on Friday to continue to comply with Government policy and not tell passengers of security threats against their flights in most cases.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,424,200,000
1,432,000,000
Net inc
101,400,000
102,300,000
Share earns
.93
.94
Shares outst
109,200,000
109,600,000
Yr sales
5,734,100,000
5,616,700,000
Net inc
465,200,000
467,600,000
Share earns
4.18
4.26
Shares outst
111,300,000
109,800,000


An Apartment Hotel Opens on West 48th Street
LEAD: A 479-unit rental apartment house, which just opened in the theater district of Manhattan, offers prospective tenants the option of leasing an apartment fully furnished - with bed linens, dining and kitchen equipment in place - for an added monthly fee.
The concept is an echo from the 1940's and 1950's, when dozens of rental buildings on the Upper West


2 Acquitted of Child Molestation In Nation's Longest Criminal Trial
LEAD: The former director of a preschool and her son were acquitted today on 52 counts of molesting young children at their school, bringing a dramatic end to the longest and costliest criminal trial in American history.


Yugoslavia's Turn Is Surely Coming
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quantum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
111,190,000
51,591,000
Net inc
10,276,000
3,312,000
Share earns
.37
.12
Shares outst
27,744,585
27,926,070
9mo sales
316,461,000
130,289,000
Net inc
34,412,000
5,966,000
Share earns
1.25
.20
Shares outst
27,488,781
29,540,928


Vice Chairman to Head International Data Unit
LEAD: Although the computer industry goes into a slump now and then and companies fold up or cut back, Axel Leblois thinks the world is still at the beginning of the computer revolution.


Bear Stearns Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bear Stearns Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
578,046,000
632,580,000
Net inc
29,134,000
63,258,000
Share earns
.29
.63
Shares outst
95,669,583
97,238,640
6mo rev
1,158,485,000
1,111,500,000
Net inc
51,196,000
83,771,000
Share earns
.51
.82
Shares outst
95,970,608
97,591,160


Rising Opposition To Soviet Garrisons
LEAD: The Hungarian Government told an international conference on conventional forces in Europe that it wants the Soviet Union to withdraw all its troops from Hungarian soil.
And in a meeting with a Soviet official in Gdansk, the Polish union leader, Lech Walesa, demanded the removal of the Soviet garrison in Poland.


National Securities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Securities
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,694,000
1,704,000
Net inc
188,000
b91,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Complaints On Proposed Regulations
LEAD: A QUARTET of advertising and media industry leaders addressed the question ''Advertising: An Endangered Species?'' yesterday by insisting, ''No, no,'' while implying ''Yes, yes.'' Their remarks gave an audience packed with communications professionals strong doses of the self-flagellation and Washington-bashing that have been familiar medicine at recent industry gatherings.


300 Fans Join Brawl After Foul
LEAD: A 15-minute brawl tonight between players and spectators at a basketball game between visiting North Carolina Central and North Carolina A. &amp; T. sent at least seven people to the hospital and suspended the game with 8 minutes 4 seconds left.


Dollar's Value Up Sharply As Rates Appear to Be Firm
LEAD: The dollar rose sharply yesterday against key foreign currencies in active trading as the market appeared more confident the Federal Reserve would not cut interest rates any time soon.


Modine Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Manufacturing Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 26
1989
1988
Sales
111,356,000
106,245,000
Net inc
6,680,000
5,387,000
Share earns
.44
.36
Shares outst
15,009,000
15,107,000
9mo rev
327,813,000
313,518,000
Net inc
18,203,000
19,921,000
Share earns
1.21
1.32
Shares outst
15,038,000
15,131,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Economy


China Reports Release of 573 Held in Revolt
LEAD: The Government said today that it recently released 573 people who had been imprisoned for taking part in the democracy movement last year.


Primerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,585,200,000
291,500,000
Net inc
95,900,000
b67,500,000
Share earns
.87
1.51
Shares outst
112,100,000
45,400,000
Yr rev
5,695,300,000
1,003,700,000
Net inc
289,000,000
b161,800,000
Share earns
2.87
3.61
Shares outst
102,300,000
45,800,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
TBenckiser Group, Ludwigshafen am Rhein, West Germany, a household products company, named Thomas V. Bonoma executive vice president of the company and president of its United States unit, Benckiser Consumer Products, Greenwich, Conn.


Susan D. Hanson, 49, Relief Agency Director
LEAD: Susan D. Hanson, a project director for AmeriCares, an international relief agency based in New Canaan, Conn., was killed on Monday along with her mother, Phoebe Dunn, a commercial photographer, and 19 other people in the crash of a Costa Rican airliner near San Jose, the capital city.
She was 49 years old and lived in New


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
26,768,000
30,667,000
Net loss
b1,198,000
c237,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
5,811,000
6,623,000
b-Included the results of the ''Plymouth'' division of NTI, which was acquired by Symtron Corp.


General Kinetics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Kinetics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,228,551
2,539,448
Net inc
180,763
b286,196
Share earns
.21
-
6mo sales
7,846,758
4,327,422
Net inc
317,276
b663,050
Share earns
.37
-
b-Net loss


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptek Research Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
13,669,000
12,034,000
Net inc
349,000
bc182,000
Share earns
.16
-
9mo sales
35,396,000
36,271,000
Net inc
996,000
c325,000
Share earns
.46
.15


Candy Jones Dies; Ex-Model, Teacher, And Writer Was 64
LEAD: Candy Jones, a 1940's cover girl whose career later encompassed teaching, broadcasting and writing, died of cancer yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bass P.L.C. said its shareholders had approved the company's acquisition of the Holiday Inn hotel business in North America of the Holiday Corp., Memphis.


Pop/Jazz;   Remember Mickey Katz? No? Well, Just Listen to This.
LEAD: WHEN the young clarinetist Don Byron steps on stage at the Knitting Factory tomorrow, he'll be reclaiming the music of a long-forgotten composer working in a long-forgotten genre.
The 30-year-old Mr.
Byron, along with a 10-piece band, will be performing a concert of pieces by Mickey Katz, a clarinetist, a musical director for Spike Jones, a klezmer musician, a composer and the father of the actor Joel Grey.


The Bronx Is Giving Itself a Birthday Party
LEAD: The Bronx, a borough with two unique distinctions from the other five, is giving itself a 350th-birthday party -in the Bronx, of course.


Keith Group of Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keith Group of Cos (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,041,000
1,550,000
Net inc
126,548
b124,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Johnson in Car Accident
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who was stripped of the 100-meter gold medal he won in the 1988 Summer Olympics after he tested positive for steroids, received a summons after he was involved in a minor accident on Wednesday in Lincoln, Ontario, the Niagara regional police said.


Campeau's Problems on Other Fronts
LEAD: Only days after its United States retailing operations filed for bankruptcy protection, the Campeau Corporation faces potential problems with bank loans on which Canadian real estate is collateral, as well as with loans Campeau received from two developers for the retailing operations.


American First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American First Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
642,000
918,000
Net loss
85,000
c1,246,000
Shares outst
4,541,000
5,560,000
9mo rev
2,499,000
2,517,000
Net inc
b355,000
c1,362,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
5,217,000
5,565,000


Delay on Betting Bill Not Really a Victory
LEAD: Competition from increased legal sports betting may be the greatest battle in horse racing in the years ahead, and the sport appeared to lose an early skirmish this week.


Nintendo Plans Comic Book Line
LEAD: Nintendo, the Japanese company that built a video game empire, is trying to put its winning formula on paper with a line of comic books featuring Donkey Kong, Super Mario Bros. and its other characters.
The Nintendo characters have been licensed to a new comic book publishing company called Voyager Communications Inc.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
With Accordions


Florio Expands Disclosure Rule for Officials


Money Fund Assets Soar
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 488 money market mutual funds soared by $5.29 billion, to $381.11 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 147 institutional funds increased by $2.03 billion, to $92.65 billion.
The assets of the 243 general-purpose funds were up by $1.85 billion, to $126.66 billion.


World Economic Aide Sees Trouble for Warsaw Policy
LEAD: After a three-day visit to Poland, the leader of a delegation from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said today that there were major difficulties ahead for Poland's economic liberalization program.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
9.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.66
8.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.68
7.54
8.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.29
8.15
9.04
30-YR.


Serendipity Is the Password At the Antiques Show
LEAD: ANTIQUES shows are invariably made memorable by the regal objects antiques dealers present.
This year's Winter Antiques Show has a generous representation of ancient gods and goddesses decked out in Neo-Classical finery, stern-faced ancestor portraits, and such exotica as Louis XIV's wine cooler from Versailles (a marble tub with gilded images of sunbursts and lions' faces), and George Washington in the form of an aristocratic stove figure.


Ciatti's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciatti's Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,987,495
2,558,163
Net inc
161,051
122,265
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
3,802,053
3,107,074
6mo sales
7,771,862
4,966,960
Net inc
374,780
202,582
Share earns
.10
.07
Shares outst
3,788,039
3,103,512


Premieres at Carnegie
LEAD: The violist Paul Neubauer is to be the soloist with the National Orchestral Association in the world premiere of Joel Phillip Friedman's Concerto for Viola and Orchestra at Carnegie Hall tonight at 8.
The program, which is to be conducted by Jorge Mester, is part of the National Orchestral Association's New Music Orchestral Project, in which the ensemble presents recently composed works.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,138,000,000
2,254,000,000
Net inc
142,000,000
255,000,000
Share earns
.60
1.09
Shares outst
227,300,000
229,900,000
Yr rev
9,047,000,000
8,626,000,000
Net inc
835,000,000
931,000,000
Share earns
3.58
3.85


International Minerals &amp; Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Minerals &amp; Chemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
330,100,000
241,000,000
Net inc
b9,500,000
c23,400,000
Share earns
.39
.83
Shares outst
21,054,000
23,847,000
6mo sales
641,500,000
458,600,000
Net inc
b17,000,000
c52,200,000
Share earns
.66
1.86
Shares outst
21,279,000
24,220,000


Antonio Cipollone, 66; Won Suit on Smoking
LEAD: Antonio Cipollone, whose lawsuit against three cigarette makers resulted in the first jury award against the industry involving the death of a smoker, has himself died, his wife said today.
He was 66 years old.


Becton Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becton Dickinson (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
428,801,000
406,134,000
Net inc
27,743,000
b27,653,000
Share earns
.71
.69
Shares outst
39,142,000
40,257,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $4,696,000, or 12 cents a share.


For Jurors, Facts Could Not Be Sifted From Fantasies
LEAD: In the end, the jurors said, the facts and fantasies that blend in the memories of small children, influenced by the comments of parents and legal questioners, did not offer a firm enough basis for a conviction in the McMartin child molestation trial that ended today.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
Economic and Social Council
INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Beijing to Limit More Posts In Hong Kong to the Chinese
LEAD: China, which has said it will bar holders of foreign passports from top government jobs in Hong Kong after Beijing resumes sovereignty in 1997, will extend the ban to more posts, a Chinese official said today.


Worried About Its Own Azerbaijanis, Teheran Acts With Caution
LEAD: The armed revolt in Azerbaijan has been received with apprehension in Iran, where an estimated 16 million Azerbaijanis represent the largest ethnic minority and have at times challenged the authority of the Teheran Government.


Restaurants
LEAD: Lightheartedness is not a trait that comes to mind when one thinks of sun-starved, hard-working Scandinavians.
So I'm never surprised upon entering Aquavit, the Nordic palace on West 54th Street, to encounter an impassive hostess at the door who whispers, ''Reservations?''


New York Schools Chief Challenges Boards' Power
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez mounted a frontal assault yesterday on New York City's decentralized school system, demanding that its 32 local boards clear all candidates for district superintendent with him.


Risk Is Seen in Needless Removal of Asbestos
LEAD: Removing undisturbed asbestos from schools and other buildings could needlessly expose the removal workers to cancer, scientists say.


M/A-COM Deficit
LEAD: M/A-COM Inc. said it expects to post a loss of about $115 million for its quarter ended Dec. 30.
Stock in the Burlington, Mass., company fell 50 cents today, to $4.125, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its decline of 8.1 percent was the fifth worst of the day.
The loss will cover an operating loss and an estimate of the impact closing some business and product lines and shrinking others.


Israelis Accuse a P.L.O. Aide
LEAD: A military court today identified a leading West Bank Palestinian as a supporter and financial backer of the so-called Palestine Popular Army in an indictment of five alleged members of the group.


Pfizer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,494,000,000
1,368,200,000
Net inc
133,300,000
141,600,000
Share earns
.79
.84
Yr sales
5,671,500,000
5,385,400,000
Net inc
727,300,000
791,300,000
Share earns
4.31
4.70


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto-Culver Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
176,330,000
162,466,000
Net inc
6,574,000
5,501,000
Share earns
.50
.42
Shares outst
13,117,000
13,055,000


Argentines Take to the Streets Against Inept Police
LEAD: In a notable shift from the fear Argentines felt of the police during the military Government just a decade ago, residents of several provincial towns have recently risen up in mass protest and accused their local police of corruption and laziness.


Edward H. Kass, 72, Researcher on Toxic Shock
LEAD: Edward H. Kass, an epidemiologist who was a leading researcher into the mechanism of toxic shock syndrome in menstruating women, died of lung cancer Wednesday at his home in Lincoln, Mass.
He was 72 years old.


India Names New Governor for Troubled Kashmir
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister V. P. Singh reassigned a popular former Governor today to Jammu and Kashmir state, where a secessionist movement is taking on alarming proportions for India.


Agents Kill Two Linked to Series Of Bank Thefts
LEAD: F.B.I. agents and New York City detectives who were following a car linked to a series of bank robberies opened fire yesterday on two masked men who left a savings and loan branch in Brooklyn with guns drawn and a satchel of cash.
One suspect, still wearing a stocking mask and a ski cap, died in the barrage of bullets.


Review/Art;   Soviet Artist as a Storyteller Of Not-Always-Pretty Tales
LEAD: For many years, the only unofficial Soviet artist to have achieved a measure of fame in the West was Ilya Kabakov.
Mr.
Kabakov's works were shown in Western Europe as early as 1965, and he became known as the leader of a generation of artists whose activities were not sanctioned by the authorities in Moscow.


Applied Magnetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Magnetics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
79,555,000
83,294,000
Net inc
454,000
4,928,000
Share earns
.03
.30
Shares outst
16,437,742
16,164,279


Prague's Leader Quits the Communist Party
LEAD: Prime Minister Marian Calfa has resigned from the Communist Party, the Government said today.


BUCHAREST SEIZES COMMUNIST ASSETS
LEAD: The provisional Government today announced the confiscation of all the property and assets of the defunct Communist Party, including 21 large palaces used by Nicolae Ceausescu.


Bankrupt Banking
LEAD: Banking is the business of risk.
A good banker lends depositors' money when he sees little risk of the borrower's inability to repay; he acts both as an informed source of credit and a restraining hand.


Radiomutuel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiomutuel Inc.
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
8,700,000
8,300,000
Net inc
375,000
b736,000
Share earns
.07
.13
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $123,000, or 2 cents a share.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Eastern Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
225,595,000
174,805,000
Net inc
14,743,000
16,802,000
Share earns
.63
.72
Shares outst
23,310,000
23,191,000
Yr rev
840,086,000
671,929,000
Net inc
56,553,000
50,673,000
Share earns
2.43
2.18
Shares outst
23,276,000
23,197,000


Graf Gains Quick Recovery From Errors (and Herself)
LEAD: Steffi Graf accidentally clunked her head with her racquet and survived 39 unforced errors today in the Australian Open.


Genetics Institute Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,300,000
14,372,000
Net loss
16,378,000
2,887,000
Yr rev
43,644,000
29,684,000
Net loss
28,737,000
11,240,000
The company said operating expenses for the fourth quarter included a $9 million charge related to a contract dispute with a customer over production of a drug.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
540,893,000
501,298,000
Net inc
36,592,000
b37,320,000
Share earns
.59
.57
Shares outst
63,250,000
65,726,000
Yr sales
2,120,434,000
1,953,754,000
Net inc
143,980,000
145,772,000
Share earns
2.28
2.22


Raytheon Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,244,000,000
2,209,000,000
Net inc
137,000,000
127,300,000
Share earns
2.07
1.92
Yr sales
8,796,000,000
8,192,000,000
Net inc
528,800,000
489,600,000
Share earns
8.01
7.35


Pace of Giving To Neediest Is on Increase
LEAD: With the 78th annual New York Times Neediest Cases Fund drive now past its midpoint, proceeds are ahead of last year's collections by more than a quarter of a million dollars.
If giving continues at the same pace, the drive will again break records when it closes on Feb. 28.
Last year, the $4 million mark was reached for the first time.


Boeing Plans Worker Cuts At Factories
LEAD: Despite an $80 billion backlog of orders for commercial airliners, the Boeing Company said yesterday that its factory work force had grown too large and would be reduced this year by 5,000 workers.


'Lemon Law' Methods Upheld in New York
LEAD: The state's highest court today upheld the arbitration process set up by New York's ''lemon law,'' which was passed in 1983 to protect residents who buy cars that turn out to be clunkers.


Wolverines Turn Back Buckeyes
LEAD: Demetrius Calip's patience tonight helped Michigan make order out of chaos.


Prosecutors and Politics: a Feud Reopens the Debate on the Propriety of Such a Match
LEAD: Three guesses: What famous former Federal prosecutor wanted to be elected mayor of New York City, United States senator or, it sometimes seemed, any other high-ranking position that might come open?


Smith (A.O) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith (A.O) Corp.(A)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
215,961,000
262,316,000
Net loss
b14,618,000
c6,423,000
Share earns
-
.69
Shares outst
7,910,405
8,014,379
Yr sales
976,262,000
1,015,427,000
Net loss
b9,559,000
c18,989,000
Share earns
-
1.86
Shares outst
7,935,949
8,221,649


Bernstein and Thomas Head New Pacific Music Festival
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein and Michael Tilson Thomas are to be the artistic directors of the first Pacific Music Festival, a $7 million event to be held in Sapporo, Japan, from June 26 to July 13.


Omni Films International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omni Films International
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,984,850
3,592,868
Net loss
379,259
b303,167
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
11,582,000
9,616,000
Net inc
726,000
616,000
Share earns
.19
.17
Shares outst
3,739,700
3,693,100
9mo sales
33,275,000
26,183,000
Net inc
2,099,000
1,510,000
Share earns
.56
.50
Shares outst
3,724,900
3,044,400


Market Place;   Industry Attack On Market Study
LEAD: EXECUTIVES in the securities and futures industry have mounted an intense lobbying campaign to change the conclusions of a draft report by an independent Congressional agency that questions some fundamental aspects of the nation's financial system.


Suspect Shot In Terminal At Rush Hour
LEAD: A man the state police said was a suspect in a burglary in Dutchess County was shot and seriously wounded by the Metro-North police last night at Grand Central Terminal as he got off a train he had taken to Manhattan.
Metro-North officials said the officers fired after the man pulled a revolver and pointed it at the officers who met the train.


GZA Geoenvironmental TechFnologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GZA Geoenvironmental TechFnologies (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,470,000
7,006,000
Net inc
806,000
510,000
Share earns
.22
.20
Shares outst
3,673,000
2,522,000
9mo rev
23,961,000
20,481,000
Net inc
1,802,000
1,382,000
Share earns
.60
.56
Shares outst
3,028,000
2,489,000


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


JB's Restaurant Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* JB's Restaurant Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 18
1989
1988
Revenue
24,192,000
23,363,000
Net inc
240,000
235,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
5,074,032
5,042,022


George Washington Falls to Rutgers, 90-82
LEAD: Keith Hughes scored 25 points and Earl Duncan had 23 tonight as Rutgers held off George Washington, 90-82, in an Atlantic 10 Conference game.


Noriega Aide's Lawyers Say 3 Witnesses Were Harassed
LEAD: Lawyers for a co-defendant of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega asserted late this afternoon that prosecutors had sought to intimidate three defense witnesses today, sending immigration agents to their homes to investigate their legal status after they had testified.


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Bell (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
226,824,000
195,163,000
Net inc
22,748,000
17,312,000
Share earns
.36
.26
Shares outst
59,860,000
62,591,000
Yr rev
900,001,000
738,434,000
Net inc
94,359,000
84,335,000
Share earns
1.50
1.31
Shares outst
59,993,000
62,702,000


A History of the Molestation Charges
LEAD:
Aug. 12,1983: The mother of a child at the McMartin Preschool calls the Manhattan Beach Police Department and says she believes her 2 1/2-year-old son was molested by Raymond Buckey, who worked at the school.
Sept. 7, 1983: Mr.
Buckey is arrested then released for lack of evidence.
The police send letters to 200 parents naming Mr.


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
367,637,000
367,340,000
Net inc
32,216,000
45,516,000
Share earns
.86
1.22
Shares outst
35,815,000
36,216,000
Yr sales
1,449,980,000
1,410,411,000
Net inc
144,569,000
164,317,000
Share earns
3.86
4.37
Shares outst
35,876,000
36,398,000


2 Die as Jet Crashes in Ohio
LEAD: A twin-engine cargo jet crashed today in a rural area 15 to 20 miles northwest of here, killing the pilot and a passenger, aviation officials said.
The Lear 23 jet, chartered by Aero Flight Services, was on its way from Ypsilanti, Mich., to Louisville, Ky., to pick up cargo when it crashed, a Federal Aviation Administration spokesman said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about Ethiopian famine relief misidentified the Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister.
He is Yuli M. Vorontsov.


No Human Cancer Link to Breast Implants
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When the model JERRY HALL makes her London stage debut on Thursday, she may have more than comedy on her mind.
She and her longtime companion, MICK JAGGER, are to be married.


Oberlin Choir
LEAD: The Oberlin College Choir will give the world premiere of Edward Miller's ''Bad Dreams,'' a setting of poetry by Donald Justice, tomorrow evening at 8 at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
The program, which is to be conducted by Daniel Moe, also includes Stravinsky's Mass.
Tickets are $7.50 to $15.
Information: 840-2824.


Treasury Issues Decline Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply and long-term interest rates rose to their highest levels in more than six months yesterday in a selloff that traders said was largely spurred by comments from two Federal Reserve Board governors that suggested the Fed was not about to ease monetary policy again any time soon.


Geodyne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodyne Resources (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,169,091
4,426,525
Net inc
1,764,420
1,671,071
Share earns
.10
.10
Shares outst
16,748,506
16,456,680
9mo rev
19,748,153
13,921,549
Net inc
4,844,047
5,802,685
Share earns
.27
.34
Shares outst
16,861,643
16,439,506


Education Panel Chief Assailed by Protesters
LEAD: A meeting of the City Council education committee in City Hall was disrupted yesterday by a protest by about two dozen adults and school children objecting to what they described as racist and white supremacist remarks by the committee's new chairman.


Sandwich Chef Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandwich Chef Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,146,187
8,103,724
Net inc
102,050
b94,732
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
18,062,572
16,634,668
Net inc
266,723
27,493
Share earns
.26
.03
b-Net loss


Outjo Journal;   U.N. Namibia Team Makes Some Unlikely Friends
LEAD: The United Nations was greeted with widespread suspicion and some outright hostility when its workers arrived in this tidy farming community nine months ago to help monitor Namibia's transition to independence.


Signet Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
32,697,000
28,295,000
Per share
1.22
1.02
Year net inc
123,320,000
152,468,000
Per share
4.55
5.71
Signet said its 1989 fourth quarter earnings included a net gain of $10.8 million from the sale of about $83 million of credit card receivables.


Japanese Mayor Who Criticized Hirohito Is Shot


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,304,000
6,385,000
Net inc
1,590,000
266,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Yr rev
40,894,000
30,231,000
Net inc
3,214,000
b1,174,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Doubleday's New Chief Moved Quickly to Top
LEAD: Stephen Rubin is not shy about the fact that he has risen rapidly in the publishing business.
The new president and publisher of Doubleday confesses that about five years ago he had to ask his boss at Bantam Books what a royalty was.


Betsy R. Gordon Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Betsy Ribakoff Gordon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene J. Ribakoff of Palm Beach, Fla., and Boston, was married yesterday to Richard Charles Sheerr, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley I. Sheerr of Philadelphia.
Rabbis Henry Cohen and Aaron Landes officiated at the Beth David Reform Congregation in Gladwyne,


Troubled by Migration From East, Bonn Sharpens Reunification Call
LEAD: Alarmed by a continuing flood of East German immigrants, the West German Government said today that a freely elected East German government must join Bonn in declaring German unity as their goal.


Federal Judge Inzer B. Wyatt, 82; Presided at Acquittal of Roy Cohn
LEAD: Judge Inzer B. Wyatt, a senior judge in the Federal District Court in Manhattan, died of pneumonia and heart failure Wednesday at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Smart About Sex
LEAD: Every year, more than a million youngsters get pregnant, most of them unintentionally, and half undergo abortions.
Many Americans may not yet be ready to do what's necessary to reduce this horrendous teen-age pregnancy rate, but a new survey shows that New Yorkers are.


American Ship Building reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Ship Building (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
18,900,000
16,900,000
Net inc
302,000
b2,400,000
Share earns
.05
-
b-Net loss


Fehr Raises Questions On Revenue Sharing
LEAD: Are baseball's club owners ready to have players or their representatives sitting in their offices, sharing in their decision-making process?


Charles Hernu, Official in France Hit by 1980's Scandal, Dies at 66
LEAD: Charles Hernu, a French Socialist politician whose time as Defense Minister in the early 1980's was clouded by scandal, died of a heart attack Wednesday in Villeurbanne, a Lyons suburb where he had been Mayor for more than two decades.
He was 66 years old.


Motorola Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motorola Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,652,000,000
2,193,000,000
Net inc
132,000,000
124,000,000
Share earns
1.01
.95
Shares outst
130,300,000
129,700,000
Yr sales
9,620,000,000
8,250,000,000
Net inc
498,000,000
445,000,000
Share earns
3.83
3.43
Shares outst
130,000,000
129,600,000


Stocks Mixed Despite Rally In Blue Chips
LEAD: Blue-chip stocks rallied in the final half-hour of trading yesterday, but the overall market finished the day mixed.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ''I drank so much beer,'' said WOLFGANG PUCK, recalling his youth in Austria, ''so now I'm making it.''


Kickers Face Tougher Task
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association football rules committee has voted to reduce the distance between goal-post uprights from 23 feet 4 inches to 18 feet 6 inches, the width used in the National Football League.


Day Care Long a Part Of New York Schools
LEAD: To the Editor:


Indiana's Head Coach Retiring After 33 Years
LEAD: He is 69 years old.
He has tasted national and worldwide success and he is considered the dean of swimming coaches.
So there was not much surprise yesterday in Bloomington when Indiana University announced that James (Doc) Counsilman would be retiring after one more lap as head coach.


Anchor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anchor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
7,300,000
b900,000
6mo net loss
19,600,000
b4,800,000
b-Net income
Year-ago quarter and 6 months' included gains of $2 million and $4.6 million, respectively, from tax loss carryforwards.


Analysts International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysts International Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,090,000
21,559,000
Net inc
1,257,000
1,031,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Shares outst
4,624,000
4,540,000
6mo rev
50,740,000
41,733,000
Net inc
2,580,000
2,111,000
Share earns
.56
.47
Shares outst
4,620,000
4,530,000


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,603,400,000
2,504,400,000
Net inc
331,700,000
309,700,000
Share earns
1.22
1.15
Shares outst
271,392,000
270,257,000
Yr rev
10,211,300,000
9,903,300,000
Net inc
1,238,200,000
b1,237,400,000
Share earns
4.59
4.55
Shares outst
269,735,000
272,211,000


Talks Open in Yugoslav Province
LEAD: Communists in troubled Kosovo province met for the first time today with ethnic Albanian opposition figures to discuss proposals for democratic change.


Quake Jolts California Coast
LEAD: A moderate earthquake jolted the Northern California coastline early today, but no injuries or damage was reported.
The epicenter of the earthquake, which registered 5.1 on the Richter scale, was at the juncture of the San Andreas and Mendocino faults, 30 miles northeast of here, said a spokeswoman for the United States Geological Survey in Menlo Park.


A History of Trouble
LEAD: Here is a chronology of events of the political career of Mayor Marion S. Barry:
1974:  Mr.
Barry, a former black militant, is elected to the District of Columbia City Council.
March 9, 1977:  Hanafi Muslims shoot Mr.
Barry in the chest during their seizure of the District Building.


Review/Music;   St. Louis Symphony Offers a Premiere by Ligeti
LEAD: Time is at once the composer's ally and enemy.
Ally because music exists over a certain measurable span or it does not exist at all.
Enemy because it forces the composer, like the listener, to face the fact of its frightening, inexorable flow.


The Case For Dr. Myers
LEAD: New York City has health problems.
It festers with diseases caused by drugs and poverty; the AIDS epidemic rages.
The New England Journal of Medicine reports that a black man in Harlem is less likely to live till the age of 65 than a man in Bangladesh.
That makes all the more dismaying the delay in appointing a promising candidate for city health commissioner, Dr.


Texaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,241,000,000
8,469,000,000
Net inc
b287,000,000
c296,000,000
Share earns
.99
1.21
Shares outst
265,400,000
244,300,000
Yr rev
35,656,000,000
35,138,000,000
Net inc
b2,413,000,000
c1,304,000,000
Share earns
9.12
5.35
Shares outst
257,700,000
243,600,000


Collagen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collagen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,679,000
10,733,000
Net inc
1,151,000
b867,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
8,912,000
8,247,000
6mo rev
26,448,000
19,858,000
Net inc
2,010,000
b1,457,000
Share earns
.23
.18
Shares outst
8,921,000
7,976,000


Books of The Times;   The Harsh Judgments of a White South African
LEAD:
My Traitor's Heart
A South African Exile Returns to Face His Country, His Tribe and His Conscience
By Rian Malan
349 pages. A Morgan Entrekin Book/The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Jordan and Bulls on a Roll
Michael Jordan scored 44 points as Chicago stretched its home winning streak to 14 games last night with a 133-107 victory over Golden State.
Jordan, who did not play in the fourth quarter, made seven 3-point shots to set a Chicago Stadium and team mark.


General Datacomm Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Datacomm Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
51,102,000
51,244,000
Net inc
b1,005,000
c490,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $515,000, or 4 cents a share.


Mavericks Bracing For Knicks
LEAD: When the Dallas Mavericks gathered for practice this morning to prepare for Friday night's game here with the Knicks, they met to talk about such problems as how to end their five-game losing streak, and how to get more scoring from Herb Williams, Randy White, Brad Davis and Anthony Jones.
Those key bench players have been outscored by the opponent's bench by an average of 34.8 points to 18.5 in the last 12 games.


Czech-Vatican Ties Restored
LEAD: Czechoslovakia's new Government decided today to restore full relations with the Vatican after a break of more than 40 years.
The official news agency C.T.K. said the Government had decided that ''diplomatic contacts with the Holy See be restored'' but gave no details.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline by 6.4% on the Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest declined by 35.3 million shares, or 6.4 percent, in the four-week period ended Jan. 12.
Short interest is the number of shares sold short by investors and not yet covered.


Seeking Out a Florida Retirement Home
LEAD: Retiring to Florida is still a cherished dream for millions of Americans.
And midwinter is the time when those on the edge of leaving the workday world come from the Northeast and other cold areas to look for a community that will suit them.


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
159,541,000
149,541,000
Net inc
11,357,000
8,661,000
Share earns
.54
.41
6mo sales
313,835,000
285,417,000
Net inc
21,504,000
15,795,000
Share earns
1.02
.75


On the Tortuous Road to Arab-Israeli Peace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senator Tells of His Cancer
LEAD: Senator Spark M. Matsunaga disclosed today that he is being treated for prostate cancer. ''I can't conclude at this juncture that this condition is debilitating to the extent that I should step down,'' the 73-year-old Democrat from Hawaii said in a statement.
But he added, ''If it appears that my attendance in the second session of the 101st Congress does not show marked improvement over the record of the first session, I will reassess my present intention of fulfilling my term of office.


First Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,563,000
8,847,000
Per share
.92
.73
Year net inc
43,135,000
33,039,000
Per share
3.48
2.70


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,037,605
6,161,719
Net inc
1,117,252
879,086
Share earns
.55
.44
Shares outst
2,024,219
2,000,710
9mo sales
18,747,495
15,437,625
Net inc
2,431,336
1,838,666
Share earns
1.20
.92
Shares outst
2,021,530
1,998,585


Upheaval in the East;   Years of Angry Clashes In 2 Southern Republics
LEAD: Feb. 28-29, 1988:  After two weeks of Armenian demonstrations demanding that the largely Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, in Azerbaijan, be ceded to Armenia, ancient tensions between predominantly Christian Armenians and primarily Muslim Azerbaijanis explode in the Azerbaijan city of Sumgait.


Dauphin Deposit reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dauphin Deposit (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,403,000
10,491,000
Per share
.88
.81
Year net inc
44,385,000
40,673,000
Per share
3.42
3.14


Smith Corona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Corona Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
128,800,000
126,900,000
Net inc
12,000,000
b13,900,000
Share earns
.40
.46
6mo sales
281,000,000
258,900,000
Net inc
28,300,000
b26,000,000
Share earns
.94
.86


Copper Prices Fall Sharply On Fears of Slack Demand
LEAD: Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange, reflecting fears of an economic slowdown, which would reduce demand for the metal.


Southtrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
19,157,000
17,947,000
Per share
.71
.68
Shares outst
26,987,000
26,434,000
Year net inc
72,775,000
67,588,000
Per share
2.73
2.56
Shares outst
26,701,000
26,370,000


Pilgrim's Pride Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pilgrim's Pride Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
162,668,000
149,902,000
Net inc
209,000
867,000
Share earns
.01
.04


Datamag Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datamag Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
613,477
390,788
Net loss
1,708,827
461,609
Yr sales
2,495,738
1,795,439
Net loss
3,825,890
1,784,280


INSIDE
LEAD:
Garcias Get 3 Years


Amerifirst Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerifirst Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b6,900,000
c1,400,000
Per share
-
.13
b-Company said the loss was less than expected because of a $15.7 million reduction in non-earning loans and real estate.


GV Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GV Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
930,000
1,369,198
Net loss
2,090,000
863,785
Yr rev
3,802,000
3,701,234
Net loss
4,827,000
3,590,591


Duke Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
887,506,000
850,176,000
Net inc
122,249,000
c24,250,000
Share earns
1.08
.11
Yr rev
3,639,339,000
3,626,985,000
Net inc
b571,611,000
c550,386,000
Share earns
5.13
4.91


Tokheim Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tokheim Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
67,480,000
58,021,000
Net inc
4,577,000
1,803,000
Share earns
.64
.29
Yr sales
228,415,000
203,147,000
Net inc
8,057,000
10,979,000
Share earns
1.15
1.73


Japanese Gunman Tied to Crime Ring
LEAD: The police said today that a 40-year-old ultranationalist arrested in the shooting of the Mayor of Nagasaki was a member of a shadowy group involved in blackmail and extortion as well as militant acts in the name of the Emperor.


Diagnon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,076,903
883,878
Net inc
49,830
22,425
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
9,602,452
3,696,024
6mo rev
2,165,954
1,823,069
Net inc
73,774
42,313
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
9,602,452
3,693,260


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
220,735,000
182,820,000
Net inc
3,337,000
2,177,000
Share earns
.32
.31
Shares outst
10,339,000
7,011,000
9mo sales
634,246,000
502,195,000
Net inc
8,496,000
b10,239,000
Share earns
.88
1.47
Shares outst
9,620,000
6,987,000


ATC Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ATC Environmental Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,275,313
2,148,061
Net loss
120,191
b319,284
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
4,458,000
5,055,000
9mo rev
7,377,704
5,294,193
Net inc
96,346
645,884
Share earns
.02
.14
Shares outst
4,674,000
4,515,000


L&amp;N Housing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L&amp;N Housing Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,727,000
1,619,000
Net loss
2,271,000
b895,000
Share earns
-
.41
Yr rev
6,656,000
6,112,000
Net inc
383,000
c2,370,000
Share earns
.17
-


Nursing Homes Overuse Drugs for Restraint
LEAD: To the Editor:


Women's Combat Role Clarified by First Lady
LEAD: Barbara Bush says that women are not ''physically strong enough'' for military combat and that their presence on battlefields would cause morale problems as well.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
632,000
34,635,000
Per share
.08
4.39
Shares outst
7,826,500
7,884,290


Atlanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlanfed Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
250,405
299,714
Per share
.32
.38
9mo net inc
517,959
787,124
Per share
.66
1.00


Gateway Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b5,517,000
c3,323,000
Per share
-
.42
Year net inc
1,028,000
12,851,000
Per share
.13
1.61
b-Included a $7 million additional loan loss provision.


Clemson Seeks Coach
LEAD: Clemson University has received permission to talk to the Air Force coach, Fisher DeBerry, about the job vacated by the resignation of Danny Ford on Thursday, an Air Force spokesman said.


Trustee at Work in Stores' Case
LEAD: Creditors' committees are expected to be named next week in the Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings of Federated Stores Inc. after a scrutiny of all claims, said Conrad Morganstern, the United States Trustee who is overseeing the case and will designate the committee members.


Improvising a Lineup, Mavericks Top Knicks
LEAD: The Knicks, after seven consecutive close games, three of which were won in overtime, were hoping for a breather tonight against the Mavericks before going on to games against the Bulls and the Lakers.


Upheaval in the East: Armenians;   ARMENIANS REFUSE TO LEAVE A PLANE
LEAD: A planeload of Armenian refugees from rioting in Azerbaijan sat parked on a runway at Vnukovo airport here today, the weary and overwrought passengers entering the third day of a bizarre sit-in to demand housing in Moscow.


Bangalore Journal;   Christians Revel in Conversion Back to Indianness
LEAD: They gathered at dusk beside the woods, a band of several hundred Christians who had come to consecrate an empty field where they envisioned a church would one day stand.
When the deed was done, the Mass said and the Archbishop gone, they spread carpets over the dusty earth and settled down to watch a priest dance.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gerber Products Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
269,159,000
238,434,000
Net inc
b17,458,000
d19,109,000
Share earns
.46
.48
Shares outst
37,906,000
39,640,000
9mo rev
823,697,000
751,643,000
Net inc
c70,766,000
d59,522,000
Share earns
1.87
1.50
Shares outst
37,877,000
39,592,000


Cold-Shooting Nets Fall to Magic, 120-105
LEAD: Otis Smith matched his career high with 29 points tonight as the Orlando Magic snapped a losing streak at four games with a 120-105 victory over the Nets.


Manufacturers National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
28,240,000
26,311,000
Per share
1.85
1.74
Year net inc
107,280,000
96,255,000
Per share
7.06
6.40


Ruddick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ruddick Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
353,470,000
312,002,000
Net inc
5,685,000
3,902,000
Share earns
.57
.40


Warrant for Gervin
LEAD: A judge in San Antonio issued an arrest warrant yesterday for the former San Antonio Spurs star George Gervin, who left the country in apparent violation of his probation for drunken driving.


Fire Damages Forbes Office


Garcias Draw 3-Year Terms For Extortion
LEAD: Saying he was being as lenient as he could, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday sentenced former Representative Robert Garcia of the Bronx and his wife to three years in prison for extorting payments from the Wedtech Corporation and recommended that they be eligible for parole after six months.


Standing at the Precipice
LEAD: It will take a minor miracle for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. to rebound from his arrest Thursday night on cocaine charges, most politicians here believe, despite the fact that to many blacks in the District of Columbia he remains a hero and to some he has now become a martyr as well.


Software Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Software Publishing (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,109,000
23,196,000
Net inc
5,523,000
3,800,000
Share earns
.45
.31
Shares outst
12,319,000
12,135,000
Share earnings reflected a 3-for-2 split effective Oct.


Vista Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
170,052,000
191,211,000
Net inc
14,121,000
b31,189,000
Share earns
1.33
2.06
Shares outst
10,601,000
15,115,000
b-Included one-time gain of $368,000, or 2 cents a share, from stock option plan conversion.


Stone Petroleum Hints at Tesoro Bid
LEAD: James H. Stone, the chairman of the Stone Petroleum Corporation, said he might offer to buy the assets of the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation because he had become ''increasingly skeptical'' about the desire of the San Antonio refining and marketing company to find a buyer.
The Harken Energy Corporation, a Dallas gas company, has bid $11.75 a share for Tesoro, but Tesoro demanded that


Security Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,983,000
7,011,000
Per share
.69
.61
Year net inc
28,631,000
24,469,000
Per share
2.45
2.14


Westinghouse Credit reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Credit (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
46,725,000
21,545,000
Yr net inc
157,442,000
134,428,000





Jennifer Convertibles Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jennifer Convertibles Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,434,924
7,021,351
Net inc
57,441
b558,699
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
2,981,000
2,602,000
b-Net loss


BELIEFS
LEAD: A century ago, science and religion were engaged in open combat.
The relationship has now settled to something between cold war and polite indifference.
Bitter skirmishes occasionally break out over evolution.
Adventurous theologians or scientists occasionally carry peace proposals across the lines.


United Savers Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Savers Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
26,284,000
716,000
Year net loss
42,370,000
b5,469,000
Per share
-
1.19
b-Net income


Patents;   New Exhibit Shows History of Women Inventors
LEAD: Were two women inventors unfairly deprived of the credit for inspiring Eli Whitney's cotton gin and Cyrus McCormick's reaper?


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
31,736,000
28,265,000
Net loss
b673,000
c444,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo rev
63,632,000
56,226,000
Net inc
b7,362,000
d3,052,000
Share earns
.77
-


B.M.J. Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B.M.J. Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
947,000
1,935,000
Per share
.23
.50
Year net inc
6,900,000
6,500,000
Per share
1.73
1.70


Ponce Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ponce Federal Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,112,004
b1,338,313
Per share
.22
-
Shares outst
5,160,184
5,159,135
Year net loss
4,482,017
c1,641,158
Per share
-
.32
Shares outst
5,160,184
5,200,434


First Fincorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fincorp
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,725,000
b2,507,000
Per share
.71
1.03
b-After extraordinary credits of $324,000 for the latest year and $780,000 for 1988.


Wilmington Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
17,345,000
16,220,000
Per share
.99
.93
Year net inc
59,423,000
51,847,000
Per share
3.40
2.98


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 20, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Two Greats Collide
LEAD: I have a lot of trouble with the light-year.
For one thing I can never remember how far a piece of light travels per second.


The Boundaries of War
LEAD: Popular revolts and Communist change have, in weeks, redrawn Europe's political map.
In the West, the European Community debates opening its doors to the East.
In the East, nationality questions long frozen by totalitarian rule again glow hot.
With so much in flux, strategists, statesmen and bureaucrats grope for constants.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-9
Soviet troops fired on Azerbaijanis in Baku, pushing through street barricades with tanks toward the center of the city.
Some armed civilians were reportedly resisting.
Page 1
Kremlin abandons mobilization of troops
6
The White House watches helplessly as the turmoil unfolds in the Soviet Union, even as it has begun to take a more active, hands-on approach to the nations of Eastern Europe.


Sandwich Chef Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandwich Chef Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,146,187
8,103,724
Net inc
102,050
b94,732
Share earns
.10
-
6mo sales
18,062,572
16,634,668
Net inc
266,723
27,493
Share earns
.26
.03
b-Net loss


Nursing Homes Overuse Drugs for Restraint;   Before They Are Untied
LEAD: To the Editor:


Intermark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermark Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
175,399,000
169,779,000
Net loss
6,833,000
b7,184,000
Share earns
-
.79
9mo rev
575,006,000
545,909,000
Net loss
12,422,000
b7,398,000
Share earns
-
.80


Wicat Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicat Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,175,000
10,021,000
Net inc
686,000
b2,632,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
21,259,000
21,115,000
9mo rev
34,866,000
31,669,000
Net inc
2,088,000
b919,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
21,229,000
21,115,000


First Federal S&amp;L of Fort Myers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S&amp;L of Fort Myers
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,448,831
1,344,534
Share earns
.78
.43


Study for Congress Calls Report on Nutrition Program Misleading
LEAD: A revision of an Agriculture Department study unjustifiably played down the benefits of a popular $1.9 billion nutrition program intended to help poor women and children, Congressional investigators said in a report made public today.


Duel With the Sun


Chronicle
LEAD: JAVIER PEREZ DE CUELLAR received a lot of long-distance calls yesterday.
On his 70th birthday the Secretary General of the United Nations received good wishes in a call from PRESIDENT BUSH, plus calls and messages from heads of state, foreign ministers and ambassadors of just about every nation.


Putting the Best Face on Bankruptcy
LEAD: It is not easy to make bankruptcy look like a positive development, but Bloomingdale's certainly tried this week.
The president of the famous retailer, Marvin S. Traub, appeared on the three big television networks with a message directed mainly at consumers: The stores are open for business; the worst is behind us; suppliers will continue to deliver goods, and a new period is beginning.


Systems &amp; Computer Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Systems &amp; Computer Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,583,000
11,543,000
Net inc
b719,000
b2,175,000
Share earns
.06
.18
b-Included tax credits of $252,000, or 2 cents a share, and $870,000, or 7 cents a share, for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   Berlin Communists Lose a Leading Reformer
LEAD: A leading East German reformer was quoted today as saying he would abandon the embattled Communist Party, and the President suggested that pro-democracy forces help run the Government until May elections.


Video Display reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Display (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
14,550,000
11,204,000
Net inc
482,000
672,000
Share earns
.12
.16
9mo sales
41,358,000
29,990,000
Net inc
1,908,000
1,931,000
Share earns
.47
.47


Landmark Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Landmark Bancshares Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,852,000
3,450,000
Per share
.53
.53
Shares outst
7,188,000
6,349,000
Year net inc
14,513,000
12,035,000
Per share
2.14
1.98
Shares outst
6,640,000
5,944,000


Protest Against English Cricketers Crushed by South African Police


Tomisaburo Hashimoto Dies at 88
LEAD: Tomisaburo Hashimoto, a powerful official who was convicted in the bribery scandal that swept the Government in the mid-1970's, died of pneumonia today, a hospital official said.
He was 88 years old.


Treasury Issues Post Best Gain of '90
LEAD: Treasury bond prices yesterday posted their best gain of 1990 in a rally that began overnight in Tokyo and continued in the London and New York markets.
Dealers said the recovery was sustained by domestic retail investors and professional traders who were covering short positions.


ISRAEL'S MOVE IRKS STATE DEPARTMENT
LEAD: On Wednesday, the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, described as "not helpful" a statement by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, vowing to hold on to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip because "a big strong state of Israel" is needed to accommodate a wave of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union.


Provena Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
9,012,441
7,435,696
Net inc
b899,692
261,024
Share earns
.35
.10
Shares outst
2,584,974
2,602,633
Yr sales
34,253,669
31,276,497
Net inc
b1,080,817
798,511
Share earns
.42
.31
Shares outst
2,585,510
2,608,565


Ast Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ast Research Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
130,243,000
110,872,000
Net inc
7,384,000
b8,945,000
Share earns
.62
-
Shares outst
11,923,000
11,573,000
6mo sales
244,739,000
219,224,000
Net inc
10,238,000
b8,639,000
Share earns
.86
-
Shares outst
11,851,000
11,556,000


Carrington Labs reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carrington Labs (OTC)
Year to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
8,147,000
5,046,000
Net loss
b1,739,000
c3,290,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $113,000.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $60,000, or 1 cent a share.


Emulex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,691,000
37,687,000
Net inc
32,000
3,816,000
Share earns
-
.33
Shares outst
10,575,441
11,728,245
6mo sales
57,450,000
73,848,000
Net inc
208,000
7,305,000
Share earns
.02
.63
Shares outst
10,814,778
11,636,000


Giga Tronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Giga Tronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,633,000
3,472,000
Net inc
624,000
541,000
Share earns
.24
.19
9mo sales
10,748,000
10,856,000
Net inc
1,707,000
1,822,000
Share earns
.66
.61


Hometown Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hometown Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
450,000
b191,000
Per share
-
.10
Year net loss
261,000
b371,000
Per share
-
.20
b-Net income


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,450,000
5,564,000
Per share
.61
.53
Year net inc
23,321,000
20,526,000
Per share
2.21
1.96
Per share earnings adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend.


First Midwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,641,000
4,501,000
Per share
.48
.39
Year net inc
b23,456,000
c15,134,000
Per share
2.00
1.30
b-Included an after-tax gain of $3,135,000 from the sale of assets.


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press on Thursday about Barbara Piasecka Johnson's offer to buy the Lenin ship-yard in Gdansk, Poland, misidentified the position of her late husband, J. Seward Johnson Sr., with Johnson &amp; Johnson.
He served on its board, but was never chairman.


Fidelity Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Savings Assn
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
202,000
332,000
Per share
.21
.34


Text of Affidavit by Agent
LEAD: Following is the text of an affidavit by Ronald D. Stern, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, that was used to file drug charges against Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today.


Mitterrand Holds Meetings With Hungarian Politicians
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand held talks today with a top Hungarian reformer, Imre Pozsgay, and leaders of five opposition parties.


Review/Film;   A Heroine Fixated on Everything
LEAD: Tom O'Toole (Nick Nolte), a hotshot private investigator who is also something of a publicity hound, is called to the small New England city of Highbury to look into the murder conviction of a teen-age boy.
Tom's contact is Angela Crispini (Debra Winger), a young woman of no visible means of support and almost lunatic intensity.


First Michigan Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,195,000
3,877,000
Per share
.64
.60
Year net inc
16,314,000
13,744,000
Per share
2.51
2.16


Laclede Steel Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Steel Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
68,171,000
79,105,000
Net inc
3,018,000
3,304,000
Share earns
.75
.82
Yr sales
306,417,000
306,805,000
Net inc
9,150,000
16,614,000
Share earns
2.26
4.10


Bank of New Hampshire Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New Hampshire Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,348,000
2,472,000
Per share
.40
.74
Year net inc
7,833,000
8,308,000
Per share
2.32
2.47
The latest periods' results included a fourth quarter addition of $1.5 million, or 29 cents a share, to the provision for possible loan losses.


Florida Acts Against Bank
LEAD: Florida officials said today that they planned to revoke the license of a major international bank that pleaded guilty this week to engaging in a worldwide money-laundering operation for illegal cocaine receipts.


Continuum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuum Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,666,000
16,058,000
Net inc
2,675,000
23,000
Share earns
.61
.01
9mo rev
58,314,000
49,351,000
Net inc
3,012,000
1,108,000
Share earns
.69
.25


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Missouri Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
10,063,000
8,951,000
Per share
.80
.67
Year net inc
40,084,000
34,470,000
Per share
3.08
2.59


Advest Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advest Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,711,000
50,501,000
Net inc
1,192,000
795,000
Share earns
.12
.08
Shares outst
10,324,000
10,255,000


Bank of South Carolina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of South Carolina
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
165,566
152,756
Per share
.31
.29
Year net inc
575,307
366,245
Per share
1.08
.69


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
8.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.79
8.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.60
7.68
8.28
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.20
8.29
9.07
30-YR.


Reynolds, After Protests, Cancels Cigarette Aimed at Black Smokers
LEAD: Under fire for developing a cigarette aimed primarily at blacks, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company abruptly decided late yesterday to cancel the cigarette.


Sweeter Offer For Aristech
LEAD: A Salt Lake City investor, Jon M. Huntsman, whose eariler offer for the Aristech Chemical Corporation was rejected, said today that he would submit a higher offer to rival a bid for the company by a management-led group and the Mitsubishi Corporation.


CF&amp;I Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CF&amp;I Steel Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
70,621,000
59,984,000
Net loss
2,388,000
6,012,000
Yr sales
295,036,000
303,423,000
Net loss
7,585,000
b2,392,000
Share earns
-
.36
b-Net income


BRIDGE
LEAD: A promising effort to teach bridge to the hearing impaired began on Tuesday at the New York League for the Hard of Hearing, at 71 West 23d Street in Manhattan.
But the organizers ran into some problems because they had underestimated the difficulty of teaching the game to nine tables of players with widely varying skill levels and differing degrees of impairment.


Advanced Marketing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Marketing Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
95,466,000
75,221,000
Net inc
2,318,000
3,301,000
Share earns
.40
.57
Shares outst
5,846,000
5,823,000
9mo sales
171,380,000
129,260,000
Net inc
3,145,000
4,525,000
Share earns
.54
.83
Shares outst
5,841,000
5,428,000


Mayor of Washington Is Yielding Most Duties After Cocaine Arrest 44&gt;
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. turned over most of his duties to the city manager today after appearing before a Federal magistrate on a misdemeanor charge of using crack cocaine.
He went into seclusion amid a growing belief that his political career is shattered.


Rorer Shares Rise on Deal
LEAD: The share price of Rorer Group Inc. rose $1 yesterday in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange after an announcement on Thursday that the company had signed an agreement to merge with the pharmaceutical operations of Rhone-Poulenc S.A., a chemical company owned by the French Government.


Nuclear Support Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nuclear Support Services Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,223,076
17,873,638
Net inc
266,965
651,234
Share earns
.12
.30
Shares outst
2,209,345
2,173,190


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
23,077,000
21,710,000
Per share
.57
.55
Year net inc
91,462,000
86,052,000
Per share
2.32
2.21
The company said that net income for 1989 was favorably impacted by after-tax income of $3,726,000 from Meridian's mortgage banking operations, compared to an after-tax loss of $1,279,000 reported in 1988.


Colorado National Bankhares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado National Bankhares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
819,000
2,052,000
Per share
.08
.18
Year net inc
4,589,000
10,646,000
Per share
.42
.98


Barry's Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barry's Jewelers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
39,533,000
38,036,000
Net loss
b7,851,000
c916,000
Share earns
-
.18
6mo sales
71,959,000
69,174,000
Net loss
7,699,000
c1,061,000
Share earns
-
.21


Second Thoughts Prompting More Donations to Neediest
LEAD: With The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund drive past its midpoint, more than 11,000 people have made donations, ranging from $2 to $250,000.
Now some of them are having second thoughts - and sending in second donations.


First Federal Savings (Salt Lake) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings (Salt Lake) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
160,881
45,080
Per share
.14
.04
6mo net inc
269,063
113,453
Per share
.23
.10


Dylan and Rock Groups Draw 90,000 in Brazil
LEAD: Bob Dylan is leading a cast of rock and pop figures, including the New Jersey band Bon Jovi, in a six-day, two-city rock festival.


Paine Webber Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
452,326,000
446,664,000
Net inc
10,862,000
512,000
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
25,268,000
28,258,000
Yr rev
1,727,169,000
1,754,814,000
Net inc
51,960,000
42,360,000
Share earns
1.05
.58
Shares outst
26,892,000
28,873,000


AFTER 2 TRIALS, A THIRD UNFOLDS FOR JOHN GOTTI
LEAD: As the reputed leader of the nation's most powerful Mafia group, John Gotti has been acquitted in New York of Federal racketeering charges and of state assault charges.


Genlyte Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
130,075,000
125,098,000
Net inc
3,212,000
2,705,000
Share earns
.25
.21
Yr sales
511,267,000
492,853,000
Net inc
12,343,000
11,525,000
Share earns
.95
.88


Elway in Pro Bowl
LEAD: John Elway of Denver and Brent Fullwood of Green Bay have been added to conference squads for the Pro Bowl on Feb. 4 in Honolulu.


Savings Bank's Chief Resigns
LEAD: William E. Gibson resigned unexpectedly today as chairman, president, chief executive and a director of the American Federal Savings Bank.


Oil Barge Is Grounded On Housatonic Shoal
LEAD: A barge loaded with 42,000 barrels of heavy fuel oil ran aground yesterday on a shoal in the Housatonic River near Stratford, trapping it in the sandy area for more than eight hours, a Coast Guard spokesman said.


Upheval in the East;   State Dept. Team Finds Nations in Afghan Conflict Flexible on Future Rule
LEAD: A State Department delegation exploring ways to end the war in Afghanistan completed a weeklong visit to the region today, convinced that the nations involved in the conflict are more amenable to a compromise that would not leave one party or leader in a dominant position.


Records in Jeopardy
LEAD: Ben Johnson's records in the 100 meter and the indoor 50-and 60-meter dashes may be voided this weekend when the International Amateur Athletic Federation holds two days of council meetings in Tokyo.


AIDS Doctor Falters And Halts Testimony
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego returned to the witness stand yesterday, but quickly said she could not continue, causing a recess in the trial of her $175 million lawsuit in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Upheaval in the East: U.S. Policy;   A Worried Washington Is Keeping Its Distance
LEAD: Soviet experts in the Bush Administration were scrambling late today for information on the fighting in Baku between the Soviet Army and Azerbaijanis, which Administration experts said seemed the inevitable next step in the drama in the Caucasus.


A 'Painting to Hammer Nail In'


Merchants National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b3,432,000
11,173,000
Per share
.23
.77
Year net inc
41,401,000
44,051,000
Per share
2.82
3.05
b-Reflected additional $15 million provision for credit losses stemming from the disposal of the corporation's remaining lesser developed country loan portfolio.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
348,600,000
274,700,000
Net inc
7,600,000
8,900,000
Share earns
.42
.49
9mo rev
974,600,000
685,400,000
Net inc
32,700,000
19,100,000
Share earns
1.78
1.05


A.J. Ross Logistics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A.J. Ross Logistics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,273,775
15,943,988
Net inc
b1,977,148
550,290
Share earns
.14
.04
b-Included after-tax gain of $1.9 million, or 14 cents a share, from sale of its epoxy coating operations and related property, plant and equipment in Bath, Pa.


Susquehanna Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Susquehanna Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,721,000
4,804,000
Per share
.59
.60
Year net inc
b19,056,000
18,491,000
Per share
2.39
2.32
b-Included one-time pre-tax charge of $1 million due to the Pennsylvania shares tax-single excise tax refund issue.


In Brooklyn, the Tide of Despair Begins to Turn
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deficit Curbs The Royal Shakespeare
LEAD: The Royal Shakespeare Company has announced only 21 productions for 1990, blaming a shortage of money for its most modest year since the 1970's.


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,910,000
5,035,000
Per share
.15
.40
Year net inc
b17,630,000
b2,305,000
Per share
1.38
.18
b-After extraordinary credits of $308,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest year and $493,000, or 4 cents a share, for 1988, from gains on extinguishment of debt.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,146,711,000
1,043,571,000
Net inc
102,975,000
b461,644,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
427,345,000
409,386,000
Yr rev
8,588,264,000
7,645,748,000
Net inc
900,628,000
62,127,000
Share earns
1.90
-
Shares outst
420,940,000
401,775,000


Drew Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Drew Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
28,880,000
26,481,000
Net loss
40,000
b208,000
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income
Year-ago figures included the results of certain ladder manufacturing and aluminum extrusion operations since Nov.


Onbancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onbancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,908,000
2,653,000
Per share
.47
.43
Year net inc
b10,961,000
7,959,000
Per share
1.79
1.30
b-After an extraordinary credit of $741,000, or 12 cents a share, from the sale of Federal Home Loan Bank advances.


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American National Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
22,500,000
18,400,000
Year net inc
78,200,000
69,500,000


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,650,000
1,089,000
Per share
.50
.35
Year net inc
5,423,000
3,205,000
Per share
1.64
1.05
Per share earnings for 1988 year adjusted to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split paid in May 1989.


California Micro Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Micro Devices (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,034,000
6,301,000
Net inc
503,000
b606,000
Share earns
.12
-
Shares outst
4,355,000
3,950,000
6mo rev
18,430,000
11,940,000
Net inc
928,000
b1,777,000
Share earns
.21
-
Shares outst
4,353,000
3,940,000


BUSH IS DEFENDING ON CHINA
LEAD: President Bush opened a public relations campaign today to avert his first Congressional veto override, making public a report on the steps his Administration has taken to extend the stays in the United States of Chinese students who fear persecution in their homeland.


Fourth Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fourth Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,966,000
8,391,000
Per share
.65
.63
Year net inc
34,418,000
30,585,000
Per share
2.49
2.28
The latest periods included the results of Garden National Bank and McPherson Bank and Trust, both acquired in December 1989 on a pooling- of-interests basis.


Injury Sidelines Sabatini in Australia
LEAD: Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, the top threat to challenge Steffi Graf's bid for a third consecutive Australian Open singles title, sprained her left ankle while leading in a third-round match today and dropped out of the first Grand Slam tournament of the year.


Banctec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banctec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
50,119,000
24,646,000
Net inc
2,611,000
2,001,000
Share earns
.39
.32
9mo rev
135,747,000
75,802,000
Net inc
6,552,000
5,323,000
Share earns
1.00
.85


Israeli Planes Raid 2 Areas in Southern Lebanon
LEAD: The Israeli Air Force raided targets in southern Lebanon today, killing 3 people and wounding 18 in the heaviest strikes in months, police and Palestinian spokesmen said.


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
38,832,000
33,127,000
Net inc
5,622,000
5,509,000
Share earns
.65
.64
Yr sales
151,238,000
135,029,000
Net inc
22,847,000
20,843,000
Share earns
2.66
2.43


Aileen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aileen Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 28
1989
1988
Sales
15,204,000
17,157,000
Net loss
2,443,000
b426,000
Share earns
-
.08
Yr sales
60,332,000
61,767,000
Net loss
5,492,000
b865,000
Share earns
-
.17
b


About New York;   A Union Head Forever Rooted To Delancey St.
LEAD: Saturday, May 8, 1937: Two more Hindenburg passengers died.
There was a smashing rehearsal in London for the coronation of George VI, and War Admiral won the Kentucky Derby.


Fort Wayne National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Wayne National
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,383,000
4,602,000
Per share
.57
.60
Year net inc
18,576,000
17,448,000
Per share
2.42
2.28


It's Winter, But Your Car Needs Cooling
LEAD: An automobile's cooling system is at least as important in the winter as in the summer, and one of the best investments in car care is proper maintenance of the radiator and its peripheral parts.


Sunwest Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Financial Svcs (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,620,000
4,800,000
Per share
.49
.51
Shares outst
9,390,374
9,335,026
Year net inc
20,105,000
b23,320,000
Per share
2.15
2.50
Shares outst
9,363,273
9,313,016


Builders of Eurotunnel Have Had No Incentive to Control Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cybertek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybertek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,720,000
4,753,000
Net inc
505,000
b181,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo rev
17,201,000
15,026,000
Net inc
1,182,000
b243,000
Share earns
.32
-
b-Net loss


Frank C. Perkins 3d, Executive, 48
LEAD: Frank Clifford Perkins 3d, an advertising executive in Manhattan, died of a brain tumor yesterday at his home in Redding, Conn.
He was 48 years old.


Steel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steel Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
30,278,000
29,774,000
Net inc
b1,382,000
1,574,000
Share earns
.17
.20
Included an accounting adjustment gain of $250,000, or 3 cents a share, from the cumulative effect on prior year periods of a change in accounting for income taxes.


Commerce Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,748,000
1,513,000
Per share
.44
.50
Year net inc
6,501,000
5,427,000
Per share
1.89
1.80


Network Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Equipment (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,025,000
35,537,000
Net inc
5,658,000
4,177,000
Share earns
.39
.30
Shares outst
14,588,000
13,855,000
9mo rev
141,538,000
97,953,000
Net inc
15,694,000
11,327,000
Share earns
1.09
.82
Shares outst
14,415,000
13,849,000


First Indiana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
6,298,000
b1,770,000
Per share
-
.81
Year net loss
4,042,000
b5,844,000
Per share
-
2.37
b-Net income
The company said the latest quarter and year losses resulted from early repayment of long-term fixed rate borrowings of First Indiana Bank, its principal unit, and additions to the bank's allowance for losses on commercial real estate loans and real estate owned.


Panatlas Energy reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Panatlas Energy
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,033,000
2,109,000
Net loss
94,000
b33,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Progroup Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progroup Inc (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
5,446,000
4,993,000
Net loss
377,000
283,000
Shares outst
2,558,770
2,502,682


Unilab Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unilab Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
27,789,000
-
Net loss
455,000
-
6mo rev
45,731,000
-
Net loss
482,000
-
In the second quarter ended Dec. 31, 1988, the company reported a loss of $193,000, on revenues of $1,047,000.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   LIFE IN BUCHAREST IS TALK AND PRAYER By DAVID BINDER
LEAD: It is now four weeks since a popular uprising overthrew the dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu.
But from the way small knots of citizens fill the rainy streets, speaking energetically, it appears that many Rumanians have not digested the full measure of the change.


Paine Webber's Earnings Advance Sharply in Quarter
LEAD: The Paine Webber Group yesterday reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings despite the generally poor conditions throughout the securities industry.


Little Criticism of Chancellor, for Now
LEAD: From some quarters, there was predictable praise yesterday for Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's bold move to gain some control over the hiring of local superintendents.
From likely critics of the plan, the reaction was surprisingly restrained.


Upheaval in the East: Poland;   Warsaw Wins Showdown With Miners, but Signs of Unrest Remain
LEAD: The Government won its first major showdown over its crash economic plan today when coal miners agreed to return to work at four of the five mines that have been shut down over demands for higher pay.


Cray Computer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Computer Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
12,590,000
9,945,000
Yr net loss
42,673,000
32,411,000


Rights and Wrongs In the Marshall Islands
LEAD:
Day of Two Suns
U.S. Nuclear Testing and the Pacific Islanders
By Jane Dibblin
Maps. 299 pages. New Amsterdam Books. $24.95 hard cover; $12.95 paperback.


Transworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transworld Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
551,000
491,000
Per share
.52
.47
Shares outst
1,061,556
1,049,956
Year net inc
2,125,000
1,501,000
Per share
2.01
1.43
Shares outst
1,058,351
1,049,420


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
16,200,000
10,658,000
Net inc
3,017,000
2,120,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Yr sales
58,868,000
37,857,000
Net inc
10,761,000
7,067,000
Share earns
.55
.38


Citizens Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,263,000
4,611,000
Per share
.79
.69
Year net inc
19,145,000
18,002,000
Per share
2.86
2.68


Entourage International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entourage International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,314,122
1,011,581
Net loss
b241,879
cd320,400
Share earns
-
.10
Yr rev
5,452,128
4,233,319
Net inc
b492,053
d355,202
Share earns
.15
.11


Glenayre Electronics reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenayre Electronics
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
108,341,000
59,197,000
Net loss
4,869,000
b3,599,000
Share earns
-
.80
Shares outst
6,273,935
4,516,086
b-Net income
The company said earnings in the latest period included $2,173,000 in non-recurring corporate reorganization costs.


Customedix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Customedix Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
13,170,607
14,356,951
Net inc
758,032
375,812
Share earns
.03
.01
Shares outst
33,760,700
33,901,800
6mo rev
25,874,104
25,740,399
Net inc
1,232,907
409,702
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
33,760,700
32,984,300


Jobs's New Computer Off to a Sluggish Start
LEAD: Some people are beginning to wonder whether Steven P. Jobs, the boy wonder of the computer industry, has lost his touch.
The new computer offered by Next Inc., the company founded by Mr.
Jobs after he left Apple in 1985, is off to a sluggish start in sales, according to industry executives, analysts and computer users.


Carriage Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carriage Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
24,611,000
23,675,000
Net inc
5,000
487,000
Share earns
-
.10
Shares outst
5,020,000
4,973,000
6mo sales
52,465,000
47,363,000
Net inc
58,000
1,492,000
Share earns
.01
.30
Shares outst
5,008,000
4,956,000


The Selling Of the Shoe Doesn't Fit
LEAD: Bill Shoemaker stepped up to a microphone in the Gulfstream Park dining room yesterday morning and looked at a small forest of plaques and scrolls signed by Florida politicians, proclaiming him the world's greatest jockey.


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Carolina Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,886,000
5,868,000
Per share
.42
.42
Year net inc
24,223,000
22,943,000
Per share
1.74
1.65


Angell Real Estate Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Angell Real Estate Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,643,404
4,849,045
Net loss
218,379
428,010
Yr rev
19,220,018
16,618,395
Net loss
542,128
748,313


Chemical Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,112,000
2,881,000
Per share
.96
.93
Year net inc
10,913,000
9,115,000
Per share
3.42
2.92


First American Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
932,000
1,320,000
Per share
.42
.60
Year net inc
1,898,000
2,259,000
Per share
.86
1.03


Home Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,968,000
2,480,000
Per share
.44
.56
Year net inc
8,838,000
9,207,000
Per share
1.98
2.07


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
844,000
1,523,000
Per share
.21
.36
Year net inc
b7,629,000
5,032,000
Per share
1.85
1.19
b-Included after-tax gain of $3,093,000, or 75 cents a share, from the sale of a former subsidiary.


Path Cleared for Nicholls
LEAD: The Rangers, with the final obstacle having been cleared, are expected to announce, perhaps as early as today, that they have acquired Bernie Nicholls from the Los Angeles Kings.


C-Cor Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Cor Electronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
13,067,000
12,816,000
Net inc
802,000
1,354,000
Share earns
.18
.32
Shares outst
4,358,034
4,278,654
6mo sales
26,294,000
25,035,000
Net inc
1,916,000
2,420,000
Share earns
.44
.57
Shares outst
4,346,679
4,239,198


Court Bars Random Drug Tests For Workers in Transit Systems
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today overturned new Transportation Department rules that required nearly 200,000 mass transit workers in cities to submit to mandatory random drug tests.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genentech Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
111,418,000
89,511,000
Net inc
15,520,000
b15,422,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
86,743,000
83,761,000
Yr rev
400,455,000
334,840,000
Net inc
43,961,000
20,565,000
Share earns
.51
.24
Shares outst
85,967,000
84,459,000


Rockets being fired from a truck by Armenian fighters in Yeraskhavan in response to an Azerbaijani attack on the frontier between the Armenian republic and the Nakhichevan region of the Azerbaijan republic. (Agence France-Presse); Rockets being fired yesterday by Armenian fighters in Yeraskhavan in response to an Azerbaijani attack on the frontier between the Armenian republic and the Nakhichevan region of the Azerbaijan republic (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 6); map of Soviet Union highlighting Azerbaijan and showing location of Baku (pg. 1) UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   SOVIET FORCE SAID TO BATTLE WITH AZERBAIJANI MILITANTS; CALL-UP OF RESERVES HALTED
LEAD: Soviet troops were reportedly firing on militants in Azerbaijan early today and pushing through street barricades with tanks toward the center of the republic's capital in an attempt to end the civil insurrection that has swept the southern Soviet republic.


Despite Protests, Dinkins Chooses Indiana Official as Health Chief
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins last night named Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr. as New York City Health Commissioner, rejecting the advice of some gay advisers and an international AIDS expert who had questioned Dr.
Myers's policies on AIDS.


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,627,000
5,151,000
Per share
.53
.49
Shares outst
10,668,314
10,531,398
Year net inc
23,405,000
17,671,000
Per share
2.21
1.68
Shares outst
10,591,416
10,502,379


Koch Adds a Job to His List
LEAD: Edward I. Koch has been hired as a director of William A. White/Grubb &amp; Ellis, a Manhattan-based real-estate concern, the company said yesterday.
The job is one of several that the former New York City Mayor has taken since leaving office Jan. 1, including joining a law firm, appearing on televsion and radio, writing a newspaper column and selling a diet aid.


5 Players on Probation After Brawl Halts Game
LEAD: Five members of the North Carolina A&amp;T basketball team were placed on probation by the school today for their part in a brawl in which fans tangled with players and the police.


A Tax Ruling Aids Holders Of Rights Under 'Poison Pill'
LEAD: Shareholders no longer have to worry about paying taxes at the time they receive rights to buy shares under ''poison pill'' plans, a popular device used by companies seeking to prevent hostile takeovers.


Chronicle
LEAD: The investment banker, political adviser and economic soothsayer FELIX G. ROHATYN has a new concern: his shape.
Mornings before 7 he has been seen striding (two miles in 30 minutes) through Central Park with his wife, Elizabeth, and their personal trainer.


1989 Surge in Anti-Semitic Acts Is Reported by B'nai B'rith
LEAD: Anti-Semitic incidents, ranging from desecration to murder, reached their highest level in 1989 since the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith began collecting statistics 11 years ago, the group said in its annual audit.


Beyond the Kill in Arthur Kill
LEAD: Disaster is a timely teacher.
The oil spill that has raised havoc at the nature sanctuary around Pralls Island in the Arthur Kill presents a costly lesson in ways to prevent and deal with such destruction.
Beyond that it carries a lesson about ways to deal with nature - and the ways nature deals with itself.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
485,511,000
426,375,000
Net inc
44,061,000
43,935,000
Share earns
.44
.46
Shares outst
80,341,000
79,291,000
Yr rev
2,004,136,000
1,863,668,000
Net inc
276,291,000
303,412,000
Share earns
3.05
3.47
Shares outst
79,997,000
79,052,000


Quantum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
111,190,000
51,591,000
Net inc
10,276,000
3,312,000
Share earns
.37
.12
Shares outst
27,744,585
27,926,070
9mo sales
316,461,000
130,289,000
Net inc
34,412,000
5,966,000
Share earns
1.25
.20
Shares outst
27,488,781
29,540,928


Portsmouth Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portsmouth Bank Shares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,170,000
1,027,000
Per share
.29
.26
Year net inc
6,439,000
3,648,000
Per share
1.62
-
Per share earnings not applicable for 1988 year because company went public in February 1988.


Checkpoint Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
17,302,000
13,693,000
Net inc
3,597,000
1,567,000
Share earns
.39
.17
Shares outst
9,346,000
9,165,000
Yr rev
50,750,000
44,370,000
Net inc
5,603,000
1,065,000
Share earns
.61
.12
Shares outst
9,258,000
9,047,000


Anthem Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
89,849,000
64,590,000
Net inc
4,973,000
2,271,000
Share earns
.43
.20
Shares outst
11,656,000
11,292,000
Yr sales
319,020,000
264,625,000
Net inc
15,775,000
b11,892,000
Share earns
1.39
1.05
Shares outst
11,389,000
11,285,000


Integrated Device Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integrated Device Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
51,648,000
43,470,000
Net inc
b3,010,000
2,888,000
Share earns
.12
.11
9mo sales
157,337,000
133,151,000
Net inc
b13,986,000
13,713,000
Share earns
.55
.54


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
406,167,000
364,921,000
Net inc
61,057,000
41,834,000
Share earns
1.20
.84
Yr rev
1,437,511,000
1,385,875,000
Net inc
219,434,000
206,459,000
Share earns
4.34
4.32


Bush Warns Senate on Changes to Clean Air Bill
LEAD: President Bush wrote to leaders of the Senate today warning that he would oppose amendments to strengthen the Clean Air Act if the costs to the economy exceeded ''the already considerable costs'' of the legislation he proposed last year.


Ashland Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,166,768,000
2,109,893,000
Net inc
22,012,000
95,879,000
Share earns
.40
1.72
The company said sales included excise taxes.


Gorbachev Calls for Program To Save Global Environment
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev called today for the creation of an international program to salvage the environment.


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,075,555
997,081
Per share
.30
.28
9mo net inc
3,258,887
2,928,496
Per share
.92
.83


A Fed Reappointment
LEAD: President Bush plans to reappoint Edward W. Kelley Jr. to a seat on the Federal Reserve Board, the White House said today.
Mr.
Kelley, who has served as a Fed governor since 1987, will be nominated for a 14-year term that begins Feb. 1.
Before his first appointment to the Fed, Mr.
Kelley was chairman of the board of Investors Advisors Inc.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iona Appliances
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,548,833
3,708,940
Net loss
96,240
444,571
6mo rev
10,147,318
7,519,381
Net inc
658,966
b423,865
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian funds.


Head of Investigation Panel Is Named
LEAD: Pledging to reinvigorate a panel he once said should be abolished, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today tapped a former state police superintendent to head the State Commission of Investigation.


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
178,043,000
156,183,000
Net inc
44,972,000
39,355,000
Share earns
.39
.34
Yr sales
682,472,000
618,517,000
Net inc
190,487,000
162,150,000
Share earns
1.63
1.41


Two Renegade Officers Arrested in Philippines
LEAD: Soldiers seized two renegade officers linked to coup attempts today, and a rebellious provincial Governor agreed to step down and end his 12-day defiance of President Corazon C. Aquino.


Arbitration Study Cleared
LEAD: Wall Street officials have agreed to study a plan to create an arbitration system for disputes between investors and stockbrokers.
The proposal, made by the


POSSIBLE VIOLATION OF AIR RULES SEEN
LEAD: A Federal safety official investigating a crash at the airport here said today that air traffic controllers may have violated standard procedures when they cleared an Eastern Airlines jet for landing on an occupied runway.


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Western Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,369,000
1,215,000
Per share
.70
.62
Year net inc
5,316,000
4,818,000
Per share
2.73
2.48


RLC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RLC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
80,541,000
76,029,000
Net inc
4,854,000
b5,258,000
Share earns
.26
.28
Shares outst
18,723,000
18,703,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $430,000, or 2 cents a share.


In Brooklyn, the Tide of Despair Begins to Turn;   In Bronx, Young People Give Time to Others
LEAD: To the Editor:


E.P.A. Officials Condemn Exxon for Staten Island Spill
LEAD: Officials of the United States Environmental Protection Agency said yesterday that Exxon was negligent and irresponsible for failing for 12 years to fix the leak-detection system on a pipeline that ruptured Jan. 1, spilling several hundred thousand gallons of oil into the Arthur Kill.


Earth Fog Keeps Shuttle in Orbit
LEAD: The space shuttle Columbia was forced to stay in orbit an extra day today because of fog at its desert landing site this morning.
It is now scheduled to touch down early Saturday to end the longest shuttle mission yet.


Buckeye Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buckeye Partners L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,000,000
41,800,000
Net inc
10,200,000
10,400,000
Share earns
.84
.86
Yr rev
160,500,000
157,000,000
Net inc
35,600,000
34,800,000
Share earns
2.94
2.87


Matlack Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
52,282,000
55,070,000
Net loss
896,000
b430,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
5,439,000
5,295,000
b-Net income


Bank of San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of San Francisco (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
943,000
404,000
Per share
.45
.19
Year net inc
2,773,000
1,443,000
Per share
1.31
.75


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyondell Petrochemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,329,000,000
1,128,000,000
Net inc
64,000,000
157,000,000
Share earns
.80
-
Shares outst
80,000,000
-
Yr rev
5,358,000,000
4,696,000,000
Net inc
374,000,000
543,000,000
Share earns
4.67
-


Bancorp New Jersey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp New Jersey Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
841,000
834,000
Per share
.31
.31
Year net inc
3,353,000
3,341,000
Per share
1.24
1.24


Kellogg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,088,200,000
1,092,000,000
Net inc
b57,900,000
100,900,000
Share earns
.47
.82
Yr sales
4,651,700,000
4,348,800,000
Net inc
c470,200,000
480,400,000
Share earns
3.85
3.90


Fidelity Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,805,000
b2,050,000
Per share
.51
.58
9mo net inc
4,836,000
b4,848,000
Per share
1.37
1.37
b-Included $4.1 million gain on the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Pooley Alone at Top of Hope Tournament
LEAD: Don Pooley, playing in something approaching solitude, took the third-round lead and didn't know it today in the spread-out Bob Hope Classic.


Greenstone Rabasca Roberts reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenstone Rabasca Roberts
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,827,812
-
Net inc
608,165
-
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
9,327,042
-
The company said comparable prior year results are unuavailable as the company changed its fiscal year- end from Jan.


Advo-System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advo-System Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
163,494,000
152,972,000
Net inc
3,658,000
b1,599,000
Share earns
.22
-
Shares outst
16,766,087
11,779,704
b-Net loss and included ''several'' one-time charges, including changes in senior management.


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amcore Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,676,000
2,532,000
Per share
.53
.49
Year net inc
9,157,000
9,054,000
Per share
1.78
1.77


Pacific Western Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Western Bancshares (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,306,000
2,035,000
Per share
.34
.18
Shares outst
12,730,000
11,566,000
Year net inc
13,354,000
b7,368,000
Per share
1.08
.63
Shares outst
12,331,000
11,537,000


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geodynamics Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 1
1989
1988
Revenue
13,012,000
12,580,000
Net inc
853,000
900,000
Share earns
.29
.31
6mo rev
25,709,000
24,331,000
Net inc
1,723,000
1,659,000
Share earns
.58
.57


Aurora Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aurora Environmental Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,327,103
2,262,354
Net loss
164,378
b168,803
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
7,618,715
5,630,554
Net loss
56,496
b140,475
Share earns
-
.02


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
26,271,000
25,880,000
Per share
1.11
1.09
Year net inc
b110,039,000
100,051,000
Per share
4.63
4.19
b-Included an after-tax gain of $5.8 million from the sale of Bancsystems Association Inc., a credit card subsidiary, and $5.1 million in expenses, after tax, incurred in connection with the acquisition of Trustcorp Inc.


Ballard Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ballard Medical Products
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,022,084
4,120,010
Net inc
983,120
780,615
Share earns
.18
.15


Second National Federal Savngs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Second National Federal Savngs (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,400,000
2,196,000
Per share
.33
.31
Year net inc
9,530,000
7,673,000
Per share
1.30
1.07


National Savings Bank of Alany reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Savings Bank of Alany
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
872,301
882,304
Per share
.74
.75


Vermont Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vermont Financial Services (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,400,000
2,200,000
Per share
.73
.68
Year net inc
8,700,000
7,600,000
Per share
2.60
2.33


Affiliated Bankshares of Colo.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bankshares of Colo.  Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,258,000
598,000
Per share
.20
.03
Year net inc
6,452,000
c3,190,000
Per share
.54
-
b-Included a gain of $17.3 million on the sale of the company's credit card interests, with the balance of the gain of $1.2 million to be recognized in 1990.


Child Abuse: Some Prosecutions Win
LEAD: The questions about the testimony of children that stymied the jurors in the McMartin preschool molestation case, which ended in acquittal Thursday, are questions that continue to complicate hundreds of child abuse cases now in the courts.


Gotbaums Have Alien Maid; Dinkins Stands By Appointee
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that a report that Victor and Betsy Gotbaum had employed an undocumented alien as a maid for the last five years would not influence his decision to appoint Mrs.
Gotbaum as Parks and Recreation Commissioner.


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,757,000
1,648,000
Per share
.46
.44
Yr net inc
6,814,000
6,250,000
Per share
1.79
1.67


Sports-Tech International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sports-Tech International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
853,408
409,053
Net loss
9,299
b11,570
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
1,300,000
750,000
b-Net income


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page illustration in Science Times on Jan 9. with an article about the Giant Keck Telescope in Hawaii depicted its mirror incorrectly.
As the article said, the mirror has 36 hexagonal segments, not 37.
The center hexagon is left empty to let a light beam pass through the mirror.


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
27,500,000
22,300,000
Per share
.86
.71
Year net inc
103,800,000
88,500,000
Per share
3.28
2.85
The 1988 figures were restated for merger with Colonial American Bankshares Inc.


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Eastern Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,877,000
7,388,000
Per share
.70
.76
Year net inc
30,509,000
26,551,000
Per share
3.12
2.73


Champion Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
13wks to Dec 1
1989
1988
Sales
80,858,000
103,077,000
Net loss
b2,690,000
364,000
39wk sales
249,159,000
287,769,000
Net loss
b6,080,000
911,000
b-Results included gains of about $360,000 in each of the first and second quarters from the sales of limited partnership interests in manufactured housing communities located in Michigan and a gain of about $260,000 from the sale of property and equipment.


Employees Write G.M.
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said today that it had received proposals from a group of employees seeking a vote by the company's shareholders on measures to increase stock value.


Study Shows Coaches Oppose I-A Playoff
LEAD: Saying that ''when you cut away the fat, there aren't really that many coaches who want a playoff,'' Richard D. Schultz, executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, sees no possibility that a Division I-A football playoff will be adopted in the next few years.


Using 2 Ways to Run One School System
LEAD: In the short time that Joseph A. Fernandez has been Chancellor of New York City's school system, he has both championed the notion of school-based management and wielded an unprecedented authority from his seat at the Board of Education headquarters.
In less than a month in office, Mr.
Fernandez has reached down into the heart of the city's decentralized system to bypass local school boards and remove one superintendent, block the appointment of another and dismiss principals.


Eastern Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,022,000
1,010,000
Per share
.40
.38
Shares outst
2,573,245
2,631,352


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zurn Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
143,364,000
118,056,000
Net inc
6,592,000
5,865,000
Share earns
.53
.48
9mo sales
438,130,000
341,283,000
Net inc
19,702,000
16,558,000
Share earns
1.59
1.36


In a Blaze of Lawsuits and Appeals, Heirs Battle Judge and Ex-Lawyers
LEAD: In his lifetime, Sigmund Sommer rose from a modest building contractor in Brooklyn to become one of New York's wealthiest real-estate developers, the owner of a prized stable of race horses and a man known for his generosity.


Gander Mountain Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gander Mountain Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,120,000
40,287,000
Net inc
2,097,000
1,691,000
Share earns
.76
.61
6mo sales
72,770,000
69,469,000
Net inc
3,103,000
2,271,000
Share earns
1.12
.82


DPC Terminates Dataproducts Bid
LEAD: The DPC Acquisition Corporation said it was terminating its offer of $10 a share for the Dataproducts Corporation.
DPC Acquisition said the current disarray in the financial markets had made it impracticable for the company to obtain financing.
Those shares tendered pursuant to the tender bid would be returned to holders, DPC


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With a Blizzard of Batteries
LEAD: Battery advertisements fall like a blizzard these days, offering wares the manufacturers say will make your camera work better and your flashlight last longer.
Buying batteries can be an exercise in confusion unless you do a little planning.


Union Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Planters Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b17,900,000
972,000
Year net loss
b22,300,000
c22,700,000
Per share
-
1.20
b-Included $16 million special addition to loan loss reserves and $7.8 million in unusual litigation and litigation-related expenses for both periods.


Woman Named Police Chief of Houston
LEAD: Elizabeth M. Watson, who began her 17-year police career riding a beat in this city, was named Police Chief today.
If her nomination is confirmed, as expected, she will be the first woman to head the police force of one of the nation's top 20 cities.


Heritage Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Svcs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,808,000
1,787,000
Per share
.45
.45
Year net inc
7,070,000
6,457,000
Per share
1.76
1.61


Perles Is Leading Jets Candidate
LEAD: Dick Steinberg, the Jets' general manager, has interviewed his last candidate for the team's head coaching job and appears ready to ask George Perles, the Michigan State coach, to take the job next week.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diebold Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
127,361,000
117,156,000
Net inc
10,949,000
9,214,000
Share earns
.83
.70
Shares outst
13,203,000
13,177,000
Yr sales
468,883,000
450,571,000
Net inc
36,230,000
b35,824,000
Share earns
2.75
2.72
Shares outst
13,193,000
13,176,000


F &amp; M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F &amp; M National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,790,000
2,440,000
Per share
.31
.27
Year net inc
10,890,000
9,950,000
Per share
1.23
1.12


McCartney Honored
LEAD: Bill McCartney, who led the University of Colorado to 11 consecutive victories before losing to Notre Dame in the Orange Bowl, was named the winner of the Bear Bryant Award as the nation's college football coach of the year Thursday night in Houston.


Caci International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caci International (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,779,146
38,380,627
Net inc
875,312
1,142,086
Share earns
.08
.10
6mo rev
70,396,524
73,903,367
Net inc
1,712,462
2,249,600
Share earns
.15
.19


Islanders Streak Into First On 9th Consecutive Victory
LEAD: Randy Wood scored three power-play goals for his first career hat trick and a rookie, Dave Chyzowski, got the winner in the third period tonight as the Islanders beat the Winnipeg Jets, 6-4, for their ninth successive victory.


Upheaval in the East: Muslims;   Experts See No Broader Islamic Uprising
LEAD: American experts on the Soviet Union are interpreting this week's riots in Azerbaijan as a revolt rooted in local history.
They say the unrest is not part of a larger movement of the Soviet Union's 45 million Muslims, who have long been viewed as a potential challenge to Moscow's centralized control.


Outboard Marine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outboard Marine (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
232,700,000
264,400,000
Net loss
15,300,000
b1,000,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
19,400,000
19,300,000
b-Net income and included a loss from discontinued operations of $200,000.


Random Access reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Random Access
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,375,887
3,337,065
Net inc
149,980
120,900
Share earns
.03
.02


Altex Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altex Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
619,000
744,000
Net loss
b2,112,000
229,000
b-Included writedown of $1,894,000.


Your Money;   How to Measure Investing Success
LEAD: The key to successful investing is setting personal goals and working to achieve them, not matching a broad market measure, contends Lawrence B. Eichler, president of the Sentinel Investment Management Corporation, a consulting firm in White Plains.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Willamette Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
475,921,000
445,682,000
Net inc
51,307,000
39,431,000
Share earns
2.02
1.55
Yr sales
1,891,824,000
1,716,021,000
Net inc
191,056,000
161,087,000
Share earns
7.52
6.34


Child Abuse - and Trial Abuse
LEAD: Correct or not, the verdict in the McMartin Preschool case comes appallingly late and at an astonishing price.
The jury delivered the best justice it could after a 30-month trial.
But the only justice a 30-month trial can render is medieval.
California, and other states, must find more sensible ways to deal with child molestation cases.


World Steel Output Up
LEAD: World crude steel output rose to a record of 783.5 million metric tons in 1989, up five-tenths of 1 percent from 1988, the International Iron and Steel Institute said this week.
The rise was led by developing countries, which increased output by 3.7 percent, to a record 100.9 million tons, from 97.3 million tons in 1988, the institute said.


Atwater Urges Softer Abortion Line
LEAD: Lee Atwater, the Republican national chairman, sent a powerful signal of his party's new approach to abortion today, declaring that there were no litmus tests in the party and that Republicans should support Republican candidates regardless of their stand on the issue.


S.A.Y. Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* S.A.Y. Packaging
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
4,913,293
4,945,665
Net loss
173,947
95,535
6mo sales
8,325,516
9,097,758
Net loss
683,531
340,242


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
199,699,000
182,591,000
Net inc
12,965,000
11,137,000
Share earns
.33
.29
6mo sales
329,176,000
285,229,000
Net inc
15,475,000
13,233,000
Share earns
.39
.34


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Connecticut (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,661,000
1,505,000
Per share
.76
.69
Year net inc
6,077,000
5,521,000
Per share
2.80
2.55


Acme-Cleveland Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme-Cleveland Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
47,331,428
43,859,816
Net inc
b1,683,271
b901,396
Share earns
.26
.13
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $390,000, or 6 cents a share for the latest quarter and $310,000, or 5 cents a share for the year-earlier period.


Parker Hannifin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
594,590,000
579,761,000
Net inc
b25,021,000
c27,895,000
Share earns
.51
.57
Shares outst
48,859,799
48,745,708
6mo sales
1,167,011,000
1,140,090,000
Net inc
b48,382,000
c75,485,000
Share earns
.99
1.55
Shares outst
48,858,190
48,734,892


II-VI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* II-VI Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,083,000
3,226,000
Net inc
362,000
396,000
Share earns
.14
.15
Shares outst
2,668,000
2,665,000
6mo sales
7,449,000
6,411,000
Net inc
673,000
795,000
Share earns
.25
.30
Shares outst
2,668,000
2,664,000


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
652,529,000
640,555,000
Net inc
49,432,000
b61,124,000
Share earns
.90
1.11
Shares outst
55,527,912
54,890,005
b-Included a net gain of $4.8 million, or 9 cents a share, from the resale of a 50 percent interest in a cogeneration project.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,319,000
10,548,000
Per share
.69
.65
Year net inc
27,917,000
40,401,000
Per share
1.70
2.50


Initio Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Initio Inc.
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,558,162
3,413,062
Net inc
335,670
b260,836
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
4,112,742
4,393,044
6mo sales
5,391,639
4,423,721
Net loss
243,367
1,111,028
Shares outst
4,112,742
4,398,444


INB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* INB Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
15,587,000
15,147,000
Per share
.89
.87
Year net inc
59,109,000
55,826,000
Per share
3.38
3.21


Espirt Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Espirt Systems
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,883,000
5,567,000
Net loss
125,000
866,000
Shares outst
23,629,375
7,629,375
6mo sales
9,868,000
10,051,000
Net loss
1,093,000
1,553,000
Shares outst
18,349,375
7,629,375


Glenmore Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenmore Distilleries (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,850,000
38,280,000
Net inc
2,744,000
1,848,000
Share earns
1.11
.74
6mo sales
81,883,000
58,944,000
Net inc
3,575,000
2,314,000
Share earns
1.45
.93


A Blood-Spattered Car Is Seized at a Carwash
LEAD: The police said they believe a blood-spattered car confiscated at a carwash here is tied to the gangland-style slaying of an actor in Queens.


Home Federal Savings Bank- Seymour, Ind.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Federal Savings Bank- Seymour, Ind.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
608,000
534,000
Per share
.66
.58
6mo net inc
1,157,000
b1,105,000
Per share
1.26
1.20
b-Included after-tax income of $378,000 from the sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Federal Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,536,000
326,000
Per share
.30
-
9mo net inc
4,375,000
3,127,000
Per share
.85
-
There were no per share earnings in year-ago periods because the company went public in February 1989.


UAL Up on Report Of New Proposal
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation shot up yesterday after a report was published that Marvin Davis, the California investor who last August started a bidding contest for the airline company, planned a new offer around $5.6 billion.
UAL's shares rose $7.375 each, at $165.625, in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


PROSPECT GROUP BOARD BACKS SELLING ASSETS
LEAD: In a radical move intended to increase value for shareholders, the directors of the Prospect Group Inc. authorized a plan yesterday that would sell substantially all of its assets and distribute the proceeds to investors.


Suburban Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bankshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
153,000
189,000
Per share
.13
.16
Year net inc
591,000
378,000
Per share
.49
.28


Dallas Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dallas Semiconductor (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,540,000
16,679,000
Net inc
2,979,000
b2,310,000
Share earns
.12
.09
Yr sales
82,209,000
58,093,000
Net inc
11,121,000
b9,982,000
Share earns
.45
.40


Review/Music;   Stravinsky's 'Oedipus Rex,' Without Attic Trappings
LEAD: ''Oedipus Rex,'' Stravinsky's ''opera-oratorio after Sophocles,'' was written in 1927 while the Russian composer lived as an exile in France.
In a gesture characteristic of his rootless artistry throughout a long career as a displaced person, he decided that a work by a Russian drawn from a Greek tragedy would be sung in a dead language, Ciceronian Latin, and narrated in the language of whatever country in which it was performed.


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
16,059,000
13,610,000
Per share
.62
.53
Year net inc
62,035,000
53,419,000
Per share
2.40
2.08
The per share earnings were adjusted for 2-for-1 stock split paid in December 1989.


Upheval in the East: Albania;   Visitor Finds No Crackdown
LEAD: An Italian official who was in Albania for three days this week said today that he saw no sign of a security crackdown in that hard-line Communist country.


Lawmakers Urged by Baker To Back Shift in Foreign Aid
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d sought Congressional leaders' approval today to free about $250 million in 1990 foreign aid money designated for specific countries so that the department can redistribute the money to other nations.


Programming &amp; Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Programming &amp; Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
7,450,593
7,046,171
Net inc
675,172
567,871
Share earns
.37
.32
9mo rev
21,238,403
19,084,634
Net inc
2,388,087
1,975,513
Share earns
1.32
1.10


Laserscope reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laserscope (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,263,000
3,263,000
Net inc
661,000
278,000
Share earns
.12
.06
Shares outst
5,365,000
4,883,000
Yr rev
20,041,000
10,978,000
Net inc
1,989,000
112,000
Share earns
.40
.02
Shares outst
5,002,000
4,868,000


Jordache Assets
LEAD: Jean Philippe Fragrances Inc. said it had acquired the assets of Jordache Cosmetics and Fragrances, a unit of Jordache Enterprises.
The transaction is valued at about $6 million payable over the term of the license.
Jean Philippe acquired a 16-year exclusive license to sell Jordache fragrances in the United States and a license to sell them worldwide.


Upheaval in the East: Reporter's Notebook;   Beret Meets Gold Braid: Generals Out of the Cold
LEAD: It had neither the drama of the crumbling of the Berlin wall nor the setting of the maritime summit meeting in Malta.
But the cloakroom in the Hofburg Palace this week may well merit a place among images that chart the waning of the cold war.


Court in El Salvador Indicts 8 Soldiers in Jesuit Slayings
LEAD: A colonel, two lieutenants and five lower ranking military officials were charged today with the slayings of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and the housekeeper's daughter.


Noriega Was Close to Suicide, Aide Says
LEAD: Realizing that he had been cornered by the United States troops, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega originally decided to commit suicide rather than surrender or risk being ''shot by some G.I.
Joe from Missouri,'' a close associate asserted today.


Thiokol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thiokol Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
288,717,000
282,897,000
Net inc
9,699,000
7,781,000
Share earns
.51
.40
6mo sales
556,537,000
562,761,000
Net inc
18,635,000
16,127,000
Share earns
.97
.84


Western Dance For Beijing
LEAD: Li Ying raised her slender arms and lowered them slowly, gracefully, like a wave falling from its crest, as a flurry of lithe dancers swished back and forth and around her.


Upheaval in the East: Russians;   Cry of 'Won't Give My Son!' And Soviets End the Call-Up
LEAD: The Kremlin abandoned its emergency mobilization of army reserves today after an outpouring of protests from Russian parents unwilling to let their sons police the fighting in Azerbaijan.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bearings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
158,749,000
153,301,000
Net inc
4,148,000
4,341,000
Share earns
.58
.58
Shares outst
7,197,000
7,443,000
6mo sales
315,334,000
296,771,000
Net inc
8,311,000
8,043,000
Share earns
1.15
1.06
Shares outst
7,241,000
7,584,000


UST Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,826,351
7,864,378
Per share
.61
.61
Year net inc
28,339,807
28,324,917
Per share
2.21
2.22


Review/Dance;   Exploring the Extremes of Looming and Oozing
LEAD: Several programs in the two-week Man-Made festival, which ends on Sunday at the Joyce Theater, have suggested that modern dance, at least in New York, has come into an age of elevated inconsequence.
Grand themes and choreographic visions seem to be out these days.
Exploration is in, but too often it is relatively superficial exploration of such concerns as the structuring of a dance or ways to push the human body to physical extremes.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
10,608,000
10,209,000
Per share
.88
.85
Year net inc
38,583,000
b37,936,000
Per share
3.19
3.14
b-After a gain of $1,282,000, or 10 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


California Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,304,000
30,487,000
Net inc
1,874,000
1,232,000
Share earns
.22
.15
6mo sales
71,637,000
57,218,000
Net inc
3,268,000
2,418,000
Share earns
.39
.29
Shares outst
121,642,000
127,094,000


U.S. Is Told to Preserve Noriega Data
LEAD: A United States magistrate today barred the United States Government from destroying any documents belonging to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega that were seized in the invasion of Panama last month.


Big Charge Is Expected At Merrill
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is expected to take a charge against its 1989 fourth-quarter earnings of more than $100 million to pay for a significant reorganization of the firm that was undertaken late last year, analysts and Wall Street executives said yesterday.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle-Picher Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
175,555,467
202,944,537
Net inc
10,966,607
b496,446,759
Share earns
1.03
-
Shares outst
10,692,000
10,696,000
Yr sales
729,914,974
770,109,728
Net inc
53,813,527
b465,762,111
Share earns
5.04
-
Shares outst
10,685,000
10,697,000


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brajdas Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
14,738,824
15,239,177
Net loss
416,944
b265,969
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
2,880,717
2,967,014
9mo sales
46,285,697
48,404,669
Net loss
783,346
b1,953,295
Share earns
-
.66
Shares outst
2,898,561
2,958,815


Corrections
LEAD: An article in weekend yesterday about the WInter Antique Show misstated the price of a pair of andirons at the Gerald Kornblau booth.
They are $22,000.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Outdoing the Wind
Liselotte Neumann of Sweden tamed the wind yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after the opening round of the Jamaica Classic in Montego Bay, the season opener of the Ladies' Professional Golf Association.
Neumann toured the front 9 in three-under 31, then matched par-37 after the turn for a three-under-par 68.


CPB Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPB Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,580,000
1,977,000
Per share
.51
.49
Year net inc
9,419,000
7,297,000
Per share
2.02
1.82


RSI Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RSI Holdings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
14,318,000
15,555,000
Net inc
38,000
163,000
Share earns
-
.02


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,946,671
125,892,293
Net inc
11,341,251
6,599,929
Share earns
.81
.44
Yr rev
536,194,386
486,704,897
Net inc
44,143,625
44,238,095
Share earns
3.14
3.18


Japan Reports Surplus Shrank
LEAD: Increasing consumption and growing imports pushed Japan's trade surplus down in December, the Finance Ministry said today.
It was the eighth consecutive monthly decline from levels a year earlier.


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCB Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,125,000
5,104,000
Per share
1.01
1.02
Year net inc
21,011,000
19,727,000
Per share
4.17
3.94


Farley Is Sued On Pepperell
LEAD: In a class-action lawsuit filed this week in Federal court here, William F. Farley has been sued by investors who contend the Chicago financier misrepresented his ability to complete a takeover of West Point-Pepperell Inc.


Washington Post Shift to Big Board
LEAD: The Washington Post Company announced yesterday that it would move its class B stock to a listing on the New York Stock Exchange, leaving the American Stock Exchange after 19 years.
The company said it expects to be listed on the Big Board by the end of January.


Water Main Break Snarls Traffic in Lower Manhattan


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
260,290,000
274,804,000
Net inc
b29,479,000
c53,246,000
Share earns
5.28
9.91
Yr sales
1,146,583,000
1,102,994,000
Net inc
b179,324,000
c258,544,000
Share earns
33.14
48.69


Bank Sees $1.2 Billion In Losses
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation said yesterday that its real estate losses were far greater than had been expected and that it would report a deficit of $1.2 billion for the fourth quarter.


Central Penn Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Penn Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,113,000
1,086,000
Share earns
.56
.54
9mo net inc
3,374,000
3,197,000
Share earns
1.69
1.60
Year-ago share earnings for both the quarter and 9 months are adjusted to reflect a 10 percent stock dividend paid in December 1989.


Johnson Worldwide Assocites reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Worldwide Assocites (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
43,179,000
41,333,000
Net inc
501,000
b1,108,000
Share earns
.06
.14
b-After income of $403,000, or 5 cents a share, from discontinued operations.


No Decision in Inquiry on Bush Son
LEAD: Federal regulators investigating the collapse of a savings and loan association where President Bush's son Neil was once a director have barred the institution's former owner from the banking business but deferred a decision on Neil Bush.


Man in the News: Woodrow Augustus Myers Jr.;   A Commissioner Who Knows Strife
LEAD: From the time he was a youngster, Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr. has been confident of his ability to get his point across, even when it has involved some rough going.


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubco Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
829,214
1,263,362
Year net inc
3,308,928
5,253,084
Per share
.81
1.28


For Mayor Barry, Hope and Promise Crumble Under Weight of Charges
LEAD: There was a time when Marion S. Barry Jr. was a symbol of hope, living proof that the great American dream could come true, that the son of a black Mississippi sharecropper could rise to the top of the heap, could go beyond chopping cotton and waiting tables and delivering papers to being Mayor of the capital city of the United


Electronic Data Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Data Tech
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,087,000
4,583,000
Net inc
688,000
b784,000
Share earns
.18
.21
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $227,000, or 6 cents a share.
The company said it has changed to a fiscal year ended Sept.


Chronicle
LEAD: Hugo Weisgall, the composer, was elected president of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters on Thursday.
He succeeds HORTENSE CALISHER, the writer.
The Academy is made up of the nation's leading artists, composers and writers.


Action Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Action Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
335,000
857,000
Per share
.30
.78


TELE-COMMUNICATIONS PLANS CABLE PROGRAMMING SPINOFF
LEAD: In a long-expected move, Tele-Communications Inc., te nation's largest cable company, said it would spin off all of its cable programming holdings and some of its cable subscribers into a separate company.


National Community Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,100,000
11,300,000
Per share
.87
1.09
Year net inc
45,000,000
42,000,000
Per share
4.32
4.05


Tuckahoe Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tuckahoe Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,730,120
4,170,717
Net inc
696,968
499,785
Share earns
.12
.09
9mo rev
17,212,277
12,808,722
Net inc
2,102,208
1,450,826
Share earns
.36
.25


FLS Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FLS Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
123,640,969
122,195,974
Net inc
1,452,935
1,496,536
FLS Holdings Inc. is the holding company of Florida Steel Corp. and FLS Holdings is privately held.


Iomega Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iomega Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
30,448,000
26,475,000
Net inc
4,871,000
970,000
Share earns
.29
.06
Yr sales
108,991,000
111,501,000
Net inc
11,172,000
8,566,000
Share earns
.67
.50


Chronicle
LEAD: The first annual William J. Brennan Award is to be presented to - WILLIAM J. BRENNAN.
The New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers will honor the Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court on Jan. 26 at its annual dinner at the Grand Hyatt hotel.


Peoples Savings Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Savings Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
754,000
824,000
Per share
.32
.34
Year net inc
2,796,000
2,723,000
Per share
1.16
1.11


Baker Fentress &amp; Co.  reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker Fentress &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
456,191,264
406,253,981
Share earns
25.18
24.08
Shares outst
18,119,050
16,873,885
Assets represented net assets.
The latest share earnings is after $2.70 long-term and 2.4 cents short- term capital gain distributions paid in December.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
243,180,000
283,587,000
Net inc
41,243,000
54,422,000
Share earns
1.68
1.95
Shares outst
24,591,305
27,922,724
Yr sales
1,104,468,000
1,060,612,000
Net inc
191,990,000
193,604,000
Share earns
7.58
6.75
Shares outst
25,326,604
28,663,202


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Financial Services
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,342,000
b1,976,000
Share earns
1.42
1.20
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $408,000, or 25 cents a share, from a tax loss carryforward.


Keptel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keptel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
13,013,000
7,472,000
Net inc
603,000
503,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
4,797,330
4,523,263
Latest quarter included revenue of about $3 million from the recent acquisition of Comfab Technologies and about $1 million from the Armiger product line which was acquired in January 1989.


Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
428,000
703,000
Per share
.05
.08
Shares outst
8,698,519
8,542,658
Year net inc
2,673,000
2,403,000
Per share
.31
.28
Shares outst
8,651,201
8,452,351


Demolition of Noriega's Headquarters Begins


Rusty Hamer, Actor, 42
LEAD: Rusty Hamer, a child actor in the television series ''Make Room for Daddy'' in the 1950's and 60's, was found dead of a gunshot wound in his home on Thursday.
He was 42 years old.


First Illinois reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,915,000
4,249,000
Per share
.19
.17
Year net inc
18,804,000
16,082,000
Per share
.72
.62


Branford Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3*Branford Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,954,000
b504,000
Per share
-
.33
Year net loss
588,000
b2,307,000
Per share
-
1.48
b-Net income
The company said the fourth quarter loss was due to a special addition to its loan loss reserve in the amount of $3.7 million.


First Interstate of Iowa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate of Iowa Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,114,000
3,013,000
Per share
.26
.26
Year net inc
12,658,000
3,177,000
Per share
1.06
.27


Sony's New Recorder
LEAD: The Sony Corporation said today that it had developed an ultracompact digital memo recorder.
The recorder uses tapes the size of postage stamps that can record for up to two hours.
It will be commercially available later this year, a spokesman said.
No indication of price was given today.


People's Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,608,000
8,134,000
Per share
.11
.25
Year net inc
32,461,000
36,580,000
Per share
1.00
.45


Flagler Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagler Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
621,000
517,000
Per share
.28
.23
Year net inc
2,264,000
1,880,000
Per share
1.01
.84
Per share earnings adjusted for stock dividends.


BancOklahoma Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancOklahoma Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,209,000
323,000
Per share
.02
-
Year net inc
3,793,000
b74,207,000
Shares outst
12,064,000
6,232,000
b-Net loss
Preferred dividend requirements exceeded per share income in latest periods and year-ago quarter.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,775,000
7,318,000
Per share
.71
.60
Year net inc
33,605,000
26,315,000
Per share
2.72
2.15


United Banks of Colo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colo Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,300,000
900,000
Per share
.25
.02
Year net inc
18,100,000
9,000,000
Per share
1.04
.45


A Top Palestinian Is Seized By Israel a Ally Of Revolt
LEAD: The Israeli. police arrested the West Bank's most prominent Palestinian nationalist today and charged him with helping an illegal organization involved in the uprising in the occupied territories.


A 'Thrilled' Carter Signs With Giants for a Year
LEAD: Gary Carter three-putted the 13th hole in the third round of the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic today, then announced: ''I'm very happy.
I'm very excited.
I'm thrilled to death.
I'm looking forward to it.''


Eastland Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastland Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,443,000
2,938,000
Per share
.25
.51
Year net loss
10,973,000
b7,114,000
b-Net income but per share earnings were not available because company went public in July 1988.


Baghwan Shree Rajneesh, Indian Guru, Dies at 58
LEAD: Baghwan Shree Rajneesh, the Indian guru who attracted thousands of followers at his Oregon commune in the early 1980's before being deported from the United States, died yesterday of heart disease at his commune in Poona, in southern India, members of his entourage there told reporters.
He was 58 years old.


Supertex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Supertex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 3
1989
1988
Sales
5,066,000
5,141,000
Net inc
337,000
801,000
Share earns
.03
.07
Shares outst
12,180,000
12,177,000
9mo sales
15,677,000
16,060,000
Net inc
1,993,000
2,408,000
Share earns
.16
.20
Shares outst
12,180,000
12,166,000


NESB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NESB Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
14,715,000
403,000
Yr net loss
48,118,000
b7,780,000
Share earns
-
1.01
b-Net income
Latest fourth-quarter loss was affected by an increase of $12 million in the provision for loan losses.


IRT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IRT Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,745,000
3,702,000
Net inc
149,000
b2,094,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
5,484,056
4,847,476
9mo rev
15,877,000
12,930,000
Net inc
1,589,000
b1,608,000
Share earns
.29
-
Shares outst
5,464,715
4,845,438


DOW UP 11.52, TO 2,677.90, as VOLUME RISES
LEAD: The stock market finished a generally down week on a positive note yesterday as both blue chips and the broader share averages registered gains.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collective Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,414,000
3,097,000
Per share
.28
.36
6mo net inc
4,547,000
6,130,000
Per share
.52
.71


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am deeply committed to policing, and if in the course of doing that I serve as a role model to other women, I am doubtly honored.''
-Elizabeth Watson, on her nomination as Houston police chief.


Maryland Federal Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maryland Federal Bancorp Inc.  (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Net inc
833,000
1,310,000
Per share
.28
.45
9mo net inc
1,955,000
3,179,000
Per share
.66
1.09


CK Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CK Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
686,986
675,387
Per share
.51
.54
The company said that due to the issuance of 317,536 shares of common stock in connection with an acquisition, per share earnings for the quarter were down despite an increase in overall earnings.


Health Care Property reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Care Property (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,831,000
14,709,000
Net inc
4,308,000
3,343,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Shares outst
9,199,982
8,166,056
Yr rev
62,475,000
53,219,000
Net inc
13,801,000
13,656,000
Share earns
1.55
1.67
Shares outst
8,910,762
8,161,996


Dollar Moves Downward; Gold Prices Finish Lower
LEAD: The American dollar was mostly lower against other leading currencies yesterday in trading dominated by the Canadian dollar.
Gold prices declined.


Trilling Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trilling Medical
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,057,419
874,655
Net inc
64,395
128,980
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
26,420,507
15,599,379
Year-ago quarter results included revenue of $250,000 of other income derived from an option agreement with Pfizer Inc.


45 Ballplayers Cross $1 Million Threshold in Arbitration Filings
LEAD: The salary-arbitration bank broke yesterday.


BancFlorida Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancFlorida Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,315,000
b1,771,000
Share earns
.28
.52
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $2.1 million from termination of pension benefits under the company's pension plan as of Oct.


U.S.-Japanese Stock Accord
LEAD: The top securities regulators of the United States and Japan agreed Thursday to take steps to insure instant communications in sudden market plunges.


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
10,033,000
13,572,000
Per share
.33
.44
Year net inc
45,664,000
b63,288,000
Per share
1.48
2.07
b-After an extraordinary gain of $4,962,000, or 16 cents a share, from cumulative effect of accounting change.


Colonial Bancgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Bancgroup (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b41,861,000
c1,961,000
Per share
-
.29
Year net loss
b37,834,000
c7,907,000
Per share
-
1.22
b-Included a charge of $41.5 million, consisting of a $31 million writedown of goodwill, a $4.5 million writedown of the value of certain buildings obtained through the company's acquisition program and a $6 million additional provision to the loan loss reserve.


Savings Unit Has Setback
LEAD: Federal regulators today denied permission to switch insurance funds for California's Home Savings of America, the largest and one of the healthiest savings institutions in the nation.


Calfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
23,600,000
19,300,000
Per share
.94
.77
Year net inc
82,400,000
134,000,000
Per share
3.28
5.36


Soviet Bank in China
LEAD: The Soviet Union has opened a bank in the Chinese capital for the first time since relations between the two natons soured in the early 1960's, an official of the Soviet bank said today.
The Vneshtorgbank (Foreign Trade Bank) began business on Jan. 12.
The merchant bank still has no permanent offices in China and is operating in diplomatic quarters, the official said.


Ask Computer Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ask Computer Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
50,171,000
45,504,000
Net inc
791,000
3,181,000
Share earns
.06
.24
Shares outst
13,331,000
13,475,000
6mo rev
88,124,000
84,820,000
Net inc
1,343,000
5,558,000
Share earns
.10
.41
Shares outst
13,394,000
13,496,000


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AON Corp., Chicago, an insurer, bought the special markets division of Washington National Insurance Co., Evanston, Ill., for $30 million.


New Chief for Houston Police Department


Omni Films International reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Omni Films International
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,984,850
3,592,868
Net loss
379,259
b303,167
Share earns
-
.18
b-Net income


Radiomutuel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiomutuel Inc.
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
8,700,000
8,300,000
Net inc
375,000
b736,000
Share earns
.07
.13
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $123,000, or 2 cents a share.
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Sono-Tek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sono-Tek Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
712,734
605,368
Net inc
119,681
133,540
Share earns
.03
.04
9mo rev
2,127,742
1,659,607
Net inc
390,065
376,317
Share earns
.10
.10


Ccair reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ccair (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,737,000
13,958,000
Net loss
1,797,000
b1,142,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Net income


FB&amp;T Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FB&amp;T Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,383,000
1,164,000
Per share
.71
.60
Year net inc
4,923,000
4,220,000
Per share
2.54
2.19
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for 10 percent stock dividend paid in September 1989.


Continental Air Delays Merit Raises
LEAD: Continental Airlines has frozen merit raises for its managers in the latest of a series of cost cutbacks.
The airline's managers said they were told last week not to expect the raises, which are normally available every six months, until later this year. ''Merit increases are being postponed until sometime in the fall,'' a Continental spokesman, Art


Courier Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
22,909,000
23,902,000
Net inc
82,000
b2,686,000
Share earns
.05
1.46
b-Included an after-tax gain of about $2.5 million, or $1.35 a share, from the sale of the company's 50 percent interest in Nadco Directory Management Corp.


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Coal (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
86,052,000
60,032,000
Net inc
8,333,000
6,860,000
Share earns
.52
.42
Shares outst
15,036,000
15,000,000
Yr rev
316,419,000
253,835,000
Net inc
b24,236,000
33,048,000
Share earns
1.47
2.24
Shares outst
15,030,000
14,363,000


Comshare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comshare Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,398,700
24,102,900
Net inc
2,759,200
1,936,600
Share earns
1.01
.72
Shares outst
2,742,800
2,680,200
6mo rev
49,476,500
42,974,300
Net inc
3,878,000
b2,119,900
Share earns
1.41
.79
Shares outst
2,749,400
2,708,800


Donold Lourie, 91, A Retired Chairman Of Quaker Oats Co.
LEAD: Donold B. Lourie, former chairman of the Quaker Oats Company, who served briefly as Under Secretary of State in the Eisenhower Administration, died of heart failure Monday in Longwood, Fla., where he lived in retirement.
He was 91 years old.


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,487,000
4,595,000
Per share
.65
.67
Shares outst
6,950,948
6,911,990
Year net inc
16,915,000
15,841,000
Per share
2.44
2.29
Shares outst
6,937,001
6,920,301


Upheaval in the East;   Democratic Program For Bulgaria Backed By Communist Party
LEAD: The Communist Party advocates a multiparty system, parliamentary democracy and religious freedom in draft documents to be adopted at a party congress this month.


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b23,094,000
176,151,000
Year net inc
159,548,000
33,919,000
Per share
2.51
.29
b-After a tax benefit reversal of $6,950,000.


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,646,000
c11,669,000
Per share
.49
1.08
Year net inc
b22,396,000
c25,280,000
Per share
1.81
2.21
b-After an extraordinary loss of $614,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary special tax charge of $2,342,000 for the year.


Osicom Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Osicom Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
21,073,000
31,108,000
Net loss
375,000
1,988,000
9mo sales
66,417,000
78,957,000
Net loss
2,629,000
1,518,000


A Leading Lawyer's Fall Is a Jolt to Minneapolis
LEAD: He was a pillar of the Minneapolis business establishment, a star partner at Minnesota's largest and most prestigious law firm.


Frankford Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frankford Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,704,000
1,698,000
Per share
.59
.59
Year net inc
6,248,000
5,929,000
Per share
2.16
2.05


Damon Biotech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damon Biotech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,504,071
538,124
Net loss
628,610
2,098,057
Shares outst
8,879,813
22,539,130
The company said latest quarter revenues included $1,273,084 recognized under an agreement with Abbott Laboratories for the development and production of a cardiovascular product.


BHA Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHA Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
14,933,000
12,718,000
Net inc
860,000
763,000
Share earns
.13
.15
Shares outst
6,504,136
4,973,307


RENTING SKI GEAR
LEAD:
When renting ski equipment, take your time and be choosy.
You will be asked your skiing level: I, II, or III.
Beginners who ski slowly and prefer gentle slopes are Level I. Intermediate skiers, Level II, prefer a variety of terrain including, at times, the most difficult.
Advanced skiers, Level III, seek the steepest terrain.


SDNB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SDNB Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
543,000
524,000
Per share
.39
.38
Shares outst
1,384,776
1,393,054
Year net inc
1,200,000
989,000
Per share
.87
.71
Shares outst
1,384,776
1,395,744


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article on Tuesday about reaction in Minnesota to the problems of Senator David Durenberger misidentified the Mayor of Minneapolis.
He is Don Fraser.


If Your Water Has a Bad Taste
LEAD: If you are unhappy with the taste of the water from your tap, do some research before buying a device to treat drinking water.
A unit can cost from $40 to $900, and the Federal Trade Commission says water that tastes unpleasant is not necessarily contaminated.


Midconn Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midconn Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
554,772
540,502
Per share
.30
.29


Affiliated Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
859,000
1,040,000
Per share
.23
.27
Year net inc
2,142,000
4,750,000
Per share
.57
1.21


Bush Urges A Mortgage Rate Drop
LEAD: In an address to the nation's home builders, President Bush today hailed the broad decline in home mortgage rates in the 1980's and suggested that rates should be lowered further.


Fidelity Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Medical
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
1,503,644
393,962
Net loss
72,329
527,435
Yr rev
3,981,198
1,155,127
Net loss
1,413,387
2,318,001
Shares outst
12,268,554
10,374,729


Good Guys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Good Guys Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
87,350,000
58,813,000
Net inc
3,621,000
2,182,000
Share earns
.81
.50


Arthur J. Goldberg Dies at 81; Ex-Justice and Envoy to U.N.
LEAD: Arthur J. Goldberg, who rose from humble beginnings in Chicago to become Secretary of Labor, an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court and then United States representative to the United Nations, was found dead yesterday morning in his apartment in Washington.
He was 81 years old.


Hong Kong's Luck
LEAD: To the Editor:


First Federal of Western Pa.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal of Western Pa.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
431,000
b435,000
Per share
.33
.33
Year net inc
1,645,000
b1,799,000
Per share
1.24
1.36
b-After an extraordinary tax benefit of $38,000, or 3 cents a share, from tax loss carryforwards, for the quarter and year.


Silicon Graphics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Graphics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
103,010,000
65,925,000
Net inc
7,183,000
2,638,000
Share earns
.41
.16
Shares outst
18,321,000
17,019,000
6mo rev
189,441,000
110,213,000
Net inc
12,392,000
3,620,000
Share earns
.69
.21
Shares outst
18,824,000
17,036,000


Job-Related Murder Convictions Of 3 Executives Are Overturned
LEAD: An Illinois appeals court today overturned the landmark convictions of three former executives found guilty of murder and lesser charges four years ago in the death of an employee who suffered cyanide poisoning on the job.


SIXTEEN-THE THIRD TIME AROUND
LEAD: I don't get it.
If Isabel Davis was so embarrassed about the possible pregnancy resulting from her one-night stand, why did she describe the experience in The New York Times Magazine?
JOYCE MEGGETT
Chicago


A JAILBIRD'S SCHEME
LEAD:
TRUST
By George V. Higgins.
230 pp. New York:
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


THE LEGAL VIEW OF N.F.L. DRAFT POLICY
LEAD: The National Football League policy against drafting underclassmen imposes unjustifiable injury on college athletes and is therefore legally insupportable.
It constitutes a conspiracy by all employers in this industry to bar from gainful employment a group that is ready, willing and able to work.


THE VIETNAM WAR RICOCHETS INTO THE GALLERIES
LEAD: In many ways the war in Vietnam was the most relentlessy visual war America has known.
While it was going on, it was brught home to countless television sets by the newly available portable TV cameras.
Since its close, and especially since the release of ''Apocalypse Now'' in 1979, it has been a regular presence in America movies, where it has been variously dramatized, scrutinized, criticized or, in cases like the


More Exotic Ways to Prepare Fish
LEAD: NOW that fish is no longer something that makes a grudging appearance at the table once a week, ways of serving it are becoming increasingly exotic.
For people keeping an eye on their salt and fat intake, a touch of spice can make all the difference.


Rousing Tribute to Vaudeville's Last Days
LEAD: WHEN we last saw Big Bertha, Papa Du, Ma Reed and Thelma, they were carrying on in the 1979 Off Broadway hit ''One Mo' Time,'' a re-creation of black vaudeville as played at the legendary Lyric Theater in New Orleans.
Conceived and written by Vernel Bagneris, the show was set in 1926, the year before the


Jordan Gains Outside View
LEAD: Michael Jordan is on his way to a fourth consecutive National Basketball Association scoring title.
The Chicago Bulls' guard has led the league in steals.
He has won the slam dunk contest.
He has been voted the N.B.A.'s most valuable player and its best defensive player.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended Jan. 6
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$625,000
31-33 West 12th Street
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining room, maid's room, fireplace, parquet floors, high-ceilings; maintenance $786, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti/Wells &amp; Gay)


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Houlton, Me.;   Historic Square In a Comeback
LEAD: MORE than $2.5 million from public and private sources has been spent in the last few years to fix up Market Square, the downtown area of this northern Maine town of 6,700 people.
The area is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as a fine example of turn-of-the-century commercial architecture, said Charles Upton, the town's Director of Community


More Exotic Ways to Prepare Fish
LEAD: NOW that fish is no longer something that makes a grudging appearance at the table once a week, ways of serving it are becoming increasingly exotic.
For people keeping an eye on their salt and fat intake, a touch of spice can make all the difference.


Outdoors;   Tuna Protection Is Studied
LEAD: Among the chores awaiting Congress is deciding whether the United States should have the right to control the catch of the various species of tuna that swim within 200 miles of this country's shores.


CITY OF COUCHES
LEAD:
FREUD'S VIENNA AND OTHER ESSAYS
By Bruno Bettelheim.
282 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


If Cuomo Has Fiscal Problems, Republicans Can Put Them to Use
LEAD: ANYONE forgetting that this is an election year had only to read the press releases spewing from the offices of Republican legislators after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed deferring the New York income tax cut last week.
The Republicans, who signaled long ago that they were eager to exploit the tax issue, seemed engaged in a contest to construct the least complimentary metaphor about the


Installing Crown Molding
LEAD: CROWN molding is installed around the top of a room to conceal the seam between the walls and ceiling.
Used tastefully, it can greatly enhance a room's appearance.


Anti-Abortion Protests Disrupt Two Clinics
LEAD: More than 100 demonstrators who blocked entrances to an abortion clinic in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., were arrested yesterday in a protest marking the 17th anniversary of the legalization of abortion.


Enrollment Slips at Many Private Schools
LEAD: PRIVATE elementary and secondary schools in New Jersey have experienced some slippage in enrollments as they try to cope with a declining school-age population and a slowdown in the economy.


TALKING: Sponsors;   Strategies If They're In Arrears
LEAD: THE rash of news about the failure of some sponsors to meet their financial obligations to New York City co-ops raises the question of what tenant-shareholders and board members can do to recoup lost income and safeguard the financial integrity of their buildings.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Eastern Bloc;   In the East, the Selling of Democracy Takes On a New Fervor
LEAD: As Eastern Europe gropes toward democracy, political consultants are rushing in with advice, which is almost as sought after these days as Western consumer goods.


Miss Lamb Engaged to Edward Cote Jr.
LEAD: Storrs Heathcote Lamb and Edward Troutman Cote Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cote of Ligonier, Pa., are engaged, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawton Storrs Lamb of Katonah, N.Y., have announced.
The couple plan to marry in May.


Carol N. Sherwood Wed to J. S. Pettee
LEAD: Carol Nelson Sherwood was married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn., to Jonathan Starr Pettee.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith officiated.
Mrs.
Pettee is the daughter of Edythe N. Sherwood of New Canaan and Peter F. Sherwood of Stratford, Conn.
Her husband is a son of James Pettee of Bethesda, Md., and the late Mary Tetlow


Ruth V. Washington, Envoy, 67; Was About to Leave for Gambia
LEAD: Ruth V. Washington, the Ambassador to Gambia and a retired United States Magistrate, died after an automobile collision early yesterday near her home in the Hartsdale section of Greenburgh, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.


Police Officer Is Suspended
LEAD: A New York City police officer was suspended without pay yesterday after he was charged with driving while intoxicated in a fatal accident on Long Island, the police said.
The officer, John E. Bissett Jr., 23 years old, of Farmingville, L.I., was off duty when the accident occurred at 10:45 P.M.
Friday at the intersection of Hallock Road and Route 347 in Stony Brook, L.I., the police said.


Jill Akin and J. B. Schulman Are Wed
LEAD: Jill Blair Akin and J. Brett Schulman were married last evening at the Pierre in New York by Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel.


Ms. Roosevelt Weds C. H. Silberstein
LEAD: Laura Delano Roosevelt, a daughter of Mrs.
Erasmus Helm Kloman of Washington and the late Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr., was married yesterday to Dr.
Charles Henry Silberstein, a son of Mrs.
Herbert F. Storfer of New York and the late Dr.
Richard M. Silberstein.
Acting Justice Shirley Fingerhood of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Colony Club in New


Hugh C. M. Ross Is Dead at 91; Conductor of Schola Cantorum
LEAD: Dr.
Hugh C. M. Ross, a choral director who, as conductor of the Schola Cantorum of New York, worked with some of the greatest figures in 20th-Century music, died of a heart attack at his home in Manhattan yesterday.
He was 91 years old.


In Winter, the Beach Beckons
LEAD: MY husband and I find ourselves gravitating more to Jones Beach in the off seasons.
In the middle of winter, bundled for the wind and the cold, we'll park at Field 6 and walk very briskly to the Central Mall about 15 minutes away.


3d Time's the Charm for Shoemaker
LEAD: Bill Shoemaker, in his farewell ride to Florida racing, slipped Beau Genius through an opening in the final yards to score a dramatic and sentimental victory today in the $65,500 Hallandale Handicap at Gulfstream Park.


No Credible Doubt That Contras Murdered Nuns
LEAD: To the Editor:


EL SALVADOR'S ARMY
LEAD: The views expressed in your article on the Salvadoran Army could apply to many, if not all, third-world countries.
The history of Central America is a sad one of many military-ruled governments.
That is why we need to support the concept of freely elected civilian-controlled governments in all of Central America and the third world.


S. Maynard Bronstein to Wed Melissa E. Zeidman
LEAD: August wedding plans for Melissa Ellen Zeidman and S. Maynard Bronstein, a son of Patricia Honeyman of Oakton, Va., and Dr.
Seymour Bronstein of Hazelton, Pa., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Zeidman of Cherry Hill and Harvey Cedars, N.J.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
U.S. Warnings On Visiting 4 Countries


Style Makers;   Anna Somers Cocks, Magazine Editor
LEAD: The art world is a microcosm of the world, says Anna Somers Cocks. ''It has economics, commercialism, politics, religion, gossip, scandal, all aspects.''


Martin's Death Brings a Lesson
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


O'Rourke Gives Update On 3 Lingering Issues
LEAD: TRYING to tie up some loose ends from his last seven years in office, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke offered a progress report this month on ocean dumping, the cleanup ofthe Long Island Sound and an emergency 911 telephone system.


The Big Bang Survives an Onslaught of New Cosmology
LEAD: IN recent weeks, a cascade of discoveries has thrown into confusion cherished concepts about the evolution of the universe.


Where Italians Speak Ladin
LEAD: THE sign on a fir tree near a cascading stream shows an empty food can, crossed out in black, under the words ''Tenion net l Bosch.'' Underneath, in smaller letters, are translations into Italian and German: ''Keep the forest clean!'' The ecological message on top is in Ladin, an ancient language still spoken by some 17,000 inhabitants of two valleys in the autonomous Italian Alpine province of Alto Adige or South


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


A Hint of Progress On Yonkers Plan
LEAD: KAREN HILL has been struggling for more than a year here to find developers who will accept financial and zoning incentives in return for building the subsidized and market-rate housing called for in a 1986 Federal desegregation court order.
Now Ms.
Hill, the director of the Yonkers Fair Housing Office, has given the first indication that a long stalemate may be ending.


Crown a Bit Shaky
LEAD: If Sugar Ray Leonard is really determined to give up his World Boxing Council supermiddleweight title, he has a fight on his hands, against the W.B.C. president, Jose Sulaiman.


Still Engaged - Again
LEAD: This could be the story of the couple who cried ''betrothed!'' In their 12 years of unformalized domesticity, Mick Jagger and Jerry Hall (right) have issued, along with two children, numerous announcements and hints that marriage was imminent.
In 1983, Mr.
Jagger said they would be married ''any day now.


Deedee Rodolitz to MarryAlan Ransenberg in March
LEAD: March wedding plans for Diane L. Rodolitz and Alan J. Ransenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kurt Ransenberg of Skokie, Ill., have been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Rodolitz of Woodmere, L.I.


Taking a Timeout At a Truck Stop
LEAD: WHERE you stop on the road can make a big difference to the journey.
I've long since sworn off McDonald's, Burger King, Roy Rogers, Red Robin and all the other dispiriting chains, with bored high-school dropouts on minimum wages staring at you blankly as you ask for something that isn't listed among the plastic letters of the ''menu board.


Fashion: On the Street;   Spring Teases, Lightening The Shoulder And the Heart
LEAD: It was spring in January last week - almost.
Temperatures danced in the 50's and 60's, bringing fashion out from behind the smothering cloaks of winter.
Women appeared in layers of sportswear - jackets, sweaters, skirts and blouses, some of it in lightweight winter white.
And lightweight seasonless gabardine suits and Chanel tweeds were seen everywhere.


Police Pension Fund Will Invest in Loans Guaranteed by U.S.
LEAD: For the first time, a New York City employees' pension fund will invest in federally guaranteed bank loans as part of a city effort to promote greater economic growth by making more loan funds available for small businesses.


Museums
LEAD: To the Editor: Susan Jacoby's ''Museums Without Tears'' (Travel, Dec. 17) offers several excellent tips on ways to do more than rush to the major attractions in some of the world's great museums.
Here is another:


BLUE MAX CAN DELIVER AN EARFUL
LEAD: Audio isn't just a matter of nuts, bolts and other assorted hardware.
Equally important to good sound reproduction is the study of psychoacoustics - a hybrid science straddling various borders between physics, music, engineering and biology.
Its aim is to understand the ways in which human beings perceive sound.


Campus Life: Berkeley;   Into Each Lap A Little Cake Did Fall
LEAD: Oski the bear, the official mascot of the University of California, has been suspended for two weeks, after the furry cheerleader threw a layer cake into the crowd at a basketball game, splattering an estimated 15 people.


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: I think that both players should not only be fined, but also suspended without pay for a couple of games.
Pete Rose was suspended for life for betting on baseball, yet Barkley and Jackson get off with only a fine for betting on basketball.
Something doesn't seem right.
BRIAN NASH
Tenafly, N.J.


Panama's Operation
LEAD: THE UNITED STATES faced a similar problem in Korea in the 1950's: if only the Congress can declare a war, what was the military struggle that the U.S. conducted in the name of the United Nations to be called?
President Harry S. Truman liked police action; the Congress, which had to appropriate money to pay veterans' claims, settled on an official short-of-war moniker: the


Leora Joseph to Wed in July
LEAD: Rabbi and Mrs.
Howard S. Joseph of Montreal have announced the engagement of their daughter, Leora H. Joseph, to Michael Wechsler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Wechsler of Montreal.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Joseph, 21 years old, is a senior at Barnard College.
Mr.
Wechsler, 21, a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University, will enter the McGill University Medical School in September.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The turmoil in Eastern Europe serves as a reminder that the Czarist regime produced remarkable talent at the bridge table as well as the chess board.
Half a century ago London was full of bridge luminaries who were born on the fringes of the Russian Empire or in areas that have since been behind the Iron Curtain.


THE HATED SEASON
LEAD: I am not a hunter, but Gordon Batcheller's descriptions of nature are wonderful.
However, wouldn't it be nicer to shoot these creatures with his camera and let the scene remain for others to appreciate?
HAL M. LEWIS
New York, N.Y.


Aldo Gucci, 84; Expanded Fashion House in U.S.
LEAD: Aldo Gucci, the last surviving son of the founder of the elite Italian fashion house that bore his family name, died on Friday in Rome, the company said today.
He was 84 years old.


Endless Trails in Western Canada
LEAD: TO understand how much mountain there is to ski at Whistler Resort in British Columbia, imagine taking a chairlift from the floor of Manhattan to a point nearly four times the height of the World Trade Center.
From the apex of one of Whistler Resort's twin peaks, about a mile above the base, a skier can glide for days and never cover the same run twice.


WORLD WIDE PLAZA: SO NEAR AND YET SO FAR
LEAD: If you believe in the religion of gentrification, the arrival of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore on Eighth Avenue last fall is the equivalent of the coming of the Messiah.
Did anyone ever think the day would come when Cravath, the white shoe-est of all white-shoe law firms, would abandon the solid precincts of Wall Street not for Rockefeller Center but for Eighth Avenue?


Is License to Kill Really a Victory for Women?;   In Civil War Ranks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Captain Kirk Keeps Devils in Orbit
LEAD: Kirk Muller was furious.
The Devils were going through a power-play drill at their training center last Thursday, and with the All-Star break imminent and their next game five days away, there was clearly a lack of intensity on the part of some of Muller's teammates.


Kaboom!
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tourist Trade Needs Visitors' Tax
LEAD: ''Tourist Trade Seeks to Sustain Growth'' (Dec. 31) identifies our potential as well as our problems.
Both of these circumstances can be addressed by the enactment of a visitors' tax.
Suffolk and Nassau Counties will compete more effectively with the dozens of other tourist destinations that advertise their activities through a levy on visitors.


Jittery Over Junk Bonds, Wall Street Hits the Books
LEAD: Getting investors today to pony up for high-yield bonds will take more than a convincing sales pitch.
In the wake of recent disasters in the ''junk bond'' market and the bankruptcy filing last week of Federated Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation, Wall Street brokerages are having to respond to a new call by investors for more puncture-proof research.


Mornings on TV: Fine-Tuning a Sweet Formula
LEAD: The other day, NBC's ''Today'' show got a new executive producer, about a week after it had acquired a new co-host.
Last fall, a new executive producer took over ''CBS This Morning'' and hired several new reporters.
And no doubt something or someone new will soon be added to ABC's ''Good Morning America,'' although it has been doing very well in the ratings.


London Linked to '86 Ouster of Ulster Investigator
LEAD: The former British police official who tried to investigate charges of a ''shoot to kill'' policy among the anti-terrorist police in Northern Ireland says he has a document that shows that senior British civil servants were involved in removing him from the inquiry in 1986.


Managing;   Media Manipulation 101
LEAD: The battle lines used to be clearly drawn: Reporters were the predators, executives were the prey, and public relations people ran interference between the two.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Dec. 31 with an article about New Orleans misidentified the saxophonist playing at the Maple Leaf Bar.
He was John Hart.


The Extra Man Is the Man of the 90's
LEAD: THE plight of older women in search of available, interested men became a cultural cliche of the 1980's.
Now it seems that the lament of the 90's might come from younger men.
Demography dictates that they will have to fight over a smaller pool of potential mates.


Fashions;   Put a Vest in the Closet, Pull Out Lots of New Looks
LEAD: Winter sales racks have been overgrazed.
Spring merchandise is just starting to trickle in.
But the fashion urge cannot be stilled.
One way to satisfy it right now is with one of the new vests that department stores and boutiques are stocking.
In ethnic or vintage materials, they lend a one-of-a-kind look to wardrobe basics.


Suzanne W. Brask Married
LEAD: Suzanne Whitsun Brask, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Brask of South Orange, N.J., was married there yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
Andrew and Holy Communion to Robert Frederick Learsch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Robert Learsch of New Monmouth, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert B. Wardrop officiated.


ROMPING THROUGH THE INQUISITION
LEAD:
THE PALACE OF WISDOM
By Bob Marshall-Andrews.
341 pp. New York:
A William Abrahams Book/
E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


Johnson Loses Marks
LEAD: He may be the fastest sprinter the world has ever seen, but Ben Johnson is no longer a world-record holder.
Citing Johnson's admitted use of steroids over most of the last decade, track and field's international governing body voted yesterday to strip the 28-year-old Canadian runner of his three remaining records, in the 100-meter dash and the indoor 50- and 60-meter events.


FICTION
LEAD:
BALANCING ACTS: Contemporary Stories by Russian Women.
Edited by Helena Goscilo. (Indiana University, Cloth, $39.95; Paper, $17.50).
What do Russian women want?
Everything, apparently, that many other women do: the stable love of a good man and the mad passion of a lover, the security of home and hearth and the fulfillment of professional achievement, the gratitude of their children and freedom from the noose of motherhood.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Poland;   Warsaw Cabinet Asked To Move Up Elections
LEAD: Although Poland is the first East European nation since the early postwar years to install a government not dominated by Communists, many Poles are pressing the Solidarity-led Government to hasten political change.


No First Names For Me, Please
LEAD: I HANG UP the phone if the call comes from some affable but unknown salesman who calls me Bill.
Call me a curmudgeon, but it turns me off if I don't hear Mister.
I mister everybody if I don't know them.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review last Sunday about a concert featuring the violinist Yuri Vodovoz misidentified the city where he lives.
It is New York City, not Chicago.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Pizzocheri: Buckwheat Makes It Chewy
LEAD: Pizzocheri is a moderately well-known form of Italian pasta.
What distinguishes it from those that are best known is its predominant grain, buckwheat.


Karen E. Winston To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jan M. Winston of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Eve Winston to David Charles Norman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alex Norman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The couple plan to marry in June.


Review/Recital;   Oundjian And Vered
LEAD: The violinist Peter Oundjian and the pianist Ilana Vered, who joined in recital at Florence Gould Hall on Thursday evening, are excellent artists, but both have been heard to better advantage elsewhere.
Mr.
Oundjian is the first violinist of the Tokyo String Quartet, and he and Ms.
Vered have substantial careers as soloists.


Wall Street, Salivating Over Bankruptcies
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cindi Studin to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Studin of Orangeburg, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Cindi Studin and Dr.
Mitchell Russ Berger, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford Berger of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Studin, a graduate of Ithaca College, is an account executive at PMK Public Relations in New York.


Review/Operetta;   Helen of Troy, With Heavy Metal
LEAD: The Bronx Opera Company, one of New York's many small but inventive troupes, has built its reputation largely on presentations of operatic rarities - works like Nielsen's ''Masquerade,'' Smetana's ''Secret'' and Offenbach's ''Bluebeard.'' But the company also edges toward the standard repertory every now and then, and for the opening production of its 22d season, it offered a lively staging of an Offenbach favorite, ''La Belle Helene.


The Wrong Cavaty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gold's Lure vs. Indian Rights: A Brazilian Conflict Sets the Amazon Aflame
LEAD: Named Operation Free Forest, a two-week police action in the northern Amazon has led a third of 45,000 illegal gold prospectors to leave Yanomami Indian lands, Justice Ministry officials say.


Reissue Series Traces the Early Development of Genius
LEAD: The Verdi scholar Julian Budden, writing in his ''Operas of Verdi'' (Oxford) of the composer's early works, says there is no opera from those pre-''Rigoletto'' years ''which does not show an interesting musical advance in some quarter, even if the work is unsatisfactory as a whole.'' Unfortunately, not many operagoers have had the chance to see most of those early operas on the stage, but back in the 1970's Philips Records issued a cycle of many of them on LP - all conducted by Lamberto


PRO BASKETBALL: N.B.A    Friday's Games;   Magic's Running Ends Slide
LEAD: It was a running game, both sides agreed, and Otis Smith was the front-runner in a power drive that ended the Orlando Magic's four-game losing streak.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Dec. 3 about Judge Carl B. Stokes of the Cleveland Municipal Court misstated the year of his unsuccessful bid for a seat on the Common Pleas Court.
As Mr.
Stokes pointed out in a recent letter, it was 1986, not 1988.


'What It Means to Be a Human Being'
LEAD: STUDYING the humanities, an educational and cultural program based on the classics and embellished with the notion of human dignity, is a way for people to understand and come to terms with the complexities of modern society, according to David Danahar, dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at Fairfield


Installing Crown Molding
LEAD: CROWN molding is installed around the top of a room to conceal the seam between the walls and ceiling.
Used tastefully, it can greatly enhance a room's appearance.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The basic idea is interesting enough: Here was a United States postal rate that had endured with only minor interruptions for almost a century, through wars and a vast national expansion.


LONG AND MIRACULOUS AWARD FOR SCOOTER
LEAD: When Phil Rizzuto was told to dust off his tuxedo in order to be properly attired while receiving the William J. Slocum Award for long and meritorious service to baseball at the New York baseball writers' dinner tonight, he sounded confused.


In Capital, Confusion And Anger
LEAD: When the news of Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug arrest swept through the majority black population in the core of Washington, it left a trail of confusion, anger and hurt.


Fair's Fair
LEAD: To the Editor:


800 Protest Outside Albania U.N. Mission
LEAD: An estimated 800 people demonstrated outside the Albanian Mission to the United Nations yesterday, declaring that the Communist Government there would be the next one to fall in Eastern Europe.


Q and A
LEAD:
New Post Office for Ninth


Why So Rigid on Eastern Europe?
LEAD: Eastern Europe's courageous effort to leap from controlled to market economies creates a desperate need for Western help.
It would be tragic if ideological rigidity blocked that aid.


A New Name And, Soon, a New Home for Museum
LEAD: IN designing a new home for the Katonah Gallery - now to be known as the Katonah Museum of Art - Edward Larrabee Barnes was on familiar territory.


Higher Fees for UConn And 4 State Universities
LEAD: THE State Board of Governors for Higher Education last week approved a 19.3 percent increase in room fees and a 13.8 percent increase in board fees at the University of Connecticut.


Nicholls Finally A Ranger
LEAD: Neil Smith, the general manager of the Rangers, who took over the team preaching patience and frowning on the rampant trading that was the trademark of the previous regime, yesterday completed a blockbuster deal the equal of any Phil Esposito ever concocted.


Dr. Sullivan's Unfiltered Anger
LEAD: ''At a time when our people desperately need the message of health promotion, Uptown's message is more disease, more suffering and more death.'' So said a furious Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis Sullivan.
Uptown is the name of the menthol cigarette the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company had hoped to market.


Nursing Homes And AIDS Policy
LEAD: Concerning ''Nursing Homes Pressed on AIDS Policy,'' (Dec. 17): If by chance nursing homes expand and have enough beds for AIDS patients, are they equipped to take care of those individuals?


Libraries Continue Season of Poetry
LEAD: THE Poet's Voice, launched its 12th season with the first of six readings in November at the Ferguson Library in Stamford.
Five more readings are scheduled to take place at other Fairfield County libraries this year.


Miss Matheson Weds David Hilliard
LEAD: Helen Dow Matheson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Tompkins Matheson of The Plains, Va., was married there yesterday to David Shelburne Hilliard, a son of Landon Hilliard of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., and Mary Eichert Hilliard of New York.
The Rev.
S.
Neale Morgan officiated at Grace Episcopal Church.


Driving 'Miss Daisy' From Here to There and Back
LEAD: After 15 months on the road, the national touring company of ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' starring Julie Harris and Brock Peters and featuring Stephen Root, closes today in New Haven.
Charlie Willard, the company manager, will take down the photos in the theater lobby, settle up at the box office, check the company's travel arrangements and head for his cabin in the Adirondacks.


Gaps Found In Rules on Preventing Oil Spills
LEAD: AS investigations and lawsuits proceed after the Exxon Corporation's oil spill in the Arthur Kill on Jan. 2, officials here and in Washington say that because of deficiencies in Federal and state laws and regulations that govern oil corporations and pipelines, they would be powerless to avert a similar accident.


Appeals Court Says Alabama May Fly the Confederate Flag
LEAD: A Federal appellate court has affirmed Alabama's right to display the Confederate flag on the top of its Capitol, ruling that it does not violate the Constitution.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
PING CHONG


Installing Crown Molding
LEAD: CROWN molding is installed around the top of a room to conceal the seam between the walls and ceiling.
Used tastefully, it can greatly enhance a room's appearance.


Campus Life: Buena Vista;   For Study of Race, All-White School Calls on an Actress
LEAD: Black hands met white hands on Thursday as Tommie Stewart, an actress, moved through an auditorium of college students, touching and hugging them before she went onstage.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
MIRANDA AND THE MOVIES
Written and illustrated by Jane Kendall.
208 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $14.95.
(Ages 8 to 12)


City Environmental Agency Will Move to Queens
LEAD: In a major step to disperse part of New York City's bureaucracy outside Manhattan, the Department of Environmental Protection will shift its headquarters and half of its 5,000 employees to Queens next fall.


A Battle Over Swans: Beautiful or Beastly?
LEAD: To most people, bird-watchers in particular, the mute swan is a graceful and statuesque creature that adds a storybook presence to ponds and inlets along the Atlantic flyway, especially in New England.


Conservative vs. Conservative
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arizona Trips Up Sooners by 78-74
LEAD: Sean Rooks and Jud Buechler scored 18 points each today as Arizona held off Oklahoma, 78-74, extending the nation's longest home-court winning streak to 41 games.


Arizona Race in Turmoil As Governor Bows Out
LEAD: Gov.
Rose Mofford threw Arizona's 1990 gubernatorial race into confusion with her announcement on Thursday that she would not seek election to the office she inherited less than two years ago.


Garment Steamers Recalled
LEAD: The J. C. Penney Company is recalling more than 1,000 electric garment steamers that present a possible hazard to users, the Consumer Product Safety Commission says.
Consumers reported that a locking mechanism on a steamer plug could be broken during use, releasing hot water and steam.


Deliberately Unheroic
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE HATED SEASON
LEAD: Mr.
Batcheller has painted a lovely picture of a nature lover out for a quiet morning walk, not a picture of hunting at all.
Those of us who do endeavor to enjoy a marsh at dawn during hunting season, however, take our lives in our hands.
KATHY MCINERNEY
Portland, Me.


Suspicions Came Too Late in Boston
LEAD: To almost everyone, Charles Stuart's story that a black gunman had killed his pregnant wife and then shot him in the stomach seemed so believable.
But specialists in family violence now say the police, the press and the public should have been more suspicious of Mr.
Stuart from the start.


In Paris, Lace and Luxe
LEAD: AT Sabbia Rosa, where silk robes spill from padded hangers in streams of coral and peach, customers eye delicate bras edged in lace.
The tiny Left Bank shop on the Rue des Saints-Peres has long been a magnet for those who appreciate fine lingerie and Miss Rosa's sweet tooth for color.
A vivacious woman with a froth of curly hair, she proudly shows off her guest book, with signatures from the actor Dustin Hoffman and the model Cindy Crawford.


'Human Dimension' For DES Victims
LEAD: After reading Candice Tedeschi's article, ''DES Victims: Search Must Go On'' (Long Island Opinion, Dec. 24), I feel compelled to write, in an attempt to emphasize the human dimension of an issue that has not received adequate media attention.


Is License to Kill Really a Victory for Women?;   Fighting Units
LEAD: To the Editor:


The A.N.C. Is Torn Between Generations
LEAD: OVER the years, when whites in South Africa have made their arguments against black rule, the most common contention has been that blacks are not ready for the responsibilities of power.
But beginning in the 1950's, these same whites have supported a Government that has banned, imprisoned or driven into exile most of the blacks who would have been most likely to play that role.


Five Jerusalem Museums
LEAD: JERUSALEM straddles its hills and cascades into its valleys, sitting upon layer after layer of history.
Often, literally, scoops of earth are dug up and yet another archeological find is discovered.


THEY SHOULDN'T BE HOSTAGES
LEAD: In recent days, the Alabama linebacker Keith McCants, a marvelous athlete against whom we have competed, announced he would leave school a year early to enter the 1990 National Football League draft.


Business Diary: January 14-19
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Jumping In Where A.T.&amp; T. Fell Down


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: There was not just one bet between Barkley and Jackson.
The first came during last season's playoffs.
Then there was a series of three during the Jan. 10 game, each coming before critical situations.
Betting can become infectious and contagious.
The $5,000 fines to players earning megabucks has little impact.


Conflict Over Aide Wins Dinkins Respect
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins's response to the first big dispute of his administration - his appointment of Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr. as New York City's Health Commissioner - seemed to show last week that any suggestions of softness in the new Mayor's spine are greatly exaggerated.


Susan Barth Becomes Bride
LEAD: Susan Barth and Martin Ehrlich were married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., by Rabbi Walter S. Wurzburger.
Mrs.
Ehrlich, 25 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Barth of Freehold, N.J.
A graduate of George Washington University, she is an employment representative at Simon &amp; Schuster, publishers in New York.


Lisa Joseph Wed To Daniel Zelson
LEAD: Lisa Beth Joseph and Daniel Mark Zelson were married last evening at the Burden Mansion in New York by Rabbi Herbert Brockman.
The bride is the daughter of Carole Young of Westport, Conn., and New York and William K. Joseph of New York.
Her husband is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Zelson of Orange,


Insider Offers Look at Czech Revolt
LEAD: IVAN M. HAVEL, the brother of Vaclav Havel, the President of Czechoslovakia, spoke last week to an audience here about ''the revolution of intellectuals'' in his country that ''literally laughed the Communist Government out of power.''


Fisk Is Signed
LEAD: With 336 home runs, he leads American League catchers in the record book and at 42 years old, Carlton Fisk is not through yet.
Yesterday, he signed a one-year contract with the Chicago White Sox for $1.75 million.


No Deal?
LEAD: Barbara Piasecka Johnson (right, with Lech Walesa), who went to work as a chambermaid after immigrating from Poland in 1968, has doubtless learned a little something about capitalism since she inherited $570 million or so a few years ago.
Mrs.
Johnson, who married J. Seward Johnson, the Johnson &amp; Johnson heir, three years after going to work in his New Jersey mansion, last year met Mr.


Jennifer Houlton, Actress, Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frank William Houlton of New York and Fair Harbor, L.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Mann Houlton to Kosmo Vinyl, the son of Harold Dunk of London.
A July wedding is planned.


Bus Plunge Kills 25 in Nepal
LEAD: Twenty-five people died when a crowded bus plunged off a Himalayan mountain road, the Nepali television said today.


Social Events
LEAD:
Harlem Celebration


EL SALVADOR'S ARMY


Wedding in May For Miss Fordyce
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Fordyce of Darien, Conn., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Ann Fordyce, to Scott Kevin Barrett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Barrett of Cherry Hill, N.J., and Castleton Corners, Vt.
A May wedding is planned.


Airport Security: A Case in Point
LEAD: ISSUES of travel security make everyone uneasy.
The yes-no aspect of an airport is an example.
At departure, an airport is supposed to lure you in and cosset you into the wonders of travel; at the end of the flight, the arrival airport is supposed to welcome you to the new place and hint at its attractions.


Style Makers;   Mitchell R. Cutler, Book Dealer
LEAD: Mitchell R. Cutler began selling books many years ago when he was working for an art collector. ''I like doing this and think I could do it, so why not?'' he recalled asking himself.


Don't Fault Phil Simms
LEAD: To the Sports Editor In the midst of the recriminations thrown right and left about the Giants' overtime loss to the Rams, a couple of vital points have not been mentioned in any of the press reports I read.
Forget the disputed pass-interference penalty against Sheldon White in overtime.
That can be argued from now until doomsday without a resolution.


Ossining Choral Society Broadening Its Repertory
LEAD: MOST of the county's choirs gave their winter concerts last month and are now preparing their spring programs.
The Ossining Choral Society, on the other hand, has chosen to wait for the holiday bustle to fade before beginning its 53d season with a performance of Haydn's ''Creation.''


How Yonkers Has Held Off on Housing
LEAD: IT has been 10 years since the Justice Department, later joined by the N.A.A.C.P., brought suit against Yonkers, and five years since a Federal judge found the city guilty of intentional discrimination in housing and schools.
But after all the litigation, not one unit of housing has been built to remedy the discrimination and the fight is far from over.


Jerk, Jamaica's Fiery Barbecue
LEAD: SINCE dawn, Taylor Dudley of Boston Beach, Jamaica, has been at work turning a pig and plenty of hot peppers into jerk, the island's devilishly hot answer to barbecue.
At outdoor pits like Mr.
Dudley's, roadside stands and restaurants throughout Jamaica, pork, plus chicken, conch and native fish are given the distinctive jerk treatment.


POTTERY SHAPED BY A JAPANESE ESTHETIC
LEAD: Vases and bowls surfaced with vibrant splashes of color, asymmetric imagery, frogs in high relief and exotic motifs represent the Japanese style that dominated American ceramics from 1880 to 1930.
Various manifestations of this development are presented in ''Fragile Blossoms, Enduring Earth: The Japanese Influence on American Ceramics,'' an exhibition at the American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, through


About Cars;   Collectors Are in High Gear
LEAD: During the 70's, I prided myself on spending no more than $600 for a car, and I bought some very nice used automobiles.


Suit Contests Hasidic District
LEAD: The New York State School Boards Association filed a lawsuit on Friday challenging a new school district created by the state to accommodate Hasidic children.


L. D. Chafee Wed To Miss Danforth In Rhode Island
LEAD: Stephanie Birney Danforth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray S. Danforth of Providence and Exeter, R.I., was married yesterday to Lincoln Davenport Chafee, a son of Senator and Mrs.
John H. Chafee of McLean, Va., and Warwick, R.I.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Daniel Warren, an Episcopal priest, at the Exeter home of the bride's parents.


Dr. Denise Mack Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Mack of Garden City, L.I., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Denise Marie Mack and James Stewart Fraser, a son of William T. Fraser of Babylon, L.I., and the late Helen Fraser.
The prospective bride, 31 years old, is the chief resident in surgery at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.


Japanese Face Turning Point in Vote Next Month
LEAD: One of the most politically turbulent periods in Japan's postwar era is expected to reach a turning point next month with national elections that will test the resilience of the long-entrenched economic and political establishment.


Beginning a New Chapter As a Party of One
LEAD: I HESITANTLY approach the entrance.
I have no experience to help me.
This is not one of the learned behaviors that I have repeated often enough to classify as a reflex action.


Missouri Upsets Kansas
LEAD: With his players trailing Kansas by 3 points, having played as if they had seen ghosts, Norm Stewart, the Missouri coach, sat his rattled Tigers down at halftime and told them to get a grip on themselves.
If anyone should be nervous, he told them, it's the visiting Jayhawks.


PERSPECTIVES: The Dunbar Apartments;   Switching to the Rental Track in Harlem
LEAD: THE best news for the Dunbar Apartments in Central Harlem may be the city-sponsored rehabilitation activity around it, which gives a lift to the area's rental market and helps secure the Dunbar's future.


For the Best to Excel, Students Should Be Grouped by Ability
LEAD: To the Editor:


Smooth Landing for Shuttle After a Record Time in Space
LEAD: The space shuttle Columbia landed safely in the darkness of early morning today, ending the longest and one of the most successful rescue missions in the history of the shuttle program.


Questions on Closing A Dental School
LEAD: The recent article on the closing of the Fairleigh S. Dickinson Jr.
College of Dental Medicine raises some fundamental questions about the responsibility of a state for encouraging and maintaining private institutions for the benefit of its residents.


POSTING: Brewhouse Conversion;   Orange Rentals
LEAD: An 1890's brewhouse in Middletown, N.Y., abandoned for more than half a century, is being redeveloped into 53 moderate and low-rent apartments.
The three-story structure at one time produced ''Orange County - The King of All Beers - The Cream of All Ales,'' popular in the area until the mid-30's.
Local historians have cited the brewhouse, a three-story brick building with an ornate facade, as a good example of a type of local brewery that flourished in the Hudson and Mohawk


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Senior Bowl
North 41, South 0: Louisiana State's Tom Hodson passed for two first-quarter touchdowns and Penn State's Blair Thomas ran for 137 yards, leading the North to victory in the 41st Senior Bowl yesterday at Mobile, Ala.
It was the first shutout in Senior Bowl history and the victory cut the South's series lead to 20-18-3.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Indoors, start seed of long season annuals such as snapdragons, impatiens, petunias and geraniums.
Check house plants for mealybugs; examine jade plants, look under leaves of streptocarpus, African violets and other gesneriads, also check cactuses to be sure insects are not hiding near the bases of the spines.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: One disadvantage of owning a camera is that you're out of the picture most of the time.
Whenever I look at my family album, I'm struck by the absence of one vital participant - me.
But photographers don't have to be missing persons.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Jan. 7 about gains in Coast Guard enlistment resulting from the campaign against drug smuggling located the Coast Guard Training Center incorrectly.
It is in Cape May.


Minneapolis Churches Seek Racial Understanding
LEAD: The Rev.
Roderic Frohman, a white clergyman, leaned from the pulpit of a small church here last Sunday, and repeated an observation made more than 30 years ago by the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. ''In America,'' Mr.
Frohman said, ''11 A.M. on Sunday is still the most segregated hour of the week.


CORRECTION
LEAD: The Talking column on Jan. 14 gave an incorrect telephone number for ordering seedlings and saplings from the Long Island office of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
It is (516) 751-7900, ext. 234.


A Question of Performance
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New View Of Pressures
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


U.S. Officials Suspect Israelis Sent Ethiopia Cluster Bombs
LEAD: Administration officials said today they strongly suspected that Israel has sent cluster bombs to Ethiopia.
They said there were unconfirmed reports that the Soviet-backed Marxist Government in Addis Ababa has already used the weapons against rebels in the northern part of the country.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
PROFSCAM: Professors and the Demise of Higher Education, by Charles J. Sykes. (St. Martin's, $9.95.) The problem with higher education is not the students or the administrators, the author says, but the professors, who expend less energy teaching undergraduates than they do pursuing grants and tenure.


Panama Has No Dictator, But It Has a Big Brother
LEAD: AMONG the heroes of every American history textbook is the indefatigable Teddy Roosevelt, who dared to snatch Panama from Colombia to build the Panama Canal.
Nearly a century later, President Bush tried to carve out a similar place in history by conquering Panama again.


Installing Crown Molding
LEAD: CROWN molding is installed around the top of a room to conceal the seam between the walls and ceiling.
Used tastefully, it can greatly enhance a room's appearance.


PAST PERFECT
LEAD: Some furniture and objects are forever classics.
Take, for instance, a wicker chair or a child's cradle.
For generations, both have had a specific place and purpose in the home.
Now, as more and more architects and interior designers are manufacturing their own furniture, many are looking at the classics for inspiration.


THE GRANDDADDY OF ALL TAKEOVERS
LEAD:
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE
The Fall of RJR Nabisco.
By Bryan Burrough and John Helyar.
Illustrated. 528 pp. New York:
Harper &amp; Row. $22.95.
TRUE GREED
What Really Happened in the Battle for RJR Nabisco.
By Hope Lampert.
259 pp. New York:
NAL Books/New American Library. $18.95.


Donations for the Needy Come From Faraway
LEAD: Proceeds from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund drive are used to help people in the city's five boroughs, but there are no limits to how far from New York the donations may come.


Czechs Don't Regard Benes as a Hero
LEAD: To the Editor:


More Exotic Ways to Prepare Fish
LEAD: NOW that fish is no longer something that makes a grudging appearance at the table once a week, ways of serving it are becoming increasingly exotic.
For people keeping an eye on their salt and fat intake, a touch of spice can make all the difference.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Is Irony Affirmative Action?
According to David Mamet, American Jews have never enjoyed any of the ethnic compensations that are so much on our minds today - unless we accept irony as an affirmative action.
This is from ''Some Freaks,'' a collection of his essays (Viking).


Jury Begins Hearing Gotti Trial in Shooting of Union Leader
LEAD: John Gotti, the nation's reputed top organized-crime boss, went on trial in Manhattan yesterday as a state jury heard sharply conflicting views of the evidence and of Mr.
Gotti's character.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   In Moscow, Heated Cry for an Opposition
LEAD: Freely debating how to create a viable political opposition, political insurgents from across the country met today in a gathering that presented the most open challenge thus far to the Communist Party's dominance over Soviet public life.


Guilty, but Not for Sale Of Drugs Used as Prop
LEAD: A high school senior who was arrested near the White House on charges of selling the cocaine that President Bush later used as a prop in a nationally televised antidrug speech has been convicted by a Federal jury on three counts of drug distribution.


Sauce for the Gander
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kudos Come When Actors Abandon Type
LEAD: Meryl Streep acts silly, Tom Cruise looks grungy and Danny DeVito is the voice of reason; this season's films have been a parade of big-name stars acting against type.
And while Ms.
Streep is hilarious as the husband-stealing romance writer draped in acres of pink satin in ''She-Devil,'' and Mr.
Cruise flawless as the paraplegic Vietnam veteran in ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' their performances are enhanced by an undeniable layer of surprise.


Why Be Surprised At the Budget Crisis?
LEAD: IN the words of New Jersey's Yogi Berra, it's deja vu all over again.
A newly elected governor, who had predicted on the campaign trail that he could balance the state budget without a tax increase, is dropping hints that higher taxes might be necessary after all.
He says he has discovered new information that was unavailable to him before the election.


Longshoremen Strike in Baltimore, Idling Port, After Internal Dispute
LEAD: The Port of Baltimore was idled today when dockworkers went on strike.
About 2,000 members of the International Longshoremen's Association put up picket lines at the port, where 13 ships were scheduled to call this weekend.


The Business of Health Helps a School Regain Its Prominence
LEAD: JOHN L. LAHEY, president of Quinnipiac College in Hamden, recalls that in 1988, when the school began raising money for its Echlin Health Sciences Center, its only fund-raising experience was a $1 million campaign 10 years earlier that fell 25 percent short of its goal.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I own a year-round home in the mountains that has a 3-foot-high crawl space.
The floor of the crawl space is bare earth.
There are eight vents to keep air circulating, but in the summer condensation accumulates.
One contractor told me to put plastic on the ground to prevent moisture from rising, another said I should install a fan to circulate the air.


Campus Life: Grinnell;   Students Skip Vacation Pleasures To Serve the Poor and Homeless
LEAD: Thirty students from Grinnell College spent the final week of their winter vacation in Des Moines, working in local shelters for the homeless, renovating low-income housing and helping bring medical care to people living on the street.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Murdoch Buys Share of 2 Hungarian Tabloids
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, the Australian-born entrepreneur, announced today that his company had bought 50 percent of two independent Hungarian newspapers, making him the first Westerner to make a significant investment in Eastern Europe's emerging free press.


Austerity Is No-Show Amid Antiques
LEAD: The new Age of Austerity may have begun, but the back-to-back preview parties for the Winter Antiques Show were pretty grand.
The show is still the premier event for antiques collectors and connoisseurs as well as interior decorators and their clients.


Wind Players to Take The Spotlight
LEAD: PIANISTS and violinists are rarely in short supply, but next weekend it will be the wind players who will be in the spotlight at chamber and orchestral concerts around the state.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Murdoch's Hungarian Move


First Target for Congress: The Sewer
LEAD: When Congress reconvenes this week, it will have no more important task than to clean up financing of its election campaigns.
Chastened by scandal, House and Senate leaders say they will act, and powerful remedies are available: tight limits on contributions and spending and public funding in place of special-interest millions.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
FIRESIDE TALKS


Campus Lief: Wellesley;   Shadow Program Aims to Illumine Life After Degree
LEAD: January means winter term and almost no one is on the campus, but more than 150 Wellesley College students are getting some education about life after graduation.
The students are participating in the annual Shadow Program, which enables a woman to follow an alumna in the field of her choice for a day in January.


Carolyn J. Nourie To Marry in June
LEAD: The engagement of Carolyn Josephine Nourie to Donald Bernard Aspinall Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aspinall of Villanova, Pa., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Nourie of Strafford, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I own a year-round home in the mountains that has a 3-foot-high crawl space.
The floor of the crawl space is bare earth.
There are eight vents to keep air circulating, but in the summer condensation accumulates.
One contractor told me to put plastic on the ground to prevent moisture from rising, another said I should install a fan to circulate the air.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: the others have finished their games early and gone off to the movies, the bridge table or the bar, there you are slaving over a minuscule-advantage end game.


Martin's Estate Under $100,000
LEAD: Billy Martin, who died in a Christmas night automobile accident in front of his home, has left an estate that legal papers say is worth less than $100,000.


Capital Mayor's Arrest Seen As 'Catharsis' by Prosecutor
LEAD: Jay B. Stephens, the Federal prosecutor who supervised the sting operation that snared Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. on drug charges, said today he viewed the arrest as a ''catharsis'' that could open the way for a new generation of political leaders in the city committed to combatting drug use.


Irritants
LEAD: To the Editor:


Haiti Army Declares State of Siege And Reportedly Seizes Opponents
LEAD: The military Government declared a state of siege tonight after the slaying of an army colonel, and the police reportedly arrested several opposition leaders.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: As-of-Right Construction;   Kalikow Opts for a 58-Story Lower Manhattan Hotel
LEAD: PETER S. KALIKOW did not want to spend any more time going through the complex approval process necessary to build a 29-story office building in lower Manhattan.
So he decided to go the easier route and build a 58-story hotel instead.


MOST COLLEGIANS ARE TOO YOUNG
LEAD: With the alluring prospect of multimillion-dollar contracts, the question for many college football players is, ''Why not take the money now?'' Underclassmen are being barraged with more information than ever about professional football and the possibility of becoming instant millionaires.


'Roar of the Greasepaint' Is Reborn in Westport
LEAD: IN ''The Roar of the Greasepaint, the Smell of the Crowd'' - you will be subjected to the title just once - an elitist (Sir) and a commoner (Cocky) play the Game (of life, of course), or something like that.


QUERY, MR. MAHLER: WHEN DID YOU KNOW IT?
LEAD: There is a mysterious juncture early in the career of important composers when all at once they begin speaking in a voice that is theirs and theirs alone.
For Mahler, that time came at age 20 in 1880, when he finished ''Das Klagende Lied,'' a large-scale cantata that he submitted to Vienna's Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in hopes of winning a prize.


A Closer Look at Broker Discipline
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chicago
LEAD: To the Editor: William E. Schmidt's article (''On the Lam in Chicago,'' Travel, Nov. 19) on gang landmarks has some notable omissions.
Both the city map and itinerary of the Untouchable Tours ignore Al Capone's adjoining West Side suburban Cicero headquarters, the hotel-restaurant on the south side of Cermak Road (22d Street) just west of Cicero Avenue, where the most awesome machine-gun shelling in gangland history took place when Bugs Moran led a motorcade attack, which


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Scarlatti: Keyboard Sonatas (16)
Ton Koopman, harpsichord. Capriccio 10 212; CD and cassette.


DEADLY SERIOUS
LEAD: Filmed at the medical intensive care unit of Boston's Beth Israel Hospital over a period of six weeks, Frederick Wiseman's ''Near Death'' looks unblinkingly at patients and their families and doctors facing the end of life.
The six-hour black-and-white documentary will be shown on the Public Broadcasting


Monet Joy Berger Is Bride
LEAD: Monet Joy Berger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Berger of Las Vegas, Nev., was married there last evening at Bally's hotel and casino to Daniel Smith Levinson, the son of Linda Levinson and Fred Levinson, both of New York.
Rabbi Melvin Hecht officiated.
Miss Berger, 20 years old, is a student at the University of California at Los Angeles.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Azerbaijan;   SOVIET MILITARY TAKES CONTROL OF BAKU; SCORES OF AZERBAIJANIS KILLED; COUP AVERTED, GORBACHEV SAYS
LEAD: Soviet troops claimed control of the Azerbaijani capital of Baku today and began settling in for a probable long-term occupation after a night of urban conflict that left scores of civilians and several soldiers dead.


Lost Without Men?
LEAD:  LOOKING FOR LOVE
By Ellen Feldman.
318 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company.
$17.95.


WE HAVE MET THE ELDERLY AND THEY ARE US
LEAD:
RISKING OLD AGE IN AMERICA
By Richard J. Margolis.
202 pp. Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press.
Cloth, $36.50. Paper, $14.95.


New Field To Conquer
LEAD: He spent a full four years in college, but with three major sports to distract him he didn't get a degree.


Museum Internships
LEAD: A special internship program for those interested in museum careers is to begin in September at the National Gallery of Art in Washington.
The two internships in the program, which is underwritten by a grant from the Southwestern Bell Foundation, will be open to black, Hispanic and American Indian applicants.


Soviet Dissidents Join In Big Strategy Session
LEAD: In the most open challenge thus far to the Soviet Communist Party's hold on power, dissidents from 78 cities and more than 100 political organizations gathered in Moscow to debate how to create a viable political opposition.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 21, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
13
THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
$5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in
"The Gunslinger."
2
10
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.


Wall Street;   New Faith in Old Money
LEAD: Old money.
America has always been fascinated by family wealth, rooted in some corporate bedrock and carefully handed down from one generation to the next.


Report Notes Low Radiation At Millstone 3 Nuclear Plant
LEAD: The Millstone 3 nuclear plant gets high marks for lower-than-average radiation levels, effective daily management, and ''safe and conservative plant operations,'' in a new evaluation by the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: Deafening in their silence are the Knicks and the 76ers.
Jackson and Barkley turned their team's efforts into a game of one-on-one.
They bet - gambled - put the outcome of the game (perhaps the season?) and the fortunes of their teammates on the line.
Yet neither team, nor its management, said or did anything.


A 'Salesman' as Powerful as Ever
LEAD: ONE of the classics of the American stage is Arthur Miller's ''Death of a Salesman.'' As the current revival at Theater Three in Port Jefferson proves, the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Death of a Salesman'' is as powerful today as it was when it made its debut 40 years ago.


IN THE REGION: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bedford, N.Y.
$455,000
Cartway Lane West
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, family room, pool, 1.4 acres; taxes $6,289.
Katonah, N.Y.
$321,500
28 The Terrace
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 99-year-old farmhouse; fireplace, den, terraced backyard; taxes $3,852.


Once Free-Spirited, Jackson Leads Calmly
LEAD: In preparation for a 14-day trip on the West Coast earlier this season, Coach Phil Jackson of the Chicago Bulls spent an afternoon in a bookstore.
He bought a novel for each of his players, ranging from Elmore Leonard's ''Glitz,'' to ''Things Fall Apart,'' by Chinua Achebe.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: An Office of Technology Assessment advisory committee considers recommendations to revamp the securities and futures industries.
TUESDAY: Congress reconvenes with a capital gains tax cut on its agenda.
The House Banking Committee resumes hearings on troubled thrifts.
The Resolution Trust Corporation auctions $5 billion in 40-year bonds - the longest maturity on Government securities since 1960.


Lifestyle;   Some People Ski in the Wintertime, But Thousands of Others Go to Class
LEAD: She put up with her job as chief of radiology at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Manhattan for too long.
Then she worked hard to make her private practice go.
All the while, she took care of the house, her husband and her two children, now in their teens, and had not ''done a thing for this old body for a long time.


'Roar of the Greasepaint' Is Reborn in Westport
LEAD: IN ''The Roar of the Greasepaint, the Smell of the Crowd'' - you will be subjected to the title just once - an elitist (Sir) and a commoner (Cocky) play the Game (of life, of course), or something like that.


ALL ABOUT/DISK DRIVES
LEAD: Naming this area Silicon Valley, some say, was a mistake.
It should be called Ferrite Valley, after the magnetic materials used in disk drives even before the emergence of silicon-based semiconductors.
Dozens of disk-drive start-ups blossomed, much like the semiconductor companies, in the area of San Jose.


Barbara Stanwyck, Actress, Is Dead in California at 82
LEAD: Barbara Stanwyck, the luminous protagonist of such classic movies as ''Stella Dallas,'' ''The Lady Eve'' and ''Double Indemnity'' and the award-winning western television series ''The Big Valley'' in the 1960's, died of congestive heart failure yesterday in a hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 82 years old.


F.B.I. Man and Bank Suspect Slain in Shooting in St. Louis
LEAD: A bank robbery suspect and an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation died in a shootout here Friday night after the agent and two others had burst into the suspect's house.


Fernandez and DeLeon on Verge of Joining Virtuoso Pitchers
LEAD: If their 1989 performances can be viewed as a prelude, Sid Fernandez and Jose DeLeon could be ready to burst onto the level of virtuoso pitchers this year.
A study of 1989 pitching records finds their names dominating various areas.
They worked so effectively, in fact, that it would seem that they should have gained more victories.


If You're Thinking of Living In: Northport
LEAD: MAIN STREET, in downtown Northport Village on Long Island Sound, is Main Street, U.S.A.: the quintessential American hybrid of versatility, accessibility and old-fashioned neighborliness that is fast becoming extinct.


Ending Long Standoff, Pope Plans to Visit Prague
LEAD: The Vatican said today that Pope John Paul II would travel to Prague in the early spring, his first visit to an Eastern-bloc country other than his native Poland.


Lawsuit by Telephone Company Accused of Wiretaps Goes to Jury
LEAD: A jury has begun deliberating a civil case in which two former phone installers for the Cincinnati Bell Telephone Company are accused of defaming the company and two of its managers by charging them with engaging in a vast scheme of illegal wiretapping over more than a decade.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Gorbachev;   Soviet Chief's Address On Azerbaijan Fighting
LEAD: Following is a transcript of a televised address to the Soviet Union yesterday by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, as reported by the English-language service of the official Soviet press agency, Tass:


Miss Connolly, Administrator, Becomes Bride
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Connolly and Robert Leon Alexander were married yesterday at the St.
Petersburg (Fla.) Yacht Club.
The Rev.
Ignatius Tuoc, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Samuel Manuel Silver officiated.


Mandlikova Eliminated By Qualifier
LEAD: On a day when two players left in wheelchairs, a 16-year-old American amateur created the biggest news in the Australian Open.


Deborah J. Hall, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Deborah Jane Hall and James Cameron Woods were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in North Haven, Conn., by the Rev.
John H. Elledge Jr.
The bride is a daughter of Mrs.
Almon Blakeslee Hall of Wallingford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Hall.
Mr.
Woods is the son of Col.
James R. Woods, U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.


Carol Goodwin and Douglas Fuller Are Married
LEAD: Carol Warren Goodwin, a financial analyst, and Douglas Swanson Fuller, a real-estate executive, both of New York, were married yesterday at the Union Congregational Church in Peterborough, N.H., by the Rev.
Gary Hauze.


Linda Fessler Engaged To Michael Weinstein
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Fessler of Merrick, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Linda Beth Fessler, and Michael Jeffrey Weinstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Weinstein of Jericho, L.I.


Evening Hours;   Saluting Ballet, a Park And 9 Decades
LEAD: American Ballet Theater celebrated its 50th anniversary last Sunday night with a gala performance at the Metropolitan Opera House.
A champagne supper dance for 1,200 guests followed in a heated tent over the terrace pool on the north side of the Opera House.
The Henry Moore sculpture ''Reclining Figure'' separated the two dance floors.


Selling a Business? Mum's the Word
LEAD: SO, you want to sell your business.
How do you go about it?
Very carefully and quietly, caution the experts.


Senator Dole's Jackpot Question On Foreign Aid Stirs Up Congress
LEAD: SENATOR BOB DOLE set off a stormy debate on foreign aid last week by saying aloud something that has only been whispered on Capitol Hill: Given the limited resources the United States has for foreign aid, wouldn't it make sense to cut by a mere 5 percent the grants made to Israel and the four other largest aid recipients, reallocating that money to Eastern European countries and


INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS
LEAD: As a former cancer patient, I can identify with Anatole Broyard's feelings of buoyancy while undergoing treatment of his illness (About Men: ''Intoxicated by My Illness,'' Nov. 12).
During chemotherapy treatment, which left me bald, weak and loaded with mouth sores, I continued to play sports, to the amazement of my friends.


The City of Mayor Barry: Achievement and Decay
LEAD: On Friday afternoon, David A. Clarke, the chairman of the City Council here, said with evident anxiety, ''The most important thing I want to project to the people of Washington and across the nation is that this city is under control.''


WHY PLANE TRAVEL ISN'T ALWAYS FAST
LEAD: USAir Flight 188 from Washington to Cleveland had a perfect record in November.
It was never on time.


Mike Figgis Likes Looking at Life On the Dark Side
LEAD: Mike Figgis was not only down in the dumps the day his directing career turned around a few years ago, he was literally down in a Dumpster as well, standing hip deep in five-inch recording tape boxes in an enormous trash bin in an alley in London's Soho district when the big break came.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Albania;   U.S. Group Accuses the Albanians of Crushing Basic Freedoms
LEAD: An American human rights organization has accused the Communist Government in Albania of suppressing freedom of religion, expression and movement.


In the Desert, a Jim Thompson Novel Blossoms on Film
LEAD: The town is called Mecca, and the street names are Bagdad, Damascus and Cairo.
In the 1930's, local businessmen imported date palm trees from the Middle East to the Southern California desert, and they created their own ersatz Saharan village.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
Geri-Olympics


Wetlands Protection Brings a Backlog to Projects
LEAD: ASK Hemraj Khona about the United States Army Corps of Engineers and it's likely to start his head throbbing.


Karen Lee Young to Wed
LEAD: Karen Lee Young and Barry Stewart Dirkin plan to marry in May, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Young of Clifton, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Dirkin is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Dirkin of Woodbury, N.J.
The future bride, 28 years old, is on the staff of the New Jersey Pinelands Commission in New Lisbon.


Greece Seeking to Bar Publicity for Terrorists
LEAD: In an effort to combat terrorism in Greece, which has been criticized in the West for inadequate security, a parliamentary committee has introduced a bill that would bar news agencies from publicizing statements by terrorist groups.


Don Cossacks: Classical Ballet Isn't for Them
LEAD: ''The Cossacks were indeed warriors - that's part of history - but it's misleading to think of them as mean and nasty people.'' So asserts Anatoly Kvasov, artistic director of the Don Cossacks Song and Dance Company of Rostov, which opens on Tuesday night for a 16-performance engagement at the Neil Simon


What Women Want Is Simple Respect
LEAD: AS far as I'm concerned, Women's Lib will have done its job if it merely succeeds in gaining women respect.
That may seem simple, but it's not.
With this accomplished, though, the specific goals of the movement should fall into place.
Let me make my case.


THE ART OF PEOPLE, PERIOD
LEAD:
THE SPIRIT OF FOLK ART
The Girard Collection at the Museum of International Folk Art.
By Henry Glassie.
Color photographs by Michel Monteaux.
Black-and-white photographs and drawings by Henry Glassie.
276 pp. New York:
Harry N. Abrams in association with the
Museum of New Mexico. $60.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
P.
T.
BARNUM: The Legend and the Man.
By A. H. Saxon. (Columbia University, $32.95.) Ah, yezz.
P.
T.
Barnum - Phineas Taylor, by name.
Connecticut boy, born and bred; staunch believer in ''a cheerful Christianity.'' Smart fellow, and clever, too.
Had a wicked sense of humor for practical jokes - those Yankees weren't all glum and gloomy.


Auto Rental
LEAD: To the Editor: A warning to your readers: Despite all the mental gymnastics you go through to anticipate that the price that car rental agencies quote you will be the price ultimately charged, you cannot anticipate everything.


Casual Route
LEAD: To the Editor: I was very pleased to see Martha White's article (''Taking the Casual Route,'' Travel, Nov. 19), which described some of the lesser-known pleasures of traveling.
Over the summer my sister and I decided to take a car trip before returning to our respective colleges.
We arranged to take five days off from work, got the car tuned up and took off early on a Sunday morning before our parents knew what we were up to.


Review/Opera;   'Dutchman': Robert Hale In Met Debut
LEAD: August Everding's thoughtful if clumsily designed and executed new production of Wagner's ''Fliegende Hollander'' appeared Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Opera with entirely different singers from the ones who performed at the Dec. 11 opening.
The new cast was consistently superior to the old one.


THERE GOES THE CAVE
LEAD:
CAVERNS
By O. U. Levon.
(Robert Blucher, Ben Bochner, James Finley, Jeff Forester, Bennett Huffman, Lynn Jeffress, Ken Kesey, Neil Lidstrom, H. Highwater Powers, Jane Sather, Charles Varani, Meredith Wadley, Lidia Yukman and Ken Zimmerman.)
Introduction by Ken Kesey.
325 pp. New York:
Penguin Books.


Delaware Tries to Erase Image of Its Poor Health
LEAD: Gov.
Michael N. Castle has a problem: scientific studies saying that people who live in Delaware are among the least healthy in the nation.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
FAMILY.
By Susan Hill. (Viking, $18.95.) At the center of this absorbing story of an English mother's struggle to have a second child is a baby named Imogen.
Born prematurely at 25 weeks in Oxford, Imogen lived for five weeks.
She was tiny: she weighed one and a half pounds, and her entire hand was only as large as the top joint of her mother's thumb.


Review/Music;   Orchestra of Young Players In Five World Premieres
LEAD: The program notes for the concert of five premieres by the National Orchestral Association at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening offered a freewheeling mix of analysis, apologia, boosterism and criticism.
Of Frederick Bianchi's studiedly amorphous ''Rauschenberg Variations,'' readers were informed, evidently on behalf of the composer, ''As long as the performers are honest and try their hardest, any performance - whether by an amateur group or by the world's most virtuosic orchestra - is correct.


Chicago
LEAD: To the Editor: The readout to the headline ''On the Lam in Old Chicago'' used the word gunsels for gunmen.
Some years ago I read that the first use of gunsel was attributed to Max Brand, a successful writer of Western stories and books.
After he used gunsel for gunslinger, hordes of pulp writers who had probably never been west of the Hudson, not to speak of the Mississippi, copied this seemingly authentic bit of the real West.


Are We Shielding the Killers of Salvador's Priests?
LEAD: The massacre of six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter in El Salvador in November brought to center stage the failure of U.S. assistance to end political killings by the Salvadoran Army.
Congress must find out why, after $1 billion in aid and a decade of U.S. training, that army is still killing priests and if the U.S.


August Wedding For Randi Justus
LEAD: The engagement of Randi Michele Justus to Howard Keith Simon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Simon of Jericho, L.I., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Justus of East Northport, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.


Top East German Says Party Won't Disband
LEAD: East Germany's Communist Party resisted calls from grassroots members to disband, saying today that its continued existence is vital for political stability.


Alison W. Hunter Becomes the Bride Of Cary N. Potter Jr. in Connecticut
LEAD: Alison Webb Hunter and Cary Nicholas Potter Jr. were married yesterday at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan, Conn., by the Rev.
Roland M. Jones.


What Shapes a New Apartment House?
LEAD: THE 13-STORY St.
Andrew Hotel guarded the northwest corner of Broadway at its intersection with Amsterdam Avenue and 72d Street for half a century until it was pulled down during the Great Depression to make way for a two-story retail development that, in those hard days, paid a better return than old hotels.


Another Challenge of the 90's: Managing Information Technology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Style Makers;   Howard Jay Fleischer, Toy Designer
LEAD: Almost everyone doodles, but not everyone doodles his way into something called a ''Polygonzo,'' a multidimensional sculpture cube that has become a chic executive toy, as addictive as worry beads.
It can be twisted, folded and pulled into 20 geometric shapes, almost every letter of the alphabet and numerous other odd and wonderful configurations.


Notre Dame Gets a Nod
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Andrea I. de Cholnoky To Wed Scott Wilson
LEAD: The engagement of Andrea Ilona de Cholnoky to Scott Curtis Wilson has been announced by the future bride's mother, Ingrid de Cholnoky of Greenwich, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.


Washing Dishes Isn't Just a Chore
LEAD: TELLING anyone, especially one's son, that you don't really want his wonderful, thoughtful gift is enough to make mental anguish sound like a vacation.


Adrienne Knoll to Marry
LEAD: Adrienne M. Knoll, a speech writer for Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn, and Kenneth Brown, a Brooklyn newspaper editor and publisher, plan to marry in the fall.
Ms.
Knoll, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Knoll of Coral Springs, Fla., and a graduate of Brown University.


Reviews/Music;   A Clarinetist With Some Good Moves
LEAD: Like a cobra intent on doing some charming of its own, the clarinetist Paul Green weaved, darted and hovered over his instrument at his recital in Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday evening, conjuring gorgeous sounds.
If the gyrations had anything to do with the superb musical results, perhaps other clarinetists should study his choreography.


In East Berlin, a Rare Chance to Buy Western Food With Eastern Marks


SIXTEEN - THE THIRD TIME AROUND
LEAD: I have not walked in Isabel Davis's shoes, nor am I in the business of judging the circumstances under which consenting adults should or should not have intercourse (Hers: ''Sixteen - The Third Time Around,'' Dec. 17).
But why did she take on faith the assurance of this stranger that he was ''just back from a year meditating with a Buddhist monk?


Sad Vigil for Ramos Family
LEAD: In the early hours of the day, while life goes on around them, the parents of Ramon Ramos rise from their bed in an empty hospital room, dress, and walk the short distance to the room where their son sleeps.


Pride of the Garden State
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUSPECT ARRESTED IN RAZOR ATTACKS
LEAD: After a weeklong search that took detectives to Miami Beach, a Brooklyn teen-ager was arrested yesterday in the razor-slashings of two people, including the actress Viveca Lindfors, as they walked in Greenwich Village on Jan. 13.
The police said the suspect was high on LSD and alcohol during the attacks.


REPUBLICANS SHOW GAINS IN LOYALTY
LEAD: The Republican Party enjoyed virtual parity in 1989 with the Democrats in the loyalty of Americans for the first time since just after World War II ended.


DATA UPDATE: January 21, 1990
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Dec.
Nov.
Dec. 88
Rents
151.4
0.3
5.7
Homeowner's costs
160.3
-0.1
7.5
Fuel and utilities
99.9
2.0
7.3
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union,
*4*Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


A Latin American Perspective
LEAD: AN exhibition of Latin American art is not the rarity it was, even a decade ago.
Only last year, a major peak was scaled when the Bronx Museum of the Arts mounted its ''Latin American Spirit: Art and Artists in the United States, 1920-1970,'' which is now visiting the Vero Beach Center for the Arts in Florida.


Cold, in the Winter Years
LEAD: The golden years.
Senior citizenship.
These aren't necessarily euphemisms for age and infirmity.
Many Americans age gracefully, in good health, with sound finances and close to children and grandchildren.
A half-century of advances in medicine and Social Security has made retirement something to look forward to.


Those Awful Shuttle Fares
LEAD: On Wednesday morning, Jan. 3, weekday Shuttle passengers on the Washington-New York and New York-Boston routes received a nasty New Year's present from the glitzy self-promoter Donald J. Trump.
His Trump Shuttle raised its one-way weekday fares by an unprecedented 20 percent, to $119 from $99, thereby exacerbating the already excessive unrestricted air fare gouge that presently afflicts most of the nation's business (and many other) travelers.


Herbert Wehner, 83, Key Member Of the Social Democrats in Bonn
LEAD: Herbert Wehner, a leading member of West Germany's Social Democratic Party who was once described as an ''oratorical volcano'' and ''a boulder in the desert of German politics,'' died on Friday at his home in Bad Godesberg, a suburb of Bonn.
He was 83 years old.


Pyper Davis and Hartley Rogers to Wed
LEAD: Mr and Mrs.
Carlisle Ragland Davis Jr. of Birmingham, Moch., and New York Have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizebeth Pyper Davis to Hartley Raymond Rogers, a son of Prof.
Hartley Rogers Jr. and Dr.
Adrianne E. Rogers of Winchester, Mass.
A june wedding in planned.


At Close Range, the Human Face of War
LEAD: In recent years, we've seeN Sylvester Stallone's ''Rambo'' movies, which re-fight (and win) the Vietnam War.
There was Clint Eastwood's ''Heartbreak Ridge,'' which exalts the United States' invasion of Grenada.
We've also had the phenomenally successful ''Top Gun,'' in which Tom Cruise comes very close to starting World War I


DEALS
LEAD:
FRIDAY
Baseball


THE HATED SEASON
LEAD: I read Gordon R. Batcheller's letter concerning his reason for hunting (Letters, Dec. 31, in response to ''The Hated Season,'' by Steven Lewis, About Men, Nov. 26).
He says he has given up trying to explain to people why he hunts; nevertheless, he presents us with a half-complete, self-justifying statement about ''what it's like to hear a wild turkey gobble .


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Iran;   Teheran Is Said to Back 'Islamic Zeal' but Not Separatism in Azerbaijan
LEAD: Iran has encouraged Muslims in Soviet Azerbaijan to express their Islamic identity and religious feelings, but has not tried to inflame separatist sentiment there for fear that violence might spill over into the two Azerbaijani provinces of Iran, American experts said today.


Goodbye 'Mom's Limo,' Hello New Life
LEAD: THIS was not the first time I had sold a car.
But this was the first time in 19 years that a station wagon (or Mom's Limo, as ours was fondly called) would not be replaced by another station wagon as our family car.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
BENEFIT PLAY


Shari Birnbaum, Student, to Wed
LEAD: Shari Ellen Birnbaum, a law student at Harvard University, and David Howard Dreier, a management consultant in Boston, plan to marry in August.
Mr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Birnbaum of Wesley Hills, N.Y., have made known their daughter's engagement.
Mr.
Dreier is the son of Judge and Mrs.
William A. Dreier of Warren, N.J.


Polished and Gracious Italian Fare
LEAD: THERE were no postholiday doldrums at La Rondinella, and no wonder.
Some of the best food in the Five Towns is found at this gracious Italian restaurant in Woodmere.
There is a Mediterranean feel and spirit at this simply appointed spot with its creamy walls, mirrors, wood lattices and fresh flowers.


Sheila Anne Carey T Wed in March
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond B. Carey Jr. of Locust, N.J., and Nantucket, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sheila Anne Carey to Parker Stephen Bryan, a son of Carleton Felton Bryan of San Francisco and the late Carol Bryan.
A March wedding is planned.


SOME KEEPSAKES
LEAD: They are ideas whose time has come.
Notions that once seemed far-fetched or just fanciful, they've found a lasting place in the fashion lexicon.
Some, like the lean six-button suit, the unmatched vest or the raucously patterned, bottle-shaped tie, have been around before.
Wardrobe staples of earlier decades, they've emerged in new contexts as classics for the 1990's.


Prosecutor Sees 'Catharsis'
LEAD: In an unusually political comment, the Barry prosecutor said the case might be a ''catharsis'' bringing the District of Columbia new leaders who will fight drugs.
Page 26.


Mia M. Hylfelt Weds Mark S. Clowes
LEAD: Mia Magdalena Hylfelt, a daughter of Magda A. Hylfelt of Bardonia, N.Y., and the late Kai W. Hylfelt, was married yesterday to Mark Stetson Clowes, a son of Annette Foisie of Rowayton, Conn., and Everett Clowes of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Francis Geer performed the ceremony at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church in the Highlands in Garrison, N


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: Completely.
The future portends that this could just be the beginning of a less than innocent one-on-one bet.
Point-shaving and dumping loom for others if rules are not abided.
Considering their salaries, I believe the fine was too lenient.
JACK MARSHALL
New York


China Imposes Tighter Curbs on Foreign Reporters
LEAD: China imposed new restrictions on foreign journalists today and banned articles that in the view of the authorities ''distort facts'' or violate ''the public interest.''


Lifestyle;   The Lambada, a Torrid New Dance, Is Not for the Bashful or the Demure
LEAD: Eight pairs of professional dancers did slow turns on a shiny black floor at the Palladium nightclub to the thump of tropical music, the right thigh of each man between his partner's legs as their hips swiveled in unison.
Astride their partners' right knees, the women occasionally performed deep back bends followed by several fast pirouettes that set their miniskirts flying.


The Making of a Post-Communist Disorder
LEAD: THE Popular Front of Azerbaijan first emerged in the fall of 1988 as an earnest, ineffectual circle of intellectuals, banded together in emulation of the national democracy movements in the Baltic republics.
The founders included a poet, a few historians, a linguist, some journalists, a physicist.


THE REVENGE OF THE ONE-NIGHT STAND
LEAD:
EXES
By Dan Greenburg.
384 pp. Boston:
A Marc Jaffe Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


FLASHBACKS
LEAD: In their never-ending quest for inspiration, designers often rifle through the past.
Anything is fair game.
Done well, this delving into the archives results in new clothes with familiar, even classic connotations.
While these designs may be redolent of nostalgia, they are modern in line.
This season, for instance, the French house of Hermes dipped into its horsy heritage to come up with racy 1990's styles.


1790 Broadway
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Rumanians, Political Freedom Opens Cultural Doors


Report Warns of Pollution in Eastern Europe
LEAD: While efforts to restore clean air to the United States have met with partial success, there is a far greater ecological disaster brewing in Eastern Europe, a report on worldwide air pollution said today.


Top Gun
LEAD: Considering the rocky relations between Houston police officers and their last chief, Elizabeth M. Watson (left) may have taken the comments of the head of a patrolmen's group there as a compliment. ''I can't think of anything bad to say about her,'' he said.
If, as expected, she is confirmed, Ms.


Is License to Kill Really a Victory for Women?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Currency;   Drawing Strength From the Fed
LEAD: It turned out to be an up week for the American dollar.
While it was buffeted by news of the jump in the November trade deficit, the dollar was pushed higher by the growing belief that the Federal Reserve, concerned about inflation, would not be lowering interest rates any time soon.
Firm interest rates tend to support the dollar.


Tourism Trade Needs Visitors' Tax
LEAD: Whenever an article about the tourism industry on Long Island appears, I read it with concern for the inaccuracies it might contain.
There seem to be more spokespersons for our tourism industry than I care to count.
Many consider themselves experts and the quotes of these persons are usually accepted as fact.


The New Organized Crime
LEAD: John Gotti, you poor, obsolete loser.
You've missed the boat.
You forgot Willie Sutton's lesson - go where the money is.
Just before Christmas, when I was in New York, I saw on the local news a story about the police in Queens ''busting'' a gambling ''bank.'' A veritable army of police cruisers were outside a pitiful-looking building next to a bakery.


Fees for Disposing Of Medical Waste
LEAD: In response to the recent article ''Medical Waste Law Survives a Challenge'':


A Musician's Hobby Is Behind the Camera
LEAD: WHEN the harpsichordist Igor Kipnis of Redding, a leading concert and recording artist, rehearses with an orchestra, he takes along two things: his music and his camera.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   An Organic Bistro, a Mirrored Chinese Palace
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication; restaurants mentioned in the Diner's Journal do not have ratings.
Prices are current.
Bernard's Organic French Cuisine


In the Galleries, a Delayed-Action Explosion
LEAD: Even though American movies have scrutinized the Vietnam War, art about the conflict has been scarce, perhaps because it has taken many years for artists to come to terms with what happened there.
But such art exists, and some of it movingly incorporates the contradictions that permeated that era.


DYING LIKE AN EXPERT
LEAD:
IN THE FACE OF DEATH
By Peter Noll.
Translated by Hans Noll.
254 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Cordelia T. Pitman, Student, to Marry
LEAD: Cordelia Taylor Pitman and Winslow James Furber plan to marry in June, her parents, Virginia Bradley Pitman of New York and Bay Head, N.J., and Dr.
Walter Clarkson Pitman 3d of New York, have announced.
The prospective bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Furber of Bow, N.H.


Hitting Volleys and the Books
LEAD: Her name is Angelica Gavaldon and she is a 16-year-old high school junior from California who came to the Australian Open with schoolbooks and racquets in tow.


SNET to Test 6 Options: No Plan for Caller ID
LEAD: The Southern New England Telephone Company will test six new services in three Connecticut communities, but will not any time soon introduce the caller identification system, which allows people to see before they answer the number of the telephone from which the call was made, a spokesman said last week.


Daryl G. Nelson And Amy B. Wall Wed in Princeton
LEAD: Amy Batterson Wall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hally Peter Wall of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church to Daryl Gene Nelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Nelson of Naples, Fla.
Bishop George P. Mellick Belshaw, the Bishop of New Jersey, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Review/Music;   New Leads In 'Porgy' At the Met
LEAD: When all goes smoothly, the Metropolitan Opera's uncut version of ''Porgy and Bess'' runs to a Wagnerian length of nearly four hours.
All did not go smoothly at the Thursday evening performance: a stage elevator malfunctioned between the Kittiwah Island and Catfish Row scenes in the second act, forestalling Bess's return to Porgy after a tropical dalliance with


Nina Purviance to Wed Andrew West
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Purviance of Middletown, R.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter Anna Harris Purviance to Andrew Phelps West, a son of Patricia S. Bradshaw of New York and the late Davenport West Jr.
A June wedding is planned.


Review/Ice Capades;   Cutting Capers for a 50th Anniversary
LEAD: The Ice Capades 50th-Anniversary show, which opened on Friday night for a two-week run at Madison Square Garden, gets off to a surprisingly listless start.
But just as one begins to despair of seeing the good, old-fashioned cornball ice dancing on which the show has built its reputation, along comes a second act that lives up to all the hype.


'A Feast for Lawyers'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Art of the State
LEAD: THERE'S A SELFISH SIDE TO THE project, as even Gerry Holzman would admit. ''It's an opportunity to do just about anything that a woodcarver can do,'' he says.
But all in all, the creation of the Empire State Carousel must qualify as a labor of love. ''Making a living museum of New York's history and culture,'' is how Holzman describes it.


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: Rather than discussing what the next bet should be, Barkley and Jackson should concentrate on the game and ways to help their teams win.
A coach with any respect for his team would have benched and/or suspended the player for several weeks, unless, the word team really does have an ''I'' in it.


Bittersweet Trip
LEAD: To the Editor: Like Leslie Maitland's parents, who returned to Freiburg, West Germany (''A Bittersweet Pilgrimage,'' Travel, Dec. 17), my wife and I were invited to return to my native town, Vallendar, after 51 years.


Deirdre Slavin to Wed R. B. Mitchell
LEAD: The engagement of Deirdre Jane Slavin to Richard Bates Mitchell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry E. Mitchell of Groton, Mass., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Slavin of Darien, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Warm Salad With Chicken on the Grill
LEAD: The recipe direction to grill does not have much meaning in January for most of us, unless the kitchen comes equipped with a charcoal grill.
But last year I was introduced to an indoor alternative that takes up less room than a frying pan and fits neatly on the top of a burner.


Giving Up On Rangers
LEAD: The Sports Editor:


Winfield Would Shift
LEAD: Right field is still his position of choice, but Dave Winfield, the 38-year-old Yankee slugger who missed last season after back surgery and watched as Jesse Barfield took over his familiar ground, has made it clear that he is a team player first and last.


POSTING: Calculated Optimism;   More Offices For Stamford
LEAD: Why would a real estate development company invest $40 million to put up a pair of towers containing 325,000 square feet of office space in a city that already has 3.6 million square feet of vacant office space?
Three reasons, said Larry Feldman, a partner in Feldman Equities of Lake Success, L.I., which developed the just-completed Stamford Towers project in the business district of Stamford,


Laura Sheppe to Wed Michael Miller
LEAD: Mrs.
P.
Peter Sheppe of Scarsdale, N.Y., has announced December wedding plans for her daughter, Laura Elizabeth Sheppe, and Michael Bruce Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Miller of Calabasas, Calif.


THE BOUNTY HUNTER
LEAD: RECENTLY, A DEAR fried came to visit from Seattle.
I met her at the baggage Carousel where she stood surrounded by luggage and one crisp, square box.
The label read ''perishable,'' and I knew instantly what was inside.
That box contained a wealth of brilliant, fresh seafood.
My friend confirmed my suspicions with a smile as wide as Broadway: ''I wanted to bring you a present, and I thought this would please you the most.


The Executive Computer;   With Sound, Graphics - It's Multimedia
LEAD: The Audio Visual Connection from the International Business Machines Corporation allows companies to create computer presentations that include text, sound, voice, graphics and video images - and at relatively low cost.


GOOD AND EVIL ON CANVAS
LEAD: Imagine receiving national acclaim as a painter at the tender age of 22, only to slip into the shadows of a fickle, mostly uncaring art world for the rest of one's long and prolific career.
Such has been the discouraging story for Jack Levine, one of the foremost Social Realists of his generation, a satirist whose gritty urban iconography and brassy style have often led to comparisons with Goya and Daumier.


U.N. Council Is Pursuing Its Postwar Mission
LEAD: The five victorious World War II Allies are putting on the peacemaker's mantle that the United Nations gave them more than 40 years ago, a mantle they have had difficulty wearing until recently, specialists on the United Nations say.


31 Artists Take a Decade's Measure
LEAD: WHAT if life had always been measured by the decade?
To express it in contemporary terms, 100 years ago the Divisionist 80's were giving way to the Symbolist 90's, nostalgia for the lost Impressionist 70's was doubtless brewing, and the artists may already have known to call themselves Post-Impressionists.


World Beat Has Become An Industry
LEAD: Most movements in popular music arise without any clear understanding by participants or observers as to what is going on.
At some point, after audiences and styles establish themselves, spontaneity begins to give way to calculation, and self-consciously created modes vie for domination.
For example, by the time ''Saturday Night Fever'' played in movie theaters, disco was poised to catch on as a prepackaged way of life.


Neighbors Stone House To Protest Treatment
LEAD: A couple are being held on child-abuse charges after 20 neighbors angered by mistreatment of the couple's children surrounded their home and threw stones at it.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Yugoslavia;   Communists in Belgrade Delay Move to Yield Monopoly on Power
LEAD: Hard-line and liberal Communists clashed today at the opening of a pivotal party congress over how quickly to renounce their 45-year guaranteed monopoly on power, and the hard-liners succeeded in delaying a vote on democratic changes.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$223,500
1 Tudor Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old split level; c/a, 2-car garage, finished basement, patio; taxes $2,954.
Montague
$105,000
Riverview Way
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; pool, eat-in kitchen, full basement, brick fireplace; taxes $2,124.


CRIME
LEAD: Hector Belascoaran Shayne works nights and shares his Mexico City office with a sewer expert, which no doubt contributes to the morbid outlook he presents in AN EASY THING (Viking, $16.95), the first of Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d's many crime novels to be published in English.


KLEIG LIGHTS ON THE POTOMAC
LEAD:
HOLLYWOOD
A Novel of America in the 1920s.
By Gore Vidal.
437 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.


The Great British Breakfast
LEAD: LONG before anyone worried about cholesterol, there was the English breakfast, and undoubtedly long after all the medical controversies have subsided, the morning repast of eggs, sausage, bacon and buttered, marmalade-laden toast will live on in London.
It may not be a meal to be savored for its culinary delights, but it can be a feast for the eyes and ears at some of


Review/Music;   Premiere Of Ashley's 'Brother'
LEAD: Whatever Robert Ashley does, it's extreme.
His compositions have always tested audience endurance, from the amplified shouting over roaring electronic distortion of his early ''Wolfman'' (1964), to the protracted television operas of the 1980's, with his own mumbling monologues, rockish percussion and vocal interjections and cocktail-jazzish piano filigrees.


New Albums Lead Rap Down Different Roads
LEAD: Though rap is often seen as a monolithic force, in reality it's a genre jam-packed with contentious styles and ideologies.
Two terrific new albums - from the historyoriented Jungle Brothers and the commercially minded Young M. C. - show how different rap's subcultures can be.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There were growing calls for a seizure of power by force.''
- President
Mikhail S. Gorbachev,
speaking of unrest
in Azerbaijan.
[1:6.]


Data Bank/January 21, 1990


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I own a year-round home in the mountains that has a 3-foot-high crawl space.
The floor of the crawl space is bare earth.
There are eight vents to keep air circulating, but in the summer condensation accumulates.
One contractor told me to put plastic on the ground to prevent moisture from rising, another said I should install a fan to circulate the air.


Office Sublets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Some money just goes up in smoke.
In Chinese communities around the world joss money does just that.
It's burned in honor of the dead so the deceased can make ends meet in the afterlife and at 50 cents for a hundred notes, joss money is a bargain.


Shooting in Nagasaki Stirs Fears of Speaking Out
LEAD: Nagasaki's Mayor is out of danger now, his suspected assailant is in custody and the sprawling, busy city that the world still pictures in nuclear ruin is back to work.


All the Work That Really Goes Into a Dream
LEAD: WHEN I called my daughter Tracey, I laughed as I listened to her answering machine message. ''Hi, this is Tracey,'' it said. ''I'm not in my new condo right now.''


For the Best to Excel, Students Should Be Grouped by Ability;   Shortchanged Middle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
Entry to East Germany


Still Punching
LEAD: In a sport where 30 is old and 40 is ancient, George Foreman beat the odds -and Gerry Cooney - last week.
Foreman (above, delivering a punch), the oldest and heaviest of heavyweights, was so impressive as he knocked Cooney out in the second round that sportswriters, who had joked that the 253-pound Foreman would be ordering food between rounds, turned to speculating that the 41-year-old former champion might make a fit opponent for the current titleholder, 22-year-old Mike Tyson.


Want a Seat? They're Going For a Song
LEAD: Anybody want to buy a house?
Or a seat?
With share prices weakening last week as interest rates rose and housing starts hit a six-year low, the most depressing news at the New York Stock Exchange may have been the year's first sale of a seat in that august body.
The price: $390,000, the lowest tab since 1985.


East Europe's Next Test: To Survive Democracy
LEAD: IF 1989 gave the world the indelible image of vast crowds on the cobbled squares of Eastern Europe demanding democracy, then 1990 may be the year when those same crowds learn that chasing out a clutch of ham-fisted commissars was the easy part.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-20


How Outrage in U.S. Spurred Action in Jesuit Case
LEAD: Behind the arrests of eight military men in the killing of six Jesuit priests and two women in El Salvador lies an extraordinary campaign of pleas to the Bush Administration by church groups and of pressure on the Salvadoran Government by American officials demanding a full investigation.


POSTING: From the McAlpin;   Nautical Tiles, Anyone?
LEAD: A collection of colorful terra cotta wall panels designed by the late muralist Fred Dana Marsh that depict New York City's nautical heritage is looking for a new home.
For over 40 years the 24 panels were the backdrop for the 250-seat Marine Grill at the McAlpin Hotel on Herald Square, which opened in 1912 and between World Wars was one of the city's more fashionable restaurants.


BRITISH TAX PLAN SPURS TORY MUTINY
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government survived a Conservative Party mutiny on Thursday night over a plan to replace real-estate taxes levied by local governments with a ''community charge,'' or head tax, on every adult.


Two Pianos, Three Hands And One Composer
LEAD: Commissioning a concerto for three hands at two pianos is like designing a three-legged cow.
It can be done.
But why bother?


A Mayor's Word On Hispanic Issue
LEAD: I am writing this letter with great concern over some of the statements made concerning my actions by a professional social worker by the name of Rosa M. Calderon.
In an article concerning the Mount Kisco Hispanic community [''Tensions Rise Over Illegal Hispanic Immigrants,'' Dec. 24] , Ms.
Calderon made some inflammatory remarks concerning me.


A Word on Rates And Fuel Supply
LEAD: In the Jan. 7 story covering heating-oil prices [''Price of Heating Oil Prompts an Outcry''] , the paraphrasing of my comments to your reporter incorrectly substituted the word ''oil'' for ''gas'' in describing the effects of interruptible gas supply, thus changing the whole sense of the comment.


BLACKS In ART;   Straining Credulity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cranston Decides to Fight in Effort to Overcome Image in Savings and Loan Failure
LEAD: Declaring himself ''bloodied but unbowed,'' Senator Alan Cranston has abandoned his tactic of lying low in the Lincoln Savings and Loan failure and come out swinging in a fight to save his political life.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary by The Associated Press on Dec. 31 about Hermann Julius Oberth, a West German rocket scientist, misstated his birthplace.
He was born in Nagyszeben, in Transylvania, an area that is now part of Rumania.


S. Fannie Simon, Teacher, 88
LEAD: S. Fannie Simon, a retired teacher and labor leader, died of a ruptured appendix Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Victoria Hong Weds John McElrone
LEAD: Victoria Misa Hong, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sung Ho Hong of Neenah, Wis., and John Daniel McElrone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Joseph McElrone of Rivervale, N.J., were married yesterday in New York.


The Plot Thickens for Plotless Dances
LEAD: Drama is dancing its way into choreographic abstractions.
A remarkable number of modern dancers are offering works which, because they are plotless, could be termed abstract; at the same time, they appear to concern changing human relationships.
Productions of this sort are not entirely new, and they are also devised by ballet choreographers.


Teachers Have No Chance To Give Their Best
LEAD: NO one in the advanced 10th-grade English class has the foggiest notion who King Kong is.
The last book read, they seriocomically inform me, was the one I assigned as a book report.


250 Protest I-95 Plan for Mamaroneck
LEAD: THE most dangerous curve in the village of Mamaroneck is a serpentine monster on Mamaroneck Avenue that has claimed two lives and caused 22 accidents in the last five years.
But this stretch of road could be carrying up to 200 more vehicles an hour under a plan by the New York State Thruway Authority to alleviate the danger at a nearby interchange on


Track and Field;   Foster Keeps Winning Pace
LEAD: Greg Foster, ranked as the world's best high hurdler for most of the last decade, is 31 years old and showing little sign of slowing down.


Syrians and Lebanese Troops Clash as a Cease-Fire Falters
LEAD: Syrian troops clashed today with Lebanese Army units loyal to the Christian general, Michel Aoun, in the first such encounter since an Arab-brokered cease-fire last September ended six months of fighting between the two sides.


Experience Alters a View Of Disabled
LEAD: THE summer I was 19 my friend Razel had a job assisting the social director of a nursing home on Riverside Drive in Manhattan.
A whirlwind of energy and optimism, she would go in with a guitar and try to cheer up the residents with a song.
Then she would take the time to chat about their grandchildren or perhaps about their younger, stronger days.


WHY ROCK REMAINS THE ENEMY
LEAD: Those who fret that rock is dead - which usually means that the music they grew up with has been supplanted by something younger folk like - might take comfort in its continued ostracism.
On the theory that anything continually attacked must have some life left in it, rock seems very much alive.


2 Army Women Being Investigated For Disobeying Order in Panama
LEAD: The Defense Department said today that it was investigating an incident in which two women in the Army refused an order to drive other soldiers into downtown Panama City early on Dec. 20, the day that United States troops invaded Panama.


In Washington, It's the Year for Clean Air
LEAD: UPON its return this week, the Senate will immediately face the moment of truth on strengthening the Clean Air Act, a goal that has eluded Congress for a decade.


Yugoslavia Catching East Europe's Political Fever
LEAD: For months, this nation of scrappy and independent burghers and farmers watched calmly as other East European nations swept away in anger the Communist systems that unlike the one here were imposed by Moscow.


Who Else Painted Bellini's 'Feast'?
LEAD: One of the most rewarding exhibitions in recent months is hardly an exhibition at all.
It focuses on a single painting, ''The Feast of the Gods,'' long attributed to Giovanni Bellini and Titian.
In the possession of the National Gallery since 1942, it was removed from display five years ago to be cleaned and is now back on the wall.


Protests in Georgia Strain Security Budgets
LEAD: With white supremacists demonstrating again this weekend in downtown Atlanta, officials here are increasingly asking a difficult question: who should pay the bills when free speech gets expensive?


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Strolling Around the Yale Campus
LEAD: Perhaps it is because its sand-colored stone buildings so tidily fit the popular notion of the ideal campus that Yale University in New Haven seems so familiar, even to the first-time visitor.
Or perhaps it is because of the pervasive influence of the school that gave the world ''Doonesbury,'' William F.


Giving Credit To Teacher of Russian
LEAD: I strongly object to the omission of the name of the instructor of Russian language at Morristown High School in the Dec. 17 article ''Studying the 'Critical Languages.''' The article gave the name of the principal, who does not teach a critical language, the name of the chairman of the foreign langauge department, who does not teach a critical language, and the name of a teacher who monitors, not teaches, the course in


World Markets;   Will Tokyo's Slide Snowball?
LEAD: It is becoming a regular reflex to check the Nikkei 225 - Tokyo's closely watched stock index - early in the evening in New York.
Since the beginning of the year, it has been plunging with regularity and has helped bring down many other major markets.


Forging a Global Empire in a Sluggish Market
LEAD: These are not the easiest of days for the Marriott Corporation, the largest hotel company in the world.
The company's chairman, J. W. Marriott Jr., is recuperating from open-heart surgery.
The Marriott hotel in Panama endured a harrowing seige during the United States invasion last month.
Business at some of the company's lodging properties has been so sluggish that the company last month announced a $150 million write-down.


Fewer Turf Battles, More Drug Arrests
LEAD: QUIETLY, virtually unnoticed by most New Yorkers, a three-year effort by Federal and local law-enforcement officials has made some notable gains against some of the city's most notorious narcotics traffickers.
Government officials say that 150 dealers, including some major traffickers who controlled drug distribution in parts of Manhattan and Queens, have been locked up since 1986 in an operation that has become a model for


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Breathes there anyone who is never in a bad mood?
If so, beware - that person is a disguised creature from another planet and definitely not human.
Real people, even nice real people, are grumpy sometimes, down in the dumps at least occasionally and mean-mad, mean-tired or plain mean once in a while.


FICTION
LEAD:
VOICES IN THE EVENING.
By Natalia Ginzburg.
Translated by D. M. Low. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $16.95.) Natalia Ginzburg has been recognized for many decades as a major force in Italian letters, but it is only in recent years that her work has begun to be read and appreciated in the English-speaking world.


Ms. Dinneen Wed On Long Island
LEAD: At the Armenian Orthodox Church of the Holy Martyrs in Bayside, Queens, Jane Dinneen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
James Dinneen of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory Derian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Derian, also of Port Washington.
The Rev.
Asoghik Kelejian performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.


Brooks Barton Plans to Marry
LEAD: Malcolm Brewster Barton of Bedford, N.Y., has announced April wedding plans for his daughter, Brooks Barton, and Gerald Scott Cantini, the son of Gerald Peter Cantini of Manchester, Vt., and Mrs.
Barry Hyde Chappel of Norwalk, Conn.
Miss Barton also is the daughter of the late Cynthia Towell Barton.


Jacobsen Fights Drought in Desert
LEAD: Peter Jacobsen is determined to put past disappointments behind him as he tries to win his first PGA Tour tournament in six years at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bethpage
$198,000
12 Romscho Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, wraparound porch, 2-car garage; taxes $1,900.
Farmingdale
$205,000
22 Eagle Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old split level; family room, new kitchen, finished basement; taxes $4,500.


Aspen: The Call of the Wild
LEAD: THE SUN FIRST PEEKS OVER the Continental Divide just after 6 on New Year's Day, and particularly at this hour, it seems there could be no more beautiful place on earth than the Roaring Fork Valley - red-tinged clay, bright white snow and a pure blue in the sky that only high altitudes can produce.


Cole Porter Series
LEAD: Five programs devoted to the music of Cole Porter will be featured in this year's Lyrics and Lyricists series, to begin on Jan. 28 and 29 at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
A different aspect of the songwriter's music will be discussed at each session.
Subscriptions to the Monday programs are $130 to $110, and tickets for single sessions are $27.50 to $22.50 (students and the elderly may buy half-price tickets on the day of the session).


New Police Chief Facing a Familiar Task of Building Bridges
LEAD: When Lee P. Brown walks into the red-brick Police Headquarters building tomorrow morning to be sworn in as New York City's 36th police commissioner, he will be taking charge of an embattled department struggling against an explosion of violent crime with a shrinking force.


BEST SELLERS: January 21, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
10
DADDY, by Danielle Steel (Delacorte, $19.95.)
Unexpected crises wreck the safe, predictable world a man has
built for himself and his family.
2
3
21
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy (Putnam, $21.95.) The
C.I.A.


On Deadline
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Jazz;   Louis Hayes And Drums, Plus Four
LEAD: The drummer Louis Hayes is leading hard-bop blowing sessions -earthy and eccentric tunes, plenty of time for soloists - through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South.
His trim, brisk drumming, with its careful cymbal accents, supports a quintet that features two experienced players with too little New York exposure, the trumpeter Charles Tolliver and the saxophonist Gary Bartz.


Loryn R. Cohen to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold S. Cohen of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Loryn R. Cohen and Michael Lawrence Kass, the son of Harriet Marcus and Dr.
Alfred M. Kass, both of Columbus, Ohio.
Ms.
Cohen, 24 years old, is a graduate of Tulane University and a marketing associate at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.


Jean M. Hanavan Wed in Delaware
LEAD: Jean Marie Hanavan and Christopher John Kelly were married yesterday in the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph-on-the-Brandywine in Greenville, Del., by Msgr.
Francis J. Evans.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor W. Hanavan of Wilmington, Del., and Northfield, Mass.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr.


Joy Johnson Wed To S. B. Carlson
LEAD: Joy Sanborn Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur William Johnson of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday at the Georgetown Presbyterian Church in Washington to Stephen Bruce Carlson, a son of Dr.
Bruce Einar Carlson of Aspen, Colo., and Mrs.
Richard Dirkes of Aspen and Port Washington and Quogue, L.I.


PITT ENDS SLUMP, EDGING PIRATES
LEAD: Pittsburgh, one of the Big East Conference's dominant teams for three years, hadn't won a conference game this season.
But Bobby Martin blocked that failure out of his mind before the Panthers' game against Seton Hall today.


EVERYBODY'S MOTHER IS A WOMAN
LEAD:
FEMINISM AND PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY
By Nancy J. Chodorow.
286 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. $25.


THE DARK AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL
LEAD:
ESCAPES
By Joy Williams.
168 pp. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


A PAWN OF WAR
LEAD: IT HAD ALREADY BEEN A BAD NIGHT.
CBS NEWS CORRESPONDENT Juan Vasquez, editor John Mondello and I were covering the United States invasion of Panama as best we could from our edit room on the mezzanine of the Marriott Hotel.
We were on an open phone line to the control room in New York, able to go on the air at any time.


Exit Campeau, Exit Leverage, And the Hunt for a Safe Deal Is On
LEAD: THERE is near unanimity, it seems, in the lessons of the Campeau Corporation.
After last week's bankruptcy filing by two of the company's department store subsidiaries, it is almost as hard to find anyone who has not sworn off greed and excess as it was to find anyone who admitted losing money in the stock market crash of 1987.


Teen-Agers and the Trap of Affluence
LEAD: I SIT in the back row of the Seaport deli, that twilight hub of East Setauket, alternately reading a newspaper, picking at a plate of fried seafood and surveying the comings and goings of teen-agers who casually drift in and out.


Incaviglia Signed
LEAD: The Texas Rangers said Pete Incaviglia, their slugging outfielder, had signed a one-year-contract with the club. . . .
Bubby Brister, the Pittsburgh Steeler quarterback, had minor surgery Friday to repair a joint at the top of his left shoulder that was injured in an off-season weight-lifting session.


March Wedding For Ms. Murphy
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Murphy of Wethersfield, Conn., have made known the engagement of their daughter Marguerite Amelia Murphy to Samuel Baumgarten Solomon, the son of Dr.
Jolane Solomon and Bernard Solomon of Brookline, Mass.
A March wedding is planned.


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: The N.B.A. did a terrific job stopping Jackson and Barkley early with fines.
To allow petty betting would surely open a dire Pandora's box of big time gambling in professional and college sports of whose consequences even the most fanatical advocates should shudder.
ANTHONY C. E. OKOLO
New


Getting a Lift To Untracked Powder
LEAD: JUMP out of the helicopter and sink to your knees in snow.
Stay low and move slowly.
But the rat-a-tat-tat of the chopper and the pulse of your heartbeat make you want to sprint away.
The chopper lifts, glides sideways and hovers over space before gliding down the canyon and out of sight and sound.


Question Of the Week;   Was the Bet By Jackson And Barkley Improper?
LEAD: Absolutely not.
As a matter of fact, it made both players' games better.
How many players, coaches, managers and most of all fans, bet on games off the books, and nothing happens to them?
As long as it doesn't get out of hand, and it gets players pumped up, I'm all for it.
RON RICHARDSON
Jersey


THE TRIUMPH OF THE UNOFFICIAL
LEAD:
CONTEMPORARY RUSSIAN ART
By Matthew Cullerne Bown.
Illustrated. 127 pp. New York:
Philosophical Library. $34.95.


Fashion;   A Cashmere Look That's Soft on the Pocketbook
LEAD: Acrylic is still a word that's short on cachet.
But reformulated under names like Cashmink, Cashmaire or Cashmore, the fiber is turning up in some of the best places.


Mutual Funds;   Reassessing Eastern Europe
LEAD: When the Iron Curtain ripped open, investment managers rushed through, seeking profits in the chaos of Eastern Europe.
Shares in Hungary and Germany funds have been sold and plans are in the works for Poland and Berlin funds.


Alicia Ruggiero To Wed in July
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony W. Ruggiero of Princeton, N.J., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Alicia M. Ruggiero and Jonathan I. Brodsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Brodsky of Boca Raton, Fla.


IN THE GRIP OF THE NAZI PAST
LEAD:
20TH CENTURY JOURNEY
A Memoir of a Life and the Times.
Volume Three: A Native's Return, 1945-1988.
By William L. Shirer.
Illustrated. 484 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


BLACKS In ART;   Art as a Decoding Exercise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rooms Of Their Own
LEAD: When Ellen Baxter was working on a report about the homeless people of New York City, she went into shelters and subway stations and parks to talk to them about their lives.
The problem was enormous but her conclusion was simple. ''It was so obvious to me that what they wanted was a place to live,'' she says.


In Beijing, Wishful Whispers That Li Will Fall
LEAD: The whispers among Chinese officials these days are all about power struggles or major reshuffles in the leadership.


More Exotic Ways to Prepare Fish
LEAD: NOW that fish is no longer something that makes a grudging appearance at the table once a week, ways of serving it are becoming increasingly exotic.
For people keeping an eye on their salt and fat intake, a touch of spice can make all the difference.


'Invisible Thread': Unfair Stereotype
LEAD: I read with interest the article by Judy Chicurel about ''The Invisible Thread,'' a newly published book that intends to dispel myths and stereotypes about Jewish women in America [Women in a Jewish Tapestry, in Words and Pictures,'' Dec. 31] .
I was disturbed, though, by a quote from a college student who was one of the 60 interviewees in the book.


Witness Says Troops 'Shot at Everything'
LEAD: Aris Yunusov, an Azerbaijani political centrist who spent the predawn hours walking through the streets of Baku, said today that army and Interior Ministry troops converged on the city from the north, south and west, with the most intensive battles in the north.


Raise 'User Fees' on Alcohol To Reduce Drinking-Related Problems
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dorsett Returns To Super Bowl
LEAD: After 12 seasons, Tony Dorsett's career is ending where it began.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
LONE TREE: A True Story of Murder in America's Heartland.
By Bruce Brown. (Crown, $17.95.) Shortly before noon on Dec. 9, 1985, Dale Burr, an Iowa farmer, grabbed his shotgun, entered the kitchen where his wife of 40 years was baking cookies and shot her through the heart.
He then drove into town, where he killed his banker.


BLACKS In ART;   Tortured Optics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colleen Cooper and Joseph Reardon 3d to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Colleen Ann Cooper and Joseph A. Reardon 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reardon Jr. of Bloomfield, N.J., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond V. Cooper of Rockaway, N.J.
A fall wedding is planned.


A Spot for Music and Light Meals
LEAD: THE former owner of Breakaway in Fairfield has gone south, but not far.
East Coast, Marty Levine's new restaurant, is just over the town line, in Westport, in a building that once housed Beeksteak Charlie's.


Plan to Buy Condos As Public Housing Stirs Wide Interest
LEAD: INTEREST has been so strong in a state plan to buy hundreds of condominiums to rent or sell to moderate- and low-income families that officials at the Department of Housing have had to add more sessions this week to explain details of the plan.


STREETSCAPES: The Saint Urban;   A New Roof in an Old - but Not the Old - Material
LEAD: AT the moment it is the brightest thing on the Central Park skyline - 6,000 square feet of Day-Glo orange.
No, it is not a new Christo wrap sculpture or a high-rise HoJo's; it is the protective tarpaulin around the great roof and tower of the 1906 Saint Urban apartment house at the southwest corner of 89th Street and Central Park


Making a Name One's Own
LEAD: THE other day I watched my 6-year-old son Eric slowly, painfully print out his full name at the top of a first-grade assignment.
It seemed like some important rite of passage, this unquestioning writing of our last name as if it naturally was his own.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I own a year-round home in the mountains that has a 3-foot-high crawl space.
The floor of the crawl space is bare earth.
There are eight vents to keep air circulating, but in the summer condensation accumulates.
One contractor told me to put plastic on the ground to prevent moisture from rising, another said I should install a fan to circulate the air.


HIS BUS CAME IN
LEAD: STORIES FROM THE STREETS ARE RICH WITH THE improbable.
Here, for instance, crossing Columbus Avenue and coming into view, is a man with a preposterous past.
When fortune attended, he ran a union; when it was wanting, he cracked safes.
At 35, he declared himself an actor.
Up to that point, he had emoted anonymously - into a microphone announcing bus routes.


Saying It With Music as Well as the Words
LEAD: Words, as every poet knows, have a music of their own, especially when spoken sonorously by gifted performers.
So why paint the lily?
Yet the wedding of words to music is almost as old as poetry itself, and when the collaboration is between geniuses, even though centuries apart - as when Mendelssohn underscored ''A Midsummer Night's


A GOOD ROAD TO SOMEWHERE
LEAD:
A PLACE OF LIGHT
By Mary Bush.
254 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


A PRIMARY SCHOOL TESTS FOR DRUGS
LEAD: Some students at a Roman Catholic elementary school have been reporting to a hospital to give urine samples in what may be the nation's first primary-school drug testing program.


POSTING: 3-Story Living Room;   Halston Town House Sold
LEAD: An East Side town house designed by the architect Paul Rudolph and called ''extremely sophisticated, starkly modern'' by the Landmarks Preservation Commission has been sold for $5 million.


Prof. Moynihan Wakes the Class With Truth About Taxes
LEAD: DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, Ph.D., was a professor before he became a Senator.
Although his recent proposal to cut Social Security taxes has turned out to be a clever political stroke that has embarrassed President Bush, it was meant mostly as a teaching device.
Angry and frustrated that no one seemed to be listening to his economics lessons, the New York


Technology;   A Pioneer is Out on a Limb Again
LEAD: Twenty-two years ago, when a young professor of computer science at the California Institute of Technology predicted that single chips containing millions of transistors would one day be commonplace, his vision was greeted with incredulity.


Persian Folk Music
LEAD: Reza Derakhshani, who plays tar and sehtar, two varieties of Iranian lute, will perform Persian folk music at the Uris Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art this afternoon at 2:30.
Mr.
Derakhshani's ensemble includes players of the tar, santur (a hammered dulcimer), kamancheh (a fiddle) and daff (a drum).


WHAT'S DOING IN: Melbourne
LEAD: Called the garden city of Australia for its tree-lined streets and 2,000 acres of gardens and parklands, Melbourne still has many of the grand Victorian buildings built in the gold rush years of the late 1800's, when it was the port of arrival for thousands of new settlers who came from the United States and


Leader of Church of England Says Terry Waite Is Still Alive
LEAD: The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev.
Robert Runcie, said today he believed that Terry Waite was still alive three years after the Anglican Church envoy disappeared in Lebanon on a mission to free Western hostages.


For Gov. O'Neill, Bitter 3d-Term Prospects
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill, whose popularity soared with the economic boom of the mid-1980's and sank as financial woes rocked the state government last year, will face the toughest battle of his career when he seeks re-election to a third term in November, supporters and opponents say.


A Vice Chairman at Ann Taylor
LEAD: Thomas H. K. Brooks, who joined Ann Taylor Inc. in April, has been named a vice chairman of the fashion chain, which is rapidly expanding under his father, Joseph E. Brooks.


Rangers Mull Nicholls's Role
LEAD: The price, Tomas Sandstrom and Tony Granato, was high.
The cost, roughly $700,000 a year, will be considerable.
The trade for Bernie Nicholls: Was it, is it, will it be worth it?


Frank Gervasi, Author And Correspondent, 81
LEAD: Frank Gervasi, a reporter who covered the Spanish Civil War and World War II in Europe, died yesterday after a stroke at Doctors Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Judith Mazo Is Wed to Louis Seidman
LEAD: Judith Frances Mazo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Mazo of Washington, was married there yesterday to Louis Michael Seidman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benedict S. Seidman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Judge Frederick H. Weisberg of Superior Court of the District of Columbia officiated at the bride and bridegroom's home.


The Bundesbank's Partial Success
LEAD: With its aggressive strategy to strengthen the mark, the Bundesbank of West Germany has shown again why it is considered the most skilled of the West's central banks and a primary player in the economic future of Europe.
But not everything has gone according to plan.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, the diagram of the deal with the bridge column Saturday duplicated two cards and was missing two cards.


Pregnant Woman Is Charged With Child Abuse for Drinking
LEAD: A pregnant woman has been charged with child abuse after prosecutors accused her of excessive drinking.


4 Golden Globe Awards To 'Born on 4th of July'
LEAD: ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the Vietnam drama, won four Golden Globe Awards Saturday night, including best dramatic picture, best dramatic actor for Tom Cruise and best director.


Gorbachev Is at Fault, Chess Champion Says
LEAD: The world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, said today that Soviet troops should withdraw from the Azerbaijani republic and that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev should take full responsibility for the ethnic violence there.


Harbin Journal;   In the City of Ice, Heat Brings the Biggest Shivers
LEAD: It is a cold so chilling that it requires new metaphors: not just icy cold, or freezing, but a subzero cold that quickly disables cameras and makes even the hardy pushcart vendors shiver as they shout for customers: ''Ice cream!
Buy your popsicles here.''


Frederick C. Shrady, 82, Sculptor Best Known for Religious Figures
LEAD: Frederick Charles Shrady, a sculptor best known for his works on religious themes, died of cancer on Saturday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Easton, Conn.


Delta Air Lines Reports 24.6% Fall in Profit
LEAD: Delta Air Lines on Saturday reported a 24.6 percent drop in profit for its second quarter, reflecting higher fuel costs and weaker-than-expected holiday travel.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
Automobile Sales
Mid-Jan.
Thursday
None
Friday
Durable Goods
Dec.
G.N.P.
4th Qtr.


Alfred Olcott, Financial Planner, 70
LEAD: Alfred Van Santvoord Olcott, a financial planner and founder of a maritime historical society, died of complications of heart surgery at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.


Environmentalists Seek To Buy Off Development
LEAD: Tremper Mountain rises gently over this Catskill village, its slopes an unbroken mass of evergreens and white birch.
New York State owns the summit, but much of the lower mountain is in private hands, and some of those hands belong to developers with plans to subdivide the land.


Question Box
LEAD:
Record Before Ruth
Q. Henry Aaron broke Babe Ruth's career home run record. Whose record did Ruth break?
A.
If you had picked up a major league baseball record book in April 1921, the listing under ''Most Home Runs in a Career by a Player Since 1900'' would have read: ''Gavvy Cravath, 119.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   East German Party Purges Ex-Leaders
LEAD: Faced with growing rebellion and defections in its ranks over the slowness of internal change, leaders of East Germany's Communist Party decided after an emergency session that ended early today to purge several more former leaders, but rejected calls that it dissolve altogether.


Strong Start for the Schools
LEAD: For years, school reformers in New York City have lamented the absence of a strong chancellor.
But now that Joseph Fernandez, only three weeks into the job, is asserting his authority with unusual breadth and swiftness, critics furrow their brows.
Is he, as some assert, overstepping legal bounds?
Probably not.


Lowe Marschalk Becomes Its Own Best Ad
LEAD: Lowe Marschalk had been one of the best-kept creative secrets in advertising.
It was the kind of agency that most people on Madison Avenue simply used to ignore.


Stephen Sondheim Bows as Oxford Don
LEAD: The Broadway composer and lyricist Stephen Sondheim has begun his new role as professor, addressing an overflow crowd of 250 people at Oxford University.


Outdoors: Time for Tending to Tackle
LEAD: ALTHOUGH we've still got a long way to go before the whippoorwill's persistent three-note song celebrates soft summer nights, this is the best time of year to begin sorting out, refurbishing and replacing fishing tackle.


Experts Doubt Entrapment Plea by Barry
LEAD: Reports by clergymen and friends that Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. has told them he has a drug problem - and his wife's saying that he admitted he needed ''help'' -will make it more difficult for him to use a claim of entrapment as a defense to a misdemeanor charge of cocaine possession, legal experts and


New Rules Forcing Cuts by Builders
LEAD: Most housing analysts concluded months ago that fewer first-time home buyers, a slowing economy and rising land and development costs would curb home construction this year and next.
But builders in many regions are starting to slash operations even more deeply than they had planned, because of tough new lending policies Congress forced on savings and loan institutions in


Why the Fed Is Largely Uncriticized
LEAD: President Bush and his spokesman last week broke his Administration's policy of keeping quiet about the policies of the Federal Reserve.


A United Europe Seems Closer Than Ever
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East: Communists;   400 Insurgent Soviet Communists Form an Organization for Prodding or for Opposing
LEAD: Insurgent Communists from across the Soviet Union created an organization today that is to serve as a prod for rapid democratization of the Communist Party and, failing that, as the nucleus for a formal political opposition.


Chronicle
LEAD: LETITIA BALDRIGE, the arbiter of manners for the 80's, made her first public gaffe of the 90's.
Ms. (a form she approves of) Baldrige, the author of several etiquette books and ''New Manners for the 90's,'' is to speak on Wednesday at a luncheon about her favorite subject.
Invitations were mailed in late


India Seeks to Reopen Bhopal Case
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh said today that his Government wanted to set aside a $470 million settlement with the Union Carbide Corporation to compensate victims of the world's most deadly industrial disaster.


Carl Goldmark Jr., 80, Physician at Lenox Hill
LEAD: Dr.
Carl Goldmark Jr., an obstetrician and gynecologist and a former president of the New York State Medical Society, died Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Upheaval in the East: Yugoslavia;   COMMUNIST SESSION IN BELGRADE SPLIT
LEAD: In a tense atmosphere of a crew fighting for control of a sinking ship, Yugoslavia's ruling Communists today insulted, challenged and prodded each other on nationwide television, displaying a split in their ranks on the second day of the party's national congress.


Dominick Lamanna, Teacher, 42
LEAD: Dominick Lamanna, a physics teacher at the Bronx High School of Science who worked with students in independent research, including helping them prepare entries for the Westinghouse Science Talent Search, was killed on Wednesday in an automobile accident on the Taconic State Parkway.
He was 42 years old and lived in Poughkeepsie, N


Japanese Rate Surge Felt in U.S.
LEAD: For the first time since Japan became a financial superpower, the market for its Government bonds is playing a critical role in the movement of interest rates in the United States.


Egghead Executive Shift
LEAD: Egghead Inc., which owns the Egghead Discount Software retail chain, said Friday that its president and chief executive, Stuart Sloan, had also become chairman, succeeding the company's founder, Victor Alhadeff.
Egghead said on Jan. 11 that Mr.
Alhadeff intended to buy the company's Egghead University unit and would resign his posts.


Hispanic Community Leaders Have Been Active in AIDS Fight
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


Topics of The Times;   Arthur Goldberg's Titles
LEAD: Arthur Goldberg, who died last week at the age of 81, may go down in legal annals as a brilliant lawyer and restless public servant who persisted in seeking other callings.
He was a hard-bargaining labor lawyer, an architect of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. union merger in 1955 and a hustling mediator as Secretary of Labor before becoming a Supreme Court


Metro Matters;   One-Man Show Ending in Blaze At Parks Agency
LEAD: Seabury Place near Crotona Park in the Bronx was named years ago for the nation's first Episcopal bishop.
No similar distinction was ever bestowed on his great-great-grandson, Judge Samuel Seabury, whom Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia once hailed as ''the father of good city government.''


San Francisco Journal;   Milestone In Church: Gay Clergy Ordained
LEAD: When Jeff Johnson was a boy, he prayed in the Rev.
Lyle Miller's church and went camping with the pastor's children.
When Mr.
Johnson entered the seminary, his spiritual mentor was as proud as if he were family.


Harassment Makes Doctors Fear Abortions;   Getting RU 486 Tested
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ethnic and Disabled Actors Ask for a Chance
LEAD: ''For those of us living and working in this city,'' said the playwright Jules Feiffer, ''writing in the realistic or naturalistic mode for whites only has become unreal and unnatural.''


Peres Visiting Prague; Renewal of Ties Seen
LEAD: Shimon Peres, the Deputy Prime Minister of Israel, arrived in Prague today on the first visit to Czechoslovakia by an Israeli minister since ties between the two countries were cut in 1967.


New Line From Intel
LEAD: Expanding its role as a computer manufacturer, the Intel Corporation will introduce a new line of work stations Monday.


Barry Pledge Wins Sympathy
LEAD: It was a day of redemption and renewal today within the high walls of the First Rising Mount Zion Baptist Church, an anchor in the capital's poor black Shaw neighborhood.


Harassment Makes Doctors Fear Abortions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Knicks Lose As Jordan Scores 42
LEAD: The Knicks did very little right today.


Barbara Stanwyck, Actress, Dead at 82
LEAD: Barbara Stanwyck, the luminous star of such classic movies as ''Stella Dallas,'' ''The Lady Eve'' and ''Double Indemnity'' and the award-winning western television series ''The Big Valley,'' died of congestive heart failure late Saturday at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif.


Bull to DDB Needham
LEAD: The French computer company Groupe Bull has awarded its new corporate advertising account to DDB Needham France.
The image-building account, which will cover North America, Europe and Southeast Asia, will have billings of $10 million.
The other finalists for the account were TBWA, Publicis and HDM.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 21, 1990:
MONDAY
Kennametal Inc
Philadelphia Elec Co
Lubrizol Corp
TUESDAY
Ahmanson HF &amp; Co
Jostens Inc
Amoco Corp
Kansas Gas &amp; Elec Co
Ball Corp
Legg Mason Inc
Black Hills Corp
Norfolk Southn Corp
Cilcorp Inc
Nui Corp
Consol Edison Co NY Inc
Rollins Inc
Edo Corp
Schering Plough Corp
Fedders Corp
Shelby Williams Indstry Inc
Glenfed Inc
USLife Corp
Great Westn Finl Corp
Weis Mkts Inc
WEDNESDAY
Alltel Corp
Hillenbrand Inds Inc
AMP Inc
Johnson Ctls Inc
Ashland


Fate of Daily News Seen at Stake as Labor Talks Start
LEAD: After months of bitter verbal sparring, labor and management at the 70-year-old Daily News began the collective-bargaining process last week on negotiations that both sides say are apt to save the paper or sink it.


Perles and the Jets: It's Almost Final
LEAD: The Jets are expected to have a new head coach today after George Perles of Michigan State flies to New York to hammer out the details of a contract.


Deceit and Disaster in Myanmar
LEAD: If anybody deserves to be disqualified from next May's elections in Myanmar, formerly Burma, it is those who have run the country into the ground during the last 28 years of military misgovernment.
Instead, the regime has disqualified the opposition leader likely to give the architects of the disastrous ''Burmese Road to


Harassment Makes Doctors Fear Abortions;   Problem for Couples
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Recital;   Debussy and Schumann With a Soupcon of Chopin
LEAD: The most immediately striking quality of Katsurako Mikami's performance at Weill Recital Hall on Saturday afternoon was the smooth, rounded tone she drew from the hall's Steinway piano - an instrument that can sound glaring in less careful hands.


First Executive Sees Loss
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation said last week it expects to report a charge of about $515 million against its fourth-quarter earnings, partly because of its holdings in the Campeau Corporation, which sought bankruptcy protection last week.


Congressional Leaders Take Issue With Moynihan Plan to Cut Taxes
LEAD: Congressional leaders of both parties took issue today with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's proposal to cut Social Security taxes, and President Bush's budget director, Richard G. Darman, called the plan ''the most irresponsible idea of the '90's.''


Honda to Make Chips
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company said Friday that it plans to make gallium arsenide semiconductors on an experimental basis at a plant it is building at a cost of two billion yen, or about $13.7 million, at its laboratory in Tochigi Prefecture near Tokyo.
It plans to produce prototypes of the heat-resistant chips by the end of this month and to mass-produce the semiconductors in the early 1990's for use in sensors and other electronic devices.


Doris Bernstein, Psychoanalyst, 57
LEAD: Doris Bernstein, a psychoanalyst and past president of the Institute for Psychoanalytic Training and Research, died of cancer on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 57 years old.


Upheaval in the East;   Tale of Panic at Execution of Ceausescus
LEAD: In a chilling new account of the last hour of Nicolae Ceausescu, the deposed Rumanian dictator, and his wife, Elena, a prosecutor was quoted as saying that they ran wildly around the courtyard where they were to be shot until troops hunted them down.


Gifts to Neediest Reflect Gratitude of Elderly


Can 'Thirtysomething' Fans Accept a Bout With Cancer?
LEAD: Last Tuesday, fans of ABC's ''Thirtysomething'' got unsettling news.
Nancy, a major character in the critically praised television series, was discovered to have ovarian cancer.


Upsets Give an Assist to an Amazed Missouri
LEAD: Less than 24 hours after watching his team snap Kansas' winning streak at 19 games, Norm Stewart, Missouri's head basketball coach, sat in an empty locker room this morning, stunned by a succession of upsets that had put his Tigers in position to be the country's top-ranked team for the first time in eight years.


China Says Grain Harvest Hit a Record Level in 1989
LEAD: China's recent grain harvest, an indicator of national well-being, has set a record, narrowly exceeding the level in 1984, the Government announced Friday.


The British Are Coming, And Winning
LEAD: IN a classic British television commercial of the 1980's, two characters in a cinematic melodrama anguish over their relationship in words that are curiously out-of-synchronization with their lip movements.
But when they each quaff a beer, their voices and lips miraculously harmonize.


A Tearful Mayor Barry Pledges To Seek Help for 'Weaknesses'
LEAD: His personal and political life shattered by a criminal charge that he smoked crack, a repentant Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today, in public and in tears, that he had ''weaknesses'' and would seek help for them.


Review/Pop;   Booker T. and the MG's Recapture the Past
LEAD: Less is still more in the music of Booker T. and the MG's, who reunited last weekend at the Lone Star Roadhouse.
Booker T. Jones on organ, Steve Cropper on guitar and Donald (Duck) Dunn on bass were three-quarters of the Stax Records studio band from 1961 to 1971.
They backed up the top Memphis soul singers - including Eddie Floyd, who joined the group for part of the set - and, as the MG's (Memphis Group), put out classic soul instrumentals.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in Business Day on Jan. 4 about Sematech, the Government-industry alliance formed to improve ways of making computer chips, referred imprecisely to Semi-Gas Systems Inc.
Despite the juxtaposition with a reference to other companies' troubles, Semi-Gas is profitable and currently has no long-term debt.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Living Section on Jan. 3 about the Maytag Dairy Farm in Newton, Iowa, misidentified the university that isolated a mold spore used in the manufacture of the farm's blue cheese.
It was Iowa State University at Ames, not the University of Iowa at Iowa City.


Handbook Tells Scouts to Prepare for 90's
LEAD: The new Boy Scout handbook still tells Scouts to be prepared and how to use a compass, build campfires and tie knots.
But it also aims to help them cope with life in the 1990's.


No. 7 Could Make the Broncos No. 1
LEAD: WHEN you play Denver, the key to your game is what you can do about No. 7.
Because John Elway is such a big-play performer, your best defense is to have your offense control and keep the ball so No. 7 stays on the sideline.
The 49ers are good at that.


One Dead and Six Missing As Fishing Boat Breaks Up
LEAD: A chartered fishing boat with nine people aboard capsized and broke up in 15-foot swells in a river's mouth today, leaving one person dead and six people missing, Coast Guard officials said.


CART Develops Insider Information
LEAD: Championship Auto Racing Teams, the Indy-car sanctioning group created more than a decade ago out of car-owner discontent, was reshaped last October out of that same dissatisfaction.


Group Plans To Tour '94 Sites
LEAD: Just as the next few months will become critically important for the team that will represent the United States in the 1990 World Cup finals in Italy, the time will also be crucial for the organizing committee of the 1994 tournament, which will be staged in the United States.


Bush to Nominate Chairman To End Safety Board Vacancy
LEAD: President Bush will nominate James L. Kolstad to be the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board, ending a long stalemate with Congress over who should run the agency, a White House official said today.


BBDO Quits Account
LEAD: BBDO Los Angeles has resigned the account of Coldwell Banker Residential Real Estate, citing difficulty in working with the client.
Billings are believed to be about $8 million.


Lemieux Steals The All-Star Show
LEAD: Mario Lemieux, who has been adored by hockey fans in Pittsburgh and elsewhere around the National Hockey League, may have enhanced his sport's image today with his performance in the league's 41st All-Star Game.


Man Rushing to Aid His Mother Is Killed
LEAD: A Bronx man was shot to death late Saturday night as he tried to come to his mother's aid during an attempted robbery, the police said.


Hours for Emergencies On Metro-North
LEAD: To the Editor:


Harassment Makes Doctors Fear Abortions;   Fetus Is Different
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   Outings of a Newly Ubiquitous Instrument
LEAD: The accordion, that lowly and often mocked instrument, has spent the last decade getting revenge.
Once the simple butt of jokes, it is now heard everywhere, from highbrow stages at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where accordionists play art music, to albums by quirky rock groups and clubs featuring hard-rocking regional dance bands.


Quiet Arrival for Broncos
LEAD: There were no brass bands and no welcoming committee as the Denver Broncos arrived in New Orleans today for the Super Bowl.
Players and coaches quickly left a chartered jet and boarded buses at New Orleans International Airport for the trip to a downtown hotel.


Conference Ponders Nature of Crafts
LEAD: All day Friday and half of Saturday, a group of nearly 280 artists, art historians, curators, museum directors, dealers and critics took over the lower level of the American Craft Museum.
They constituted a sold-out symposium titled ''A Neglected History: 20th-Century American Craft.''


35 Reported Dead as Indian Army Opens Fire on Kashmir Protesters
LEAD: The Indian Army opened fire today in clashes with demonstrators defying a curfew in the Kashmiri city of Srinagar, and at least 35 people were killed and 100 wounded, Indian news agencies reported.


For Cable Systems, the Takeover Frenzy Cools
LEAD: The rush to buy cable television systems appears to be slowing, industry executives and media brokers say.


A New World With New Issues Born in the Recess Is Awaiting Congress
LEAD: The 101st Congress returns to work on Tuesday in a world made new.


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   From Iron Rule to Ridicule in Bulgaria
LEAD: A short announcement on the radio early last week was enough to send streams of people through the second floor of a Sofia art gallery to gape, chuckle, even laugh out loud at hundreds of caricatures mocking the foibles of their former leader, Todor Zhivkov.


Inflation Up in Britain
LEAD: The inflation rate in Britain rose three-tenths of 1 percent in December and was up 7.7 percent for the year, the Government said Friday.
The Central Statistical Office attributed the December rise in the retail price index to increases in food prices and housing costs.
The rate was better than the 7.8 percent rise that the financial markets had been expecting and was good news for the Government, which has been fighting inflation with 15 percent interest rates.


Campus Security Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upheaval in the East: Mongolia;   2,500 Mongolians in Protest Are Undisturbed by the Police
LEAD: At least 2,500 Mongolians defied a ban on demonstrations today by gathering in the Mongolian capital, Ulan Bator, to demand human rights and other concessions from the country's Communist leadership.


William McEwen, 77, Former Hofstra Provost
LEAD: Dr.
William Peter McEwen, an educator and former provost of Hofstra University, died of cancer on Wednesday at the Berkshire (Mass.) Medical Center.
He was 77 years old and lived in Becket, Mass.


Chronicle
LEAD: From the woods of Oregon, BARRY LOPEZ is making a rare trip to Manhattan.
In a nostalgic mode, the author is to talk to high school students today at the Donnell Library Center, which he used when he was a student at Loyola High School.
His subject is ''the meaning of nature to city kids,'' a spokesman for the library said.


The View From the Top Left Much to Be Desired


Mitsuo Horiguchi, Club Director, 82
LEAD: Mitsuo Horiguchi, a former director of the Nippon Club in Manhattan, died of emphysema and heart failure on Wednesday at Rye General Hospital in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 82 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Barbara Stanwyck Dies
The star of such films as ''Stella Dallas'' and ''The Lady Eve'' died on Saturday.
She was 82.
Page D11.
Anger in Hong Kong
Hong Kong political leaders denounced a new draft of the charter that will govern the colony.
Page A3.
A Billion-Dollar Burden
Investment managers in Japan say the size of their vast holdings overseas hamstrings them.


Another American Tragedy
LEAD: If Theodore Dreiser were alive, he would be avidly read about the Stuart murder case in Boston.
The parallels between it and his novel ''An American Tragedy'' are striking.


Chronicle
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation has named THOMAS E. DuHADWAY as the agent in charge of the bureau's Washington metropolitan field office.
He had been a deputy assistant director of the intelligence division, which tracks and occasionally catches spies.


State Of the Drug War
LEAD: In the past month, the U.S. Government's ''war on drugs'' won two victories.


Designer Conjures A Lost New York For 'Enemies'
LEAD: It is a world where women in hair nets and men in fedoras occupy wicker seats in the Sea Beach Express, heading for their rendezvous with the Wonder Wheel, the Parachute Jump and the Cyclone.
It is a universe of linoleum-floored rooms, Arvin radios, Raleigh cigarettes and indestructible seltzer bottles.


Topics of The Times;   Banned in Beirut
LEAD: One of the few glories of Beirut to survive 15 years of sectarian violence has been its lively press.
Three papers published in the Christian East sector of the city and seven in the Muslim West have circulated on both sides of the dividing Green Line, offering an antidote to unfounded rumors and managed information.


Tilford E. Dudley, 82, Dies; New Deal Labor Aide
LEAD: Tilford E. Dudley, a labor lawyer who served in President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal era, who clashed with President Lyndon B. Johnson over the Vietnam War and who continued to help social causes in the 1980's, died Thursday at the family home in Bellingham, Wash.
He was 82 years old.


Environmentalists Seek to Rescue a Catskill Mountain From Developers


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co., a unit of Unilever United States, named Kimberly Delsing president and chief executive.


Syndicators Find a Winner: The Successful Game Show
LEAD: GAME shows are gold mines.


Taylor-Gordon Wins
LEAD: Six months after it resigned the $5 million Helmsley Hotel Corporation account over a fee dispute, Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company has returned to the hospitality field.
The agency has won the account for the Vista International Hotel at the World Trade Center in New York.
Billings for the new account, formerly at Albert Frank-Guenther Law, are projected at $1 million to $2 million.


Virginia Tops Georgia Tech in Overtime
LEAD: Kenny Turner, who had not scored since the first half, hit a 10-foot jump shot with 6 seconds to play in overtime today to give Virginia an 81-79 victory over Georgia Tech.


3 Issues in This Week's Treasury Auctions
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues this week includes today's auction of three- and six-month bills and Wednesday's auction of two-year notes.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Dactique Triumphs in Upset: Dactique upset the odds-on favorite, Grecian Flight, scoring a three-quarter length victory in the $83,100 Broadway handicap for fillies and mares yesterday at Aqueduct.
Dactique, ridden by Frank Lovato Jr. and carrying 113 pounds, got up in the final few strides to beat Grecian Flight.


Chronicle
LEAD: JOHN E. FROHNMAYER, the new head of the National Endowment for the Arts, spent the weekend in New York getting acquainted.
On Saturday he toured the Metropolitan Museum's Canaletto exhibition.
Today he speaks at a meeting of chamber music groups.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The market for Japanese Government bonds is playing a critical role in U.S. interest rates, for the first time since Japan became a financial superpower.
Because of the run-up in Japanese rates, fears are mounting that Japanese investors will lose their appetite for new U.S.
Treasury issues.


Old and New Help Clear Hurricane-Felled Trees
LEAD: Amid the shattered grandeur of the Francis Marion National Forest, Buddy, Prince, Duke and Joe took a break the other day from the logging operations that are clearing trees felled by Hurricane Hugo.
It was lunchtime, and on the menu was a mixture of oats, corn and molasses.


The Best Ever?
LEAD: TO his teammates, Joe Montana is revered as the Legend.


Sun Leads in Work Stations
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. continues to lead the worldwide market in work stations with a 28.7 percent share, up from 27 percent in 1988, according to a survey by the market research firm Dataquest.


7th Avenue Ponders Unpleasantness
LEAD: Along the coatrack-clogged sidewalks of Seventh Avenue in Manhattan, the garment industry took out its handkerchief and dabbed its sweaty brow and talked last week about Federated Stores Inc., the renamed American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation.


Portugal Investment Up
LEAD: Foreign investment in Portugal more than doubled last year, to $2.4 billion, the Government said Friday.
In 1988, direct foreign investment totaled more than $920 million.
The Trade and Tourism Minister, Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral, said Britain provided the most investment in Portugal, followed by France, Spain, the United States and Japan.


Highland Springs Captures Appleton
LEAD: Highland Springs, who won two stakes races and set a course record at Saratoga last summer, scored his first victory since then when he pulled away in the stretch to win the $100,000 Appleton Handicap today at Gulfstream Park.


Dribbling And Traveling
LEAD: COLBY COLLEGE's 96-80 victory last week over the University of Southern Maine in a Division III basketball game at Southern Maine's Hill Gymnasium in Gorham did more than preserve Colby's unblemished record.


Upheaval in the East;   MOSCOW'S TROOPS CONSOLIDATE HOLD OVER AZERBAIJAN
LEAD: The Soviet Army consolidated its occupation of Baku today as leaders of the Azerbaijan Popular Front made plans to stage a general protest strike throughout the strife-ridden Soviet republic.


A Poor Way to Save
LEAD: President Bush's misguided urge to cut the tax on capital gains finds a dubious companion in his ''family savings plan.'' Floated during the 1988 campaign and now being readied for submission to Congress, it shares at least two faults with the gains tax: it is weak medicine for America's low savings rate, and it would create new budget problems for the future.


For Top Flexibility, Avoid Exercises in Futility
LEAD: FOR the last 10 years, the staff at the Somax Posture and Sports Clinic in Corte Madera, Calif., has been studying the relationship between joint range (flexibility) and the range of motion of the body's joints during sports activity.


Color Analysis
LEAD: A golf ball designed with red, yellow and blue stripes has been developed to give players a visual cue on where to hit the ball and how to gauge its spin.


Transcript of Comments by Mayor and His Wife at Church
LEAD: Following are the comments made today by Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and his wife, Effi, at St.
Timothy's Episcopal Church.
The comments were recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription service.


Edward H. Cleary, 82, Lawyer and Professor
LEAD: Edward H. Cleary, a lawyer, professor and authority on legal procedure who helped draft the uniform rules of evidence used in Federal courts, died of congestive heart failure on Friday at Scottsdale (Ariz.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Scottsdale.


Debate Over Dummies Delays Car Safety Rule
LEAD: Will the real dummy please be seated?


Hong Kong Leaders Criticize Beijing-Dominated Draft of Charter
LEAD: A new draft of the charter that will govern Hong Kong has aroused bitter opposition from political leaders, and even some businessmen who had been reluctant to oppose China said they could not support the planned political model.


Review/Television;   Meredith Monk's Blend Of Medieval and Modern Life
LEAD: Meredith Monk has been an anomaly for much of her 27-year career as a composer and choreographer, creating dances that were operas, operas that were dances and mythic theater pieces that were operas and dances.
To complicate matters, Ms.
Monk is also a film maker.
In ''Book of Days,'' to be shown tonight at 10 on Channel 13 as part of the ''Alive From Off


LEBANESE LEADER MEETS SYRIA CHIEF
LEAD: President Elias Hrawi of Lebanon held talks in the Syrian capital with President Hafez al-Assad today on what Government officials here described as ways to oust Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Christian leader.


Churches to Close in Chicago
LEAD: Roman Catholics in the nation's second largest archdiocese learned today that about 30 churches and at least 6 schools would be closed to ease what church officials called a critical financial situation.


Bridge
LEAD: A British partnership scored a victory yesterday in one of the strongest events on the tournament calendar.
Tony Forrester and Andrew Robson, playing in the Staten Bank World Top tournament in The Hague, overtook two Brazilian world champions in the final stages.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION: 10 A.M.
Economic and Social Council
INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION: 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Edouard Izac, Honored As a Hero, Dies at 100
LEAD: Edouard V. M. Izac, a World War I Navy hero who served as a Congressman from California in the 1930's and 40's, died of congestive heart failure on Thursday at the home of a daughter in Fairfax, Va.
He was 100 years old.


Nicklaus, 50, Still Striving
LEAD: Jack Nicklaus turned 50 years old today with his competitive fires still burning.
He said he planned to win events on both the regular PGA Tour and the Senior PGA Tour this year.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm going to find a way to begin to heal my body, mind and soul.''
-Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington.
[A1:2.]


Beyond The Jackpot
LEAD: If anybody doubted it, recent polls show that Lee Atwater, the Republican national chairman, was right as well as crass when he said the death and destruction of the Panama invasion had won President Bush a political ''jackpot.'' As poker players know, while the winners crack jokes, the losers can only say ''deal!


Hatfield to Clemson And Squad Relents
LEAD: Ken Hatfield of Arkansas accepted the head coaching job at Clemson today, and a threatened player boycott was averted after he met with the team.


Miss Engelbourg Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Karen Ann Engelbourg, the New England regional director of development at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., was married yesterday at the Faculty Center at Brandeis to Donald Bruce Stewart, the executive director of public relations at Wheaton College in Norton, Mass.
Edward English, the City Clerk of Newton, Mass., officiated.


Haiti Deports Some Opposition Leaders
LEAD: The military Government of Haiti has begun expelling political leaders and at least one presidential candidate was reported in hiding today, a day after the imposition of a state of siege.


New Retrieval Software By On Technology Inc.
LEAD: Three years after resigning as chairman of the Lotus Development Corporation, Mitchell D. Kapor is to introduce today the first software product developed by his new company, On Technology Inc.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-8


Din Forgone
LEAD: THOUGH the University of Connecticut's Field House has been a good-luck charm for the basketball team, for years it has been the bane of the school's coaches.


Tokyo's Wary Money Managers
LEAD: It takes only one shout of, ''It's the Japanese; they're buying!'' in a Wall Street dealing room to throw traders into fits of nervous activity.
It is easy to understand why.


People
LEAD: *
Arnold J. Blum, who has been senior vice president and creative director of the international team of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, will become executive vice president and co-creative director of Trahan, Burden &amp; Charles in Baltimore.


Listing Shows Homeless Sites To Aid Census
LEAD: New York City has made its first concerted effort to list the places where homeless people spend their nights, in the hope of guiding the Census Bureau to those who live in shelters, subway stations, parks, doorways and abandoned buildings - and who would otherwise go uncounted.


Korea Accepts Du Pont Plant
LEAD: After a four-year delay, South Korea has authorized E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company's application to build a $97 million titanium dioxide plant with a local company, the Finance Ministry said Friday.


U.S. and Soviet Miners Meet and Find Surprises
LEAD: Nine Soviet miners, who helped organize a nationwide strike last summer to change their future, came to the Appalachian coalfields last week to learn from Americans who are striking to preserve the gains of the past.


On-the-Air Diary of a Passage Toward Death
LEAD: Once a week here on the evening news, television viewers are making the acquaintance of a man with AIDS, hearing firsthand about his fears and frailties and watching his jaunty passage toward death.


Savings Bank's Chief Resigns
LEAD: William E. Gibson resigned unexpectedly Friday as chairman, president, chief executive and a director of the American Federal Savings Bank.


Max Roach Takes 3-Night Look at His Music
LEAD: Often enough, a jazz musician's artistic life traces a predictable pattern: an explosive period of youthful creativity metamorphoses into a period of refinement.
The growing artist's desire for change is replaced by the classicist's concern for rules, a type of formalism that fits right in with the demands of the jazz audience, which usually wants its musical icons to defy time and stay the same.


Mergers Off 8.3% in '89; Japan Acquisitions Rise
LEAD: The number of mergers and acquisitions worldwide declined last year, based on figures released on Friday by IDD Information Services, although the American market accounted for a higher percentage of those deals.


The Word Is Out: Players Are Free
LEAD: ONE of the truly great sweetheart deals in sports has been the long and loving association between real professional football and more-or-less professional football called college football.


Agencies Faulted for Latitude Given to Contractors
LEAD: In another report of Reagan Adminstration lapses in supervision, the General Accounting Office has found that the Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency gave too much responsibility to contractors for the performance of essential Government functions.


Business and the Law;   States to Regulate Money Transfers
LEAD: THE sweeping set of regulations for commercial transactions is about to get the most significant addition in decades.


Lakers' Defense Stops Pistons
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers, playing tough, bone-rattling defense, shed their Hollywood image for Detroit's old ''Bad Boy'' look today as they won, 107-97, snapping a losing streak against the Pistons at seven games.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Farmland Industries, Kansas City, Mo., an agricultural cooperative, to Grey Advertising, with a budget of $4 million.


Upheaval in the East: Secret Police;   East Europeans Are Making Big Brother Smaller
LEAD: The new editor of the Czechoslovak Communist Party daily, Rude Pravo, placed an article on the front page of his newspaper this week, an announcement by the Interior Ministry that the secret police would be dissolved and their domestic spying activities abolished.


'Jack of All Trades' Named To Chairman's Job at Boots
LEAD: The Boots Company, the British retail and pharmaceuticals group, has appointed Sir Christopher Benson chairman.
He will succeed Robert Gunn, who had the post for the last five years and will retire in July at age 65.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Employees of the advertising agency Al Paul Lefton Company spent Saturday restoring the Edgecomb, a homeless shelter in Washington Heights, in northern Manhattan.


Boom! McEnroe Is Ejected
LEAD: So much for Mr. Nice Guy.


5 Are Hurt in Newark as Gunmen Open Fire
LEAD: Two gunmen opened fire on a quiet residential street on the south side of Newark yesterday evening, wounding five people.
The police said the shooting may have been drug related.


Joan Fuld Is Wed To Frank Strauss
LEAD: Joan Fuld and Frank Strauss, officials of the Council of Jewish Federations in New York, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents in New York by Rabbi David Posner.


More Weapons Than the Pentagon
LEAD: THE San Francisco 49ers are not an unbeatable football team.
But if the Denver Broncos are going to be competitive they better have their best players on the field at all times paying strict attention.
The 49ers can beat you in so many ways.
If you stop this, they'll try that.
They keep after you relentlessly.


Rift Ends for Spanish Bank Over Who Will Be Its Head
LEAD: A bruising five-week leadership struggle at Spain's largest private bank ended Saturday when the board of the Banco Bilbao Vizcaya approved the appointment of a Basque financier, Emilio Ybarra Churruca, as its chairman.


Brooklyn Teen-Ager Found Fatally Shot on the Street
LEAD: A 15-year-old Brooklyn youth was fatally shot in the chest yesterday, apparently due to a dispute that began earlier in the day, the police said.


Goodenow Is Hired By N.H.L. Players
LEAD: Bob Goodenow, a lawyer and player agent from Detroit, was named the deputy executive director of the National Hockey League Players Association today.


East-German Party Prevails
LEAD: Leaders of East Germany's Communist Party decided to purge several more leaders, but rejected calls that it dissolve altogether.
Page A7.


BUSH WOULD AGREE TO ELEVATE E.P.A.
LEAD: President Bush, reversing his previous position, would accept a vote in Congress to make the Environmental Protection Agency a Cabinet-level department, Administration officials say.


Reporter's Notebook;   An AIDS Courtroom Drama, Permeated by Tragedy
LEAD: A sense of tragedy seems to fill the small Brooklyn courtroom where a jury is hearing the trial of a $175 million lawsuit by Veronica Prego, the doctor who is dying of AIDS.


Cuba Is Said to Arrest 4 in Communist Youth
LEAD: At least four leading members of Cuba's Communist youth organization have been arrested in Havana after complaining about lack of democracy in their country, the Spanish newspaper El Pais said today.


Books of The Times;   Engineering a Perfect Pencil, and Thoreau's Part in It
LEAD:
The Pencil: A History of Design and Circumstance
By Henry Petroski
434 pages. Illustrated. Knopf. $25.


One-Shot Victory for Jacobsen
LEAD: Although Peter Jacobsen has been known as many things in his 14 years on the PGA Tour - a gifted ball striker, unerring impressionist, entertaining musician and even actor-in-waiting - it has been a long time since he has been recognized for what he most wants to be: a winner.


1,440 Minutes
LEAD: WHAT with SportsChannel, SportsChannel America, SportsChannel Plus, MSG and ESPN, not to mention occasional offerings on HBO, USA and the like, cable television would seem to have sports and the alphabet pretty well covered.
Wait, there's more.
On Feb. 1, Mizlou Communications, the seasonal syndicator of college bowl games and other sports events, will begin the Mizlou Sports News


Whittle Acquires Rival
LEAD: Whittle Communications, which has been considering making commercially sponsored television programming for doctors' waiting rooms, said yesterday that it had acquired a company that was about to begin a rival service.
Whittle, based in Knoxville, Tenn., said it had purchased the Healthcare Television Network, a privately held company in Tampa, Fla.


Unaware of It, O'Connor Says Of Shaking Her Head in Court
LEAD: Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court sometimes seems to be shaking her head involuntarily from the bench in an up-and-down motion, like someone expressing affirmation.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Rumanians Call for Freedom in Schools
LEAD: Student leaders, addressing a crowd of about 3,000 of their classmates today, demanded far-reaching changes in the faculties of Bucharest University and other Rumanian institutions of higher learning.


Upheaval in the East;   Rally to Support Armenians Is Staged in New York City
LEAD: More than 150 people demonstrated near the Soviet Mission to the United Nations yesterday, calling on the Gorbachev Government to protect the lives of Armenians in Azerbaijan and to allow self-determination in Armenia.


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   Hornet's Nest in the Soviet South: Is Azerbaijan Another Afghanistan?
LEAD: By sending troops to impose order in the southern republic of Azerbaijan, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has committed himself to a prolonged occupation that supporters already fear could be his domestic Afghanistan.


When Your Ski Boots Become a Pain in the Ankle
LEAD: MIDWAY through the skiing season, many skiers find that the ski boots they once thought were comfortable have become sources of torture.
Ankles are rubbed raw.
Insteps are afflicted by cramps.
Shins are red and tender.
Many people try to solve the problem by stuffing foam rubber into their boots, putting pads under their heels, or pasting moleskin on their feet.


Market Place;   Super Bowl Nears And Theories Fly
LEAD: THERE are just five trading days until the Super Bowl is played, and unless share prices rise this week the outcome could be bad news for San Francisco and for stock buyers.


New Police Chief Brings a Sense of Loyalty That Left Rift in Houston
LEAD: One of Lee P. Brown's last acts as police chief here, before starting work as the New York City Police Commissioner on Monday, was to dismiss four officers involved in two highly publicized and widely criticized shootings of civilians.


Harper &amp; Row Takes a Gamble on Mass-Market Paperbacks
LEAD: Publishing executives at other houses have long asserted that Harper &amp; Row pays too much for books, and they solemnly predicted that the company would fall on its face when it began its mass-market paperback division.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL;   Gervin Gets a Break
LEAD: A San Antonio judge yesterday agreed to extend the terms of the former San Antonio Spurs guard George Gervin's probation, sparing Gervin an arrest on probation violation charges.


Chronicle
LEAD: A new broom swept out an old rug yesterday, as PRESIDENT BUSH replaced a rug from the Reagan era.


Books of The Times;   Evoking the Vanished Past Of a Family in Dissolution
LEAD:
Sweet Talk
By Stephanie Vaughn
194 pages. Random House. $16.95.


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
743,628,000
682,091,000
Net inc
79,357,000
78,960,000
Share earns
1.26
1.12
Shares outst
63,220,000
64,500,000
Yr rev
2,934,379,000
2,694,455,000
Net inc
300,217,000
268,635,000
Share earns
4.75
4.10
Shares outst
63,192,000
65,500,000


On Horse Racing;   Running Down Another 'Bias'
LEAD: For those students of thoroughbred handicapping who believe that ''track bias'' is an overrated and abused concept, opening week at Gulfstream Park has been quite a challenge -to their beliefs and to their bankrolls.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
2,798,104,000
2,673,684,000
Net loss
361,762,000
c275,827,000
Share earns
-
2.69
Shares outst
102,953,000
100,658,000
Yr rev
11,335,206,000
9,747,570,000
Net loss
b213,385,000
c463,182,000
Share earns
-
4.29
Shares outst
101,859,000
103,746,000


New Theory on Spread of AIDS-Related Cancer
LEAD: A CANCER that has been thought to be a direct result of AIDS virus infections may actually be an independent sexually transmitted disease, researchers from the Centers for Disease Control say.
In a separate report, a researcher in New York City said he had seen at least eight gay men who have the cancer but not AI


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Colgate-Palmolive Co., the maker of health products and toilet articles, extended until Friday its $14-a-share offer for Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc., Fort Collins, Colo.
The offer was to have expired yesterday.


Harry Traulsen Sr., 82, Refrigeration Executive
LEAD: Harry Traulsen Sr., founder of Traulsen &amp; Company, a commercial refrigeration business in Queens, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 82 years old and also lived in Deering, N.H.


Upheaval in the East: Azerbaijan;   Story of Action in Baku Is Framed in Questions
LEAD: Between the tight rationing of official information and the unchecked explosion of rumors presented as fact, the outside world can still claim only an incomplete picture of what happened Saturday when Soviet troops rolled into Baku.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Surgery for Polonia
LEAD: The Yankee outfielder Luis Polonia had arthroscopic surgery to remove loose cartilage from his right knee yesterday and is expected to be ready by the start of spring training.
Polonia, acquired from Oakland last summer in the Rickey Henderson trade, batted .300 for the season with 3 homers and 46 runs batted in.(


Market Plan, Under Fire, To Be Revised
LEAD: After hours of harsh criticism by executives in the securities and futures industries, officials of an independent Congressional agency said today that they would make significant revisions in a draft report that questioned some fundamental practices of the two industries.


Sports People: PRO HOCKEY;   Berthiaume Traded
LEAD: Under criticism for allegedly cursing at children seeking his autograph, the goalie Daniel Berthiaume was traded yesterday by the Winnipeg Jets to the Minnesota North Stars for future considerations.
Mike Smith, the general manager of the Jets, said the goalie's trade was related to his off-ice actions.


Tandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,456,588,000
1,402,661,000
Net inc
117,633,000
135,050,000
Share earns
1.43
1.50
Shares outst
82,481,000
89,855,000
6mo rev
2,442,565,000
2,339,614,000
Net inc
180,387,000
199,959,000
Share earns
2.14
2.23
Shares outst
84,400,000
89,834,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Economy


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keycorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b36,357,000
34,549,000
Per share
.86
.80
Year net inc
b136,925,000
119,860,000
Per share
3.20
2.90
b-Included a gain on sale of capital assets of $20,427,000 for the quarter and year.


McEnroe's Theatrics Get Mixed Review
LEAD: The reaction to John McEnroe's misadventures at the Australian Open, where Flinders Park became his Flanders Field, has been less than incredulous.


A CORPORATE LAG IN RESEARCH FUNDS IS CAUSING WORRY
LEAD: For the first time in 14 years, spending on corporate research and development in the United States has not even kept pace with inflation, raising concerns that the nation is lagging in its efforts to hold a competitive edge in high technology.


Citicorp Interested
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that it is interested in buying the credit-card operations and other assets of the ailing Bank of New England Corporation.
It might want to buy branches in areas close to New York City where it is not represented, a Citicorp source said.


Iran Reports Series of Quakes
LEAD: Eight earthquakes measuring between 4.0 and 5.2 on the Richter scale hit areas of Iran near Firuzkuh, east of Teheran, in the past 24 hours, the Iranian press agency I.R.N.A. said today.
The agency, monitored in Nicosia, did not say if the earthquakes caused any casualties or damage.
It said two tremors registering 3.3 and 3.7 on the Richter scale also shook Birjand, 490 miles southeast of Tehran, today.


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Side Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,847,000
1,351,000
Per share
.46
.33
Year-ago first quarter results included those operations of Richmond Hill Savings Bank for only the two- month period from Oct.


Justice Fortas Told President About Case, Researcher Says
LEAD: Associate Justice Abe Fortas of the Supreme Court violated judicial ethics about the confidentiality of cases by providing information to President Lyndon B. Johnson, a history professor says after studying newly released records of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


American Home Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,640,199,000
1,536,203,000
Net inc
304,391,000
254,892,000
Share earns
1.95
1.65
Shares outst
156,474,000
154,901,000
Yr sales
6,747,016,000
6,401,454,000
Net inc
1,102,158,000
995,461,000
Share earns
7.07
6.43
Shares outst
155,822,000
154,698,000


Claire B. Adler, Professor, 94
LEAD: Dr.
Claire B. Adler, associate professor of mathematics at New York University, died of stomach cancer Friday at Flushing Hospital in Queens.
She was 94 years old and lived in Jamaica Estates, Queens.


President Is Named At Prime Computer
LEAD: Prime Computer Inc. yesterday named as its new president John J. Shields, a former senior vice president at the Digital Equipment Corporation, and said he would become chief executive in a year.


Intel Chip Pact With Japanese
LEAD: The Intel Corporation said today that it had formed a venture with NMB Semiconductor of Japan to manufacture and sell dynamic random access memory chips, or D-RAM's.


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Federal Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,536,000
326,000
Per share
.30
-
Year net inc
4,375,000
3,127,000
Per share
.85
-
b-Included pre-tax charge of $55,000 reflecting effect of marking to market the bank's high yield investment portfolio, and a pre-tax gain of $815,000 on the partial sale of Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Raids Reported at Radio Stations As Crackdown Goes On in Haiti
LEAD: The military Government continued its crackdown on dissent today with police raids that halted broadcasts by three independent radio stations in the northern port of Cap-Haitien, a witness said.


Reviews/Opera;   At a Lower Pitch, 'Fidelio' By the Lubo Company
LEAD: Sunday afternoon's concert version of ''Fidelio'' at Alice Tully Hall was one of those events that appear more virtuous before than after the fact.
Beethoven's opera was done by the Lubo Opera Company at a pitch considerably lower than today's - A equaling 430 cycles per second instead of today's A-440.


Daily News Reveals Its Plan To Sell Its Routes to Drivers
LEAD: Executives at The Daily News released the details yesterday of their tentative plan to sell the right to deliver the paper to newsstands and stores in many areas.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,171,341,000
949,551,000
Net inc
65,853,000
67,751,000
Share earns
.66
.68
Shares outst
99,360,581
98,988,642
Yr rev
4,371,528,000
3,519,099,000
Net inc
193,943,000
201,960,000
Share earns
1.95
2.04
Shares outst
99,330,154
98,923,661


Fighting Between Muslim Factions Flares in Beirut
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militiamen clashed with rockets, mortars and heavy machine guns in Beirut's densely populated southern suburbs today in an expansion of a conflict that broke out in southern Lebanon a month ago.


Reviews/Opera;   City Opera's 'Boheme' Tour Has Early Stop in Brooklyn
LEAD: Last fall's strike by the New York City Opera orchestra killed the company's regular season, but it did not cast its shadow over the endeavors of its touring troupe, the New York City Opera National Company, which offered a likable, slightly scaled-down version of Lloyd Evans's production of Puccini's ''Boheme'' on Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.


Topics of The Times;   No Shortage of Ideas
LEAD: In 1988, American workers dropped 1,010,889 ideas into their suggestion boxes, according to the National Association of Suggestion Systems.
Their bosses adopted more than 293,000 of those ideas, roughly 29 percent, and thereby saved $2.2 billion.


Upheaval in the East: Iran;   CROSSINGS TO IRAN SAID TO BE CLOSED
LEAD: The official Iranian radio said today that the Soviet Union had sealed its border with Iran in the Azerbaijan region, allowing Soviet Azerbaijanis who had gone to Iran to return but permitting no further travel across the border by Soviet citizens.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section on Thursday about an apartment with passages from Italo Calvino on the walls misidentified the project designer for the headquarters of Windham Hill Records in Palo Alto, Calif.
He is Ross Anderson of Anderson/


Defense Tactics in the AIDS Doctor's Suit
LEAD: In the course of their work, lawyers have to wear many hats - as advocates, counselors, publicity agents and confessors.
And, as the recent experience of Stanley Friedman, a lawyer for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation makes clear, at least some of those hats must be black.


United Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,264,300,000
5,271,500,000
Net inc
184,400,000
150,600,000
Share earns
1.43
1.16
Shares outst
123,434,000
130,714,000
Yr rev
19,756,500,000
18,517,900,000
Net inc
702,100,000
659,100,000
Share earns
5.34
5.05
Shares outst
128,693,000
130,608,000


Careers;   Reducing The Stress On Lawyers
LEAD: ROGER W. TITUS made a hurried trip to New York last week for a panel discussion on how lawyers can cope with stress.
The session was part of the New York State Bar Association's 113th meeting.


Champion International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,266,687,000
1,314,372,000
Net inc
102,977,000
119,892,000
Share earns
1.08
1.26
Shares outst
93,014,000
95,207,000
Yr sales
5,163,218,000
5,128,513,000
Net inc
432,421,000
456,445,000
Share earns
4.56
4.80
Shares outst
94,289,000
95,137,000


Kashmiris Clash With India Troops for Second Day
LEAD: Bitter clashes between Indian troops and pro-independence crowds defying curfews continued for the second day today in Kashmir, where the death toll is said to have risen to around 50, reports from the area said.


Art Institute of Chicago Receives Two Grants
LEAD: The Art Institute of Chicago has been given $1 million by a Hong Kong businessman and a grant from a Japanese newspaper to complete a renovation of its Asian art collection, one of the largest in North America.


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
242,860,000
222,239,000
Net inc
44,369,000
36,857,000
Share earns
1.01
.85
Yr sales
952,521,000
896,804,000
Net inc
167,919,000
149,883,000
Share earns
3.85
3.44


Harris Bankcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Bankcorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
28,314,000
17,526,000
Per share
4.24
2.62
Year net inc
52,294,000
90,098,000
Per share
7.84
13.51


Luxury Brooklyn High-Rise Fails to Win Planning Votes
LEAD: The New York City Planning Commission, in a series of votes yesterday, dealt a serious setback to a luxury high-rise development proposed for the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn.


Johnson Is Lakers' Man for All Positions
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers, here tonight for their annual visit to play the Knicks at Madison Square Garden, are doing many different things to compensate for Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's retirement.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Justices, 5-4, Say an Impartial Jury Needn't Be a Cross-Section
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that while the Constitution requires juries to be drawn from a fair cross-section of the community that cross-section need not be reflected in the composition of a particular jury.


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b344,270,000
c144,033,000
Per share
-
3.10
Year net loss
b124,497,000
c129,396,000
Per share
-
2.63
b-After gains of $11,312,000, or 24 cents a share, for the quarter and $27,417,000, or 59 cents a share, for the year, both from the cumulative effect of an accounting change; the quarter also included an extraordinary loss of $29.9 million.


Israel Releases a Leading Palestinian
LEAD: The Israeli authorities released a leading Palestinian nationalist from jail on bond today as they continued investigating charges that he helped organize potentially violent activities in the Arab uprising.


Coaching Change
LEAD: Texas A&amp;M's Shelby Metcalf, the winningest coach in Southwest Conference basketball history, was relieved of his duties today and reassigned within the athletic department.


Upheaval in the East;   East Germany Discloses Serious Accident at Nuclear Plant in 1976
LEAD: The East German Government said today that a power plant on its Baltic coast had suffered the country's ''most serious and grave'' nuclear accident in 1976, and that a single pump might have prevented the reactor's radioactive core from melting down after a fire.


Naruhiko Higashikuni, 102, Dies; Led a Postwar Japanese Cabinet
LEAD: Naruhiko Higashikuni, a member of the Japanese imperial family who became the country's first Prime Minister after World War II, died Saturday.
He was 102 years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Changes at Thompson
LEAD: The J. Walter Thompson Company has overhauled its upper management, creating a North America division to oversee Thompson U.S.A. and Thompson Canada.
The agency named James B. Patterson, formerly chief executive of Thompson U.S.A., chairman of the North America division.
Ronald S. Burns was named chief executive, while remaining chairman of Thompson Canada and director of the Goodyear and Kraft General Foods accounts worldwide.


In Search of lower Insurance Rates
LEAD: Major parts of Gov.
Jim Florio's plan to lower automobile insurance premiums in New Jersey, which now average more than $1,000 a year:
Eliminate the Joint Underwriting Association, the state-created agency intended to insure drivers with bad records.
The association insures more than half the drivers in the state and is $3.1 billion in debt.


The Marlin's Secret
LEAD: The powerful leaping abilities and the fighting movements of the great blue marlin are a result of its flexible structure, and not the spring-like property of its backbone, as scientists once theorized, a zoologist has found.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
From '88
H.F. Ahmanson &amp; Co.
$ 65,900,000
-2.8
Amerada Hess Corp.
70,800,000
+6.8
American Brands Inc.
172,000,000
+34.4
American Home Products
304,400,000
+19.4
Amoco Corp.
319,000,000
-14.9
Atlantic Richfield Co.


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loral Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
301,191,000
310,292,000
Net inc
16,019,000
c21,951,000
Share earns
.64
.88
Shares outst
25,186,000
25,024,000
9mo rev
829,602,000
860,202,000
Net inc
b53,821,000
c62,560,000
Share earns
2.11
2.50
Shares outst
25,195,000
25,051,000


First Interstate Shows Loss
LEAD: The First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles, hit hard by losses on real estate loans at its Texas and Arizona bank subsidiaries, announced a large loss yesterday for the fourth quarter and a deficit for all of 1989.


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California State Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
946,000
625,000
Per share
.40
.36
Year net inc
3,615,000
2,705,000
Per share
1.95
1.65


Profits Mixed at 3 Big Oil Companies
LEAD: Sharply higher oil prices and natural gas production helped offset reduced profits from chemical, refining and marketing operations in the fourth quarter at Amoco Inc. and ARCO, the oil companies said today.


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Paper Board (NYSE)
16wks to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
421,293,000
368,661,000
Net inc
57,890,000
57,877,000
Share earns
1.39
1.43
52wk sales
1,310,143,000
1,116,941,000
Net inc
205,480,000
143,300,000
Share earns
5.00
3.51


BellSouth Net Up in Quarter
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation, a regional Bell telephone company based in Atlanta, said yesterday that its profit in the fourth quarter of 1989 rose 11.9 percent and that its earnings for the year increased 4.2 percent on relatively flat revenues in both periods.


Peach Bottom Journal;   Amish Man Vs. a Law: Centuries Collide
LEAD: Jacob J. Herschberger Jr., a 36-year-old horse trader, spent 15 days in the Lancaster County Prison last fall because he built a house without a sewer system.


After 400 Years, a Challenge to Kepler:He Fabricated His Data, Scholar Says
LEAD: JOHANNES KEPLER, the father of modern astronomy, fabricated data in presenting his theory of how the planets move around the Sun, apparently to bolster acceptance of the insight by skeptics, a scholar has found.


African Wildlife Parks: Is Less Wild the Way of the Future?
LEAD: AT high noon, in the glaring sun that washes out the sky to a barely perceptible blue, cars jam the paved roads in Kruger National Park as visitors peer from windows and sun roofs at a cluster of elephants or a pride of lions.


3 Bank Robbers Steal $500,000 in Brooklyn
LEAD: Three men wearing ski masks took more than $500,000 from a Brooklyn bank yesterday in what the police described as one of the largest bank robberies in recent memory.


Legent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
40,745,000
33,030,000
Net inc
b7,888,000
7,320,000
Share earns
.36
.34
b-Included costs of $975,000 related to acquisition of Business Software Technology Inc.


Gretzky's All-Star Play Falls Far Short of Great
LEAD: Wayne Gretzky, perhaps the greatest hockey player ever, spent a miserable weekend here attending the National Hockey League's 41st All-Star Game.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Yugoslav Party Eases Grip
Yugoslavia's Communist Party voted to yield its monopoly on power and let other parties compete.
But a key delegation walked out after the defeat of other changes.
Page A9.
Palestinian Out on Bail
The Israeli authorities released a leading Palestinian nationalist while investigating charges that he helped organize the Arab uprising.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A2-17
The Parliament of Azerbaijan demanded that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from the republic's capital and threatened to secede if the demand was not met.
Page A1
Reports of fighting in Baku are framed in questions
A8
Iran says Soviets have sealed border to keep Azerbaijanis in


'M. Butterfly' Run May Extend to March
LEAD: The closing notice for ''M.
Butterfly'' went up at the Eugene O'Neill Theater last night, but the show may remain there until March when ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'' is to move in.
David Henry Hwang's drama, which won three Tony awards, opened on Broadway on March 20, 1988.


Troopers Bolstering Hartford Police
LEAD: A state plan to help overworked local police departments combat street crime by sending in a little extra muscle from the state police has turned into a fight over jurisdiction, public perception and ruffled pride.


Amerada Hess Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,537,477,000
1,193,819,000
Net inc
70,829,000
b66,277,000
Share earns
.88
.80
Shares outst
80,967,000
82,030,000
Yr rev
5,679,327,000
4,263,544,000
Net inc
476,349,000
b124,271,000
Share earns
5.87
1.51
Shares outst
81,147,000
82,031,000


Withholding Cut in Belgium
LEAD: In an attempt to stem a flight of capital, the Belgian Government approved plans today to reduce its rate of withholding tax on investors' interest income.


Professor at Harvard To Head Benckiser Unit
LEAD: ''This is a good chance to practice what I preach,'' said Thomas V. Bonoma, a Harvard Business School profesor who has written 17 books on marketing.
Mr.
Bonoma has been named president of Benckiser Consumer Products Inc., the maker of Electrasol dishwasher detergent and other household brands.


American Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,890,000,000
3,000,200,000
Net inc
172,000,000
b128,000,000
Share earns
1.75
1.34
Yr rev
11,921,400,000
11,980,000,000
Net inc
630,800,000
b580,000 000
Share earns
6.51
5.84


MCA Taking Loss In Sale of Toy Unit
LEAD: MCA Inc., the diversified entertainment company with interests in motion pictures, records and television, said it planned to sell its LJN Toys Ltd. subsidiary.
Analysts said the toy company, which MCA acquired in 1985 for $66 million, had been losing money for the last three years.
MCA said it will record a $53 million after-tax loss from discontinued operations for 1989 because of the decision to sell the company.


Park Land Swap Steals From Our Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Our Towns;   Where Muscles And Characters Are Being Built
LEAD: It was a Saturday morning meeting of the Trenton Volcanoes, and 15-year-old Lewis Williams led the opening prayer.
He gave thanks for Brother James and the others who were helping out, and concluded with a special supplication.


Putnam Trust Co. of Greenich reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Putnam Trust Co. of Greenich
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,236,000
945,000
Per share
.43
.33
Year net inc
4,410,000
4,380,000
Per share
1.54
1.47


New A.T.&amp;T. Plan On Service Breaks
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that in the event of another serious service disruption to its long-distance network, its operators will tell customers how to place calls on other long-distance carriers.
When A.T.&amp; T.'s long-distance network suffered a computer failure last week that disrupted millions of telephone calls, its operators refused to tell subsribers how to reach competing carriers.


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NBB Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
315,000
3,926,000
Per share
.03
.42
Year net inc
11,687,000
14,120,000
Per share
1.24
1.50
NBB said that in addition to its increased fourth quarter loan loss provision, the bank also took a writedown during the period of $847,000 against a condominium project that had been developed by the Taunton Savings Bank subsidiary which NBB acquired in 1988.


Alabama Town Is Searched In Investigation of Bombings
LEAD: Federal agents, armed with the first search warrants in the investigation of a series of bombings last month, descended on this southeastern Alabama town today, searching a warehouse, a vacant pawn shop and the home of a resident.


American Home Profits
LEAD: The American Home Products Corporation, a diversified health and consumer products company based in New York, said yesterday that its net income rose 19 percent in last year's fourth quarter, as sales increased 7 percent.


Abrams Says He May Run for D'Amato Seat
LEAD: Attorney General Robert Abrams said today that he was considering running for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's seat in 1992.


New Leader of Police Pledges 'Partnership of Trust'
LEAD: Pledging to make the New York City Police Department ''a part of the community, not apart from the community,'' Lee Patrick Brown yesterday accepted from Mayor David N. Dinkins the 14-karat gold shield whose five platinum stars mark him as Commissioner of the nation's largest police force.


Lake Shore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Shore Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,271,000
2,804,000
Per share
.40
.35
Year net inc
11,577,000
11,556,000
Per share
1.42
1.42
Year-ago periods' per share earnings were adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split paid in December 1989.


Chrysler Deal to Make Mini-Vans in Europe
LEAD: Hoping to transfer the success of its popular mini-van overseas, the Chrysler Corporation said today that it had signed a preliminary agreement with an Austrian manufacturer to produce mini-vans for the European market.


At Clinic, Goal is to Achieve Catharsis Through Sharing
LEAD: The clinic in southern Florida that Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington entered today is run by an organization whose drug-and alcohol-treatment program is one of the most highly regarded in the country.


Sports People: COLLEGE FOOTBALL;   Arkansas Names Coach
LEAD: One day after Ken Hatfield resigned as head coach at the University of Arkansas to fill the same job at Clemson, the Razorbacks named Jack Crowe, the offensive coordinator at Arkansas, as Hatfield's successor.
Last year, Hatfield hired Crowe, 41, from Clemson, where he had been the quarterback coach and offensive coordinator.(


Servicemaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servicemaster L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
423,165,000
394,159,000
Net inc
16,373,000
15,484,000
Share earns
.51
.47
Yr sales
1,609,267,000
1,531,276,000
Net inc
68,047,000
64,626,000
Share earns
2.10
2.02


Galleries: Westward Ho to Santa Monica
LEAD: You can still be a pioneer by going west in this sprawling city, and three years ago the art dealer James Corcoran did just that.
He was the first major dealer to move his gallery from West Hollywood to Santa Monica, about 10 miles away, where he says the air is cleaner and the customers are closer.





The Story of Yugoslavia
LEAD:
1918: In the aftermath of World war I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes is proclaimed.
In 1929, it takes the name Yugoslavia.
The movements for unification led by Serbia had been a major cause of the war.
In 1914 only Serbia (including present-day Macedonia) and Montenegro were independent; Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina were under the Austro-Hungarian monarchy.


49er Offense's Unknown Factor
LEAD: After William (Bubba) Paris left the University of Michigan as an all-America tackle in 1982 and became the first offensive lineman Bill Walsh used a first draft pick to select, the hoopla and optimism over Paris's career crumbled in one play.
In the San Francisco 49ers' last preseason game that year, Paris crushed his right knee so severely against the Seattle Seahawks that doctors said his career was probably finished.


Monsanto Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,007,000,000
1,881,000,000
Net inc
b90,000,000
45,000,000
Share earns
1.37
.70
Yr sales
8,681,000,000
8,293,000,000
Net inc
679,000,000
591,000,000
Share earns
10.03
8.27
Shares outst
67,700,000
71,500,000


Man Held in Beating Death of Homeless Man After Subway Fight
LEAD: A 39-year-old unemployed plumber, punched and spat at by a homeless man while standing on a subway platform Sunday night with his 3-year-old son, beat the vagrant so badly that he died a few hours later, the transit police said.


In Paris, Magic of Lacroix and Versace
LEAD: The haute couture is hardly fashion's sedate old lady anymore.
She parties all night.
She flaunts her knees and bares slivers of flesh.
She can be vampish or demure.
In the spring and summer showings that began over the weekend, Christian Lacroix has already wonthe prize for imagination and vitality.


Chronicle
LEAD: PRINCESS ANNE of Britain denied reports yesterday that she was planning to divorce her estranged husband, MARK PHILLIPS, despite their six-month separation.


Tarpley Cleared For Mavericks
LEAD: The Dallas Mavericks' forward, Roy Tarpley, who was suspended Nov. 16 for violating his substance-abuse aftercare program, was reinstated to the team today on advice of a doctor.


Review/Dance;   From Doom And Death To Goofy Cavorting
LEAD: Two facets of Jerome Robbins were on view on Sunday afternoon, when the New York City Ballet presented ''In Memory of . . .'' and ''The Four Seasons.'' The first ballet, a programmatic work inspired by its score by Alban Berg, is at its best a haunting look at that old subject, death and the maiden.


Quaker Oats reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quaker Oats (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,340,000,000
1,350,000,000
Net inc
21,400,000
37,400,000
Share earns
.27
.47
6mo rev
2,800,000,000
2,800,000,000
Net inc
77,100,000
82,400,000
Share earns
.97
1.04


Britain Raises an Objection To Goldsmith's B.A.T. Offer
LEAD: The British Government has issued a preliminary objection to a proposal by Sir James Goldsmith to acquire two of the British-based insurance subsidiaries of B.A.T.
Industries, the conglomerate that has been the target of a takeover attempt by Sir James for six months.


By Design;   Trend-Setting Accessories
LEAD: So far the couture collections have been filled with pretty clothes, but the accessories are even better; they are the sort that start trends.
Take the shoes - or mules, as the case may be.
The slippers that Christian Lacroix chose for evening are like bedroom scuffs of fairyland princesses.
They are conceived by Sidonie Larizzi, a well-known Parisian shoe designer, to complement Lacroix's clothes.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
121,702,000
112,773,000
Net inc
13,530,000
12,295,000
Share earns
.75
.69
Shares outst
18,018,000
17,949,000
6mo sales
236,616,000
219,210,000
Net inc
27,953,000
24,230,000
Share earns
1.55
1.35
Shares outst
18,009,000
17,950,000


Dean S. Butler, Tax Lawyer, 69
LEAD: Dean S. Butler, a tax lawyer and financial adviser to President Richard M. Nixon, died of heart failure on Wednesday.
He was 69 years old.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
644,905,000
578,424,000
Net inc
62,591,000
c58,851,000
Share earns
.53
.49
Shares outst
119,381,000
120,919,000
Yr rev
2,431,654,000
2,093,487,000
Net inc
b231,332,000
c231,016,000
Share earns
1.93
1.91
Shares outst
120,038,000
120,963,000


6 Days Before Kickoff, Party Begins
LEAD: Super Bowl XXIV may be six days away, but this city of good times has begun to let the good times flow.


Using the Toxin From Tiny Frogs, Researchers Seek Clues to Disease
LEAD: THE tiny dart-poison frogs of the American tropics are helping scientists understand nerve and muscle cell functions that play a central role in a variety of devastating disorders, from abnormal heart rhythms to Alzheimer's disease.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   AMERICANS MISSING, BUCHAREST FRETS
LEAD: For weeks now, Rumanians have watched a parade of high-level Western and Eastern European officials arriving in the capital of this stricken country, along with millions of dollars' worth of food and other emergency aid.
Now, in puzzlement, they are asking: ''Where are the Americans?''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Shuttle Hires Consultants From Politics
LEAD: BATTLING for the loyalty of air travelers in the Boston-New York-Washington corridor, the Trump Shuttle has retained two prominent political consultants, one Democrat and one Republican, to advise it on marketing strategy.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
9.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.73
8.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.60
8.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.23
8.20
9.03
30-YR.


Bankruptcy Is Better for Petitioners in America
LEAD: If Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Jordan Marsh had been declared bankrupt in most other countries, they would be quickly closed or immediately sold to satisfy their lenders.
But not in the United


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Brioschi, an antacid, to Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company, with a budget of $1 million.


Market Place;   First Executive Sinks With 'Junk'
LEAD: AS Fred Carr campaigned in New York yesterday, trying to persuade investors that there is still value in the First Executive Corporation, the company's shares tumbled in reaction to the company's large ''junk bond'' write-offs.


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
138,374,000
119,407,000
Net loss
1,661,000
c5,291,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
546,870,000
378,908,000
Net loss
b24,892,000
c24,702,000
Share earns
-
.60


British Telecom Weighs Mitel Sale
LEAD: British Telecommunications P.L.C. said it was considering selling its 51 percent stake in the Mitel Corporation, the Canadian telecommunications equipment manufacturer.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, British Telecom said its board had ''agreed that the option to be considered immediately was for British Telecom to sell its stake in Mitel, provided reasonable terms including price could be secured.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Business Week Venture
LEAD: Business Week magazine and Hirlapkiado Vallalat, a Budapest publishing company, have agreed to publish Business Week Hungary beginning in May, with articles culled from Business Week and Business Week International.


Upheaval in the East;   Azerbaijan Vows to Secede if Soviet Troops Stay
LEAD: The Parliament of Azerbaijan today demanded the prompt withdrawal of Soviet troops from the republic's battered capital and threatened secession if the demand was not met.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies of Sports Pages on Jan. 10, about the Pittsburgh Penguins' victory over the New York Rangers, misidentified the Rangers' goalie.
He was John Vanbiesbrouck.


Brown Is Sworn In as New York City Police Commissioner


Ahmanson's Profits Dip; Great Western Shows a Loss
LEAD: H.F.
Ahmanson &amp; Company, the nation's largest savings and loan company, today reported a slight decrease in earnings for the fourth quarter because of higher tax payments.


Gateway Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,520,000
1,399,000
Per share
.44
.40
Year net inc
5,831,000
5,275,000
Per share
1.67
1.51
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid in April 1989.


Roman Vishniac, 92, a Biologist And Photographer of Jews, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Roman Vishniac, a biologist whose brilliant talent for photography captured an extraordinary range of subjects, from Jewish life in Eastern Europe on the eve of the Holocaust to hitherto unseen life under the microscope, died of colon cancer yesterday morning at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old.


Western Digital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
264,944,000
258,403,000
Net inc
b8,577,000
12,693,000
Share earns
.29
.44
6mo rev
489,844,000
505,369,000
Net inc
5,887,000
25,547,000
Share earns
.20
.89


Ranieri, Wilson Founder Quits
LEAD: Less than two years after helping to found Ranieri, Wilson &amp; Company, a small, New York investment firm, Kendrick R. Wilson 3d will be stepping down as president and leaving the company.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corning Inc. (NYSE)
12wks to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
610,900,000
543,000,000
Net inc
b73,300,000
c51,600,000
Share earns
.77
.58
52wk sales
2,439,200,000
2,121,500,000
Net inc
b261,000,000
c210,700,000
Share earns
2.80
2.34


Irwin Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Union Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,263,024
1,439,954
Per share
1.35
1.53
Year net inc
4,024,318
b4,117,793
Per share
4.28
4.37
b-Included after-tax gain of $1.1 million on the sale of credit card portfolio.


Organized-Crime Turncoat Testifies in gotti Prosecution
LEAD: Prosecutors in Manhattan began presenting their evidence against John Gotti yesterday with an unusual expert witness, an admitted Mafia turncoat and informer.


Insufficient Funds
LEAD: The building that was once B. Altman stands on Fifth Avenue, solid as a rock, pathetic as an abandoned house.
Two women mount the steps and peer inside the glass doors. ''I was on their bridal registry,'' said one sadly.


U.S. Set to Ease High-Tech Curb On Eastern Bloc
LEAD: Under intense pressure from American business and Western European allies to relax curbs on exports of high technology to Eastern Europe, the Bush Administration said today that it would work toward opening the door.


Barry Case Puts Political Spotlight on Jackson
LEAD: The fall of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. has created a hard political choice for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, who is under enormous pressure to enter the race for mayor here.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We agreed to put a full stop to politics that bring confrontations and splits over partisan interests.''
-President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, on his party's merger with two opposition groups.
[A1:4.]


Once Abortion Foe, State Senator Reverses Stand
LEAD: A Republican State Senator who had been a strong opponent of abortion reversed his position today, providing a further sign of the intense political pressure on abortion foes.
The move also bolstered predictions that abortion restrictions are unlikely to come up for a vote in the Legislature this year.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cincinnati Microwave Inc., Cincinnati, an electronics company, said John A. O'Steen had resigned as president.
James L. Jaeger, the chairman, will become interim president.


Varian Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
317,700,000
287,400,000
Net inc
7,600,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.39
.44


Calmat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calmat Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
172,452,000
162,960,000
Net inc
b31,235,000
12,345,000
Share earns
1.01
.40
Yr rev
689,812,000
666,662,000
Net inc
b78,101,000
56,386,000
Share earns
2.52
1.82


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
77,349,000
b59,735,000
Share earns
-
.47
Yr net inc
100,095,000
248,439,000
Share earns
.78
1.95
b-Net income
The company said the reduced earnings in 1989 and the loss in the latest quarter were the result of a $200 million writedown of commercial and multi-family real estate and the year- end increase in loan loss reserves.


Charles Stuart Capitalized on Racial Fears
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Tumbles 77.45 to End at 2,600.45
LEAD: The stock market yesterday posted its biggest loss since Oct. 13 as the Dow Jones industrial average plummeted 77.45 points, or 2.89 percent, to 2,600.45.


Integrated Programs
LEAD: INTEGRATED programs typically combine several applications in one package, including a word processor, a spreadsheet, a data base, a communication module, a program for creating charts, etc., and perhaps some other odds and ends, like a macro generator or a calendar or a grammar checker.


No Cleanup Is Planned For Alaska Fuel Spill
LEAD: Coast Guard officials have decided to let nature clean up the estimated 57,600 gallons of gasoline that spilled from a grounded tanker into the scenic Inside Passage off southeastern Alaska.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Ronald Arnold, Mark Hughes, Frank Fleizach and Robert High have been promoted to executive vice presidents at HDM New York.


Upheaval in the East: Poland;   First Solidarity Mayor Aims to Clean Up a City
LEAD: At home, late at night, after being bombarded by a dozen phone calls from townspeople seeking help, Waldemar Bohdanowicz sometimes asks himself why he ever wanted to be mayor of this grimy textile center.


Scientists Trace Aberrant Sexuality
LEAD: THE derailed sexuality of child molesters, exhibitionists, rapists and deviant murderers, as well as others with peculiar erotic interests that are less repugnant, has its roots in early childhood when the first links between love and sex are forged, a pioneering researcher has demonstrated.


Hartford Steam Boiler Insur reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler Insur (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
19,137,000
18,308,000
Share earns
.93
.90
Yr net inc
77,571,000
70,659,000
Share earns
3.78
3.46


'City of Angels' Songs Echo the Jazzy Youth Of Their Composer
LEAD: When Cy Coleman sat down to the write the score for the hit musical ''City of Angels,'' the composer, whose theater music has ranged in style from circus tunes (''Barnum'') to comic opera (''On the 20th Century,'') reached back for inspiration to his youthful career as a jazz pianist.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addendum
LEAD: The Block Group, New York, a public relations and promotional marketing firm, has merged with the graphics division of Everett Studios, White Plains.
The new firm, Block Everett Nardizzi, will have offices in those cities and will be based in Stamford, Conn.


Dr. Prego Ends 7 Days of Testimony
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego finished testifying yesterday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, ending seven days of detailed questioning about her painful illness and expected death from AIDS.


Computer Intruder Is Found Guilty
LEAD: A Federal jury today found Robert Tappan Morris, a 24-year-old computer science student, guilty of intentionally disrupting a nationwide computer network in November 1988 by writing a program that copied itself wildly in thousands of separate machines.


American Wheat Habit Was Killing Nigeria;   African Multiplicity
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.M. Saturn Plant Makes Friends
LEAD: The $2 billion Saturn project, which General Motors hopes will prove it can match the best from Japan on its own, will not begin production until June.
But there are early indications of success in a number of ways, say experts who have criticized G.M. in the past, as well as workers and managers at the new plant here.


Bancorp Hawaii Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
21,137,000
16,564,000
Per share
1.41
1.15
Year net inc
79,861,000
74,902,000
Per share
5.41
5.25
Bancorp Hawaii said excluding the effects of the 1988 sale of the Waikiki property and non-recurring expenses, its 1988 net income would have been $62,197,000 or $4.36 a share.


Saudi Oil Find Said to Be Vast
LEAD: A newly discovered Saudi oilfield yielding high-quality light crude could have recoverable reserves of at least 30 billion barrels, the Middle East Economic Survey said today.


Delta Air Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Air Lines (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,048,600,000
1,858,100,000
Net inc
64,200,000
85,200,000
Share earns
1.13
1.73
6mo rev
4,221,900,000
3,739,700,000
Net inc
197,400,000
185,100,000
Share earns
3.65
3.76


Federated Asks to Keep Benefits for Employees
LEAD: Federated Stores Inc. asked a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday for permission to continue financing its employee benefit programs.


T. Fleischmann, 94; Took Photographs Of Famous Subjects
LEAD: Trude Fleischmann, a portrait photographer known in her native Vienna as the Photographer of the Famous, died on Saturday at the home of her nephew in Brewster, N.Y.
She was 94 years old.


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evergreen Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,421,000
2,557,000
Per share
.53
.55
Year net inc
10,046,000
9,023,000
Per share
2.18
1.96
Shares outst
4,598,977
4,593,827
The 1988 year's shares outstanding and per share earnings were adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split paid in September 1989.


Upheaval in the East: Yugoslavia;   Yugoslav Communists Vote To End Party's Monopoly
LEAD: The Yugoslav Communist Party voted today to give up its 45-year monopoly on power and to permit a new political system in which other parties may compete.


Dime Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,808,000
1,560,000
Per share
.34
.29
Shares outst
5,347,000
6,352,000
Year net inc
7,271,000
6,902,000
Per share
1.36
1.29


Anti-Apartheid Rebels Tilt Toward Negotiation
LEAD: Nearly 30 years after mounting a guerrilla struggle against South Africa's white Government, the African National Congress is moving toward an effort to negotiate for black-majority rule.


CML Proxy Fight Planned by Jacobs
LEAD: Spurned in his effort to acquire the CML Group Inc., Irwin L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis investor, said he planned a proxy fight for control of the board of the Acton, Mass., retail store company.
Last week, directors of CML, which operates the Nature Company, Carroll Reed Stores and other retail outlets, rejected Mr.


Student Found Guilty In Computer Jamming
LEAD: Robert Tappan Morris, a suspended graduate student at Cornell University, was convicted of computer fraud and abuse yesterday in the disruption of a nationwide network of computers in 1988.


Few Blessings But Still Some For Neediest
LEAD: No matter how deep their own pain nor desperate their problems, some people are determined to give what they can to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
256,300,000
252,700,000
Net inc
25,300,000
15,600,000
Share earns
.45
.28
Shares outst
56,793,000
56,731,000
Yr rev
1,060,000,000
1,045,300,000
Net inc
133,800,000
114,300,000
Share earns
2.36
2.02


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boise Cascade Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,066,170,000
1,034,820,000
Net inc
51,290,000
76,450,000
Share earns
1.28
1.70
Yr sales
4,338,030,000
4,094,630,000
Net inc
267,580,000
289,120,000
Share earns
6.19
6.34


Chess
LEAD: Conservative play was the key to victory in the 1989 United States Championship, which ended Dec. 3, in Long Beach, Calif.


Luang Prabang Journal;   If the Buddha Is Laughing, There's a Good Reason
LEAD: This large village on the Mekong River, deep in the interior of a landlocked and underdeveloped country, was once a royal capital and, with its dozens of pagodas, also a capital of the celebration of Buddha.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
347,172,000
343,869,000
Net inc
13,593,000
12,532,000
Share earns
.42
.37
Yr sales
1,455,589,000
1,313,136,000
Net inc
55,919,000
b62,483,000
Share earns
1.72
1.85


Results Plus
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Tis Michelle Takes Miss Oceana
Tis Michelle won her second race in two starts by scoring a three-length victory yesterday in the Miss Oceana purse for fillies and mares at Aqueduct.
Tis Michelle, ridden by Jorge Chavez and carrying 115 pounds, took the lead moving to the far turn and held it the rest of the way.


The Cloud Over Congress
LEAD: First, honor.


Atlantic Richfield Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Richfield Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,011,000,000
4,548,000,000
Net inc
403,000,000
391,000,000
Share earns
2.38
2.22
Shares outst
169,100,000
176,900,000
Yr sales
16,021,000,000
18,324,000,000
Net inc
1,953,000,000
1,583,000,000
Share earns
11.26
8.78
Shares outst
173,400,000
180,400,000





American Wheat Habit Was Killing Nigeria
LEAD: To the Editor:


F.D.A. Generic Drug Inquiry
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration said today that it is investigating whether a generic drug manufacturer bought large supplies of a drug from an unauthorized distributor.


Counsel Due For Inquiry On Dinkins
LEAD: At the request of Mayor David N. Dinkins, a special counsel will be appointed to continue a city inquiry into some of his activities while he was Borough President of Manhattan, including a transfer of his stock in a broadcasting company.


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westamerica Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,188,000
870,000
Per share
.42
.17
Year net inc
7,316,000
4,770,000
Per share
1.42
.93


British Aid to East Bloc
LEAD: Britain announced today that it was forming a big aid package to help the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe rebuild their economies.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd, before flying to East Germany for a three-day visit, said a ''know-how'' fund already in place for Poland and Hungary would be extended to other countries.


Treasury Issues Are Down Again
LEAD: Prices of most Treasury notes and bonds continued to slide in lethargic trading yesterday, as dealers focused on coming auctions of securities.


Bronco Defense's Father Figure
LEAD: Everyone in town, in every town, seemed to know Wade Phillips's father.


Magna Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,314,000
3,971,000
Per share
.43
.34
Year net inc
20,033,000
16,846,000
Per share
1.64
1.47
Magna Group said latest fourth quarter net income included about $500,000 from the sale of two bank charters.


Mark Selling Raises Dollar Despite a Plunge in Stocks
LEAD: The dollar rose against most currencies yesterday, despite a steep slide in stock prices on Wall Street that would make dollar-denominated investments less attractive.


Madrid Jolted by Influence-Peddling Charges
LEAD: Less than three months after winning a third successive term in office, Spain's Socialist Government has been shaken by accusations of influence-peddling by the brother of the Deputy Prime Minister.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
525,330,000
490,644,000
Net inc
75,927,000
69,755,000
Share earns
5.22
4.68
Shares outst
14,537,994
14,914,942


Review/Music;   A Trio Performs a Prize-Winning Work
LEAD: Aequalis, the piano, cello and percussion trio that performed at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday evening, may seem oddly constituted.
But contemporary-music groups that commission new works, as Aequalis does, have the luxury of calling their own shots in the realm of instrumental deployment.


National Westminster Banorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster Banorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
84,024,000
b38,835,000
Year net loss
139,542,000
b129,899,000
b-Net income
The company said in the latest year its loan loss provisions included a special $295 million provision related to lesser developed countries.


ARREST OF BARRY CONCERNS N.A.A.C.P.
LEAD: Benjamin Hooks, executive director of the N.A.A.C.P., said today that his organization would investigate the arrest of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. in response to ''widespread concern'' among black Americans that the case was racially motivated.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Consumer's World page on Saturday about water-treatment devices gave an incorrect number for the safe-drinking-water hot line of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Its number is (800) 426-4791.


Patterns
LEAD:
Attention-Getter


U.S. Prosecution of Noriega: Signs of Trouble at the Start
LEAD: The Federal prosecution of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has been plagued by a lack of preparedness, sniping among current and former prosecutors, and early missteps in what many officials believe was a weak case from the start.


Sports People: PRO FOOTBALL;   Millard Arrested For Drunken Driving
LEAD: Keith Millard, the Minnesota Viking tackle recently selected as the National Football League's defensive player of the year, was arrested early yesterday in Bloomington, Minn., on charges of drunken driving and speeding.
The arrest marked the 12th drunken-driving incident in four years involving Viking players.


Florio Presents Plan for Reducing Car Insurance Costs About 20%
LEAD: Laying blame for high automobile-insurance costs on the insurance industry, Gov.
Jim Florio today proposed a drastic change in the way automobile insurance works in New Jersey with a plan his aides said would reduce what drivers pay to $860 annually, from $1,112, within one year.


Rule to Widen Trading In Options Takes Effect
LEAD: A new Securities and Exchange Commission rule that will allow stock options to be traded on more than one exchange went into effect today.


Banco Santander reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Santander (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
487,600,000
346,400,000
Per share
4.00
3.33
The latest year's results were converted at a rate of 109.72 Spanish pesetas per $1.00.
The year-ago results were converted at the 1988 prevailing exchange rate of 113.45 pesetas per $1.00.


Chronicle
LEAD: ANN POLLARD, who was sentenced to five years in prison in connection with thy spying case of her husband, JONATHAN POLLARD, has been released from Federal prison in Danbury, Conn., and is living in a halfway house in Greenwich Village.


Indian Government Lodges First Charges In Weapons Scandal
LEAD: The Government of Prime Minister V. P. Singh formally opened a criminal investigation today into allegations of official corruption in a 1986 weapons purchase by the Indian Army.


The Greeks Said It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Phelps Dodge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phelps Dodge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
615,700,000
686,200,000
Net loss
b140,700,000
cd140,600,000
Share earns
-
4.46
Shares outst
34,900,000
30,700,000
Yr rev
2,699,600,000
2,319,800,000
Net inc
b267,000,000
c420,200,000
Share earns
7.59
13.15
Shares outst
35,100,000
30,800,000


Israeli Colonel and 4 Guerrillas Killed in Southern Lebanon


Upheaval in the East: Emigres;   Armenians in U.S. Say the People of the Homeland Are in Danger, but What Can Be Done?
LEAD: Khachatur Nagapityan, a track and field coach, came here from Soviet Armenia just two years ago, but he is ready to return whenever he is needed to fight for what he sees as his people's survival.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   WPP Buys Agency
LEAD: The WPP Group P.L.C. announced yesterday that it had acquired Thomas G. Ferguson Associates Inc., a health-care marketing and advertising communications agency based in Parsippany, N.J.
Ferguson has about $130 million in billings and a client roster that includes Johnson &amp; Johnson and the Warner-Lambert Company.


Charles Stuart Capitalized on Racial Fears;   A Detail in the Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Universal to Sell Cheese Division
LEAD: The Universal Foods Corporation, which successfully fought a hostile takeover bid last year, tentatively agreed to sell its cheese division to the unit's management.
The company said the proposed sale, which should be completed this spring, is intended to generate capital for other investment opportunites.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   United Savings Shift
LEAD: United Savings Association of Texas FSB has chosen GSD&amp;M Advertising for its $9 million advertising and marketing account, which was formerly at Winius-Brandon Advertising/Houston.


Love Gets in the Way as 'Rocky V' Starts Filming
LEAD: Sylvester Stallone is to Philadelphia what Woody Allen is to Manhattan, though that comparison is not quite right because this city has so few other nationally known celebrities except Julius (Dr. J) Erving, the retired star of the Philadephia 76ers basketball team.


Talking Business: with Guarascio of General Motors;   G.M.'s Cutbacks On Advertising
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation spent $1.3 billion on domestic advertising in 1988, the last year for which it disclosed the spending.
But tough conditions in the market have forced the company to cut or defer some advertising plans, although it will not say by how much.
Philip Guarascio, executive director for advertising and strategic merchandising, discussed the company's plans.


PLOT ON BUSH'S JET POSSIBLE, U.S. SAYS
LEAD: United States intelligence has picked up indications that Colombian drug traffickers may be planning to attack President Bush when he visits the city of Cartagena next month for a four-nation meeting on narcotics, Administration officials said tonight.


Bridge
LEAD: The idea of ''instant match points'' was a brilliant conception, and is gaining in popularity.
Immediately a deal is played, the players are made aware of their match-point scores, predetermined by the organizers on the basis of a past tournament and unrelated to the other tables in the same location.


Meritor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meritor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b33,754,000
117,767,000
Year net loss
b55,574,000
209,844,000
b-After extraordinary credits of $402,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $5,912,000, or 17 cents a share, for the year, both from early extinguishment of debt.


Orange Juice Prices Soaring On New Report on Damage
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices soared to record highs yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after a report showed far more damage to the Florida orange crop from last month's freeze than traders had expected.


Polish Crew Tells of 3-Week Ordeal After a Red Sea Attack
LEAD: A crew of Polish seamen, captured and held prisoner on the remote beaches and rugged mountains of Eritrea, today recounted the surreal drama that occurred when their cargo ship carrying cotton was bombarded with cannon, bazooka and machine-gun fire by guerrilla fighters in speedboats.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,828,000,000
6,188,000,000
Net inc
319,000,000
375,000,000
Share earns
.62
.72
Shares outst
512,488,000
516,864,000
Yr rev
26,768,000,000
23,919,000,000
Net inc
1,610,000,000
2,063,000,000
Share earns
3.12
4.00
Shares outst
515,540,000
515,453,000


Bass Group Holds 5.6% Pentair Stake
LEAD: An investment group led by Acadia Partners, a Fort Worth investment partnership that is backed by the Robert M. Bass Group Inc., has acquired a 5.6 percent stake in Pentair Inc., a St.
Paul-based paper products concern.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Acadia said that the shares were for investment.


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
247,429,000
271,937,000
Net loss
655,000
2,054,000
6mo sales
533,021,000
547,265,000
Net inc
6,739,000
b717,000
Share earns
.30
-
b-Net loss


2 PARTIES IN SEOUL AGREE TO A MERGER WITH RULING GROUP
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo's party and two opposition parties announced today that they would merge into a conservative majority party to break a two-year political deadlock in Parliament.


Georgetown Survives Scare
LEAD: A driving layup by Alonzo Mourning put Georgetown ahead with 18 seconds left and the Hoyas held on for a 70-69 victory over Villanova tonight in a Big East Conference game.


Qintex Accord With MCA
LEAD: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 22


Chronicle
LEAD: The new Mayor of New York has taken on a second new job.
He'll play himself in ''H.E.L.P.,'' a series to be broadcast on ABC-TV.


Antibiotics Cut Infection If Used Before An Operation
LEAD: A DOSE of an antibiotic given to patients before they undergo breast surgery or hernia operations sharply reduces post-operation infections, a new study has found.


Porwik Eliminates 16-Year-Old Galvadon
LEAD: Angelica Gavaldon, the American amateur who had earlier upset the two-time Australian Open champion, Hana Mandlikova, lost in a quarterfinal match today to Claudia Porwik of West Germay.


Man Who Burned His Son in 1983 Is to Be Freed From California Jail
LEAD: A man who set fire to his son in 1983 in what he said was a murder-suicide plan leaves prison on Wednesday, but prison officials are keeping relocation plans secret.


Jets and Perles Remain In Limbo on Coach's Job
LEAD: The confusion surrounding the Jets' coaching job became more confusing today as Dick Steinberg, the team's newly appointed general manager, intimated that he had offered the job to George Perles of Michigan State but later seemed to back off.


Tyson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyson Foods (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
900,817,000
502,414,000
Net inc
23,011,000
19,860,000
Share earns
.35
.31
Shares outst
65,563,629
63,869,353


Israel Gives Assurance About Cluster Bombs
LEAD: The United States has been assured that Israel is not selling cluster bombs to Ethiopia, the State Department said today.


Review/Television;   For Good or Bad, Exposing a Demagogue
LEAD: There are two ways to look at ''So Proudly We Hail,'' if you are going to look at it at all: as an effort to bring some real political and social issues to the tube in the form of entertainment, or as the exploitation of those issues for prime-time purposes.


Detroit Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
792,713,000
760,698,000
Net inc
87,576,000
b462,396,000
Share earns
.53
-
Shares outst
146,848,292
146,774,498
Yr rev
3,203,031,000
3,102,172,000
Net inc
425,951,000
b378,826,000
Share earns
2.65
-
Shares outst
146,816,363
146,761,458


Lightning Is More Powerful in South
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have long assumed that lightning strikes with the same power wherever it occurs, but a new study contradicts that notion.


Drexel Aide Said to Quit
LEAD: A spokesman for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. said yesterday that Jeffrey Beck, an investment banker who was the subject of a lengthy Wall Street Journal article yesterday, had tendered a preliminary resignation to the firm several weeks ago.
Drexel's spokesman, Steven


No-Frills Mathematics Instruction
LEAD: THERE is plenty of educational software, much of it so enhanced with color and pictures that learning seems like a game.
Nothing is wrong with that, especially for younger children, but sometimes a more straightforward approach can be refreshing, especially for older students.


New Czechoslovak Leader Receives Visit From American Rock Star
LEAD: Frank Zappa, the rock musician, left, meeting with President Vaclav Havel yesterday in Prague.
Mr.
Zappa, on a brief visit to Czechoslovakia, said he was planning a film about the country. (Reuters)


J. Ernest Wharton, 90, A Former Congressman
LEAD: J. Ernest Wharton, a lawyer and a former Republican Congressman from upstate New York for eight terms, died of a stroke on Friday at his home in Summit, N.Y.
He was 90 years old.


Journalist Reports Hearing Shots in Albania
LEAD: A Hungarian radio correspondent in the Albanian capital, Tirana, reported hearing shooting outside the city today gut said it might have been from army training.


Will Clark Package Zooms to $15 Million
LEAD: Will Clark jumped to the top of baseball's salary list today when he agreed to a $15 million, four-year contract with the San Francisco Giants that calls for the first $4 million salary in baseball history.


Oryx Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oryx Energy Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
298,000,000
270,000,000
Net inc
14,000,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.13
.02
Shares outst
105,200,000
105,700,000
Yr sales
1,140,000,000
1,070,000,000
Net inc
b139,000,000
c305,000,000
Share earns
1.32
-
Shares outst
105,500,000
105,700,000


Appeals Court Upholds Convictions of LaRouche and Four Others
LEAD: The convictions of Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. were upheld today by a Federal appeals court.


Upheaval in the East: Espionage;   Cold-War Riddle: A Most Unusual Spy
LEAD: From the day in 1961 that he first met F.B.I. agents in Manhattan, Donald F. seemed a most unusual spy.


Mayor Barry Enters a Florida Clinic As His Top Aide Takes Over the City
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today checked into a Florida clinic that treats drug and alcohol dependency, leaving behind a heated debate over his legal situation and the political consequences of his arrest on a charge of smoking crack.


Time Books' Australia Deal
LEAD: Time-Life Books said yesterday that it had acquired the Record Clubs of Australia, making Time Warner Inc. one of the largest direct marketers of books and records in Australia and New Zealand.


Out of the Welfare Roll and Into the Soup Kitchen, Albany Style
LEAD: To the Editor:


Land-Use Chief Off to a Rocky Start
LEAD: For 15 years, Jerry L. Crispino, like most of his colleagues on the New York City Council, performed his duties with little fanfare.
He had a few streets renamed, made sure the trash was collected in his Bronx district and earned a good living as a lawyer.


Jennings Creates a Gun-Control Special
LEAD: Tomorrow night at 10, ABC will present ''Peter Jennings Reporting,'' the first of at least four hourlong programs this year in which the anchor will examine contentious public-affairs issues.
The first program, on gun-related violence, is part of an unusual collaboration between ABC News and Time magazine, which features a cover story on the gun lobby in its current issue.


Thieves Hoist Mobile by Calder
LEAD: Art thieves removed a glass dome from atop a Madison Avenue gallery over the weekend and stole a mobile designed by Alexander Calder valued at $1.4 million dollars, the police said last night.


Chemical Said to Plan Job Cutbacks
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation is planning to cut more than 300 jobs in its consumer banking business in an effort to improve profits by reducing expenses, according to Chemical employees, who asked not to be indentified.


Final Score on Panama
LEAD: President Garcia of Peru refuses to meet with President Bush on drug issues . . .
Colombia discourages the U.S.
Navy from patrolling its coasts . . .
Mexican and Venezuelan leaders stiff-arm Vice President Quayle.
Has the Bush Administration relieved its Noriega headache at the cost of paralyzing itself elsewhere in Latin America?


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbia First Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,938,000
909,000
Per share
.56
.23
b-Included a net gain of $1.1 million related to settlement of litigation.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
243,643,000
214,821,000
Net inc
23,160,000
24,979,000
Share earns
.45
.44
Shares outst
51,090,000
56,775,000
Yr rev
860,062,000
800,160,000
Net inc
79,502,000
87,986,000
Share earns
1.48
1.55


Beijing Starves the Hong Kong Goose
LEAD: China's weekend decision to impose a Big Brother political system on Hong Kong is bad news for the colony, for London and for the United States, home to Hong Kong's major customers.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Whooping Cranes


Avery International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avery International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
449,800,000
416,600,000
Net inc
23,200,000
21,200,000
Share earns
.52
.48
Yr sales
1,732,400,000
1,582,000,000
Net inc
86,500,000
77,700,000
Share earns
1.96
1.77


Cardinal Szoka Leaving Detroit for Vatican
LEAD: Edmund Cardinal Szoka of Detroit announced yesterday that he would be resigning as the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Detroit to take up new duties in June, heading the Vatican's budget office.


York Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* York Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,812,000
2,264,000
Per share
.95
.78
6mo net inc
4,267,000
4,833,000
Per share
1.44
1.66


Hearing in Bensonhurst Case
LEAD: The black victims in the fatal attack in Bensonhurst in August were attacked by a group of whites without provocation, one of the men charged in the attack said in a videotaped statement played yesterday in a court hearing.


Dichter Anniversary
LEAD: The final sonatas of Beethoven and Schubert are to be performed in a special concert by the pianist Misha Dichter on Feb. 15 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Mr.
Dichter will celebrate the 30th anniversary of his first public performance with the concert, which is also to include works by Brahms and Schumann.


Cyprus Minerals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyprus Minerals Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
437,300,000
413,100,000
Net inc
39,200,000
65,400,000
Share earns
.93
1.61
Yr rev
1,790,100,000
1,327,100,000
Net inc
250,100,000
170,000,000
Share earns
6.06
4.21


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BellSouth Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,615,200,000
3,577,200,000
Net inc
469,000,000
419,300,000
Share earns
.97
.90
Shares outst
481,600,000
464,000,000
Yr rev
13,996,300,000
13,596,900,000
Net inc
b1,741,100,000
1,665,500,000
Share earns
3.64
3.51


Strategic Arms Talks Resume
LEAD: United States-Soviet talks on long-range nuclear weapons resumed today, and negotiators expressed confidence that they could meet the Malta summit goal of completing a treaty this year.
An agreement was signed allowing trial inspections of each side's nuclear warheads, with the goal of finding ways to insure that the number of warheads on each missile does not exceed the agreed limit.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   East German Premier Offers a Coalition
LEAD: Facing spreading disaffection and a growing loss of confidence in his leadership, the head of East Germany's interim Government urged the opposition today to join his Cabinet and share the responsibility for guiding the country through its troubles.


Golden West Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
40,859,000
36,495,000
Share earns
.65
.58
Shares outst
62,964,833
62,808,524
Yr net inc
157,938,000
138,347,000
Share earns
2.51
2.20
Shares outst
62,906,275
62,780,646


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
468,800,000
468,600,000
Net inc
25,300,000
19,300,000
Share earns
.37
.27
Shares outst
68,900,000
71,000,000
Yr rev
1,725,000,000
1,546,500,000
Net inc
174,100,000
b103,400,000
Share earns
2.48
1.46


Irving Schachtel, 80, Hearing-Aid Leader And Former Lawyer
LEAD: Irving I. Schachtel, former president of the Sonotone Corporation, a manufacturer of hearing aids, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan after a series of strokes.
He was 80 years old.


East Germans Begin Dismantling the Berlin Wall


Marine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marine Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,458,000
1,963,000
Per share
.40
.33
Shares outst
6,395,577
6,027,192
Year net inc
9,423,000
7,749,000
Per share
1.55
1.29
Shares outst
6,395,577
6,027,192


Bush Talks in Gentler Tone To Abortion Foes in Capital
LEAD: Tens of thousands of anti-abortion demonstrators marched from the White House to the Capitol and the Supreme Court today after President Bush praised their cause with more restraint than he did on the same occasion a year ago.


Players From Outskirts Who Bide Their Time
LEAD: When Tim Crawford makes a rare trip from his cozy seat on the Notre Dame bench to the scorers' table at the Joyce Athletic and Convocation Center in South Bend, Ind., the eager crowd steadily increases its roar.
When Crawford steps onto the basketball court, thousands of fans give him a standing ovation.


Nuclear Winter Theorists Pull Back
LEAD: SINCE 1983, scientists have been bitterly divided over whether a nuclear war is likely to result in a catastrophic global chilling.
But the five scientists who introduced the term ''nuclear winter'' now acknowledge that they overestimated its severity, and their concession appears to have moderated the longstanding debate.


Londontown Corp.
LEAD: The Londontown Corporation, which makes London Fog clothing, said yesterday that it had retained Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company to find ways to reduce its debt from a management buyout.
Mark Lieberman, the company's chairman and president, said Londontown hopes to restructure the debt to reduce its interest burden.


Senior Note Issue Priced by Kroger
LEAD: The Kroger Company, the large Cincinnati-based retail food company, yesterday priced $250 million in senior notes due in 1998 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Underwriters offered the notes at par, to yield 11 1/8 percent, with interest on the securities payable March 15 and Sept. 15 annually, beginning this


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,476,000
3,307,600
Per share
.39
.39
Year net inc
11,817,600
10,735,100
Per share
1.33
1.26


Britain Exempts Hong Kong From Ivory Ban
LEAD: HONG KONG, a leading center for the manufacture and export of ivory objects, has been exempted by the British Government from a worldwide ban on the trading of ivory that went into effect last Thursday.


Topics of The Times;   Ball of Fire
LEAD: Ordinary people walk.
Barbara Stanwyck strode, and when she did, the screen crackled.
She was many people - the sad, silly Stella Dallas, the icy murderess of ''Double Indemnity,'' the enchanting con woman of ''The Lady Eve'' and the slangy showgirl of ''Ball of Fire'' - but all of them were monuments to vitality.


Sports People: Pro Football;   New Pact for Everett
LEAD: The Los Angeles Rams quarterback Jim Everett has signed a six-year contract with the team.
Everett, 27, would have become a free agent on Feb. 1.
Terms were not disclosed.(AP)


Supreme Court Says Strike By Lawyers Violated Law
LEAD: Rejecting free-speech arguments, the Supreme Court ruled today that a group of criminal defense lawyers here violated Federal antitrust law six years ago when the lawyers refused to accept more cases representing indigent defendants until the local government raised their pay.


New Task for the Computer: Making Clothes
LEAD: Engineers and computer scientists at two colleges here say they have harnessed computers to standard industrial sewing machines to produce a larger variety of garments more quickly and cheaply than conventional clothing factories do.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
831,800,000
885,300,000
Net loss
b209,400,000
ce156,100,000
Share earns
-
.99
Shares outst
157,800,000
158,600,000
Yr rev
2,977,900,000
3,143,600,000
Net inc
b14,600,000
de46,500,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
159,300,000
157,000,000


Accounts
LEAD: *
Solow Realty Company, to Great Scott Advertising, for several residential properties, with a budget of $2 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
MARKETS
The Federal Government's first auction of 40-year bonds since the mid-1950's went poorly, as investors demanded higher-than-expected interest rates on $5 billion worth of bonds issued to help finance the bailout of the savings industry.
The higher rates will cost the Government more than $200 million over the life of the bonds.


News Summart
LEAD:
International
A2-13
The President's policy toward China was greeted by fierce opposition from Democrats and Republicans.
A vote overriding Mr.
Bush's veto of a bill allowing 40,000 Chinese students to stay in the U.S. is expected soon.
Page A1
Prices for Japanese computer chips will be set by the European Community, a move that mirrors one taken by the United States three years ago.


Foreman Looms as Top Contender
LEAD: Suddenly there is life beyond Mike Tyson in the heavyweight division.


Bush Replaces Leadership Of Legal Services for Poor
LEAD: In an effort to end the ideological battle that has left the Legal Services Corporation in disarray over the last eight years, President Bush has selected a new board of directors for the agency that oversees legal programs for the poor.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Jan. 19
Jan. 12
Jan. 20
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.6
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
219.5
214.9
236.6
Distillate stocks
111.8
108.4
120.2
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.2
6.1
Product imports, daily
3.1
2.8
2.8
Crude stocks
344.0
345.1
326.0
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.9
Refinery utilization (%)
88.3
87.9
85.9


Freeport McMoran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
476,584,000
558,830,000
Net inc
b21,625,000
c54,498,000
Share earns
.40
.78
Yr rev
1,958,196,000
1,944,638,000
Net inc
b130,667,000
c288,569,000
Share earns
2.17
4.13


Elitist Visions Won't Feed China's Masses;   A Haven Then and Now
LEAD: To the Editor:


Haiti Imposes Restrictions On Radio News Broadcasts
LEAD: The military government told radio stations today they may broadcast only officially approved news and nothing ''likely to incite agitation.''


Newmont Mining Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmont Mining Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
155,687,000
125,924,000
Net inc
81,630,000
c93,757,000
Share earns
1.21
1.39
Shares outst
67,595,000
67,320,000
Yr sales
591,141,000
394,568,000
Net inc
b123,947,000
c174,851,000
Share earns
1.84
2.60
Shares outst
67,459,000
67,319,000


Grey Names Directors For Cover Girl Account
LEAD: Grey Advertising has found the creative leadership it was seeking for the Noxell Corporation's Cover Girl account, which the agency won from Lintas in November.


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   East Germans' Revisions Urged for Bulgaria
LEAD: A prominent opposition leader said today that Bulgaria must follow the democratization model of East Germany and Czechoslovakia rather than Soviet perestroika, because the Soviet Union faces chaos.


Tim Curry Plunges Ahead Into the Past, Part IV
LEAD: Sitting in the lobby of the Manhattan Theater Club, a smile on his face, is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, William Shakespeare, Tristan Tzara and William Hogarth.
Or, to put it another way, sitting in the lobby of the Manhattan Theater Club, a smile on his face, is the English actor Tim Curry.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It was a story made for television.
A California woman revealed in November that as a child she had witnessed her father murdering her best friend.
Twenty years later the woman accused her father and said she would testify against him.
As a result, her father has been charged with first-degree murder.


Hanna (M.A.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna (M.A.) Co.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
283,760,000
250,264,000
Net inc
15,574,000
13,081,000
Share earns
.56
.51
Shares outst
27,777,459
21,550,806
Yr rev
1,163,365,000
1,084,940,000
Net inc
86,920,000
83,223,000
Share earns
3.34
3.48
Shares outst
25,355,736
21,501,609


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
28,979,000
15,607,000
Net inc
3,864,000
220,000
Share earns
.45
.03
Shares outst
8,636,000
7,541,000
9mo rev
78,679,000
45,249,000
Net inc
8,899,000
715,000
Share earns
1.06
.09
Shares outst
8,399,000
7,608,000


Kodak Plans Issue Of Floating Notes
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company is making a public offering of $500 million in floating-rate notes that are due to reach final maturity on Jan. 20, 1993, and are tied to rates on commercial paper.


Judge Limits Poindexter Bid To Subpoena Reagan at Trial
LEAD: John M. Poindexter must produce a list of specific questions he intends to ask former President Ronald Reagan at Mr.
Poindexter's trial on charges relating to the Iran-contra affair, a Federal district judge ruled today.


A Drug Dealer Finds Many Eager To Launder His Drug Money
LEAD: By the time he was 24 years old, Thomas Mickens, a high school dropout turned cocaine dealer, had amassed a fortune.


It Takes Astronauts To Retrieve Satellites
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bofors to Cut Jobs
LEAD: Bofors A.B., Sweden's largest weapons producer, will cut its work force by 500 because of falling orders from the Swedish military.
The decision, which is to take effect July 1, follows a reduction last October of 1,300 workers.
Bofors had counted on continued orders from India, but they were suspended amid allegations that Bofors paid bribes to secure a $1.3 billion artillery sale in 1986.


Dinkins Appoints Advisers on Drugs And Top Positions
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, a former United States Attorney General, to head a study group to recommend a strategy for fighting drug abuse.


Interim Head Selected At Brush Wellman Inc.
LEAD: Brush Wellman Inc., a company that mines the specialty metal beryllium and turns it into a finished product, announced yesterday that its chief executive for the last two years had resigned.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Former Mayor JOHN V. LINDSAY was taken to a hospital yesterday afternoon after he had a dizzy spell at lunch that may have been a mild heart attack.
Mr.
Lindsay, who has a history of heart disease, was reported in stable condition in the emergency room at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center as doctors performed tests to determine whether he had experienced a mild heart attack, a hospital spokeswoman, Diana


Old Stone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Stone Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
13,914,000
9,250,000
Per share
1.57
1.03
Year net loss
b20,689,000
c36,350,000
Per share
-
3.99
Shares outst
8,438,114
7,711,764
b-Included reserve additions and writedowns totaling $78.1 million.


Why There's No U.S. Market for Electric Cars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Advanced Medical To Acquire IMED
LEAD: Advanced Medical Technologies Inc. signed a definitive agreement for the acquisition of the IMED division of the Fisher Scientific subsidiary of the Henley Group by a new company to be formed by Advanced Medical and Fisher.


Drug Maker Says It May Have Given Investigators Bad Data
LEAD: Lawyers for a generic drug company say it submitted what appear to be false documents in an effort to block the removal of one of its main products from the market.


Angolan Chief Is Said to Cancel Plans to Visit U.S.
LEAD: Americans close to the Angolan Government said today that President Jose Eduardo dos Santos had canceled a visit to the United States scheduled for next month.


G.M. Plans Recall Of 244,000 Fieros, Citing Fire Hazard
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation will recall 244,000 four-cylinder Pontiac Fieros -every one ever made - because of a nagging engine-fire problem that contributed to the company's decision to stop making the two-seater.


Court to Be Open to the Public in List Case


Chinese Quietly Cripple Policies of Crackdown
LEAD: It was a whodunit with a twist: everyone knew the name of the culprit, except the detectives.
They were searching for the person who had hung a banner from the Xiehe Hospital, welcoming the changes in Rumania, but nobody would tell the police who did it.


From Schools Comes Money For Neediest
LEAD: The Social Studies Honor Society at Forest Hills High School in Queens held a bake sale.
So did Class 2-7 at Public School 346 in Brooklyn.
Class 2-102 at P.S. 221 in Little Neck, Queens, sold used games, books and toys in a white elephant sale.
A fourth grade at Rye Country Day School in Rye, N.Y., did odd jobs, and the middle-school student council at the Birch Wathen School in Manhatan conducted a raffle.


Michigan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
24,200,000
23,427,000
Per share
1.56
1.52
Year net inc
b187,264,000
93,154,000
Per share
12.13
6.07
b-Included a gain from the cumulative effect of an accounting change of $8,325,000.


Gotti Lawyers Attack Tape Recordings
LEAD: John Gotti's lawyers tried yesterday to use two prosecution witnesses to sow doubts about the central evidence - secret tape recordings - against the reputed Mafia crime leader at his assault and conspiracy trial in Manhattan.


Hudson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson Foods (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
149,359,525
136,029,694
Net inc
163,980
1,591,432
Share earns
.01
.12


Players Try Their Way With Words
LEAD: This was Media Day for the San Francisco 49ers, the Denver Broncos and the hundreds of reporters, photographers and camera crews already here to cover the teams' meeting Sunday in Super Bowl XXIV.


Disruption In London
LEAD: Trading on the London Stock Exchange suffered a minor disruption today when a computer problem interrupted the quotation of the stock exchange market indexes for two hours and 20 minutes.


WHITE HOUSE ASKS AN IRATE CONGRESS FOR CHINA SUPPORT
LEAD: The Bush Administration pressed returning members of Congress today to support the President's handling of relations with China, but the effort was greeted by a storm of opposition from both Democrats and Republicans.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
D.
H.
Blair &amp; Co., New York, an investment banking firm, appointed Thomas N. Hennigan executive vice president of corporate finance.


Consolidated Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,370,581,000
1,211,466,000
Net inc
105,275,000
94,228,000
Share earns
.42
.37
Yr rev
5,550,621,000
5,108,826,000
Net inc
606,065,000
599,282,000
Share earns
2.49
2.46


Merck's Net Increases by 20% in Quarter
LEAD: Buoyed by strong gains in sales volume, Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, said yesterday that net income rose 20 percent in the fourth quarter of 1989 and 24 percent for the year.


Japan Parliament Dissolved; Elections Are Set for Feb. 18
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu dissolved the lower house of Parliament today, clearing the way for national elections on Feb. 18 in which the governing Liberal Democratic Party is considered virtually certain to lose a large number of seats.


Barnum Cues Fed Scam
LEAD: Dr.
Harold J. Liverworth, the world's foremost authority, sits for an interview on what in the name of Barnum are the Feds doing with our Social Security money.
Can you tell us, Doctor, who Barnum was?


$15 Million to Aid Partnership of Teachers, Parents and Pupils
LEAD: The Rockefeller Foundation will spend $15 million in the next five years expanding a program that seeks to better the educational performance of poor children, especially from minorities, by promoting a shared belief in the value of education among teachers, parents and pupils.


Mobil Says Earnings Fell 3.2%
LEAD: The Mobil Corporation, the nation's second-largest energy company, said today that its fourth-quarter earnings declined 3.2 percent.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Beyond the Cold War


Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,900,000,000
2,900,000,000
Net inc
3,800,000
c13,500,000
Shares outst
88,800,000
88,100,000
Yr rev
12,500,000,000
10,500,000,000
Net inc
b110,000,000
d96,000,000
Share earns
.95
.81
Shares outst
88,900,000
88,000,000


Now It Can Be Told: The Dark Tale of Red Clam Chowder
LEAD: ON Dec. 25, 1978, Austin Phelps Winters sat down at his typewriter to set about straightening out the facts as they pertained to his grandfather William H. Winters and Manhattan clam chowder.


Goldome reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldome (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
18,500,000
b63,100,000
Per share
.63
-
Year net loss
253,000,000
119,100,000
b-Net loss
Latest quarter included a gain of $40 million from the sale of selected New York City branches and charge- offs of commercial loans and other real estate totaling $16 million.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about Gov.


Editor at People Named To Post at Putnam's
LEAD: Andrea Chambers, an associate editor at People magazine, was named vice president and executive editor of G. P. Putnam's Sons yesterday.
She will assume her new position in mid-March.


BARRY GRAND JURY HEARS FROM MODEL
LEAD: In a move that intensified the pressure on Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. to resign, Federal prosecutors today brought before a grand jury the former fashion model who lured Mr.
Barry into a videotaped arrest on drug charges last week.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harris Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
761,129,000
491,200,000
Net inc
30,791,000
b25,170,000
Share earns
.78
.65
Shares outst
39,430,000
38,716,000
6mo sales
1,483,840,000
921,165,000
Net inc
56,379,000
b45,754,000
Share earns
1.44
1.18
Shares outst
39,139,000
38,760,000


The U.N Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council
INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


International Lease Finance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Lease Finance Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
107,046,000
62,840,000
Net inc
27,966,000
12,182,000
Share earns
.73
.32
Shares outst
36,026,873
32,435,511
Yr rev
334,081,000
213,156,000
Net inc
61,164,000
43,406,000
Share earns
1.57
1.14
Shares outst
34,213,960
32,452,283


Medication Misclassified On List With Steroids
LEAD: To the Editor:


A van Gogh Now at Met Is to be Auctioned
LEAD: Vincent van Gogh's ''Portrait of Dr.
Gachet,'' completed six weeks before the artist's suicide in July 1890, is soon to be removed from the Metropolitan Museum of Art so that it can be auctioned on May 15 at Christie's in New York.
The auction house expects it to bring $40 million to $50 million.


Berlin 'No Man's Land' Turned Over to the Children


Review/Television;   'Hallmark' vs. 'American Playhouse'
LEAD: Two of television's more prestigious purveyors of plays, the ''Hallmark Hall of Fame'' and ''American Playhouse,'' compete for the upscale audience tonight at 9, as Hallmark's ''Face to Face,'' on CBS, goes head to head with ''Sensibility and Sense,'' on PBS.


Upheaval in the East: Czechoslovakia;   COMMUNISTS DELAY A SHIFT IN PRAGUE
LEAD: Angry at the way their party has been steadily yielding power since the popular uprising last November, Communist members of the Czechoslovak Parliament balked briefly today at an agreement to give up their legislative majority.
Later, they approved the law requiring them to surrender 90 to 100 of the seats they have held.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
SCENE: Sung Tieng restaurant in Greenwich Village.


Topics of The Times;   More Franking Follies
LEAD: Anyone who doubts the ingenuity of Congress might consider the wrinkles it has built into new rules on the franking privilege, the right to send free mail.


Syria Agrees to Aid Lebanon in Ousting General
LEAD: Syria has agreed to give the Lebanese Government military aid to enable it put down a revolt by the Christian general who controls a chunk of central Lebanon, officials here said today.


The Longest Trial - A Post-Mortem;   Collapse of Child-Abuse Case: So Much Agony for So Little
LEAD: The case of the Virginia McMartin Preschool began six years ago with lurid news reports of children being raped and sodomized, of dead rabbits, mutilated corpses and a horse killing, and of blood drinking, satanic rituals and the sacrifice of a live baby in a church.


Police in Egypt Fire on Protest by Militants
LEAD: Egyptian policemen opened fire to disperse Muslim fundamentalist demonstrators on Monday night, killing one person and arresting 12, security officials said.


Eating Well
LEAD: ANOTHER magic bullet has plowed into the dirt.
A study published in The New England Journal of Medicine last week said that oat bran may not lower cholesterol after all.
But then again it may.
Americans have just been treated to a behind-the-scenes look at what goes on in the world of science every day.


Owens Award Finalists
LEAD: Said Aouita of Morocco, Roger Kingdom of the United States and Javier Sotomayor of Cuba are the finalists for the 1990 Jesse Owens International Trophy Award.
The winner will be honored Feb. 6 at a dinner at the Waldorf Astoria.
The award is given to the athlete who best personifies excellence in athletic performance and promotes understanding among people of all nations.


Algeria Acts on Debt
LEAD: Algeria has taken a step toward lightening its crippling $24 billion foreign debt by ordering state companies to restrict short-term borrowing.
The central bank governor, Hadj Nasser, said in an interview that the move was part of a strategy to spread Algerian debt over a longer period, easing the immediate strain on the economy.


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
174,407,000
154,861,000
Net inc
20,233,000
18,444,000
Share earns
.71
.64
Yr sales
668,765,000
614,237,000
Net inc
79,364,000
71,288,000
Share earns
2.78
2.48


Two 49ers' Routes Converge Once Again
LEAD: As boyhood friends in Davenport, Iowa, they frolicked in golden leaves on sandlot football fields until the sun turned copper, sharing a bond that would include attending the same schools from elementary through college.


2 Regional Phone Companies Report Declines in Earnings
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation and the Southwestern Bell Corporation, two regional telephone holding companies, yesterday reported lower earnings for the fourth quarter.


Woman in the News;   Putting a Rational Face on a Government in Turmoil
LEAD: ''Process'' was the watchword in Marion Barry's administration back in 1979.
The administration was new and full of promise, and Carol Thompson had just been hired in the city's housing department.
Process.
It meant: Figure out how to make a decision, get all the information, check all the bases, and know all the pitfalls.


Moody's Cuts Some Merrill Debt Ratings
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service downgraded more than $12 billion in debt of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company yesterday, one day after the firm announced that the full cost of its reorganization effort begun last November would be $470 million.


Elitist Visions Won't Feed China's Masses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rome Journal;   Campuses Aflame Again: Just Tools of Industry?
LEAD: From Palermo to Turin, and on more than a dozen campuses in between, Italian universities are being rocked by student protests that had all but disappeared in the passive, self-absorbed 1980's.


Self-Defense Claim in Subway Death
LEAD: Saying he acted in self-defense to protect himself and his 3-year-old son, a 39-year-old Manhattan man pleaded not guilty yesterday to first-degree manslaughter charges in the death of a homeless man who had spat at him and punched him on a subway station platform.


Cautious Course Is Charted in Kashmir
LEAD: The new Governor of Jammu and Kashmir state, sent specially from New Delhi to deal with anti-Indian agitation by Kashmiri militants, said tonight that he will not allow Kashmir to slip away from India.


Electronic Teacher: A Mississippi Experiment
LEAD: Mississippi, where one of every three adults is functionally illiterate, is embarking on an ambitious experiment in electronic education: put an I.B.M. computer program in every kindergarten and first grade, and try to have every child reading and writing by the end of the first grade.


East German Weekly
LEAD: An East German publishing house said on Monday that next month it will start putting out Die Wirtschaft, a weekly business newspaper whose title means ''The Economy.'' Its predecessor of the same name was shut in 1983.
At the time, the Communist Government said a shortage of paper had forced the closing.


For Salvador, Democracy Before Peace
LEAD: The November military offensive by the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front guerrillas in my country has created a tragic paradox.
While it demonstrated that there is no military solution to the costly civil war, it has hardened the armed forces' opposition to serious negotiations and to the democratic forces that support this alternative.


Most Employers Coveting Frequent-Flier Bonus Miles
LEAD: Corporations are increasingly wrestling with their employees to claim frequent-flier bonuses from airlines as travel costs soar and the economy slows.


Johnny Mac, Darryl and Chemistry
LEAD: John McEnroe says that if he had known the rules, he would have controlled his temper, not have thrown his racquet, not have tried to intimidate a lines official, not have screamed at the chair umpire, not have issued a string of vile language at the head supervisor (the supervisor's quote), not have thrown his opponent off his game with his abusive deportment and nearly drilled him in the back with an angry whack of a ball, not have shouted to a mother in the stands to feed her squalling infant.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When a forum on the environment ended in Moscow Friday, it was after sundown.
So RABBI ARTHUR SCHNEIER, the senior rabbi of Park East Synagogue in Manhattan, promptly conducted a sabbath service.
In a hallway in the Kremlin.


Midlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b19,055,000
59,452,000
Per share
.47
1.53
Year net inc
206,261,000
222,865,000
Per share
5.27
5.73
b-After $75 million addition to the provision for possible loan losses, which reduced after-tax earnings by $49.5 million, or $1.25 a share.


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Southern Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
126,200,000
127,000,000
Net inc
b21,600,000
c58,100,000
Share earns
2.07
-
Yr rev
503,700,000
505,200,000
Net inc
b47,900,000
c31,500,000
Share earns
4.59
-


Coach K. Gives Stately Duke an Undignified Jolt
LEAD: Along with a reputation for clever and intimidating cheers, the students at Duke University relish their inspirational role in the performance of the school's basketball team.
Mike Krzyzewski, the head coach, has gone to considerable lengths to foster that involvement, often lauding the students as his squad's ''sixth man.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,888,700,000
2,771,600,000
Net inc
57,900,000
302,600,000
Share earns
.29
1.53
Shares outst
198,700,000
197,800,000
Yr rev
11,448,600,000
10,880,100,000
Net inc
1,074,500,000
1,316,800,000
Share earns
5.43
6.65
Shares outst
198,000,000
198,100,000


INSIDE
LEAD:
Cool Welcome for Bonds
The Government's first auction of 40-year bonds since 1955 went poorly, as investors demanded interest rates that will cost the U.S. at least $200 million more than expected.
Page D1.
Bush Acts on Legal Services
In an effort to end the bitter battles that have long brought disarray to the agency overseeing legal problems for the poor, President Bush has chosen a new board of directors.


2 Ex-Phone Workers Guilty in Ohio Wiretap Trial
LEAD: A jury concluded today that two former telephone installers for the Cincinnati Bell Telephone Company had defamed the company and two managers by contending that they had ordered the installers to perform hundreds of illegal wiretaps from 1972 to 1984.


Morgan Stanley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,592,854,000
1,161,340,000
Net inc
148,636,000
108,303,000
Share earns
3.80
2.84
Shares outst
37,938,665
36,560,760
Yr rev
5,831,019,000
4,108,829,000
Net inc
443,022,000
394,645,000
Share earns
11.21
10.26
Shares outst
37,866,161
36,996,063


Radio Revenues Up
LEAD: Network radio revenues rose by 11.9 percent last year, to $427.2 million, according to the Radio Network Association.
Revenues in New York rose just 1 percent, to $224.3 million, the group said.


Insurance Industry Disputes Florio Attack on Profits
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio's plan to reduce auto-insurance premiums raises two big questions for politicians and drivers.
Are insurance companies to be blamed for the high rates?
And will the industry foot the bill for lower ones?


Nathan N. Rosen, Rabbi, 85
LEAD: Rabbi Nathan N. Rosen, a chaplain at Brown University, Providence, R.I., for 25 years, died of cancer yesterday at Long Island Jewish Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Jamaica Estates, Queens.


From Hacker to Symbol
LEAD: If the Federal Government intended to send the nation's computer hackers a message in the prosecution of Robert Tappan Morris, that message may not be clear until Federal Judge Howard G. Munson sentences the former 24-year-old computer science student.


Japanese Moon Flight Is Delayed by Problem
LEAD: Space officials postponed Japan's first mission to the Moon just 18 seconds before liftoff today, but they said they would try again Wednesday if they could correct a technical problem.


Atwater Defuses the Doubts
LEAD: Nine months after the Denver Broncos faced the kind of difficult decision that can determine the success or failure of a draft, it no longer seems so surprising that Steve Atwater would become an important part of a rebuilt defensive secondary.


Why There's No U.S. Market for Electric Cars;   Experimental Models
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dahlen Gives Nicholls His Number, Then Scores Twice
LEAD: It was an act of humility and decency, and it didn't take Ulf Dahlen more than a minute to make.
Dahlen, who has worn No. 9 throughout his brief career with the Rangers, met Bernie Nicholls, the high-profile acquisition from Los Angeles who had worn No. 9 with the Kings, and immediately offered to give up his jersey.


Space Plane Developers Join Together
LEAD: Four of the nation's largest military suppliers joined forces today to design an aerospace plane that would take off from conventional airports and then fly in orbit at 25 times the speed of sound.


About New York;   Hospital Worker, Loose Needle, Gnawing Fear
LEAD: For the last three weeks, Carol Beckmann has had trouble sleeping, waking up often. ''Sometimes I dream about it,'' she said in a birdlike voice.


Bank Yields Down in Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions were down for the week that ended yesterday.


Northern Telecom Limited reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom Limited (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,787,200,000
1,533,300,000
Net inc
168,500,000
bc17,500,000
Share earns
.67
-
Shares outst
241,370,000
238,432,000
Yr rev
6,105,500,000
5,407,500,000
Net inc
376,500,000
b183,200,000
Share earns
1.47
.70
Shares outst
240,910,000
237,565,000


Addenda
LEAD: *
Earle Palmer Brown has signed a letter of intent to buy the Madison Public Affairs Group in Washington.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
76ers Win Fifth Game in a Row
Charles Barkley had 32 points and 15 rebounds last night as the visiting Philadelphia 76ers won their fifth game in a row, beating Cleveland, 103-88, to deny Coach Lenny Wilkens of the Cavaliers his 700th National Basketball Association victory.
Barkley, who reached double figures in scoring and rebounding for the seventh time in eight games, had 14 points in the third quarter, including 7 during a 7-2 flurry that put the 76ers ahead by 72-55 midway through the period.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
9.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.69
7.66
8.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.58
8.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.32
8.23
8.97
30-YR.


Fame for Four Bruins
LEAD: Four former basketball players who gained all-America honors at least three times while playing at the University of California, Los Angeles, will be honored at Pauley Pavilion on Feb. 3 at halftime of a game against DePaul.
The first Bruin basketball players to have their numbers retired will be Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (33), Bill Walton (32), Ann Meyers (15) and Denise Curry (12).(


Dollar Declines on Reports Of Subsiding Soviet Unrest
LEAD: The dollar lost value against all major foreign currencies yesterday and finished near its lowest levels of the day in United States trading.


Jets Foiled in Effort to Hire Spartans' Perles
LEAD: The Jets' flirtation with George Perles as their next head coach ended last night when Michigan State refused to let him out of his contract, but offered him the additional role of athletic director.


Devils Earn Victory By Stopping Lemieux
LEAD: With the All-Star emblem erased from the ice at the Civic Arena, Mario Lemieux seemed to lose his inspiration.
In his return to regular action in the National Hockey League tonight against the Devils, Lemieux was limited to just an assist in New Jersey's 4-2 triumph over the Penguins.


Shamir and Sharon in Bitter Fight to Run Israel
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and his chief Likud party rival, Ariel Sharon, are deep into a bitter political war two weeks before a party meeting at which the future leadership of the nation, and the future of the Government's moribund peace initiative, may well be decided.


Books of The Times;   A Satire on the Brezhnev Era From 2044
LEAD:
Astrophobia
By Sasha Sokolov
Translated by Michael Henry Heim. 385 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $21.50.


General Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,200,000,000
15,500,000,000
Net inc
1,173,000,000
1,011,000,000
Share earns
1.30
1.12
Yr rev
54,600,000,000
50,100,000,000
Net inc
3,939,000,000
3,386,000,000
Share earns
4.36
3.75


Famed Restaurants In Japanese Hands
LEAD: RESTAURANT ASSOCIATES, the trend-setting operating and consulting group that has been an important force in the American hospitality industry for nearly five decades, was sold yesterday to the Kyotaru Company, a Japanese food-service company, for an undisclosed sum.


Topics of The Times;   Special Counsel, Special Care
LEAD: Mayor Dinkins of New York, dogged by charges of ethical lapses during his campaign, shows welcome sensitivity.
He has asked for appointment of a special counsel to complete an inquiry by the Department of Investigation into business deals when he was Manhattan Borough President.
They include a transfer of Inner City Broadcasting stock also under scrutiny by


Clifford V. Coons, 78, Manufacturing Chief
LEAD: Clifford V. Coons, retired president of the Rheem Manufacturing Company, died on Monday at Boca Raton (Fla.) Community Hospital.
He was 78 years old and had homes in Boca Raton and Highlands, N.C.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Republicans as well as Democrats are going to vote in the House to override the President's veto.
The President has simply made a mistake, but the American Congress and the American people stand very strongly with those people in China.''
- Representative Mickey Edwards of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee.


Haircut Ordered
LEAD: Dwayne Schintzius, the Florida center indefinitely suspended from the team for his role in a fraternity house fight, will not be allowed to return until he cuts his hair, Coach Don DeVoe said yesterday.


Howard A. Golieb, Broker, 77
LEAD: Howard A. Golieb, a stockbroker and account executive, died of pneumonia on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Upheaval in the East;   Havel Plan for Summit Site
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel today offered Prague instead of Washington as the site of the next summit meeting between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Dime Savings Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of New York (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b109,871,000
c15,037,000
Per share
-
.66
Year net loss
b92,306,000
c80,118,000
Per share
-
3.52
b-Included for the quarter a tax charge of $7,120,000 relating to net operating loss carryforward and charge of $2,510,000 for early extinguishment of debt; the year included a charge of $2,510,000 from the early extinguishment of debt.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: BUSY cooks looking for fast and easy weeknight meals seem to have an insatiable appetite for recipes that use chicken breast.
That's because it is easy to pick up boned chicken breasts on the way home and prepare a full meal in well under an hour.


EDUCATIONLessons
LEAD: The pervasive practice of holding back low-performing students to repeat a grade presents a curious paradox.
Few educational causes get more popular applause than refusing to promote students just because they are a year older, yet few current policies have been shown to be as ineffective.


Freeport-McMoran Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,939,000
24,358,000
Net inc
6,266,000
3,985,000
Share earns
.15
.10
Yr rev
87,865,000
106,070,000
Net inc
12,768,000
28,519,000
Share earns
.31
.69


Economic Scene;   U.S. Memories: Who Is the Loser?
LEAD: U.S.
MEMORIES, R.I.P.: The joint venture formed last year to rescue the American computer industry from the clutches of a Japanese chip cartel died of financial anemia last week.
The giant companies it was intended to protect just could not bring themselves to sign checks amounting to a few days' worth of the industry's annual investment budget.


Voting Proposals Don't Meet New York's Needs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Questions Raised on Role of Cheese in Salmonella
LEAD: Health officials in Minnesota said yesterday that cheese may be a more important source of salmonella infections than scientists now believe.
They also raised questions about whether testing methods for salmonella bacteria in dairy products are adequate.


Tricking a Molecule to Create a Coating
LEAD: Fooling Mother Nature is helping a New Jersey company develop coatings that prevent corrosion and adhere more tightly to solid surfaces than other forms of plastics.


G.E.'s Profits Climb For Quarter and Year
LEAD: The General Electric Company, one of the nation's largest diversified corporations, said yesterday that its profit rose 15.8 percent in the fourth quarter and 16.2 percent for the year.


Mariano Rumor, 74, Italian Chief During Student and Labor Strife
LEAD: Mariano Rumor, a five-time Prime Minster who steered Italy's democracy through the shoals for part of its most trying period since the fall of Fascism, died Monday night of a heart attack in Vicenza, the town of his birth 74 years ago.


Dip in Working Oil Rigs
LEAD: The number of United States rigs drilling for oil and gas fell by 55, to a total of 964, for the week ended Monday, compared with 789 a year ago, Baker Hughes Inc. has reported.


Transcanada Pipelines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transcanada Pipelines (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
798,800,000
882,500,000
Net inc
54,100,000
c41,600,000
Share earns
.31
-
Yr rev
3,082,900,000
3,268,700,000
Net inc
b196,700,000
c8,600,000
Share earns
1.09
-
Shares outst
151,741,000
146,298,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about labor negotiations at The Daily News misstated the expiration date of union contracts at The New York Post.
It is March 30, 1991.


Seton Hall Routs B.C. To Snap 4-Game Slide
LEAD: A blend of youth and experience combined for 50 points tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, helping Seton Hall end a four-game losing streak and dealing Boston College its seventh consecutive defeat in Big East Conference play.


Real Estate;   Construction Without Loan Or Tenants
LEAD: AS a cadre of dignitaries looked on, ground was broken on Monday for a new 28-story office tower in Fort Lee, N.J.


Bridge
LEAD: A few experts, notably Boris Koytchou, Sami Kehela and the late Ivan Erdos, learned their bridge in Europe, crossed the Atlantic and later represented North America in world championships.
There has also been some traffic in the opposite direction.


Trading Halt In Centrust
LEAD: Federal regulators today ordered a suspension of trading in the stock of the Centrust Savings Bank because of what they called misleading and inaccurate financial reports from the troubled institution.


Greater N.Y. Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater N.Y. Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,449,000
c6,004,000
Per share
.07
.47
Year net inc
b19,334,000
c14,730,000
Per share
1.37
1.16
b-After extraordinary credits of $873,000, or 6 cents a share, for the quarter, and $7,107,000, or 56 cents a share, for the year, both from realization of federal income tax benefits of net operating loss carryforward.


Haste Urged in Savings-Asset Sales
LEAD: Congress today prodded Federal regulators charged with disposing of the assets of insolvent savings institutions to step up their pace and urged them to sell some single-family homes to low-income buyers.


Upheaval in the East;   Rumania Ousts Envoys To the U.S. and the U.N.
LEAD: Rumania's new leaders recalled their country's envoys to the United States and the United Nations this month, soon after the execution of Nicolae Ceausescu, and canceled their diplomatic accreditation, United Nations and State Department protocol officials said today.


In First Talk as Health Chief, Myers Tries to Calm His Foes
LEAD: In his first appearance in New York City since being named Health Commissioner, Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr. faced some of his critics at an AIDS conference yesterday and struck a conciliatory tone.


Dow Rebounds by 14.87 to Close at 2,615.32
LEAD: Stock prices were mixed yesterday, with the blue chips accounting for much of the gains in the popular averages.


Military Erred in Cocaine Report
LEAD: The Pentagon today retracted claims made after the Panama invasion that United States soldiers had found a large cache of cocaine in a guest house used by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Plan to Push Unruly Homeless Out of the Subways Is Failing
LEAD: To the frustration of Transit Authority officials and the dismay of subway riders, a campaign to purge New York City's subways of unruly homeless people has made no discernible headway after almost three months.


IRISH LEADER BACKS TALKS ON ULSTER
LEAD: Prime Minister Charles J. Haughey of Ireland has joined the British Government in urging talks among parties in Northern Ireland to try to break the political deadlock there.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
822,700,000
882,100,000
Net inc
b24,400,000
36,000,000
Share earns
.68
1.00
Yr sales
3,414,500,000
3,286,900,000
Net inc
b136,400,000
129,200,000
Share earns
3.79
3.60


Birmingham Deal Loses Financing
LEAD: A deal for the acquisition of the Birmingham Steel Corporation foundered when the buyer indicated it would not be able to obtain financing for the deal.
In a letter to Birmingham, Duffy Holdings Inc. said its financial adviser, Bear, Stearns, did not believe an acquisition of Birmingham could be financed because of deteriorating financial results at


Cray Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
330,139,000
330,885,000
Net inc
52,477,000
88,528,000
Share earns
1.78
2.80
Yr rev
784,700,000
756,306,000
Net inc
89,045,000
156,631,000
Share earns
3.02
4.99


For New Year, Fish, Hong kong Style
LEAD: BECAUSE the Chinese words for fish and for prosperity or abundance are pronounced the same - yu - fish is one of the symbolic foods for the Chinese New Year celebrations that begin Saturday.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lukens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
155,901,000
155,591,000
Net inc
b13,794,000
c9,603,000
Share earns
1.57
1.12
Yr sales
644,964,000
605,294,000
Net inc
b41,494,000
c33,388,000
Share earns
4.73
3.91


Jackson Undecided on Future
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson said tonight that he had no plans to run for mayor of the nation's capital, but he refused to rule out the option.


Thomas C. Renner, Author, 61
LEAD: Thomas C. Renner, a newspaper reporter for 36 years and the author of several books about organized crime, died of heart disease on Friday at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old and lived in Smithtown, L.I.


American Wins Friends and Influence at the U.N.
LEAD: When Thomas R. Pickering, the United States representative here, started whispering into a portable phone during the Security Council debate on Panama last month, he reinforced the split image that many people have of him after his first year on the job.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
'Under My Skin'


No Decision Yet On Neil Bush
LEAD: Federal regulators have not reached a decision on whether Neil M. Bush, the President's son, violated Federal banking laws as a board member of the bankrupt Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association in Denver.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The French celebrated the 40th birthday of SNOOPY in a manner usually reserved for loftier subjects - with a museum retrospective of his life.


Barkley and Thomas Fined for Altercations
LEAD: Charles Barkley of the Philadelphia 76ers and Isiah Thomas of the Detroit Pistons were among seven players fined for incidents during National Basketball Association games last week.


Upheaval in the East: Muslims;   Islamic Population Gain A Challenge to Soviets
LEAD: Experts on the Soviet Union say they expect to see more violence in areas populated by Muslims, who account for a large, rapidly growing share of the Soviet population.


Five Die in 15-Vehicle Crash
LEAD: Five people were killed today when as many as 15 vehicles collided in dense fog in the San Joaquin Valley, where fog often poses a road hazard.
Four members of one family and the driver of another vehicle were killed, California Highway Patrol said.


Computer Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
347,083,000
362,489,000
Net inc
70,529,000
60,592,000
Share earns
.38
.35
Shares outst
186,023,000
175,524,000
9mo rev
932,331,000
874,445,000
Net inc
90,823,000
87,900,000
Share earns
.49
.50
Shares outst
185,287,000
175,263,000


Mother of Slain Baby In Deal to Avoid Prison
LEAD: A woman who confessed last year to killing her baby in 1952 reached a plea bargain with prosecutors today that is likely to allow her to avoid a prison term.


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,147,800,000
1,010,700,000
Net inc
b71,700,000
c59,100,000
Share earns
.60
.57
Yr sales
3,985,900,000
3,474,900,000
Net inc
b190,700,000
c233,500,000
Share earns
1.50
2.19


No Headline
LEAD: TO 46-year-old Ina Pinkney, this is the Decade of the Blobb.


Central Bancshares of the South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Bancshares of the South
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
10,851,000
10,592,000
Per share
.51
.49
Year net inc
41,918,000
41,048,000
Per share
1.95
1.91


Capital Restaurants Born of Global Politics
LEAD: Ten years ago Gabriel Aubouin, the private chef for the French Ambassador in Washington, decided to open a restaurant. ''A backer offered me $100,000,'' Mr.
Aubouin, 43 years old, said. ''That was the opportunity I was waiting for.''


Fiscal Crisis Could Open Door to the G.O.P. in Massachusetts
LEAD: The precipitous decline in Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis's popularity and a budget crisis that has paralyzed state government have set the stage for a wide-open governor's race - so wide open that people are talking about the possibility that a Republican candidate could win for the first time in two decades.


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   AZERBAIJAN TENSE AS CLASHES GO ON AND TOLL MOUNTS
LEAD: Sporadic clashes and a deepening mood of civil resistance were reported today from the rebellious Soviet republic of Azerbaijan as officials of the central Government talked of compromise and dialogue with separatist leaders in Baku.


Ulster Policeman Slain
LEAD: Gunmen killed a police officer as he was making a cup of coffee in his kitchen Monday night, the Royal Ulster Constabulary said today.
Inspector Derek Monteith, 35 years old, was hit in the head and died instantly at his home in Armagh, the police said.
No group claimed responsibility.
The gunmen fired at least five shots from the back yard of the house through a glass door, the police said.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
206,026,000
176,879,000
Net inc
10,353,000
15,362,000
Share earns
.50
.75
Yr sales
813,092,000
711,257,000
Net inc
47,640,000
51,475,000
Share earns
2.31
2.51


The Party Is Over
LEAD: The Trumbull Little League All-Stars, the toast of the World Series, the White House, and the chicken-dinner circuit since bringing home the world championship to Connecticut in August, are being benched.


U.N. Women's Rights Convention, 10 Years Old, Gets Mixed Review
LEAD: While the 10th anniversary of what is essentially an international bill of rights for women is being hailed this year, women who have gathered in the last few days to evaluate the treaty have greeted its achievements with only a tentative sense of triumph.


Upheaval in the East: Hungary;   Hungarian Prime Minister Reports That Moscow Has Agreed to Withdraw Its Troops
LEAD: The Hungarian Prime Minister told Parliament today that Moscow had agreed in principle to withdraw its troops from Hungary.


Knicks Left in the Dust By Freewheeling Lakers
LEAD: After the Los Angeles Lakers came down harder on the Knicks last night than any other opponent this season had, Stu Jackson, the New York coach, uncharacteristically came down on his team even harder.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: ALTHOUGH it has been open almost eight years, the restaurant at the Basque Cultural Center in South San Francisco is still a revelation to many of the Bay Area's most devoted restaurant goers.
Just 10 minutes south of downtown San Francisco in this working-class suburb, the restaurant preserves the culinary and convivial appeal of the city's popular


Hilton to Discuss Bids; Stock Price Plummets
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation said today that its board would meet next week to consider bids for the company as well as restructuring plans that would not involve a sale.


Bensonhurst Statements Blocked
LEAD: The defense won a victory yesterday in the Bensonhurst fatal racial attack case when the judge upheld defense motions to suppress three statements made by one of the defendants.


China Disputes Western Accounts Of Secret Trials of Demonstrators
LEAD: China today denied reports that it had held secret trials of those involved in last year's democracy movement and also appeared to deny that it had arrested as many as 10,000 people in connection with the movement.


On China, Trust Is Not Enough
LEAD: Congress now has an excellent opportunity to show Beijing, and President Bush, how the American people feel about the backward-looking policies of China's fading leaders, and the Administration's shameful apologetics on their behalf.
It can do so by voting this week to override Mr.
Bush's veto of a measure that could help guarantee


Colombia Envoy Angry About U.S. Trade Policy
LEAD: Recent Bush Administration trade decisions are squeezing Colombia's earnings and making its war against cocaine trafficking more difficult, the country's Ambassador, Victor Mosquera Chaux, said today.


Disney's Net Is Up by 17.6%
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company reported today that its earnings for the quarter ended Dec. 31 increased 17.6 percent, but the results did not stop a slide in the company's stock price.


Ferranti Deal Set
LEAD: The General Electric Company of Britain will buy the business and assets of the Ferranti Defense Systems Group, based in Edinburgh, and part of Ferranti's interests in Italy in a deal worth $:310 million, the Ferranti board said.
Ferranti Defense Systems Group is a subsidiary of Ferranti International P.L.C., which was seeking a rescue from the effects of a reported fraud by a United States subsidiary.


Municipal Bond Upgradings Were Favorable in 1989
LEAD: Upgradings in the ratings of municipal bonds in 1989 were the most favorable in recent years, according to a report released this week by the public finance department of Moody's Investors Service Inc.


Taking Message on Road, Bush Pushes Crime Bill


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
268,988,000
270,509,000
Net inc
14,600,000
12,627,000
Share earns
.56
.47
Yr sales
1,076,697,000
1,069,050,000
Net inc
46,992,000
39,646,000
Share earns
1.80
1.48


Cleric Assails Cuomo Stand On Abortion
LEAD: The debate over abortion, an issue that politicians of both parties have said they want to leave untouched here this year, flared anew with an unusual exchange today between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and a Roman Catholic bishop who is in jail for trespassing at a local abortion clinic.


Astronaut Testifies for AIDS Doctor
LEAD: An astronaut who is a physician and research expert testified yesterday that an AIDS researcher failed to follow proper procedures to safeguard the anonymity of Dr.
Veronica Prego and others in a study of health-care workers.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Textile
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
336,700,000
357,300,000
Net inc
10,600,000
2,500,000
Share earns
.32
.04
6mo sales
684,900,000
664,500,000
Net inc
15,300,000
200,000
Share earns
.44
-


Jerome H. Dols, Banker, 54
LEAD: Jerome H. Dols, a senior vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank, died of cancer Friday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 54 years old and lived in Chatham, N.J.


Search in Bombings Expands, But U.S. Names No Suspects
LEAD: Federal investigators looking into a rash of bombings in the South expanded their search in this small southeast Alabama town today, but they made no arrests and identified no suspects.


Washington Talk;   'Umbrella' on Abortion Delays G.O.P. Decision
LEAD: Republicans have grown adept at pursuing two-track strategies, with the White House sending one message and party leaders another.


Gordon Buehrig, 85, A Leading Designer Of Specialty Autos
LEAD: Gordon M. Buehrig, an automobile designer who numbered among his creations the sporty low-slung Cord 810 that electrified visitors to the 1935 New York Auto Show, died of heart failure Monday at his home in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
He was 85 years old.


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acxiom Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,090,000
19,781,000
Net inc
1,921,000
845,000
Share earns
.39
.18
9mo rev
64,559,000
53,975,000
Net inc
4,704,000
3,250,000
Share earns
.96
.69


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TOM BROKAW, the NBC anchor, conceded that the report was unusual for network news. ''But several of my sophisticated friends called this morning,'' he added, ''and said, 'That's the one I'm going to remember.' ''


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
35,829,000
24,753,000
Per share
1.05
.90
Shares outst
31,564,000
25,054,000
Year net inc
138,926,000
60,226,000
Per share
4.10
3.51
Shares outst
31,141,000
16,531,000


Venezuela Plane Crash
LEAD: A military transport plane crashed into a hillside near the Venezuelan capital early today, killing all 24 people aboard, rescue officials said.
The cause of the crash was under investigation.
National guardsmen on the scene said fog was suspected as the cause.


Allen W. Brown, Bishop, 81
LEAD: Allen W. Brown, Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Albany from 1961 to 1974, died on Friday at the Meadow Wind Nursing Home in Massillon, Ohio.
He was 81 years old and lived in Fort Myers, Fla., and in Massillon.


Martin Marietta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,623,277,000
1,535,140,000
Net inc
73,524,000
b23,714,000
Share earns
1.41
.45
Shares outst
52,295,000
53,096,406
Yr sales
5,796,182,000
5,727,482,000
Net inc
306,943,000
b358,875,000
Share earns
5.82
6.75
Shares outst
52,770,895
53,151,967


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingersoll-Rand (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
893,000,000
815,100,000
Net inc
64,800,000
58,300,000
Share earns
1.22
1.09
Yr sales
3,447,400,000
3,021,400,000
Net inc
b210,700,000
161,600,000
Share earns
3.95
3.00


Franklin Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
69,100,000
59,300,000
Net inc
21,900,000
18,200,000
Share earns
.56
.46
Shares outst
39,316,887
39,248,701
Year-ago quarter share earnings and shares outstanding are restated for a 3-for-2 stock split paid Jan.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misstated the expiration date of the $14-a-share offer by the Colgate-Palmolive Company for Vipont Pharmaceutical Inc.
It is Feb. 2.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Dining for Charity


Japan Stakes Out Nearby Markets
LEAD: From Taipei to Bangkok to Jakarta, Japan's largest securities firms are rushing to open new offices, beef up their staffs, set up new investment funds and start joint ventures in their own backyard - Asia.


Panamanian Leader on First Foreign Trip


Examination for Hinson
LEAD: Roy Hinson, the Nets' starting power forward, will have his right knee examined today to determine if he will be placed on the injured list.


Upheaval in the East;   Where Fear and Death Went Forth and Multiplied
LEAD: The dictatorship of President Nicolae Ceausescu caused extreme hardships for all but a few hundred thousand of Rumania's 23 million citizens.
But in the case of mothers and babies, his rule apparently had the most tragic consequences.


Brother Luke, Teacher And a Missionary, 95
LEAD: Brother Cornelius Luke, an educator, missionary and former overseer of educational training centers for the Brothers of the Christian Schools, died of complications of diabetes on Monday at De La Salle Hall in Lincroft, N.J.
He was 95 years old and had retired to De La Salle in 1983.


Injuries Bring a Controversy Over Surface at the Open
LEAD: The serious ankle injuries suffered by Gabriela Sabatini and Mark Woodforde in the Australian Open have started a controversy over the surface at the National Tennis Center.


Morgan Stanley Net Jumps; Shearson Has a Slim Profit
LEAD: Defying the downturn on Wall Street, the Morgan Stanley Group Inc. said yesterday that it had a substantial jump in profits in the fourth quarter and for the year.


Freeport-McMoran Resource reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Resource (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
265,928,000
312,464,000
Net inc
16,995,000
43,921,000
Share earns
.21
.55
Shares outst
81,550,000
79,966,000
Yr rev
1,156,281,000
1,159,505,000
Net inc
133,583,000
207,255,000
Share earns
1.65
2.77
Shares outst
81,041,000
74,905,000


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
LEAD: Share prices fell on the Tokyo Stock Exchange this morning as the United States dollar recovered slightly from its lows.
Stocks fell almost across the board, and the 225-issue Nikkei average lost 535.01 points, or 1.43 percent, to end the morning at 36,843.01.
The index had gained 121.01 points on Tuesday.


EXTRADITION SET FOR ACCUSED NAZI
LEAD: A Federal judge today ordered the extradition of a retired grocery clerk to West Germany to face charges that he killed three prisoners while serving as a Nazi concentration camp guard in World War II.


Market Place;   Dow Back Above 200-Day Average
LEAD: THE stock market yesterday faced a substantial technical test, one that it seems to have passed.


Disney (Walt) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Disney (Walt) Co.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,288,151,000
1,043,561,000
Net inc
174,410,000
148,289,000
Share earns
1.26
1.08
Shares outst
138,878,000
137,661,000


Bankers Trust New York Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust New York Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
101,200,000
185,500,000
Per share
1.17
2.29
Year net loss
979,900,000
b647,700,000
Per share
-
8.09
b-Net income
A income tax benefit of $5.8 million was recorded for the 1989 fourth quarter, compared with income tax expense of $66.8 million for year-ago period.


Chanel Is Saucier, Ungaro Is Cooler And Venet Livelier
LEAD: Calm, dependable Philippe Venet was supposed to provide the curtain raiser for today's blockbuster spring and summer couture collections.
But it did not quite work out that way.
Venet emerged with vigor from his unpreposessing mood.
Emanuel Ungaro, after his recent marriage to Laura Fanfani, did not give up his sexy clothes but toned them down considerably.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
506,300,000
448,300,000
Net inc
52,800,000
31,100,000
Share earns
1.38
.81
Yr sales
2,009,500,000
1,799,400,000
Net inc
192,600,000
b299,600,000
Share earns
5.04
7.84


Review/Music;   After 84 Years of Composing, a Bit of Advice: Be Flexible
LEAD: Concerts that pay tribute to elder composers tend to fall into a pattern: a sample of the artist's works is presented, the honoree rises to acknowledge the ovation and applauds the performers whether they deserve it or not.
That is that.
At Monday evening's concert by the North/South Consonance entitled ''Otto Luening: 90th Birthday Salute,'' the saluted one broke with tradition: he took the Merkin Concert Hall stage and gave a remarkably succinct outline of the contemporary music movement in Europe and the


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,954,000,000
2,752,000,000
Net inc
292,000,000
272,000,000
Share earns
1.31
1.21
Shares outst
223,009,610
225,693,975
Yr sales
11,990,000,000
11,323,000,000
Net inc
1,244,000,000
1,154,000,000
Share earns
5.60
5.09
Shares outst
222,244,858
226,876,795


Francis H. Philp, 59, Investment Executive
LEAD: Francis Higginson Philp, a senior vice president of the Fiduciary Trust Company International, died of a heart attack on Thursday at Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 59 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.


Strike Vote Taken At Ford in Britain
LEAD: Workers of the Ford Motor Company in Britain voted today on whether to accept an improved pay offer from the automaker or go on strike.
The results are not expected to be released until Thursday.
The 32,000 workers at Ford's 22 plants in Britain voted on a proposed pay increase of 10.2 percent in the first year, and 8 percent or a choice of the inflation rate plus 2.5 percent in the second year.


How to Pay for Social Security
LEAD: I thought I understood what Senator Moynihan had in mind with his proposal to cut the Social Security payroll tax.
He wants to stop using a tax that bears hardest on the poor to reduce the Federal deficit.
That sure sounds nice.
But if we reduce the payroll tax, won't benefits be threatened for people who retire in the future?


Crazy Eddie Cash Sought
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Newark yesterday ordered Eddie Antar, the founding owner of the Crazy Eddie electronics stores, to repatriate more than $50 million that the Securities and Exchange Commission said Mr.
Antar had transferred to Israel.


Wine Talk
LEAD: In 1989, for the third year in a row, Americans drank less wine than the year before.
But as they have been doing regularly for more than a decade, they continued to drink more good wine: sales of premium wines, while they constitute only a tiny segment of the wine business, were up.


Taking Message on Road, Bush Pushes Crime Bill
LEAD: Evoking the legends of Bat Masterson and Wild Bill Hickok to bolster his anticrime message, President Bush today urged Congress to adopt his proposal for new laws on drug abuse and violent crime and attacked a Democratic alternative as a "Trojan horse" that would bind the hands of the police and prosecutors.


Planes Ordered By Alaska Air
LEAD: The Alaska Air Group, a regional airline company based in Seattle, yesterday announced its largest order ever, agreeing to pay up to $2.5 billion for jets and parts from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the Boeing Company.
The company, parent of


Income Down 45% at Bankers Trust
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation announced yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings dropped 45 percent as sharply higher profits from bond and foreign-exchange trading only partly compensated for losses in its loan business.


Ford to Defer Merit Raises
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it would defer first-quarter merit pay increases for 55,000 salaried workers in the United States to cut costs in a soft and unpredictable auto market.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
From '88
Bell Atlantic Corp.
$ 57,900,000
-80.9
Computer Associates
70,500,000
+16.3
Cray Research Inc.
52,500,000
-40.7
Walt Disney Co.
174,400,000
+17.6
FMC Corp.
24,400,000
-32.2
Gaylord Container Corp.


Europe Sets Prices for Japan's Chips
LEAD: The European Community said today that it would set minimum prices for computer memory chips sold by Japanese manufacturers.


Senate Opens Debate on Proposal For Stiffer Clean-Air Regulations
LEAD: The Senate began debate today on legislation that would provide powerful new tools for removing pollution from the nation's skies.


Gold Prices Climb Sharply; Traders Said to Seek Safety
LEAD: Gold futures prices climbed sharply yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange, erasing substantial losses posted in the three previous sessions.
Investors worried about the stock market apparently sought safety for their money.


U.S. Rethinks Strategy
LEAD: The Bush Administration and Congress began work on reshaping American military strategy in the face of upheavals in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
Page A11.


Upheaval in the East: U.S. Policy;   Congress Starts Review Of U.S. Military Posture
LEAD: The Bush Administration and Congress began work today on what is likely to be a basic reshaping of American military strategy and spending in the wake of political and social upheavals in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.


Shawmut National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,900,000
66,100,000
Per share
.05
.88
Shares outst
73,122,000
74,521,000
Year net inc
201,700,000
242,500,000
Per share
2.68
3.28
Shares outst
74,256,000
73,294,000


Prosecutors Seek More Time to Prepare Noriega Case
LEAD: The Government today asked for more time to produce documents in the drug-trafficking case of Manuel Antonio Noriega, an action that defense lawyers derided as evidence that the prosecution was unprepared.


More Nixdorf Cuts
LEAD: Nixdorf Computer A.G., the troubled computer maker that has agreed to be acquired by Siemens A.G. said it would reduce its work force by about 4,880 as part of a reorganization.
About 1,600 jobs, out of a total of 31,000, were cut as part of an earlier reorganization.


Mobil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,100,000,000
13,400,000,000
Net inc
447,000,000
b462,000,000
Share earns
1.08
1.12
Yr rev
56,656,000,000
54,361,000,000
Net inc
1,809,000,000
b2,087,000,000
Share earns
4.40
5.07


Shortage of Ph.D.'s Imminent, Report Says
LEAD: A study by university deans predicts an intense tug of war among government, industry and academia for people with doctorate degrees.


Victory Streak Stops At 9 Games for Isles
LEAD: For the first time in 1990, the Islanders have lost.


Boatmen's Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boatmen's Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
33,208,000
bc11,612,000
Per share
.95
-
Year net inc
129,243,000
c69,769,000
Per share
3.72
2.01
b-Net loss
c-Included non-recurring merger expenses of $41.4 million for the quarter and $47.2 million for the year.


Alan K. Magary, Executive, 78
LEAD: Alan K. Magary, a former executive of Seth Thomas, the clockmaker, died on Saturday at his home in Woodbury, Conn., after a long illness.
He was 78 years old.


Futures Trader Pleads Guilty
LEAD: A Treasury bond futures trader pleaded guilty on Monday to racketeering charges, in the first admission of a conspiracy to cheat customers in Chicago's futures pits.
At a court hearing, Howard


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column of Business Day on Jan. 17 about a new account for the Lowe Marschalk agency misstated the relationship between the Interpublic Group of Companies and the Lowe Group, the owner of Lowe Marschalk.
Interpublic owns 35.4 percent of the Lowe Group, not 29 percent.


Review/Jazz;   Half of Max Roach's Double Quartet
LEAD: The Uptown String Quartet embodies a wonderful idea - a string quartet that can not only handle European classical style but that can also swing and improvise, and that plays music steeped in black American traditions.
But in its enjoyable New York debut on Monday night at the 92d Street Y, the quartet - Diane Monroe and Lesa Terry on violins, Maxine Roach on viola and Eileen Folson on cello - ran up against its technical limitations.


Dining In the Capital: It's a New Deal
LEAD: An avid diner in this city once told a story about going to an Italian restaurant in the mid-1970's that was favored by Congressmen and legislative aides for its pasta with clam sauce.
It was a rough-edged place, with Formica tables, a dimly lighted bar and a disheveled chef.
On the menu was pasta with both red and white clam sauces.


Francis P. Coombs, 74, A Dermatologist on L.I.
LEAD: Dr.
Francis Place Coombs, an educator and dermatologist, died of cancer Sunday at Community Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 74 years old and lived in Old Westbury, L.I.


Chronicling Politics as An Industry
LEAD: HOLLYWOOD has Daily Variety to report on the business and politics of entertainment.
Now, several Washington publishing professionals want the nation's capital to have a daily newspaper to chronicle the business and entertainment side of politics.


In Canada, Two Vie to Lead the Liberal Party
LEAD: Hoping to reinvigorate Canada's main opposition group after six years in the political wilderness, one of the country's most seasoned politicians is squaring off against a former Montreal shipping executive for the leadership of the Liberal Party.


Detective Saved By a Steel Vest; Suspect Is Slain
LEAD: A police detective shot and killed a man during a struggle in Brooklyn last night after the man fired at the detective and another officer while they were hunting for robbery suspects, police officials said.


IBM Credit Corp.  reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBM Credit Corp.
12mo Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
137,000,000
130,500,000
The 1988 net earnings included a one-time gain of $52.3 million for an acccounting change.
The total assets totaled $9.5 billion for 1989 and $7.4 billion for 1988.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Best Buy Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
198,286,000
171,970,000
Net inc
6,291,000
3,554,000
Share earns
.76
.43
9mo rev
423,750,000
400,912,000
Net inc
5,594,000
4,418,000
Share earns
.68
.53
Shares outst
8,265,000
8,261,000


Democrats Seek Advantage on Tax Cut Plan
LEAD: Returning to Capitol Hill after an eight-week adjournment, Congressional Democrats sought today to gain political mileage from Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's proposal to cut the Social Security tax without actually having to embrace the plan.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
305,212,000
284,320,000
Net inc
b229,515,000
c34,480,000
Share earns
2.71
.39
Shares outst
84,682,000
88,818,000
Yr rev
1,187,675,000
1,094,890,000
Net inc
b445,250,000
c135,078,000
Share earns
5.11
1.42
Shares outst
86,924,000
94,261,000


People
LEAD: * H. Robert Greenbaum has been named a creative director of BBDO New York.


Inaugural Fund For Dinkins Shows Surplus
LEAD: As they did in his campaign for mayor, supporters of David N. Dinkins raised more than was needed for his inaugural ceremony and related activities and festivities.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Jan. 3 about the effect of Pentagon cutbacks on New York, New Jersey and Connecticut referred incorrectly to the status of Fort Dix, near Wrightstown, N.J.
Under a Defense Department plan, the Army is to stop using the fort for basic training by 1995, but reductions in permanent personnel or trainees have yet to occur.


Sinopoli to Conduct 2 Programs With Philosophical Connections
LEAD: At a glance, the two programs in which Giuseppe Sinopoli is to conduct the Philharmonia Orchestra of London in New York might seem fairly staid.
Mr.
Sinopoli, believed by many to be in the running for the music directorship of the New York Philharmonic after Zubin Mehta leaves in 1991, is leading his ensemble in the Mahler First Symphony and Berlioz's ''Nuits d'Ete,'' with the soprano June Anderson, at Carnegie Hall tonight; and he is offering Brahms's Fourth Symphony and First Piano Concerto, with Andre Watts as soloist, at Avery Fisher Hall on


Freeport McMoran Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport McMoran Copper (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
97,464,000
128,433,000
Net inc
24,225,000
42,764,000
Share earns
.57
1.00
Yr rev
367,886,000
334,986,000
Net inc
98,704,000
94,213,000
Share earns
2.31
2.21


Upheaval in the East: Turkey;   Crackdown in Azerbaijan Leaves Turks Torn Between Politics and Kinship
LEAD: As Turkish officials contemplate the Soviet crackdown in Azerbaijan, they are torn between anger at what they call repression of ethnic kinfolk and a desire to avoid greater bloodshed or strains with the Soviet Union.


Imperial Oil Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil Ltd. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,785,000,000
1,856,000,000
Net inc
87,000,000
73,000,000
Share earns
.46
.45
Yr rev
10,120,000,000
7,205,000,000
Net inc
456,000,000
501,000,000
Share earns
2.54
3.06
Shares outst
179,243,000
163,691,000


Death Sentence Ordered in Florida Slaying
LEAD: Overriding a jury's recommendation for a life sentence, a judge today sentenced to death a man whose background as an Australian Aborigine was used in a plea for mercy after he was convicted of raping, robbing and strangling a woman.


Five Housing Officials Suspended in Passaic
LEAD: Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp has suspended five housing officials in Passaic, N.J., saying they accepted grossly excessive salaries.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Rumanian Leaders Accede To Pleas to Delay Elections
LEAD: Responding to appeals from newborn political parties seeking time to organize, the provisional government voted overwhelmingly today to postpone elections a month, to May 20.


U.S. Bond Auction Goes Poorly
LEAD: The Federal Government's first auction of 40-year bonds since the mid-1950's went poorly yesterday, as investors demanded higher-than-expected interest rates on $5 billion worth of bonds issued by the Resolution Funding Corporation that will be used to finance the bailout of insolvent savings institutions.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
DIG Acquisition Corp. said it would extend until Friday its $30-a-share tender offer for all common shares of Di Giorgio Corp., San Francisco, a food and consumer products company.


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
96,602,000
154,974,000
Net inc
4,152,000
37,875,000
Share earns
.11
1.02
Yr rev
465,923,000
552,975,000
Net inc
69,495,000
121,014,000
Share earns
1.87
3.26


Upheaval in the East: Yugoslavia;   Yugoslavia on the Brink
LEAD: Deep in the night, when the Slovenes stalked out of the grand hall, turning their backs on the red flag, the bust of Tito and 1,000 fellow delegates, they did more than paralyze the National League of Communists, Yugoslavia's only national party.


Back to the Past in Haiti
LEAD: Haiti's nightmare continues.
There is no justification for Gen.
Prosper Avril's crackdown on Haiti's moderate opposition.
The promise of democracy raised by the overthrow of Jean-Claude Duvalier in February 1986 keeps receding ever further.
Washington's sharp, prompt signal of disapproval is the right response.


Review/Theater;   'Forbidden Broadway 1990' Nips the Hand That Feeds It
LEAD: During a dim theatrical season, an actor in ''Forbidden Broadway'' announced a parody of the current hit shows - followed by a prolonged silence.
There is no such dearth of targets in ''Forbidden Broadway 1990.'' With gleeful malice, Gerard Alessandrini, as author and director, mocks Dustin Hoffman, ''City of Angels'' and that new Tommy Tune musical, ''Grim Hotel'' and throws comic brickbats at Broadway Brits.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article yesterday reported a decision by a New York State Senator, Nicholas A. Spano, to join the abortion-rights side in the Legislature after strongly opposing abortion.
It described Mr. Spano as ''a Roman


Freeport-McMoran Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Freeport-McMoran Energy Partners (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
57,320,000
67,819,000
Net inc
5,095,000
7,688,000
Share earns
.05
.08
Shares outst
110,569,000
96,135,000
Yr rev
254,835,000
233,689,000
Net inc
45,664,000
25,102,000
Share earns
.43
.28
Shares outst
105,098,000
89,974,000


Gaylord Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gaylord Container Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
183,000,000
182,700,000
Net inc
2,000,000
b12,400,000
Share earns
.13
.78
b-Included a net gain of $3.4 million, or 21 cents a share, from sale of a mill.


3M Net Grows 7.4% in Quarter
LEAD: The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said today that its earnings increased 7.4 percent in the fourth quarter and 7.8 percent for the year.


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,761,100,000
1,534,100,000
Net inc
367,900,000
307,300,000
Share earns
.93
.77
Shares outst
395,400,000
396,500,000
Yr sales
6,550,500,000
5,939,500,000
Net inc
1,495,400,000
1,206,800,000
Share earns
3.78
3.05
Shares outst
396,100,000
395,600,000


Great Northern Nekoosa reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Northern Nekoosa (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
934,000,000
944,100,000
Net inc
b52,000,000
85,800,000
Share earns
.92
1.56
Yr sales
3,900,000,000
3,600,000,000
Net inc
321,000,000
341,700,000
Share earns
5.78
6.21


First Federal Savings-Elizaethtown reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings-Elizaethtown
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
731,081
704,180
Per share
.69
.67
6mo net inc
1,450,295
1,403,870
Per share
1.37
1.33


Bytex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bytex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,702,000
9,085,000
Net inc
1,504,000
766,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
6,205,000
5,128,000
Yr rev
39,726,000
34,475,000
Net inc
3,799,000
2,299,000
Share earns
.65
.44
Shares outst
5,876,000
5,205,000


Dow Off 10.82, A Comeback After Plunge
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 62 points in the first half-hour of trading yesterday, then climbed back during the balance of the day to close at 2,604.50, down 10.82.


Meredith Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
211,917,000
195,853,000
Net inc
9,451,000
10,387,000
Share earns
.51
.54
Shares outst
18,632,000
19,094,000
6mo rev
407,638,000
386,358,000
Net inc
18,768,000
21,046,000
Share earns
1.01
1.10
Shares outst
18,650,000
19,123,000


Tecumseh Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tecumseh Products Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
348,300,000
259,200,000
Net inc
18,700,000
18,000,000
Share earns
3.42
3.29
Yr sales
1,509,800,000
1,093,500,000
Net inc
82,600,000
70,200,000
Share earns
15.10
12.84


Washington Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
375,950
146,851
Per share
.24
.09
Year net inc
1,233,029
1,341,419
Per share
.78
.85


Bridge
LEAD: Before reaching for an angry pen to complain about the typography of today's diagram, read on.
All will be revealed.


BankAmerica Change Seen
LEAD: A. W. Clausen, who led the BankAmerica Corporation back from the brink of financial ruin, is expected to retire this year as the bank's chief executive, banking industry officials said today.


Unions Set To Make UAL Offer
LEAD: Unions representing pilots, machinists and flight attendants at United Airlines will present a buyout proposal today to the board of the UAL Corporation, the airline's owner.
The buyout would give employees a 75 percent stake in the company, while the rest of the stock would remain in public hands, the unions announced yesterday.


Barry's Lawyer Terms Resignation Of Mayor 'Not a Viable Option'
LEAD: The lawyer for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today rebuffed speculation that his client might resign in a plea bargain with prosecutors, saying that ''resignation is not a viable option.''


Kentucky Rejects Bill to Bar School Smoking
LEAD: A bill that would have banned student smoking inside elementary and high schools has been rejected by lawmakers in this state where tobacco is the leading cash crop.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
121,702,000
112,773,000
Net inc
13,530,000
12,295,000
Share earns
.75
.69
Shares outst
18,018,000
17,949,000
6mo sales
236,616,000
219,210,000
Net inc
27,953,000
24,230,000
Share earns
1.55
1.35
Shares outst
18,009,000
17,950,000


Cem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cem Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,869,000
3,851,000
Net inc
729,000
597,000
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
4,697,000
4,590,000
6mo sales
8,729,000
7,465,000
Net inc
1,269,000
1,182,000
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
4,697,000
4,583,000


LSI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,634,000
13,011,000
Net inc
1,442,000
1,177,000
Share earns
.29
.26
Shares outst
4,908,000
4,443,000
6mo sales
43,889,000
23,149,000
Net inc
2,562,000
2,049,000
Share earns
.51
.46
Shares outst
4,886,000
4,443,000


Drug Stamp Tax For New Capones
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bishops Call for Greater Housing Efforts


Benefit for the Homeless
LEAD: The Da Capo Chamber Players will play a benefit concert for the Coalition for the Homeless on Feb. 14 at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street.
The program will include the premieres of two works, John Harbison's ''November 19, 1828,'' which commemorates the day of Schubert's death, and Bruce Adolphe's ''Machaut Is My Beginning.


Florio Appoints a Prosecutor For Environmental Concerns
LEAD: With a firm warning to polluters and sharp criticism of Exxon for the recent oil spill in the Arthur Kill, Gov.
Jim Florio appointed an environmental prosecutor today to coordinate enforcement of New Jersey's environmental laws and regulations.


Joining Space Race, Japan Launches Rocket to Moon
LEAD: Japan tonight became the third nation, after the United States and the Soviet Union, to launch an unmanned rocket to the Moon.


Tribute to Eisenhower
LEAD: The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, has introduced a resolution to change the name of Dulles International Airport to Eisenhower International Airport.
Renaming the airport would be a fitting tribute to Dwight D. Eisenhower, the 34th President, who was Supreme Allied Commander in Europe and ''helped save the world from tyranny'' in World War II, Mr.


U S West Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U S West Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,539,400,000
2,348,700,000
Net inc
b344,400,000
271,700,000
Share earns
1.84
1.49
Yr rev
9,690,600,000
9,220,600,000
Net inc
1,110,700,000
c1,131,700,000
Share earns
6.02
6.17
Shares outst
186,996,000
182,642,000


L.I. Nurse Gets 50-Year Term In Four Killings
LEAD: Richard Angelo, the 27-year-old nurse convicted of killing four patients with lethal injections at a Long Island hospital, was sentenced today to 50 years to life in prison.


McKesson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McKesson Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,024,800,000
1,797,700,000
Net inc
30,000,000
b30,800,000
Share earns
.67
.73
Shares outst
40,300,000
42,200,000
9mo rev
5,701,000,000
5,169,000,000
Net inc
80,400,000
b75,200,000
Share earns
1.83
1.77
Shares outst
40,500,000
42,400,000


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
256,300,000
252,700,000
Net inc
25,300,000
15,600,000
Share earns
.45
.28
Shares outst
56,793,000
56,731,000
Yr rev
1,060,000,000
1,045,300,000
Net inc
133,800,000
114,300,000
Share earns
2.36
2.02


Secord Is Put on Probation For Lie on Iran-Contra Role
LEAD: A Federal district judge sentenced Richard V. Secord today to two years' probation for making a false statement to Congressional investigators about his role in the Iran-contra affair.


Louisiana Governor Refuses to Pardon Black in '74 Killing
LEAD: Gov.
Buddy Roemer today rejected the State Pardon Board's recommendation of clemency for Gary Tyler, a black civil rights advocate who says he was framed for the killing of a white student during desegregation violence in 1974.


Florio Creates Environmental Prosecutor Post and Fills It


Orange Juice Prices Post Steepest Drop in a Month
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices plummeted on the New York Cotton Exchange yesterday.


Intermec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
44,161,000
35,084,000
Net inc
3,092,000
2,285,000
Share earns
.41
.32
Shares outst
7,573,000
7,047,000
9mo rev
122,391,000
90,849,000
Net inc
7,864,000
4,960,000
Share earns
1.07
.72
Shares outst
7,363,000
6,923,000


Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atalanta-Sosnoff Capital
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,765,000
4,398,000
Net inc
b497,000
c1,805,000
Share earns
.06
.18
Yr rev
11,270,000
23,599,000
Net inc
b5,234,000
c7,493,000
Share earns
.59
.79


Building on History of Success;   Former Teacher Keeps Niners' Offense Going Strong
LEAD: When Mike Holmgren returned in 1971 to his hometown of San Francisco to teach high school history, he thought teaching would be his job for the rest of his life.
Holmgren was happy, content.
But then he began coaching in high school, and then moved on to San Francisco State and on to Brigham Young


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Oil Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,505,000,000
5,458,000,000
Net inc
264,000,000
212,000,000
Yr rev
21,948,000,000
21,399,000,000
Net inc
1,405,000,000
b1,239,000,000
b-Included a gain of $35 million from an accounting change.


Not Your Plain Old Everyday Toaster
LEAD: SOMEDAY, toasters may be transparent, flexible or portable, judging from Black &amp; Decker's ''Toast to the Future'' contest, which was co-sponsored by the Kansas City chapter of the Industrial Designers Society of America.
The winners were awarded prizes, ranging from $5,000 to $10,000, in Chicago on Jan.


National Banc of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,831,000
1,220,000
Per share
.29
.33
Shares outst
6,204,000
3,697,000
Year net inc
6,309,000
4,422,000
Per share
1.10
1.20
Shares outst
5,758,000
3,697,000


Calendar: Antiques And Art
LEAD:
Winter Antiques, Westchester County Center, Central Avenue and the Bronx River Parkway, White Plains; 914-949-8900.


United National Bancorp-N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United National Bancorp-N.J.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
767,000
1,540,000
Per share
.36
.72
Year net inc
4,210,000
6,199,000
Per share
1.96
2.88
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted to reflect 6 percent stock dividend paid in November 1989.


Bairnco Adopts A Reorganization
LEAD: Bairnco Inc., a holding company based in New York, said its board had adopted a strategy under which it would concentrate on developing its Arlon, Shielding Systems and Kasco units.
The company said it would spin off its Keene Corporation subsidiary to shareholders on the basis of one Keene share for each Bairnco share held.


Washington Talk;   Panama Invasion Costly In a Far Wider Theater
LEAD: The domestic political verdict is in:


Washington Trust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Trust Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,479,791
1,520,694
Per share
.81
.83
Year net inc
5,855,446
5,915,264
Per share
3.20
3.20


Review/Television;   The Role of Journalists In the Stuart Case
LEAD: ''The Boston Hoax,'' tonight's edition of ''The Other Side of the News,'' at 9 on Channel 13, begins with a dramatic two-minute excerpt from the CBS ''Evening News'' in October.
Viewers heard the halting voice of Charles Stuart, calling for police help from his car telephone, telling of a late-night attack on him and his pregnant wife,


BRIEFS


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,162,026,000
1,132,449,000
Net inc
137,403,000
123,064,000
Share earns
.74
.66
Yr rev
4,321,794,000
4,267,377,000
Net inc
586,380,000
498,960,000
Share earns
3.14
2.67


In the Garden District
LEAD: IN the past 10 years, design books have been narrowing their focus, from countries to regions to cities.
In S. Frederick Starr's ''Southern Comfort: The Garden District of New Orleans, 1800 to 1900'' (M.I.T. Press, $35), the focus is even more specific: the historic area two miles up river from the French Quarter.


Flu Time: When the Sunspots Are Jumping?
LEAD: Sir Fred Hoyle, a British astrophysicist whose unorthodox theories frequently raise the hackles of scientific colleagues, has concluded that sunspots may cause flu outbreaks.


Fansteel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fansteel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
41,115,000
42,993,000
Net inc
b4,484,000
cd2,047,000
Share earns
.52
-
Yr sales
168,590,000
168,492,000
Net inc
b6,853,000
d2,152,000
Share earns
.80
.25


Subway Garble
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hewlett-Packard Retirement Plan
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said it would offer an enhanced early retirement program to about 2,400 longtime employees in the United States in a program to reduce its work force and slow the growth of expenses.


Profits Off At Chevron And Exxon
LEAD: Two giant oil companies, the Chevron Corporation and the Exxon Corporation, reported today that they had reduced their profits by a total of more than $1.7 billion in the fourth quarter, in large part to deal with their environmental problems.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Appointments At TV Guide
LEAD: Michael A. Lipton, a senior editor of TV Guide, will become executive editor of the magazine's national features section, Joe Robinowitz, the top editor at the magazine, announced this week.
Jack Curry, the deputy managing of USA Today, will become managing editor of the magazine, which is owned by Murdoch Magazines.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Fairness Complaints
LEAD: The National Advertising Division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus promises that by April 1 it will cut in half the time to decide claims of unfair advertising.
The advertising industry's self-regulatory group averages five to six months to resolve claims, said Mary-Jane Raphael, senior vice president of the National Advertising Division.


Santa Fe Pacific To Cut 2,700 Jobs
LEAD: The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation said it planned to reduce employment on its railroad by 2,700 jobs over five years.
The reductions would take place through job buyouts, attrition and possible layoffs, and would affect union and white-collar workers, said Robert Gerht, a spokesman for Chicago-based company.


British Ford Strike Averted
LEAD: Workers at the Ford Motor Company Ltd. voted by nearly 3 to 2 to accept a 10.2 percent pay increase, averting a nationwide strike, union leaders said today.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
243,643,000
214,821,000
Net inc
23,160,000
24,979,000
Share earns
.45
.44
Shares outst
51,090,000
56,775,000
Yr rev
860,062,000
800,160,000
Net inc
79,502,000
87,986,000
Share earns
1.48
1.55


Farm Credit Issue Top Yield Is 8.2%
LEAD: A $3.145 billion financing by the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation was priced at par yesterday.
The financing includes consolidated systemwide bonds with maturities of three months, six months and one year.


Chinese Paper Places Ideology Over Ability
LEAD: A revolutionary outlook, rather than education or competence, is the most important criterion in choosing and promoting Communist Party officials, the party declared today in what some experts saw as a reversal of its previous position.


Quake-Repair Bond Issue
LEAD: Officials will ask voters to approve the largest bond issue in San Francisco history, $334.4 million, for repairing buildings and pipelines damaged by the Oct. 17 earthquake.


Aceto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aceto Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,552,000
22,850,000
Net inc
1,073,000
1,477,000
Share earns
.26
.22
Shares outst
3,967,951
3,954,648
6mo sales
55,192,000
43,557,000
Net inc
1,747,000
1,493,000
Share earns
.43
.37
Shares outst
3,968,000
3,953,200


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.75
8.12
9.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.69
8.29
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.61
8.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.34
8.32
9.03
30-YR.


Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
74,352,000
54,418,000
Net inc
8,878,000
7,897,000
Share earns
.57
.55
Shares outst
15,625,000
14,359,000
6mo sales
145,297,000
98,434,000
Net inc
17,991,000
13,608,000
Share earns
1.15
.94
Shares outst
15,670,000
14,418,000


Allied Bankshares (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares (Ga.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
669,000
816,000
Per share
.13
.16
Shares outst
5,247,000
5,226,000
Year net inc
3,626,000
4,149,000
Per share
.69
.80
Shares outst
5,264,000
5,264,000


A Bug Bites 2 Niners
LEAD: A stomach virus struck Guy McIntyre and Roger Craig of the San Francisco 49ers today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Jan. 11 about van Gogh's ''Irises'' misattributed the news that the painting is on the market.
Sotheby's, the auction house that sold the painting in 1987, did not say the painting was now on the market.


Hartford Steam Boiler Insur reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler Insur (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
19,137,000
18,308,000
Share earns
.93
.90
Yr net inc
77,571,000
70,659,000
Share earns
3.78
3.46


Outdoors
LEAD: rrYou don't have to be 70 years old to race in the United States Ski Association Alpine Masters events.
But that age won't prevent you from racing either.


Screen Writers and Directors Reach Pact
LEAD: Writers and directors, who for years have been not only close collaborators but also bitter foes in the making of motion pictures, called a truce today in one of Hollywood's oldest wars.


Bankers First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers First Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
850,000
1,214,000
Per share
.20
.28
Year net inc
4,535,000
4,563,000
Per share
1.06
1.00
Latest fourth quarter included provision for loan losses of $1.8 million.


Risk of Hearing Loss Is Growing, Panel Says
LEAD: Millions of Americans are unwittingly suffering a hearing loss because of exposure to loud noises at home, on the job and during recreational activity, a Federal advisory panel said today.


Chronicle
LEAD: Will EMANUEL UNGARO soon be designing maternity clothes?
The French couturier, who is known for his sexy revealing dresses, and his wife, LAURA, are expecting a baby in May.
They were married last month.


Harrods in Canada
LEAD: Harrods, regarded by many as London's finest store, will open its first North American outlet in Toronto International Airport's new terminal, set to open in September, the company said.
Harrods, which has in the past sold itself on being only one store, now has outlets at the Frankfurt airport in West Germany, on board the liners Queen Elizabeth 2 and Queen Mary and in the Mitsukoshi Ltd.


Rochester Community Savngs Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Community Savngs Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Net inc
6,649,000
4,047,000
Per share
.48
.29
Year net inc
20,039,000
15,284,000
Per share
1.45
1.11


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DPL Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
269,026,000
263,017,000
Net inc
25,114,000
17,722,000
Share earns
.59
.43
Shares outst
42,254,000
41,390,000
Yr rev
960,463,000
988,713,000
Net inc
136,354,000
124,677,000
Share earns
3.27
3.01
Shares outst
41,744,000
41,446,000


Earnings of Some Suppliers Hurt by Debts of Federated
LEAD: Several large suppliers will reduce the value on their books of the amounts owed them by Federated Stores Inc., which has sought protection of the bankruptcy court, Wall Street analysts said yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about trading of futures contracts for orange juice concentrate misidentified the exchange that handles such trades.
It is the New York Cotton Exchange.


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
662,027,000
552,098,000
Net inc
108,062,000
75,767,000
Share earns
1.27
.84
Shares outst
75,423,000
75,231,000
Yr rev
2,356,446,000
2,213,903,000
Net inc
353,436,000
332,042,000
Share earns
4.05
3.73
Shares outst
75,314,000
75,071,000


How the Survey Was Conducted
LEAD: The New York Times/CBS News Poll was based on telephone interviews conducted from Jan. 13 to Jan. 15 with 1,557 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.


Defendant in 59th St. IND Killing May Waive Immunity and Go Before Grand Jury
LEAD: The lawyer for the man charged with killing a homeless man in the Columbus Circle subway station said yesterday that he was considering having his client waive immunity and appear voluntarily as a witness before a grand jury.


He Cut It
LEAD: Dwayne Schintzius, the Florida center suspended from the team after a fraternity-house fight, yesterday got the haircut that Coach Don DeVoe had demanded as a condition of his reinstatement.


Stratus Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratus Computer Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
98,139,000
79,398,000
Net inc
10,201,000
9,198,000
Share earns
.50
.45
Shares outst
20,619,000
20,323,000
Yr sales
341,327,000
265,314,000
Net inc
35,393,000
29,344,000
Share earns
1.71
1.45
Shares outst
20,712,000
20,257,000


Azerbaijani Strife Expected to Lift Oil Prices Throughout the World
LEAD: Western experts say the ethnic strife in Azerbaijan has begun to disrupt production of oil in the Soviet Union, the world's largest oil producer by far and a large exporter.
The resulting drop, which comes on top of a decline that began in mid-1987, is expected to contribute to tighter supplies and higher prices for oil around the world at a time when production is also falling in other regions.


Bristol-Myers Posts a Loss
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company yesterday reported a net loss of $352.7 million for the fourth quarter of 1989.
The loss reflected the company's previously announced $855 million write-down to cover the costs of the Oct. 4 merger of the Bristol-Myers Company and the Squibb Corporation.


Keystone Heritage Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Heritage Group
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,735,000
1,439,000
Per share
.86
.72
Year net inc
6,352,000
5,100,000
Per share
3.18
2.56


Dr. Selden Dickinson, Pediatric Surgeon, 62
LEAD: Selden Jerome Dickinson, a pediatric surgeon, died of lung cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.


California Paroles Man Who Set Son Afire
LEAD: A former Brooklyn man who severely disfigured his 6-year-old son seven years ago when he tried to burn the boy to death as a result of a custody dispute, was freed on parole today with $200 in his pocket and an ''electronic leash'' strapped to his body.


Suncor Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suncor Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,488,000,000
1,345,000,000
Net inc
49,000,000
b49,000,000
Share earns
.90
-
b-Net loss and included an unusual charge of $45 million.
The Sun Co. owns 75 percent of Suncor Inc.


National Steel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Steel Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
638,500,000
674,600,000
Net inc
b28,400,000
c33,200,000
Yr sales
2,576,500,000
2,599,100,000
Net inc
b83,200,000
c89,200,000
b-Included tax credits of $8,000,000 and $23,000,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Bush Aide Optimistic On South African Shift
LEAD: The top Bush Administration official dealing directly with South African affairs offered an unusually optimistic assessment today about prospects for a political system that would offer ''democracy'' for all racial groups, after three days of talks with President F. W. de Klerk and other senior officials.


I.B.M. Joins Siemens In Developing Chips
LEAD: In a move to strengthen its ability to compete with Japanese semiconductor manufacturers, the International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to work with the West German electronics giant Siemens A.G. to develop advanced computer memory chips for the mid-1990's.


Review/Dance;   Mystic Aura in Jamison's 'Forgotten Time'
LEAD: As a star of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Judith Jamison commanded attention with her authoritative stage presence, dramatic intensity and concern for expressive details.
Those theatrical virtues have helped make her effective both as a choreographer and as a director of her own dance group, the Jamison Project, which opened a week's engagement Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th


East Side Pickpocket Victim Is Held After Shooting Thief
LEAD: A Manhattan man whose pocket had been picked at an Upper East Side electronics store chased the suspected thief and shot him twice, the police said.
Both men were arrested.
Michael Friedman, 55 years old, of 320 West End Avenue, was in Concord Sound, at 228 East 86th Street, when he realized his wallet had been stolen.


Dr. Lucien Rubinstein Dies at 65; Expert on Nervous System Tumors
LEAD: Dr.
Lucien J. Rubinstein, a neuropathologist who was director of the division of neuropathology at the University of Virginia Health Sciences Center since 1981, died Monday after a cerebral hemorrhage at his home in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 65 years old.


Chronicle
LEAD: GEORGE W. BALL'S 80th birthday bash, the co-hosts (and former Cabinet secretaries) W. MICHAEL BLUMENTHAL and PETER G. PETERSON gather


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
189,500,000
191,900,000
Net inc
12,400,000
20,700,000
Share earns
.23
.37
Yr sales
777,800,000
757,500,000
Net inc
65,400,000
78,700,000
Share earns
1.18
1.38
Shares outst
55,419,000
57,047,000


Bell Savings Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Savings Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,763,000
b1,783,000
Per share
-
.71
6mo net loss
3,117,000
b2,622,000
Per share
-
1.05
b-Net income
The company said the loss in the latest quarter reflected the increased loan loss provision and reflected a charge-off of interest of $747,000.


Tyson Floored in Japan
LEAD: Japanese sports fans - or sports editors - were shocked that Mike Tyson, the undefeated world heavyweight champion, was knocked flat on his back Tuesday with a right hook from a sparring partner, Greg Page.


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chittenden Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,701,000
2,635,000
Per share
.37
.57
Year net inc
4,319,000
8,262,000
Per share
.93
1.79


Books of The Times;   James's Dalgliesh Tracks a Copycat Killer
LEAD:
Devices and Desires
By P. &gt;D. James
433 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Sysco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sysco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,888,216,000
1,733,525,000
Net inc
33,718,000
27,521,000
Share earns
.37
.30
6mo sales
3,766,242,000
3,291,631,000
Net inc
65,327,000
53,634,000
Share earns
.72
.59


The Talk of the South Fork;   Baymen Find No Warmth This Winter
LEAD: The bushel of steamers that Tom Lester harvested last week is still in his cellar, and it is starting to stink. ''I can't sell them,'' said Mr.
Lester, a burly 48-year-old baymen whose day's work normally fetches between $75 and $100. ''No one wants them at any price.''


Profits Double at Porsche
LEAD: Porsche A.G., the West German maker of sports cars, has turned the corner after a two-year slump, with earnings doubling in the fiscal year ended July 31, the company said today.


La Jolla Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Jolla Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,662,000
876,000
Per share
.22
.13
Year net inc
5,015,000
2,778,000
Per share
.71
.41


In Kashmir, Muslim Police Go on Strike
LEAD: One hundred local policemen shouted Islamic and anti-Government slogans today as they briefly went on strike to press for relief of long-simmering frustrations at a time when the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir is being swept by a separatist upsurge.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
269,928,000
260,782,000
Net inc
12,337,000
11,760,000
Share earns
.56
.57
Shares outst
19,886,202
20,581,920
Yr sales
1,083,573,000
1,008,990,000
Net inc
49,748,000
46,620,000
Share earns
2.25
2.26
Shares outst
20,648,417
20,589,865


Noriega's Trial Not Like North's;   Demobilize Panama
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Perles Mess: Who Did What to Whom?
LEAD: In the end, George Perles is still Michigan State's head coach - and has been given the additional post of athletic director - and the Jets are still looking for Joe Walton's replacement.


A Bumpy Road to Barry Rendezvous
LEAD: When Hazel Diane (Rasheeda) Moore emerged from a Federal courthouse where she testified before a grand jury on Tuesday, she proved why she had been a top student at the Cappa Chell Finshing School and Model Agency in suburban Virginia.


Cecelia M. Kenyon, Professor, 67
LEAD: Cecelia M. Kenyon, retired professor of government at Smith College, died Monday after a heart attack at her home in Northampton, Mass.
She was 67 years old.


U.S. FACES STRAINS FROM GLOBAL JUMP IN INTEREST RATES
LEAD: Interest rates in Japan and West Germany are suddenly surging, in the process dragging up American rates at what most economists say is just the wrong moment for the nation's fragile economy.


Ex-Bronx School Board Head Pleads Guilty in Corruption
LEAD: A former Bronx school board president pleaded guilty yesterday to a number of charges related to his corrupt activities while in office, the Bronx district attorney's office said.


Greening the Cabinet
LEAD: In proposing to promote the Environmental Protection Agency to cabinet status, President Bush yesterday pre-empted attention for a costless project that Congress, eager to strike blows for the environment, is likely to approve anyway.
The idea sounds good; it may even do some good.


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,114,000,000
8,428,000,000
Net inc
483,000,000
500,000,000
Share earns
.71
.70
Shares outst
700,505,538
717,893,298
Yr rev
35,991,000,000
32,771,000,000
Net inc
2,480,000,000
2,190,000,000
Share earns
3.53
3.04


Hardware, Antique or Merely Odd
LEAD: GREENWICH VILLAGE has been home to the P. E. Guerin foundry, makers of hardware, since 1892.
If a piece of furniture is missing hardware, says Andrew Ward, the president, the company can duplicate the needed part. ''We will replace anything,'' he said.


Sterling Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
88,000,000
165,600,000
Net inc
4,400,000
47,000,000
Share earns
.08
.78
Shares outst
55,600,000
60,000,000


Summer Camps Put Their Best Recruiting Faces on Videotape
LEAD: SCENE: A clear blue lake surrounded by rolling mountains.


Western Digital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
264,944,000
258,403,000
Net inc
b8,577,000
12,693,000
Share earns
.29
.44
Shares outst
29,191,000
28,800,000
6mo rev
489,844,000
505,369,000
Net inc
b5,887,000
25,547,000
Share earns
.20
.89
Shares outst
29,203,000
28,834,000


Talking Deals;   A Team Approach For Orbital Plane
LEAD: FOR the last five years some of the nation's largest aerospace companies have been competing to design and build an aircraft that could take off from a runway and fly at 25 times the speed of sound directly into orbit.
But this week, faced with daunting technological challenges and the prospect of Federal budget cuts, the companies said they wanted to stop competing and start cooperating.


Vulcan Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Materials (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
257,740,000
267,435,000
Net inc
b19,656,000
25,099,000
Share earns
.50
.62
Shares outst
39,858,000
41,033,000
Yr sales
1,076,204,000
1,053,175,000
Net inc
b130,859,000
136,029,000
Share earns
3.24
3.30
Shares outst
40,395,000
41,247,000


Allen Collins, 37; Played Rock Guitar For Lynyrd Skynyrd
LEAD: Allen Collins, one of the original members of the rock group Lynyrd Skynyrd, died of pneumonia on Tuesday.
He was 37 years old.


Kashmiris in Pakistan Press Self-Rule
LEAD: As a new Government in India grapples day to day with an explosion of separatism in Kashmir, the issue is rapidly taking on international dimensions here, drawing Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto toward a potentially dangerous confrontation with New Delhi.


FHP International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FHP International Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
222,550,000
160,940,000
Net inc
6,482,000
4,947,000
Share earns
.25
.24
Shares outst
26,119,000
20,540,000
6mo rev
432,594,000
312,919,000
Net inc
13,265,000
9,011,000
Share earns
.51
.44
Shares outst
25,999,000
20,448,000


Richman Brothers Gets A New Chief Executive
LEAD: A chain of clothing stores owned by the Woolworth Corporation has promoted Lee A. Sunderland, its executive vice president since 1983, to president and chief executive.


Microsystems Net Is Off 32%
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. today reported second-quarter earnings below the levels of the period a year earlier, but significantly higher than its first-quarter earnings.


Mission Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mission Valley Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,046,000
582,000
Per share
.35
.29
Shares outst
2,972,022
1,957,958
Year net inc
3,831,000
2,004,000
Per share
1.36
1.06
Shares outst
2,825,240
1,888,253


American Steel &amp; Wire reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Steel &amp; Wire (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
41,709,000
50,700,000
Net loss
1,676,000
b1,727,000
Share earns
-
.23
6mo sales
82,216,000
97,855,000
Net loss
1,283,000
b3,369,000
Share earns
-
.50


Poll Finds U.S. Expects Peace Dividend
LEAD: Three out of four Americans say the warming of relations between the United States and the Soviet Union can open the way for cuts in military spending, and by a wide margin they want this ''peace dividend'' spent to fight problems here at home rather than to cut taxes or close the budget deficit.


Mayors Seek More U.S. Drug Aid
LEAD: The nation's mayors charged today that the states were shortchanging the cities in allocating Federal money to combat drugs.


Redmen Defeat Friars By 83-75
LEAD: Boo Harvey started an 8-0 run tonight by hitting two free throws with 4 minutes 40 seconds left, and he made 10 of 12 foul shots in the final five minutes to lead St.
John's to an 83-75 Big East victory over Providence.


Heartfed Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heartfed Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,100,000
2,213,000
Per share
.46
.50
Year net inc
7,341,000
7,649,000
Per share
1.64
1.74


Peoples Heritage Fincl Gr reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Heritage Fincl Gr (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,156,000
5,164,000
Per share
.62
.61
Shares outst
8,317,310
8,462,106
Year net inc
22,795,000
21,435,000
Per share
2.70
2.54
Shares outst
8,440,847
8,452,979


SALVADOR POLICY AROUSES CONGRESS
LEAD: Conflict over United States policy toward El Salvador flared up today in Congress as a Bush Administration official defended the conduct of the Salvadoran armed forces and resisted efforts to reduce American aid.


Five Women Executives Quit Goldman
LEAD: Five women quit as vice presidents of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company yesterday to form a ''boutique'' investment firm specializing in municipal finance The new venture, which includes a sixth woman, from Citibank, will have offices in New York and San Francisco and is to be called Artemis Capital Group Inc., after the


First Oak Brook Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Oak Brook Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
659,000
1,013,000
Per share
.55
.84
Year net inc
2,015,000
3,453,000
Per share
1.67
2.86


Data Showed Leap in Heart Attacks at 60
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Review/Dance;   Don Cossacks Return For First Time Since 1976
LEAD: The Don Cossacks surged into the Neil Simon Theater on Tuesday night for a two-week run with music and dance guaranteed to charm the most jaded of audiences.
The performing lies somewhere between the simplicity and straightforwardness of the Red Army Chorus and the sophisticated professionalism of the Moiseyev Dance Company.


All the G.O.P. Needs Now Is a Candidate
LEAD: From his remodeled office, J. Patrick Barrett presides over New York State's Republican Party with the nervous readiness of a cook preparing dinner for company who may not show up.


Dollar Off in Hectic Trading; Gold Has a Substantial Gain
LEAD: The dollar finished lower yesterday against most major currencies.
It had dropped sharply and then bounced back as traders responded to the volatile stock market.


Lindsay in Stable Condition
LEAD: Former Mayor John V. Lindsay, who was hospitalized after he had a dizzy spell at lunch Tuesday, was in stable condition yesterday, Linda Franklin, an administrator at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, said.
She said doctors were awaiting results of tests to determine whether he had experienced a mild heart attack.


U.S. Softens Its Stance on Return Of the Boat People in Hong Kong
LEAD: The United States has softened its opposition to the forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong by indicating at an international meeting here that some boat people could be sent back after a one-year moratorium.
But the American insistence on the moratorium effectively prevented any consensus from being achieved at the meeting.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-14
Bills protecting Chinese students in the United States from deportation were overwhelmingly reaffirmed by the House.
The Senate is expected to vote on Thursday and the outcome is too close to predict.
Page A1


Solti Selected to Head Salzburg Easter Festival
LEAD: The Salzburg Easter Festival is to announce today that Sir Georg Solti has been appointed director of the Easter festival beginning in March 1992.
The appointment begins almost exactly a year after Sir Georg's final concerts as music director of the Chicago Symphony, which are to take place at Carnegie Hall in


First Federal Savings-Decatur reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings-Decatur
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
334,000
389,000
Per share
.27
.32
Shares outst
1,220,444
1,217,444


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
606,419,000
561,319,000
Net inc
61,080,000
43,723,000
Share earns
.61
.44
Shares outst
87,112,000
80,368,000
Yr rev
2,480,803,000
2,273,362,000
Net inc
376,067,000
196,813,000
Share earns
4.20
2.04


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,850,000
32,702,000
Net inc
3,463,000
7,021,000
Share earns
.30
.60
6mo rev
54,916,000
62,932,000
Net inc
8,180,000
14,223,000
Share earns
.70
1.22


Calumet Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calumet Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,303,000
10,163,000
Net loss
2,715,000
602,000


Study of Teen-Agers Hints Gain for Those Having Abortions
LEAD: A federally financed study of unmarried, sexually active teen-age girls has found that those who obtained abortions did better economically and educationally and had fewer subsequent pregnancies than those who chose to bear children.
Those who had abortions even fared better than those who were not pregnant at the start of the research project.


Home &amp; City Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home &amp; City Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,177,000
1,888,000
Per share
.41
.66
Year net inc
6,279,000
6,663,000
Per share
2.18
2.32


Pikeville National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pikeville National Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,666,831
1,834,452
Per share
.68
.73
Year net inc
6,801,612
6,215,801
Per share
2.72
2.46


Famine Threatens as Fighting Flares in the Sudan
LEAD: The civil war in the Sudan has flared anew in the last six weeks, and Western aid officials say the fighting and Government obstruction of relief efforts make another large-scale famine appear likely.


James J. Downey Jr., Contractor, 84
LEAD: James J. Downey Jr., a construction company executive and former president of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York, died in his sleep on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old.


Garvey Off the Air
LEAD: Steve Garvey, the former baseball star who has been troubled by low ratings in his new career as a radio talk-show host in the San Diego area, was dismissed yesterday by XTRA after six months at the AM station.


Central &amp; Southern Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; Southern Holding
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
278,638
597,023
Per share
.08
.21
Year net inc
2,406,000
2,661,000
Per share
.75
.94


Peres Optimistic on Setting Up Arab Peace Talks
LEAD: Shimon Peres, the Labor Party leader, left a meeting with the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, in Cairo this afternoon broadly optimistic that his party and the Egyptian Government could arrange Israeli-Palestinian peace talks in the near future.


All-Terrain Vehicles Need More Regulating
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wider Search Is Seen In Mail-Bombing Case
LEAD: A Federal investigation into mail bombings that killed a judge and a civil rights lawyer appeared today to be widening, with one law-enforcement official saying new agents had been assigned to this small town that has become the center of the case.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Lakers Make Riley an All-Star
Magic Johnson scored 26 of his 32 points in the second half last night, and Pat Riley clinched his eighth All-Star coaching berth with his 500th victory, a 120-111 triumph over the Indiana Pacers.
Riley became the 14th coach in National Basketball Association history to win 500 games, and he did it in 684 games, faster than any other coach.


Norfolk Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norfolk Southern Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,107,900,000
1,159,200,000
Net inc
148,200,000
179,000,000
Share earns
.87
1.00
Yr rev
4,536,000,000
4,461,600,000
Net inc
606,200,000
635,100,000
Share earns
3.48
3.51


Lester S. Vander Werf, Educator, 79
LEAD: Lester S. Vander Werf, retired dean of Long Island University's Graduate School of Education, died of internal bleeding on Monday at Fairview Hospital in Great Barrington, Mass.
He was 79 years old and lived in Sheffield, Mass.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alltel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
324,096,000
274,469,000
Net inc
40,301,000
b19,138,000
Share earns
.59
.29
Yr rev
1,225,607,000
1,068,480,000
Net inc
153,922,000
b125,039,000
Share earns
2.32
1.94


Miami Officer Is Sentenced to 7 Years for 2 Killings
LEAD: A Hispanic police officer whose killing of two unarmed blacks set off rioting here a year ago was sentenced today to seven years in prison.
The 30-year-old officer, William Lozano, will remain free pending the outcome of an appeal.


A Late Goal Leaves Devils Alone in First
LEAD: John MacLean, who had two goals in the victory Tuesday night at Pittsburgh, gave the Devils a 3-2 triumph over the Capitals tonight by scoring the winning goal with three seconds left.
The victory also moved the Devils into sole possession of first place in the Patrick Division with 52 points.


Imex Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imex Medical Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,579,270
1,558,671
Net inc
83,019
89,621
Share earns
.01
.02
6mo rev
3,434,639
2,738,519
Net inc
257,257
108,512
Share earns
.04
.02


BSD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,405,000
1,172,000
Per share
.40
.34
Year net inc
3,955,000
2,716,000
Per share
1.13
.78


Dr. Hugh E. Potts, 87, Biologist and Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Hugh Eustis Potts, a biologist and an educator, died of heart disease on Jan. 16 at New Milford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Washington, Conn.


Reprieve From Execution
LEAD: A woman who was sentenced to death for the poisoning of her husband 19 years ago was granted a reprieve by the State Supreme Court today, less than 20 hours before she was to die in the electric chair.
The 46-year-old prisoner, Judi Buenoano, would be the second woman to be executed in the United States since the Supreme Court reinstated the death penalty 13 years ago.


Ohio Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,260,000
4,093,000
Per share
.91
.87
Year net inc
16,480,000
15,181,000
Per share
3.52
3.23
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split paid in August 1989.


Independent Bank (Mich.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank (Mich.) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
719,000
b797,000
Per share
.34
.39
Year net inc
2,714,000
b2,425,000
Per share
1.28
1.22
b-After extraordinary tax benefits from tax loss carryforwards of $227,000 for the quarter and $600,000 for the year.


Zelia Ruebhausen, 75, Long a Civic Leader
LEAD: Zelia P. Ruebhausen, a civic leader, died of ovarian cancer yesterday at her winter home in Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.
She was 75 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


3 Small Parties Denounce Bucharest's Ruling Group
LEAD: Leaders of three political parties today denounced the provisional Government's plan to run its own candidates in national elections in May, and demonstrators at two rallies shouted slogans against its President.


Varian Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
317,700,000
287,400,000
Net inc
7,600,000
9,300,000
Share earns
.39
.44


MOSCOW ARRESTS AZERBAIJAN REBELS
LEAD: Soviet troops arrested dozens of insurgents and outlawed ''illegally functioning organizations'' in defiant Azerbaijan today in a selective crackdown aimed at consolidating the Kremlin's hold on the republic, the authorities and residents said.


Allegheny Power System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
571,641,000
524,940,000
Net inc
46,137,000
51,376,000
Share earns
.88
.99
Shares outst
52,642,103
51,969,520
Yr rev
2,258,203,000
2,170,490,000
Net inc
194,908,000
250,086,000
Share earns
3.72
3.96
Shares outst
52,393,412
51,729,928


Pacific Bank N.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Bank N.A.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,033,000
610,000
Per share
.53
.23
Year net inc
7,431,000
3,542,000
Per share
2.24
1.33
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split in March 1989.


Americans' Challenge: Teaching Democracy
LEAD: American teachers and scholars are helping schools in Eastern Europe with a new task: how to teach democracy, and practice it, in societies that for decades have known only dictatorships.


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Idex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
53,830,000
53,338,000
Net inc
b4,100,000
c3,833,000
Share earns
.38
.34
Shares outst
10,807,000
6,995,000
Yr sales
220,971,000
200,351,000
Net inc
b18,080,000
c15,237,000
Share earns
1.63
1.43
Shares outst
9,127,000
6,998,000


Northern States Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern States Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
499,500,000
483,900,000
Net inc
40,700,000
22,300,000
Share earns
.58
.27
Yr rev
1,989,700,000
2,006,500,000
Net inc
221,900,000
214,800,000
Share earns
3.24
3.11


Chronicle
LEAD: The Librarian of Congress, JAMES H. BILLINGTON, is taking a leaf from the books of many libraries around the country.
He has established the James Madison National Council, a select group of folks who will act as an advisory body.


Wang Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wang Labs (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
637,700,000
722,200,000
Net loss
b10,500,000
c1,000,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
164,625,000
165,329,000
6mo rev
1,234,500,000
1,406,200,000
Net loss
b72,600,000
c14,100,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
164,256,000
165,406,000


United Illuminating Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Illuminating Co. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
531,181,000
518,938,000
Net loss
b73,350,000
c78,639,000
Share earns
-
4.85
b-Included a charge equivalent to $10.95 a share from the effect of a change in accounting principle.


Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock R&amp;M (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
557,700,000
449,500,000
Net loss
b23,800,000
c27,400,000
Share earns
-
1.08
Yr rev
2,090,900,000
1,803,900,000
Net inc
b28,100,000
d53,500,000
Share earns
.90
2.10


Typeface Program Wins Copyright
LEAD: Adobe Systems Inc. said today that it had received the first copyright registration issued by the United States Copyright Office for a computer program that generates a particular style of type.


American Express Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Express Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,321,300,000
5,806,800,000
Net inc
257,200,000
b231,000,000
Share earns
.61
.54
Shares outst
421,634,000
420,021,000
Yr rev
25,047,300,000
20,895,100,000
Net inc
1,157,000,000
b1,038,500,000
Share earns
2.70
2.43
Shares outst
421,375,000
420,646,000


Marble Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marble Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
14,292,000
3,613,000
Shares outst
3,235,472
3,253,070
Year net loss
13,557,000
1,292,000
Shares outst
3,244,267
3,239,971


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about a trial of two former employees of the Cincinnati Bell Telephone Company misstated the verdict.
As the article said, the former employees were found liable for having defamed the company and two managers by contending they had been ordered to perform illegal wiretaps.
There was no finding of guilt.


Potlatch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potlatch Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
315,770,000
285,405,000
Net inc
39,953,000
33,039,000
Share earns
1.38
1.19
Shares outst
28,851,000
26,900,000
Yr sales
1,227,622,000
1,084,089,000
Net inc
136,715,000
112,364,000
Share earns
4.79
4.04
Shares outst
28,513,000
26,884,000


Splendid Season at Missouri
LEAD: When Norm Stewart returned to coaching basketball at Missouri this fall after seven months of recuperation from surgery for colon cancer, there was hope that the old coach would have mellowed as a result of his ordeal.
That hope was short-lived.
A few days into practice, the players realized that their coach may have lost 30 pounds, but was as cantankerous as ever.


A.T.&amp; T. Cutback
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said its New River Valley electronics plant, with 1,000 employees, would phase out its operations within 15 months.
Jay Walters, the plant's manufacturing director, said the shutdown resulted from excess capacity throughout A.T.&amp; T.'s microelectronics business.


Apple Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,588,000
6,965,000
Per share
1.44
1.52
Year net inc
b25,078,000
24,261,000
Per share
5.46
5.29
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $3,941,000, or 85 cents a share.


The Legal Services 'Emergency'
LEAD: Using loopholes to evade the intent of Congress is an odd way to provide a board of directors for the Legal Services Corporation, the Federal program of legal help for the poor.
Yet President Bush has chosen to do just that.


Morgan Guaranty In Note Offering
LEAD: The Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York yesterday priced $200 million in bank notes due Feb. 1, 1992, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Central Point Software Inc., Beaverton, Ore., a computer software company, appointed Corey Smith president and chief operating officer.


Atek Metals Center reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atek Metals Center (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
13,543,000
12,839,000
Net inc
139,000
358,000
Share earns
.03
.09
Shares outst
3,730,231
3,732,231


Cilcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cilcorp Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
120,515,000
111,419,000
Net inc
6,444,000
6,097,000
Share earns
.47
.45
Yr rev
458,630,000
470,907,000
Net inc
b48,399,000
44,822,000
Share earns
3.58
3.31


Forest Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forest Laboratories Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
38,484,000
29,746,000
Net inc
7,996,000
6,056,000
Share earns
.39
.31
Shares outst
20,722,000
19,589,000
9mo rev
109,239,000
83,195,000
Net inc
21,076,000
16,584,000
Share earns
1.03
.85
Shares outst
20,469,000
19,401,000


Hoping to Finish With a Flourish
LEAD: Sebastian Coe of Britain, who has set 11 world records and won 4 Olympic medals in his illustrious career, will retire from competition after the Commonwealth Games, which begin today in Auckland, New Zealand.
He could leave the track in a blaze of glory.


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker Hughes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
578,908,000
566,291,000
Net inc
25,412,000
b17,363,000
Share earns
.20
.13
Shares outst
120,842,000
118,511,000
b-Included an extraordinary tax credit of $1,803,000, or 1 cent a share.


Prague Arms Trade to End, Foreign Minister Says
LEAD: The Czechoslovak Foreign Minister has promised that the country will end its lucrative worldwide arms exports immediately.


G.E. Manager to Head Warner-Lambert Unit BUSINESS PEOPLE;   Richman Brothers Gets A New Chief Executive
LEAD: The Warner-Lambert Company says it has succeeded in making a biodegradable plastic from starch, a process that it calls a major advance in materials science.
And yesterday, it named Philip M. Gross, an executive from the General Electric Company, to bring the product to market.


Cytogen Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cytogen Corp. (OTC)
13wks to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,655,000
851,000
Net loss
2,978,000
6,911,000
Shares outst
12,096,000
11,935,000
52wk rev
7,468,000
5,906,000
Net loss
13,956,000
17,821,000
Shares outst
11,994,000
11,924,000


250 Jobs to Be Cut By Perkin-Elmer
LEAD: Citing sagging sales, the Perkin-Elmer Corporation said it would cut 250 jobs within two weeks, most in its semiconductor business.
Edward Bloch, a company spokesman, said most of the layoffs would be at the company's optical lithography unit in Wilton.
He said skilled and unskilled jobs would be cut.


Bush Ready to Ask $1 Billion in Funds To Repair Panama
LEAD: President Bush is preparing to propose an aid program for Panama totaling more than $1 billion to help the country recover from recent warfare and long years of corrupt military rule, an Administration official said tonight.


Graf Plays Sluggishly But Moves Into Final
LEAD: Steffi Graf, suddenly looking vulnerable, escaped an upset today to reach the Australian Open final.
Mary Joe Fernandez, the calm and confident American teen-ager, also reached the final, which is scheduled for Saturday.


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
429,135,000
370,766,000
Net inc
b42,683,000
20,062,000
Share earns
.71
.36
Shares outst
60,424,321
57,569,085
Yr rev
1,643,199,000
1,519,677,000
Net inc
b138,650,000
c53,820,000
Share earns
2.36
-
Shares outst
58,836,246
57,026,739


Rangers' Dahlen Is Back on Track
LEAD: Ulf Dahlen climbed into Tomas Sandstrom's car late Sunday afternoon for what would be a quiet ride to the Ranger practice arena in Rye, N.Y.
The friends, having shared a traditional Swedish dinner, drove through the darkness, sad and taciturn.
They were no longer teammates, though their hearts wished otherwise.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in The Living Section yesterday about Adirondacks restaurant in Washington misidentified the chef.
He is Gethin D. Thomas; Michael McCarty is the owner.


Mazda-Ford Effort Planned for Europe
LEAD: The Mazda Motor Company and the Ford Motor Company plan a venture to produce compact cars in Europe based on existing Mazda models, a Mazda official said.
Japan's fourth-largest automobile maker and its American partner expect to produce the cars in southwestern West Germany, the official said.
He declined to say whether the venture would require a new factory or use an existing


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


USAir Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USAir Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,494,234,000
1,482,933,000
Net loss
101,713,000
b22,792,000
Share earns
-
.53
Shares outst
44,256,000
43,357,000
Yr rev
6,251,559,000
5,706,992,000
Net loss
63,176,000
b165,004,000
Share earns
-
3.81
Shares outst
44,051,000
43,315,000


B.A.T. Plans to Close 2 Operations
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C., the London-based conglomerate fighting off a $21 billion takeover attempt by Sir James Goldsmith, said yesterday that it was dismantling its Batus Inc.
American management arm as well as its Batig unit in West Germany.


Northeast Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Bancorp (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
632,000
34,635,000
Per share
.08
4.39
The company said chargeoffs grew to $39 million in the fourth quarter reflecting the sagging New England economy, and resulting in a doubling of the reserve for possible loan losses.


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,900,000,000
6,900,000,000
Net loss
b883,000,000
c175,000,000
Share earns
-
.51
Yr rev
32,800,000,000
28,900,000,000
Net inc
b251,000,000
d1,768,000,000
Share earns
.73
5.17


Arab Says Israel Offered Him Deal to Confess
LEAD: A prominent Palestinian nationalist said today that the Israeli secret police tried to coerce an admission of illegal political activity from him last week by offering to release imprisoned Arabs if he confessed.


U.S. Notes and Bonds Fall Again
LEAD: Even as prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower again yesterday, some market participants and analysts said they saw the early signs of a strong technical rally.


Regulators Seize Empire of America
LEAD: Federal regulators today seized the Empire of America Federal Savings Bank, New York State's third-largest savings institution, which has been losing millions of dollars since it bought out 13 failing institutions around the country.


New Plan By Owners Rejected
LEAD: The baseball players' union yesterday rejected a proposal by the owners under which the players could accept the owners' revenue-sharing plan, with its pay-for-performance salary scale, but still qualify for elements of the current system, such as salary arbitration.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Van Doren Rubber Co., to Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, Los Angeles, for its Vans shoes, with a budget of $3 million.


Conner Peripherals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
225,715,000
96,178,000
Net inc
14,588,000
5,196,000
Share earns
.32
.15
Shares outst
41,393,000
35,812,000
Yr sales
704,908,000
256,639,000
Net inc
41,449,000
19,768,000
Share earns
1.00
.58
Shares outst
37,949,000
34,297,000


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
306,700,000
233,000,000
Net loss
b100,000
c11,400,000
Yr sales
1,222,400,000
1,073,000,000
Net inc
b35,800,000
c50,500,000
Share earns
1.44
2.17
b-Included an after-tax provision of $6.2 million to cover the projected cost to complete a fixed-price development subcontract for a U.S.


'Tel Aviv Strangler' Is Jailed For Life for Multiple Killings
LEAD: An Israeli court jailed for life plus 40 years a Palestinian known as the ''Tel Aviv Strangler,'' who claimed to have killed seven people to prove he was not a collaborator with the Israelis.


South Carolina Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina Federal
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b527,000
b1,659,000
Per share
.23
.72
b-Included tax credits from net operating loss carryforwards of $36,000 or 2 cents a share, for the latest first quarter and $116,000, or 5 cents a share, for year-ago period.


Birmingham Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birmingham Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
102,768,000
102,267,000
Net inc
b3,478,000
10,323,000
Share earns
.28
.84
6mo rev
219,580,000
217,036,000
Net inc
b11,288,000
22,323,000
Share earns
.92
1.81


Auto Sales Were Flat in Mid-January
LEAD: Sales of the eight companies that build cars in the United States were flat in mid-January, compared with a year ago.


Tidewater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tidewater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
54,500,000
47,700,000
Net inc
500,000
b1,600,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
150,800,000
140,000,000
Net loss
6,700,000
9,900,000
b-Net loss


Hogan Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hogan Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,811,000
11,096,000
Net inc
1,185,000
2,085,000
Share earns
.09
.16
9mo rev
34,009,000
35,240,000
Net inc
3,224,000
b1,452,000
Share earns
.24
-


Saint Laurent Draws Cheers And Tears
LEAD: Yves Saint Laurent followed his last model, 16-year-old Lucie de la Falaise, down the runway at the Inter-Continental Hotel shortly after noon today and the place exploded.
Trim and healthy looking, he waved to friends in the audience and put an arm protectively around the teen-ager in a shell-pink bridal dress, and everyone was standing, applauding madly.


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
498,000
1,165,000
Year net inc
3,465,000
b8,072,000
Per share
.57
-
b-Net loss and after a gain of $1,343,000 from the cumulative effect on prior periods of an accounting change for income taxes.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: A COMMON style of lavatory faucet is the double-handled type with valves for hot and cold water and a central spout.
Perhaps because of their simplicity, inexpensive, inferior models abound, and it is often necessary to replace them.
The job is usually easy, though awkward.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: SOMEONE has written to ask if I would speak at a local gathering, and suggests several possible subjects.
One of them is what my neighborhood, which is also the writer's and probably that of everyone at this gathering, means to me.
I'm not sure what it means to me.
All I know is that when I cross West 14th Street, I am crossing the border into another country.


Stephenson, Attacked, Fractures a Finger
LEAD: Jan Stephenson, the professional golfer, suffered two fractures in her left ring finger when she was attacked and robbed Tuesday night in Miami, The Phoenix Gazette reported.


BankNorth Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankNorth Group Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,164,000
4,151,000
Per share
.61
.61
Year net inc
17,821,000
16,534,000
Per share
2.62
2.43


Police in Kosovo Break Up Albanian Protest
LEAD: Riot policemen used tear gas and water cannon today to disperse about 40,000 ethnic Albanians demanding the lifting of emergency rule in Kosovo province, witnessess said.


Iowa Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Iowa Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
87,104,000
86,079,000
Net inc
7,281,000
6,950,000
Share earns
.34
.31
Yr rev
360,570,000
348,469,000
Net inc
41,703,000
32,939,000
Share earns
1.90
1.49


A Chat With Jesse
LEAD: Over the phone, Jesse Jackson's voice was so painfully raspy with laryngitis that it seemed discourteous to engage him in conversation.


Eldec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 24
1989
1988
Sales
28,092,000
24,931,000
Net inc
1,216,000
c6,689,000
Share earns
.22
1.24
Shares outst
5,489,981
5,382,032
9mo sales
81,552,000
71,551,000
Net inc
b4,169,000
c9,210,000
Share earns
.76
1.72
Shares outst
5,487,037
5,359,227


Lin Expecting Loss in Quarter
LEAD: The Lin Broadcasting Corporation said yesterday that it expects a net loss for the fourth quarter because of the costs of its settlement with the BellSouth Corporation after its merger agreement with the telephone company was canceled.
In a press release, Lin, a New


Zions Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zions Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,275,000
c12,273,000
Per share
1.05
-
Shares outst
5,964,000
5,881,000
Year net inc
b17,683,000
c17,860,000
Per share
2.98
-
Shares outst
5,931,000
5,881,000


Race to Retain Power Begins For Tokyo's Governing Party
LEAD: Japan's political leaders today opened what is expected to be a closely contested parliamentary election campaign in which the Liberal Democratic Party of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is fighting to continue its 35 years of uninterrupted control of the Government.


Greyhound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyhound Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
863,402,000
838,407,000
Net inc
28,042,000
23,818,000
Share earns
.70
.61
Yr rev
3,536,851,000
3,304,860,000
Net inc
108,711,000
b104,058,000
Share earns
2.75
2.70
Shares outst
39,128,000
38,065,000


Aeroflot Buys First Airliners From West
LEAD: In its first order for Western aircraft, Aeroflot, the Soviet airline, bought five A310 airliners from Airbus Industrie, the European consortium said yesterday.


Mercantile Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
10,696,000
7,813,000
Per share
.66
.49
Year net inc
b522,000
b28,681,000
Per share
.03
1.79
b-Included a $94,821,000 provision for loan losses in 1989, and $60,288,000 in 1988.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   3 New Books Published About the Ad Business
LEAD: Jay McNamara, the retired president and chief operating officer of McCann-Erickson Worldwide and a former president of Young &amp; Rubicam USA, has collected his management philosophy in a book.
Published by Dow Jones-Irwin ($24.95), the book is called simply ''Advertising Agency Management.'' Noting that agency executives receive mostly on-the-job training, Mr.


No-Fault Faults for New Jersey
LEAD: New Jersey Governor Florio's auto insurance reform proposals, unveiled Monday, look more like cost-shifting than cost-cutting.
He says they'll reduce the average driver's premium by 22 percent, from $1,112 a year to $860.
But what the Governor calls the ''organized ripoff'' of New Jersey drivers won't end until the state perfects its no-fault system and mounts an attack on fraud in insurance claims and repairs.


Lincoln Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,812,000
5,429,000
Per share
.83
.78
Year net inc
20,144,000
18,322,000
Per share
2.90
2.64


U.S. Burgers for China
LEAD: A tiny Arizona food chain said yesterday that it would open the first American hamburger restaurant in China.
Fast Lane Burgers, with two drive-through restaurants in Arizona, said it expects to open its first outlet across from Tiananmen Square in Beijing on May 1.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,524,000
4,811,000
Per share
.49
.41
Year net inc
22,209,000
20,489,000
Per share
1.93
1.72
The 1988 periods restated to reflect the mergers in 1989, on a pooling of interest basis, with First Service Bancshares Inc.


The Bishop And the Chairman
LEAD: Governor Cuomo of New York is in ''serious risk of going to hell'' for his support of abortion rights - so says a Roman Catholic bishop who is serving a 10-day jail sentence for trying to block the entrance to an abortion clinic in Albany.


Inglis Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inglis Ltd.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
101,895,000
114,676,000
Net inc
2,086,000
c4,111,000
Share earns
.40
-
Yr sales
406,216,000
440,097,000
Net inc
b10,769,000
d2,057,000
Share earns
2.05
.39


LPL Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LPL Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
171,484,000
150,585,000
Net inc
4,121,000
c4,015,000
Share earns
.55
.42
Shares outst
7,476,225
8,605,710
Yr sales
630,505,000
585,422,000
Net inc
b27,933,000
c9,291,000
Share earns
3.68
.89
Shares outst
7,579,740
8,609,412


11.4% Gain for American Express
LEAD: The American Express Company said yesterday that its profits rose 11.4 percent in both the fourth quarter and for all of 1989, bolstered by strong gains in travel-related services, financial services and back-office operations it conducts for others.


BUCHAREST ENVOY TO U.S. IS NAMED
LEAD: Rumania's provisional Government has named new Ambassadors to Washington, Moscow and Paris and forbidden its diplomats from joining political parties, the country's United Nations Mission said today.


Metro Matters;   On the Question Of Legal Drugs, A Vote for Maybe
LEAD: Add Nathan Glazer's voice to the chorus suggesting that drugs be legalized.
Even Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, the former United States Attorney General named this week by Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York to explore strategies for fighting drug abuse, is circumspect about rejecting legalization of heroin and cocaine.


Mega-League Weighed
LEAD: In a conference call yesterday, officials with nine football independents in the East and Southeast discussed forming an all-sports conference, Sam Jankovich, the University of Miami athletic director, said in Coral Gables, Fla.
The talks were the latest in a series in recent years.


Oil Find in Eastern Syria
LEAD: Petrofina, the Belgian oil company, said this week that an exploration well in which it has a share had struck oil in eastern Syria.
The Al Bishri test site is operated by Total Syria, of which France's Compagnie Francaise des Petroles has a 60 percent share.
Petrofina has 20 percent and London and Scottish Marine Oil has the rest.


Advanced Magnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Magnetics
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,164,000
1,577,000
Net inc
178,000
157,000
Share earns
.05
.05
Shares outst
3,303,000
3,055,000


Bristol-Myers-Squibb Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers-Squibb Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,360,256,000
2,144,375,000
Net loss
352,733,000
b293,005,000
Share earns
-
.56
Yr sales
9,189,147,000
8,558,315,000
Net inc
746,775,000
1,254,478,000
Share earns
1.43
2.39
Shares outst
522,865,000
525,351,000


Review/Jazz;   Doky Brothers as a Duo
LEAD: Since graduating magna cum laude from the Berklee College of Music in Boston in 1984, the 25-year-old pianist Niels Lan Doky has become a firmly established figure in the New York jazz world, both as a solo performer and in groups that often include the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington, a fellow student at


Curtice-Burns Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curtice-Burns Foods (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
254,917,000
227,137,000
Net inc
4,153,000
4,758,000
Share earns
.49
.57
6mo sales
468,317,000
401,895,000
Net inc
12,171,000
12,821,000
Share earns
.88
.93


After the Boston Killing: A Deluge of Books About It
LEAD: The Charles Stuart case has provoked a deluge of books and ideas for books about the killing, and the result, several agents and publishers contend, will be a slew of hastily produced mediocrity.


Wang Loses $10.5 Million
LEAD: Wang Laboratories today reported a $10.5 million loss for its second quarter and said it expected the red ink to continue for at least six months.


Charley E. Johns, Ex-Florida Official, 84
LEAD: Charley Eugene Johns, who was Acting Governor of Florida for 15 months in the mid-1950's, died at Alachua County Hospital in Gainesville, Fla., on Tuesday after a long illness.
He was 84 years old.


Trinova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
505,852,000
494,181,000
Net inc
20,324,000
c25,045,000
Share earns
.60
.72
Shares outst
35,730,000
36,113,000
Yr sales
1,942,280,000
1,781,326,000
Net inc
b32,334,000
c87,814,000
Share earns
.95
2.54
Shares outst
34,114,000
36,110,000


Shipshaped By Starck
LEAD: PHILIPPE STARCK does not just design furniture, hotels and pasta.
Since 1985, he has been designing sailboat interiors for Beneteau of St.-Hilaire-de-Riez, France.
Last week at the New York Boat Show, the 35s5 became Mr.
Starck's first boat to be introduced to the United States.


First Federal S.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S.C.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,435,000
1,366,000
Per share
.30
.29
Shares outst
4,739,000
4,705,000
6mo net inc
1,079,000
2,612,000
Per share
.23
.55
Shares outst
4,759,000
4,715,000


10 FARM WORKERS DIE IN VAN PLUNGE
LEAD: A van carrying farm workers plunged off a curve and into a canal in heavy fog here this morning, drowning 10 migrants from Mexico.


Bush to Seek $1.2 Billion For a Bigger Drug War
LEAD: As part of an additional $1.2 billion he proposes to add to the nation's budget for the war on drugs, President Bush plans a 50 percent increase in money for the military to intensify efforts to halt international drug smuggling.


Grady L. Huffman, 72, A Texas Lawbreaker
LEAD: Grady Lee Huffman, who was shot 17 times in 30 years of robberies, burglaries and prison escapes, died of cancer Tuesday.
He was 72 years old.


For Keeping Up With the Joneses, A Dual-Career Pair
LEAD: By their houses, ye shall know them.


Yields' Slide Is Slowed
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday, but the decline was not as steep as a week ago.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This vote is a referendum on human rights that will be heard around the world.''
- Representative William S. Broomfield, on a measure to protect Chinese students from deportation. [A1:4.]


New Loans Seen for Mexico
LEAD: The World Bank could lend Mexico more than $7 billion over the next three years, the bank's president, Barber B. Conable Jr., said today.


U.S. Deficit Up in Month
LEAD: The Federal budget deficit increased $14.64 billion in December, bringing the deficit total so far this fiscal year to more than two-thirds the amount permitted for the entire year, the Treasury Department said Tuesday.


Interchange Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interchange Financial Svcs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
741,979
779,524
Per share
.38
.39
Year net inc
3,060,231
2,901,050
Per share
1.54
1.44
The 1989 per share earnings reflected preferred stock dividend requirements.


Gotti Jury Hears 'Boss' on Secret Tape
LEAD: A Manhattan jury yesterday began hearing John Gotti's secretly recorded conversations - words that prosecutors contend prove he is the nation's top organized-crime leader.


Sihanouk Quits Opposition Post And Severs Ties to Peace Process
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the leader of the Cambodian opposition and probably a key figure in any resolution of his country's conflict, said today that he would resign as head of the exile government and withdraw from future discussions on a peaceful settlement in Cambodia.


Seacoast Banking-Fla.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seacoast Banking-Fla.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,173,000
1,160,000
Per share
.33
.33
Year net inc
4,498,000
4,497,000
Per share
1.28
1.28


Review/Cabaret;   Anecdotes Amid the Singing
LEAD: Arthur Siegel is one of perhaps a handful of people who know that a particular Jerome Kern melody was set with two lyrics, one by Otto Harbach in 1931 and the other by Dorothy Fields 20 years later.
The Harbach version, ''Don't Ask Me Not to Sing,'' is an amusing comic number dropped from the show ''The Cat and the Fiddle,'' while the Fields version, ''Opening Night,'' which presents a sardonically funny list of things that can go wrong at a show's Broadway opening, was written for the movie ''Lovely to Look


S.I. Man, 44 Stabbed Dead On His Beach
LEAD: A Vietnam War veteran suffering from emotional problems was hunted down and stabbed to death on a remote beach on Staten Island Monday night by two men because they thought he was a homosexual, the police said yesterday.


Sun Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,080,000,000
2,720,000,000
Net loss
b173,000,000
cd76,000,000
Share earns
-
.72
Shares outst
106,663,600
106,573,905
Yr rev
11,380,000,000
10,000,000,000
Net inc
b98,000,000
c7,000,000
Share earns
.92
.06
Shares outst
106,869,711
106,138,784


BUSH IS SET BACK BY HOUSE OVERRIDE OF VETO ON CHINA
LEAD: Handing President Bush a major defeat, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly reaffirmed legislation protecting Chinese students in the United States from deportation.
The Senate is expected to vote on Thursday, and the outcome is too close to predict.


Can Injured Humphrey Run?
LEAD: The cracked sixth and seventh ribs on Bobby Humphrey's left side, the focal point in the Denver Broncos' effort to present a balanced offense in Super Bowl XXIV, have improved enough that Humphrey can rest comfortably.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,432,000
2,896,000
Per share
.40
.47
Year net inc
10,732,000
b10,421,000
Per share
1.77
1.70
b-After a gain of $669,000, or 11 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
680,000,000
695,397,000
Net inc
69,000,000
85,110,000
Share earns
.65
.79
Shares outst
106,447,207
108,061,572
Yr sales
2,797,000,000
2,669,661,000
Net inc
281,000,000
319,123,000
Share earns
2.63
2.96
Shares outst
106,715,733
107,869,383


WAR OF NUMBERS ON BUDGET REOPENS
LEAD: Washington's annual war of numbers commenced officially today, with the Congressional Budget Office telling lawmakers they will have to find $74 billion in spending cuts or new tax revenue to reduce the 1991 deficit to the level required by law.


D. M. Bachmann, 55, A Retired Accountant
LEAD: Donald M. Bachmann, a retired certified public accountant and a former New York official, died, apparently of a heart attack, on Wednesday at his home in Sherman, Conn.
He was 55 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
623,200,000
594,600,000
Net inc
21,400,000
42,300,000
Share earns
.32
.64
Shares outst
66,609,000
66,534,000
Yr sales
2,660,900,000
2,535,000,000
Net inc
176,400,000
230,100,000
Share earns
2.65
3.46
Shares outst
66,593,000
66,561,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
Doremus &amp; Co. and Rifkind Pondel &amp; Parsons said yesterday that they had combined their Los Angeles-based financial advertising divisions, forming Doremus/Pondel &amp; Parsons.


Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cleveland-Cliffs Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
100,200,000
89,500,000
Net inc
b13,300,000
c6,900,000
Share earns
1.12
.59
Shares oust
11,700,000
11,600,000
Yr rev
372,400,000
317,500,000
Net inc
b60,600,000
c39,200,000
Share earns
5.20
2.86
Shares outst
11,600,000
13,200,000


Exide Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exide Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,310,000
33,169,000
Net inc
226,000
1,203,000
Share earns
.05
.29
Shares outst
4,462,000
4,127,000


Curb Weighed on Accounting Rules
LEAD: The Financial Accounting Foundation, the administrative body that oversees the establishment of accounting rules, is considering a new procedure in response to criticism that too many new rules have been issued.


Schools Chief Seeks Rise in Spending
LEAD: While New York City officials have urged him to scrimp, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez proposed yesterday a budget that calls for increasing spending by $483 million, in part to hire more than 1,200 new teachers and guidance counselors and to repair decaying schools.


Browning-Ferris reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Browning-Ferris (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
715,451,000
583,207,000
Net inc
66,510,000
59,650,000
Share earns
.44
.40
Shares outst
152,225,000
150,524,000


Claire McGlinchee, Professor, 91
LEAD: Claire McGlinchee, emeritus professor of English at Hunter College, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old.
Dr.
McGlinchee, a graduate of Radcliffe College and a Shakespearean scholar, came to the college as an assistant instructor of English in 1924 and retired in 1969.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
530,014,000
461,703,000
Net inc
15,468,000
9,831,000
Share earns
1.00
.64
9mo rev
1,515,954,000
1,358,486,000
Net inc
46,376,000
26,873,000
Share earns
3.01
1.77


Jackson Finds Ailing Knicks 'Not in Sync'
LEAD: The day after watching the Los Angeles Lakers embarrass his Knicks, Stu Jackson was looking for solutions to end the Knicks' four-game losing steak.


Market Place;   'Junk' Forecast: Wide Premiums
LEAD: A RECENT study by a bond research organization concluded that ''junk bond'' interest rates would have to remain 5.3 percentage points above Treasury yields to reward investors fairly for the high risk of default.


U S West Posted Increase Of 26.8% in Fourth Quarter
LEAD: U S West Inc., the regional telephone holding company based in Denver, said yesterday that its fourth-quarter profits rose 26.8 percent over the comparable 1988 period.


Notebook;   Elite System Suffers a Setbacks
LEAD: The changes that have swept through the East German sports system since December reached the national Olympic committee earlier this month, when Manfred Ewald, the committee president, and Rudolf Hellmann, a vice president and former Communist party leader for sports, resigned under pressure.


Firstbank of Illinois reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstbank of Illinois (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,882,000
2,382,000
Per share
.53
.44
Year net inc
10,696,000
b5,430,000
Per share
1.98
1.02
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $3,068,000.


Three Officers Are Charged In Thefts of Cash and Drugs
LEAD: Three police officers and four other men were charged in a Federal indictment today with plotting to steal more than $1 million in cash, 110 pounds of cocaine and a ton of marijuana from drug dealers.


Banks of Mid-America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Mid-America (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
4,389,000
b1,431,000
Per share
-
.19
Shares outst
8,684,000
7,609,000
Year net inc
1,120,000
c21,968,000
Per share
.13
-
Shares outst
8,684,000
2,617,000


Franklin Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
230,917
1,304
Per share
.24
-
6mo net inc
382,721
142,551
Per share
.40
.15
Per share earnings for year-ago quarter was less than 1 cent a share.


3 Youths Held In Wounding Of an Officer
LEAD: A 15-year-old was charged yesterday with attempted murder in the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Brooklyn.
The police said the youth and two friends attacked the officer because one of them needed $20 to join a basketball league.


President's News Conference on Foreign and Domestic Issues
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:
OPENING STATEMENT


Hunt Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hunt Manufacturing Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 3
1989
1988
Sales
54,548,000
47,773,000
Net inc
5,005,000
4,565,000
Share earns
.31
.29
Shares outst
16,096,000
16,059,000
Yr sales
203,444,000
178,755,000
Net inc
18,804,000
16,167,000
Share earns
1.17
1.01
Shares outst
16,080,000
16,059,000


For 'Fur People'
LEAD: IN 1986, Lady Slipper Designs in Bemidji, Minn., a cottage industry that provides jobs for low-income people, introduced the American Birdhouse Collection, and birds were finally able to perch on miniature Victorian, Greek Revival or Georgian houses.


Preferred Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preferred Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,800,000
342,000
6mo net loss
4,700,000
288,000
The bank said that the primary reason for the loss in the latest quarter was additional provisions for losses on loans, real estate and investments totaling $3 million.


Vanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanfed Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
299,000
276,000
Per share
.26
-
Year net inc
726,000
1,093,000
Per share
.63
-
Shares outst
1,150,000
-
Per share earnings for year-ago periods were not available; company went public in January 1989.


Battle Lines Are Shifting on Women in War
LEAD: Many of the women on this Army post in central Texas were baffled and a bit annoyed to see Capt.
Linda L. Bray lionized on television screens during the invasion of Panama.
When Captain Bray led a military police unit into combat while conducting her mission, they insist, she was just doing her job.


Baker Hughes Profit Up
LEAD: Baker Hughes Inc., an oil tool maker, posted a 45.9 percent gain in quarterly profits, despite a worldwide decrease in drilling activity, the company announced today.
Earnings for the three months ended Dec. 31, the company's first quarter, were $25.4 million, or 20 cents a share, on revenue of $578.9 million, compared with earnings of $17.4 million, or 13 cents a share, on revenue of $566.3 million a year earlier.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 10
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 10
1990
1989
Sales
2,975,993,000
2,782,004,000
Net inc
41,785,000
34,578,000
Share earns
1.05
.87
Shares outst
39,643,097
40,072,536
6mo sales
5,145,612,000
4,811,186,000
Net inc
66,837,000
54,784,000
Share earns
1.68
1.37
Shares outst
39,736,095
40,054,755


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about the seizure of Communist Party assets in Rumania included two incorrect figures provided by an interpreter for the new Government at a news conference.
The Government said the annual output of 60 industrial enterprises owned by the party was 16 billion lei, not 60 billion lei.


Rewriting Auction Records
LEAD: IN 1989, defying reports of a softening economy, many antiques and collectibles enthusiasts paid record prices for the rarest works, some with choice pedigrees, in the booming auction market.


Wesbanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wesbanco Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,974,000
2,068,000
Per share
.56
.64
Year net inc
8,512,000
7,578,000
Per share
3.55
3.16


North Fork Bancorporation reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* North Fork Bancorporation (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,556,000
5,523,000
Per share
.60
.60
Year net inc
20,866,000
14,661,000
Per share
2.25
2.13


Noriega's Trial Not Like North's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Short-Term Gains Tax Draws Bentsen's Interest
LEAD: In the first indication of how Democrats would reshape President Bush's proposal to cut capital gains taxes, Senator Lloyd Bentsen said today that raising the tax rate for short-term capital gains, to discourage investors from selling assets to realize quick profits, appealed to him.


Schering-Plough Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
776,900,000
739,900,000
Net inc
111,100,000
92,900,000
Share earns
.98
.83
Yr sales
3,157,900,000
2,969,400,000
Net inc
471,300,000
389,800,000
Share earns
4.18
3.48
Shares outst
112,800,000
112,100,000


Spoleto Festival to Offer Mozart, Verdi and Glass
LEAD: The Festival of Two Worlds at Spoleto this summer is to feature productions of classical and modern music ranging from Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' to Philip Glass's ''Hydrogen Jukebox,'' the organizers said on Tuesday.


Despite Moscow's Warning, Teheran Increases Coverage of Turmoil
LEAD: Despite a sharp warning from Moscow to keep a distance from the conflict in Azerbaijan, the official Iranian press agency increased its reporting on the situation today with a dispatch saying that Soviet Azerbaijanis were building a new bridge across the Araks River, which forms the Soviet-Iranian border.


Personal Health
LEAD: Before she was thrown from a horse more than 12 years ago, Janet Reed was an active sportswoman and an administrator for the National Industries for the Severely Handicapped.
Since then she has been paralyzed from the waist down and must use a wheelchair.


Generosity Begets Charity, and Neediest Benefit
LEAD: ''Here is my check for $1,000. Wish I were Paul Newman.''


Super Bowl Drug Testing Tightened


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,546,000
4,804,000
Per share
.58
.63
Year net inc
16,156,000
14,322,000
Per share
2.06
1.91


Looking for a Solution


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Union Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
334,432,000
297,761,000
Net inc
30,501,000
31,168,000
Share earns
1.22
1.28
Shares outst
24,281,000
23,580,000


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
574,112,000
527,995,000
Net inc
46,060,000
c63,323,000
Share earns
.42
.58
Yr rev
2,206,288,000
2,079,248,000
Net inc
b209,083,000
c233,922,000
Share earns
1.92
2.15


2 Exchanges Might Merge
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange and the Commodity Exchange Inc. said yesterday that they were exploring a merger.


Idea in Albany: A No-Fault Plan For Malpractice
LEAD: The New York State Health Commissioner, Dr.
David Axelrod, floated the novel concept of no-fault medical malpractice insurance today, saying it would compensate malpractice victims more fairly while protecting doctors from the trauma of litigation and skyrocketing insurance premiums.


FirstFed Michigan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFed Michigan Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,656,000
2,400,000
Per share
.69
.22
Year net inc
b22,525,000
c36,564,000
Per share
2.03
3.31
b-After an extraordinary gain of $12,016,000, or $1.08 a share, primarily from early retirement of Federal Home Loan Bank advances, less a charge of $934,000 from full redemption of First Federal's subordinated capital note issue.


Louisville Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisville Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
167,331,000
154,693,000
Net inc
2,276,000
10,460,000
Shares outst
21,002,000
20,582,697
Yr rev
676,900,000
659,682,000
Net inc
76,091,000
85,038,000
Shares outst
20,846,720
20,409,858


First Peoples Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Peoples Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,822,000
c4,020,000
Per share
1.00
1.30
Shares outst
2,788,000
3,068,000
Year net inc
b13,639,000
d17,003,000
Per share
4.64
5.24
Shares outst
2,898,000
3,207,000


Options Tables Are Incomplete
LEAD: The tables on Page D17 listing trading in stock options are incomplete.
The Associated Press said it had not received complete information from a number of options exchanges.


Beijing Journal;   With Fish as Bait, the Leaders Troll for Approval
LEAD: As one lunar year fades into another, the emblem of the holiday seems to be fish - live, frozen, bagged or wrapped in an old newspaper - and city dwellers carry packs of them on the fronts and backs of their bicycles, already weighed down by other bounty of the Chinese New Year.


Review/Television;   '48 Hours' On the Trail Of a Settled McCartney
LEAD: Try as it might, the CBS News team behind ''48 Hours'' cannot turn its coverage of Paul McCartney's current tour into an update of ''A Hard Day's Night.'' The 90-minute program, to be broadcast tonight at 8 on CBS, searches out some of the same ingredients as Richard Lester's 1964 film: eager fans, backstage drollery, limousines, applause.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article from Prague yesterday about an offer of the city as the site of the next Soviet-American summit meeting omitted a phrase.
The last paragraph should have read: ''Czechoslovakia began negotiations with the Soviet Union on Jan. 15 on a withdrawal of the 70,000 to 75,000 Soviet troops that have been stationed here since the Warsaw Pact invasion of the country in 1968.


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,961,000,000
1,825,000,000
Net inc
139,000,000
121,000,000
Share earns
.47
.41
Shares outst
284,000,000
279,000,000
Yr sales
7,399,000,000
6,861,000,000
Net inc
446,000,000
388,000,000
Share earns
1.50
1.31
Shares outst
282,000,000
277,000,000


Skaneateles Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Skaneateles Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b399,000
405,000
Per share
.39
.40
Year net inc
c275,000
c1,480,000
Per share
.27
1.45
b-Included a pre-tax gain of $6,000 on the sale of securities.


Kerkhoff Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerkhoff Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,248,000
3,103,000
Net loss
320,000
46,000
6mo rev
8,270,000
9,860,000
Net loss
278,000
b877,000
Share earns
-
.30
b-Net income and after an extraordinary credit of $356,000, or 12 cents a share.


Protesters Occupy the Communist Party Headquarters in Warsaw
LEAD: As protesters occupied Communist Party buildings to demand that they be taken over by the state, more than 100 members of the Polish Parliament rallied today behind proposed legislation that would seize Communist Party property and turn it over to the state.


Soviet Minorities Undeterred by Strife
LEAD: Leaders of nationalist independence movements from the Baltic Sea to the Ukraine to Soviet Central Asia say their campaigns for greater liberty from Moscow will continue undeterred by upheavals in Azerbaijan, where Soviet troops are struggling to contain an insurgency.


Trustcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustcorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b32,200,000
38,260,000
Year net loss
c104,100,000
d1,300,000
b-Included charges of $22 million to recognize one-time expenses, incurred in connection with the merger with Society Corp., for severance costs, and the writeoff of computer software, operating systems and signage made obsolete by the integration of the two companies and other matters.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: * Jonathan Harries has been named a creative director at Leo Burnett Company.


'Non-Real' House For TV
LEAD: ON ''House Party,'' an NBC-TV show of cooking, fashion and decorating tips, ''the stars are known by the furniture they keep,'' said Eugene Lee, the show's set designer.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Paint on the Carpet
Q.
I spilled latex flat paint on my acrylic carpet and cannot remove the stains.
I tried soap and water as recommended on the can, but it didn't work.
Can you help?
A.
Depending on how old the dried paint is, you may be able to soften it with a solution of hot water and detergent.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A FEW months ago Eileen Seeley broke up with the man she had been dating.
Her 6-year-old daughter, Brianna, who had become quite attached to the man and his two young children, was very upset.


Lebanese Discuss Replacing Syrian Troops in West Beirut
LEAD: Fighting broke out on two fronts in Beirut today as the Government of President Elias Hrawi discussed plans for having Lebanese Army troops replace Syrian soldiers on patrol in the Muslim western half of the city.


A Commuter Rail Link to Kennedy Airport Still Makes Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prado Opens the Largest Show Of Velazquez's Work Ever Held
LEAD: In the presence of King Juan Carlos and with more than a nod of gratitude for help provided by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, the Prado Museum this week opened the largest exhibition of paintings by Velazquez ever held.


Compression Labs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Compression Labs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,974,000
5,922,000
Net inc
469,000
284,000
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
9,093,000
7,774,000
Yr rev
29,197,000
21,402,000
Net inc
901,000
304,000
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
9,063,000
7,953,000


Waterford Workers To Protest Plans
LEAD: Waterford's 2,300 crystal employees plan to hold three work stoppages this week to dispute management cost-cutting proposals for their company.
The workers, who agreed six months ago to a three-year wage freeze, said the two-hour stoppages would protest what they said was Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C.


Fame, Then Silence and Death: Isaac Babel's Daughter Reflects
LEAD: ''It is not easy, being the daughter of Isaac Babel,'' Nathalie Babel Brown, the only child of the celebrated Soviet author, said the other day. ''The children of famous people always have it a little difficult.
But in the case of Babel there is a special element: his life was such a complicated, tragic and historical event.


Fed Expects Slow Growth This Year
LEAD: The nation's economy is expected to grow slowly in 1990, with improvements in some regions later in the year, the Federal Reserve Board said today.


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,731,963
7,644,990
Per share
.65
.65
Shares outst
11,866,497
11,690,294
Year net inc
29,686,049
26,510,284
Per share
2.50
2.27
Shares outst
11,866,497
11,690,294


Businessland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Businessland Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
375,028,000
301,339,000
Net loss
b1,209,000
c9,468,000
Share earns
-
.32
Shares outst
33,265,000
30,827,000
6mo sales
690,885,000
572,893,000
Net inc
b3,054,000
16,990,000
Share earns
.11
.58
Shares outst
33,913,000
30,652,000


Premier Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bankshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,204,000
1,243,000
Per share
.36
.36
Year net inc
5,052,000
4,939,000
Per share
1.49
1.43


Central Maine Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Maine Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
190,000,000
179,300,000
Net inc
15,400,000
4,100,000
Share earns
.57
.13
Yr rev
704,000,000
654,000,000
Net inc
48,600,000
45,800,000
Share earns
1.92
1.83
Shares outst
23,704,668
22,816,032


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Bloom Feels It's Arrived In New York
LEAD: THE Bloom Companies wants its name added to a very short list: out-of-town advertising agencies that have made it in New York.


Roosevelt Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roosevelt Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,383,000
4,339,000
Per share
.24
.77
Year net inc
5,932,000
16,788,000
Per share
1.05
3.01


Exxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
26,550,000,000
23,041,000,000
Net inc
b785,000,000
1,380,000,000
Share earns
.61
1.06
Yr rev
96,076,000,000
88,563,000,000
Net inc
3,810,000,000
5,260,000,000
Share earns
2.98
3.95


Iraq Pledge on Oil Quota
LEAD: Iraq's oil minister, Issam Abdul-Rahim al-Chalaby, pledged in remarks published Tuesday that Iraq was committed to its OPEC supply quota of 3.14 million barrels a day despite the expansion of its oil-shipping capacity.
He told The Baghdad Observer that Iraq's export capacity was about 5 million barrels a day.


Key Centurion Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Key Centurion Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,909,000
5,390,000
Per share
.28
.26
Year net inc
24,604,000
22,800,000
Per share
1.20
1.10
Results reflected the addition of First National Co., Pikeville, Ky., from July 1989 and Guyan National Bank, Barboursville, W.


Qintex Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qintex Entertainment Inc. (OTC)
Year to July 31
1989
1988
Revenue
85,714,000
-
Net loss
33,168,000
-
Prior-year figures are not directly comparable.
The company said adjustments for events related to its Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing in October increased its year-end loss by about $27,000,000.


An Exercise in Introspection Lets Goldman Bare Its Soul
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the largest private partnership left on Wall Street, has a stellar reputation and a prestigious list of corporate clients.


After Frigid December, A Warm January, Alas
LEAD: On the University of Chicago campus, ranks of ice sculptures carved for the school's annual Winter Festival are melting slowly into January's mud, and plans to build a giant snow house have been called off.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Owens-Corning Fiberglas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
871,000,000
704,000,000
Net inc
b46,000,000
58,000,000
Share earns
1.09
1.37
Yr sales
3,000,000,000
2,831,000,000
Net inc
172,000,000
189,000,000
Share earns
4.08
4.51
Shares outst
42,170,000
41,856,000


New Biography, New Debates on Jackson Pollock
LEAD: The troubled life of Jackson Pollock, a hero of Abstract Expressionism, is once again haunting his family and friends.
His world, his art and his psyche have been relentlessly explored in a new biography, ''Jackson Pollock: An American Saga,'' by Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith, which has already sparked a lawsuit.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
from '88
American Express Co.
$ 257,200,000
+11.3
Baker Hughes Inc.
25,400,000
+46.0
Baxter International Inc.
139,000,000
+14.9
Birmingham Steel Corp.
3,500,000
-66.0
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.
(352,700,000)
-
Browning-Ferris Industries
66,500,000
+11.4
Cleveland-Cliffs Inc.


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
138,374,000
119,407,000
Net loss
1,661,000
c5,291,000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr rev
546,870,000
378,908,000
Net loss
b24,892,000
c24,702,000
Share earns
-
.60


Scientists Link a Defective Gene To a Leading Cause of Blindness
LEAD: A team of scientists in Boston has discovered a defective gene that results in one form of retinitis pigmentosa, an inherited disorder that is a leading cause of blindness.


First Northern Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Northern Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
499,388
660,481
Per share
.41
.54
Year net inc
b1,938,139
c2,447,914
Per share
1.57
2.00
b-Included $76,500 of pre-tax costs from forming a holding company.


Poisoning Chances for Mideast Peace
LEAD: If Israeli and Palestinian leaders really want to explore the possibilities of peace, they know how.
All they have to do is stop making demands they know the other side cannot accept.


Leo's Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leo's Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,261,000
18,614,000
Net inc
1,926,000
393,000
Share earns
.47
.10
9mo rev
62,339,000
49,218,000
Net inc
3,733,000
944,000
Share earns
.92
.23


Elbows Off the Table, Please
LEAD: IN 1956, Walter Hoving, then the president of Tiffany &amp; Company, decided to teach his customers the art of table setting, or how not to be afraid of a fish knife.
That year, the first table-setting show was held at the Fifth Avenue store, commencing a series that has become legend.


Savings Rescue Cost Seen Rising
LEAD: The $50 billion committed by the Government to rescue depositors at failed savings institutions will run out by mid-1991 and taxpayers will need to supply additional money, L. William Seidman, chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, told Congress today.


Haiti About-Face: General 'Looking Like Dictator'
LEAD: After 16 months of tentative hope for democracy, Haiti appears to be slipping back into dictatorship.


Commonwealth Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Bancshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,661,000
2,564,000
Per share
.59
.42
Shares outst
6,229,695
6,241,956
Year net inc
12,714,000
10,115,000
Per share
2.04
1.61
Shares outst
6,231,992
6,298,457


Televideo Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Televideo Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
14,102,000
17,113,000
Net loss
b8,993,000
c18,616,000
Yr sales
47,419,000
77,869,000
Net loss
b25,976,000
c39,640,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $2,900,000 and $3,169,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


East German Police Have Demands of Their Own


Earnings Drop At Du Pont
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said today that its fourth-quarter earnings dropped 3.4 percent, prompting some analysts to lower expectations of the company's 1990 results.


A New Yankee Stadium Is Proposed in the Bronx
LEAD: The Bronx Borough President proposed yesterday that the city and state build a new stadium for the New York Yankees at Ferry Point Park, a 414-acre site at the north end of the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge.


Pentagon Freezing Construction As Bush Reviews Arms Priorities
LEAD: The Pentagon today imposed a three-month freeze on military construction, and President Bush said he would submit a new budget to Congress next week that would begin to ''restructure America's defenses in the wake of the dramatic changes'' in Europe.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
Probation for Secord


Sun Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Microsystems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
595,366,000
448,281,000
Net inc
20,197,000
29,509,000
Share earns
.23
.36
Shares outst
92,865,000
83,559,000
6mo rev
1,133,877,000
836,750,000
Net inc
25,382,000
50,072,000
Share earns
.30
.63
Shares outst
92,411,000
82,821,000


Dynatech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynatech Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
111,728,000
98,038,000
Net inc
2,473,000
5,139,000
Share earns
.24
.42
Shares outst
10,178,000
12,332,000
9mo sales
316,589,000
301,263,000
Net inc
10,443,000
18,490,000
Share earns
1.00
1.50
Shares outst
10,436,000
12,326,000


Arkansas Stops Texas To Gain First Place
LEAD: Oliver Miller scored 8 of his 19 points down the stretch and Todd Day had a career-high 34 points as sixth-ranked Arkansas held off Texas, 109-100, tonight and took over first place in the Southwest Conference.


Citicorp Floating Securities Are Backed by Credit Cards
LEAD: Citicorp yesterday priced the first-ever issue of floating-rate securities backed by credit card receivables.
The bank holding company, the largest issuer in the $20 billion, three-year-old market for credit-card-backed securities, is offering $700 million of the new floating issue through the Money Market Credit Card Trust 1989-1.


A New Bullock's
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company said it would open a 240,000-square-foot Bullock's department store in the Regional Shopping Center complex in Burbank, Calif.
The new Bullock's, the first in Burbank, will open in the fall of 1992.
Macy's said that the new store was part of a commitment to expand the Bullock's chain in Southern California and that it was among seven new stores Macy's plans to open in the next four years.


Cooney on New Track
LEAD: Gerry Cooney, who retired from boxing after being knocked out by George Foreman 11 days ago, has applied for a license to own race horses in New York State.


Pacts for 2 More
LEAD: Ted Higuera of the Milwaukee Brewers and Glenn Davis of the Houston Astros reached agreements yesterday on 1990 salaries.


At Least 24 Are Killed in Floods in Tunisia
LEAD: At least 24 people have died, 32 are missing and thousands are homeless from flooding this week in Tunisia, the official press agency reported today.


Awards Are Given for Broadcast News
LEAD: ''Frontline,'' the public-television documentary series, won the Gold Baton, the highest of the Alfred I. du Pont-Columbia University Awards for broadcast journalism, last night in the annual presentation at Low Library at Columbia University.
Three network news divisions, CBS, ABC and CNN, won Silver Batons, for their coverage of the Chinese student rebellion last


NBC Marketing
LEAD: NBC-TV said yesterday that it was consolidating its varied marketing activities.
The effort will be headed by John Miller, who was promoted to executive vice president for marketing.
Mr.
Miller will retain responsibility for the advertising and promotion for the network's entertainment, news and sports divisions.


Review/Art;   Exploring the Connections In a Multi-Faceted Career
LEAD: The retrospective of about 50 of Alan Saret's works at the P.S. 1 Museum in Queens is organized by Alanna Heiss and Chris Dercon to honor someone who has been in many ways unjustly neglected over the last 25 years, although it is difficult to say whether the show does this artist more good than harm.


I.C.H. to Make Offer For First Executive
LEAD: The I.C.H.
Corporation said today that it would form a group to make an offer for the First Executive Corporation, the insurance company stung last week by a huge write-off in its ''junk bond'' portfolio.


Upheaval in the East: European Community;   Britain Proposes Closer U.S. Ties
LEAD: Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd today proposed a stepped-up schedule of consultations between ministers of the 12 European Community countries and United States officials as part of what he called ''a new consultative partnership'' to deal with rapid change in Eastern and Western Europe.


Foreign Investing in U.S. Helps, Greenspan Says
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, told Congress today that foreign investment in the United States spurred competition and new technology.
He characterized as overblown concerns about a surge of foreign money invested in the United States.


Fox Broadcasting to Seek Syndication Rules Change
LEAD: In a break with other Hollywood studios, the 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation's Fox Broadcasting unit plans to ask the Federal Communications Commission to change the regulations that have prevented networks from maintaining a financial interest in the programs they broadcast, the studio's chairman, Barry


Accounts
LEAD: *
Greek National Tourist Organization, to Kaufman &amp; Maraffi, from Scali, McCabe, Sloves, for its United States advertising, with a budget of $2.5 million.


Review/Art;   Minimalism On the March: More and More Less and Less
LEAD: MINIMAL ART, that paragon of 1960's modernism, has never completely dropped from view, but right now it is so omnipresent that it looks like the flavor of the month.
In numerous galleries, most of them in SoHo, Minimalism's simplified forms and surfaces are visible in various guises, phases and degrees of originality - and from different generations.


Shed Light in All Corners of Academic Tenure;   Sloppy Work
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ignorance Isn't Bliss in Patent Office Post
LEAD: To the Editor:


Torchmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
51,309,000
39,730,000
Share earns
.95
.70
Yr net inc
211,308,000
182,406,000
Share earns
3.88
3.15
Results included realized investment gains and losses.


Energy Project Imperils a Rain Forest
LEAD: Bulldozers and drill platforms have come here to the Wao Kele O Puna, the last big tropical rain forest in the United States, where a showdown over the fate of this jungle may ultimately determine the fate of modern Hawaii as well.


Federated Recants on Retiree Discounts
LEAD: Thousands of retired employees of the nine retail chains owned by Federated Stores Inc. lost their discounts of 20 to 40 percent when the stores filed for bankruptcy protection last week.
It was one of the first cutbacks made after the bankruptcy filing.


Dow Jones Profit Declines by 7.4%
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, the financial information provider that publishes The Wall Street Journal, said yesterday that its profit fell 7.4 percent in the fourth quarter.


Shed Light in All Corners of Academic Tenure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lotus Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lotus Development Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
149,958,000
112,377,000
Net inc
b29,414,000
8,988,000
Share earns
.69
.21
Yr rev
556,033,000
468,547,000
Net inc
67,961,000
58,925,000
Share earns
1.61
1.29
Shares outst
42,301,000
45,551,000


4 Indian Servicemen Killed in Kashmir
LEAD: Militant separatists here shot and killed four Indian Air Force men and wounded nine today, and the Indian Army took control of this capital of the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir.


Coppola and Company File for Bankruptcy
LEAD: Francis Coppola and Zoetrope Productions, a wholy owned subsidiary of his Zoetrope Corporation, filed for Chapter 11 protection in a Santa Rosa, Calif., bankruptcy court this morning.


Interlake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interlake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
222,449,000
245,217,000
Net inc
414,000
12,633,000
Share earns
.04
1.22
Yr sales
912,894,000
892,218,000
Net inc
965,000
39,554,000
Share earns
.09
3.75


Selling Autos by Selling Safety
LEAD: After years of insisting that safety features do not sell cars, auto makers have noticed that many prospective buyers think differently.
Suddenly, many car ads talk of little else.


No Headline
LEAD: It has been eight years since a State Superior Court judge ruled that the overcrowding at the Hudson County Jail here was unconstitutional and ordered a new jail built.


Douglas Reid Brash, Investment Banker, 66
LEAD: Douglas Reid Brash, a retired investment banker, died of cardiac arrest on Wednesday at his home in Essex, Conn.
He was 66 years old and lived in Essex and Point O'Woods, L.I.


Lin Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lin Broadcasting (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
69,913,000
62,660,000
Net loss
15,005,000
b25,944,000
Share earns
-
.49
Shares outst
53,480,000
53,229,000
Yr rev
250,748,000
225,535,000
Net inc
57,366,000
82,121,000
Share earns
1.07
1.54
Shares outst
53,414,000
53,461,000


Mitsui Bank Joins in U.S. Buyout Fund
LEAD: The Mitsui Bank, which started a modestly successful mergers and acquisition team in New York four years ago, announced yesterday that it had formed a relationship with the Carlyle Group, a Washington-based merchant banking firm.


Dresser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dresser Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,087,700,000
973,200,000
Net inc
b67,900,000
c46,300,000
Share earns
1.01
.89
Shares outst
67,700,000
67,200,000
Yr sales
3,956,100,000
3,941,700,000
Net inc
b170,000,000
c156,800,000
Share earns
2.52
2.27
Shares outst
67,500,000
69,100,000


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Preferred Stock


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
4 Share Lead in Phoenix Open
Bobby Wadkins made the most of his early starting time, shot a six-under-par 65 and held one-fourth of the lead after the first round yesterday in the Phoenix Open in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Also in the lead were Lance Ten Broeck, Tommy Armour 3d and Tom Purtzer.


Ruth Jaeger, Psychoanalyst, 89
LEAD: Dr.
Ruth Jaeger, one of the first American women to practice psychoanalysis, died of a heart attack yesterday at Middlesex Memorial Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
She was 89 years old and lived in Middletown.


Another Wasted Chance for Rangers
LEAD: Bernie Nicholls, with a couple of lightning snaps of his wrists just a minute and a half apart, had turned what looked to be a 6-3 rout into a 6-5 slugfest against the Calgary Flames.
The Rangers, who for much of the season wouldn't have had a prayer of rebounding from such a deficit, now had a chance.


Chrysler Buys Olympics Time
LEAD: CBS said yesterday that the Chrysler Corporation had made the first purchase of time for the network's coverage of the 1992 and 1994 Winter Olympics.


Harman International Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harman International Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
145,039,000
142,638,000
Net inc
4,825,000
4,607,000
Share earns
.55
.53
6mo sales
263,001,000
254,964,000
Net inc
8,254,000
7,786,000
Share earns
.95
.90


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I now consider it necessary in the national interest for the African National Congress and the Government to meet urgently to negotiate an effective political settlement.''
- Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress.
[A6:4.]


Review/Recital;   Ukrainian Violinist Returns To Carnegie After 19 Years
LEAD: When Alfred Schnittke wrote the solo work ''A Paganini'' in 1982 for the Ukrainian violinist Oleg Krysa, he was obviously banking on a brilliant technique matched by a fiery and rather quirky temperament.
Mr.
Krysa's Carnegie Hall recital on Sunday afternoon, complete with a gripping performance of ''A Paganini,'' triumphantly bore out Mr.


D&amp;N Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* D&amp;N Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
11,711,000
b2,644,000
Share earns
-
.72
Yr net loss
9,421,000
b13,332,000
Share earns
-
3.65
b-Net income


FLUORIDE HELD CLUE TO CANCER IN RATS
LEAD: Researchers have found preliminary evidence that fluoride causes cancer in male rats, Federal officials said today.
But they cautioned that the study did not suggest that the fluoride in water and toothpaste would cause cancer.


Burnham Pacific Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burnham Pacific Properties (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
20,356,000
13,064,000
Net inc
b6,147,000
996,000
Share earns
1.07
.31
Shares outst
5,749,000
3,234,000
b-Included a one-time capital gain of $2,611,000 resulting from the sale and exchange of the Town &amp; Country shopping center.


Benefits Approved for Koch Officials Under Eased Severance Rules
LEAD: Severance benefits as high as $80,000 have been approved for dozens of senior officials in the administration of former Mayor Edward I. Koch under personnel rules liberalized by Mr.
Koch four years ago.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Flu Epidemic Declared
An epidemic of influenza, predominantly the strain A-Shanghai, has been identified in 35 states and is the most widespread outbreak since the winter of 1984-85.
Page A14.
More Bases May Be Shut
The Pentagon is considering closing some of the nation's largest military bases and making deep cuts in the National Guard and reserves of virtually every state.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums ''THE SNOW QUEEN,'' a show by Puppetworks, noon on Saturdays and 1 and 3 P.M. on Sundays, through Feb. 25, at the group's theater, 287 Third Avenue, at Carroll Street, Park Slope section, Brooklyn.
Children, $4; adults, $5.
Information: (718) 834-1828. ''THE FUNZAPOPPIN MAGIC SHOW,'' a show of magic, comedy and music, by Michael Taubenslag Productions, 1:30 P.M.


Peggy van Praagh; Ballerina, Teacher And Writer Was 79
LEAD: Peggy van Praagh, an English dancer, ballet mistress and teacher, died in Melbourne, Australia, on Jan. 15.
She was 79 years old and had been in poor health for several years.


Dinkins Courting Volunteer Lawyers
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said today that he wants the private sector to support New York City services, and will ask lawyers to volunteer to help reduce a backlog of more than 1,000 discrimination cases at the city's Human Rights Commission, and business executives to supplement drug education in public schools.


Niagara Mohawk Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Niagara Mohawk Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
734,038,000
678,858,000
Net inc
9,068,000
b3,808,000
Shares outst
136,100,000
134,502,000
Yr rev
2,906,043,000
2,800,000,000
Net inc
150,601,000
159,657,000
Share earns
.78
1.21
Shares outst
136,052,000
131,853,000


Charles Goldstein, Postal Executive, 83
LEAD: Charles Goldstein, former operations director of the New York branch of the Postal Service, died of bone cancer on Tuesday at his home in Bloomfield, N.J.
He was 83 years old.


Olin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
600,000,000
623,000,000
Net inc
b31,000,000
c21,000,000
Share earns
1.50
1.01
Shares outst
19,200,000
20,600,000
Yr sales
2,509,000,000
2,308,000,000
Net inc
b124,000,000
c98,000,000
Share earns
6.02
4.63
Shares outst
20,000,000
21,100,000


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
SCHOENBERG'S WORLD


Dow Corning reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Corning
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
384,800,000
370,100,000
Net inc
40,900,000
38,400,000
Yr sales
1,575,000,000
1,477,000,000
Net inc
162,800,000
150,500,000
Dow Corning is a joint venture between Dow Chemical Co.


Alabama Tornado Injures 24
LEAD: A tornado swept through a trailer park here early today, injuring 24 people.
Among them was a boy who witnesses said was freed by a man who managed to lift the corner of the mobile home that had pinned the child down.
No deaths were reported from the tornado, which hit about 5:30 A.M., when most people were sleeping in this community 40 miles south of Montgomery.


Capital Inquiry Calls Some Barry Security Guards
LEAD: Several officers of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s security detail have been summoned by a Federal grand jury in a widening investigation of drug use and corruption centering on Mr.
Barry, Government officials said today.


Public Service Co of Colo.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co of Colo.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
423,429,000
413,932,000
Net inc
42,151,000
50,444,000
Share earns
.74
.90
Shares outst
52,749,000
52,458,000
Yr rev
1,740,666,000
1,685,290,000
Net inc
148,840,000
125,019,000
Share earns
2.59
2.14
Shares outst
52,559,000
52,457,000


Accord in Sweatshop Inquiries
LEAD: The New York State Labor Department and the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration agreed yesterday to swap information on violations found in sweatshops.
When raiding illegal factories, the Labor Department frequently finds life-threatening conditions involving violations of building or fire codes.


Same Stage, Old Drive, New Role
LEAD: In some ways, he was a defensive version of John Elway in Bronco orange and blue.
During the consecutive seasons that ended with Super Bowl appearances, Karl Mecklenburg was an All-Pro-caliber player with skills that made him the most noticeable part of his unit.


President-Elect of Brazil Pushing Free-Market Ideas
LEAD: Beginning a nine-nation tour to put a ''new face'' on Brazil, the country's president-elect, Fernando Collor de Mello, vowed in New York yesterday to restore growth to Latin America's largest economy through privatization, fiscal discipline and debt relief.


1991 Budget Appears in Print


P.&amp;G.'s Net Up 7.7% in Quarter
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said today that its second-quarter earnings rose by 7.7 percent.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ABB Asea Brown Boveri A.G., the Swiss-Swedish engineering group, said it had put two U.S. subsidiaries, Georgia Kaolin Co. and C-E Minerals, up for sale.
ABB acquired the mineral companies as part of its purchase of Combustion Engineering Inc. last year.


A.T.&amp; T. Has a Profit; Nynex Reports Loss
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday reported strong profits for its fourth quarter, helped by cost-cutting measures, the removal of two important regulatory restrictions and modest revenue growth.


Sonat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
446,582,000
363,307,000
Net inc
23,131,000
11,667,000
Share earns
.56
.29
Yr rev
1,778,461,000
1,392,384,000
Net inc
b108,978,000
c97,804,000
Share earns
2.67
2.41


Shed Light in All Corners of Academic Tenure;   Harvard Law Furor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Death of a 'Lost Soul': A Gentle Man Is Killed in His Sanctuary
LEAD: All along the quiet, rundown streets of Charleston, S.I., Michael Taylor and Phillip Sarlo have a reputation for being troublemakers, heavy beer drinkers who start fistfights.
One of their favorite targets of ridicule, neighbors say, was James Zappalorti, a 44-year-old emotionally disturbed man.
They harassed him, the residents say, because they believed he was gay.


B.C. Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* B.C. Telephone
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
459,700,000
425,200,000
Net inc
b57,600,000
c43,400,000
Share earns
.52
.39
Shares outst
103,453,000
100,556,000
Yr rev
1,689,600,000
1,634,800,000
Net inc
b181,000,000
c160,600,000
Share earns
1.62
1.45
Shares outst
102,098,000
99,852,000


Southdown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southdown Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
140,644,000
145,806,000
Net inc
b40,883,000
c13,648,000
Share earns
2.31
.73
Shares outst
17,027,000
16,558,000
Yr rev
592,516,000
543,354,000
Net inc
b67,987,000
c56,660,000
Share earns
3.66
3.72
Shares outst
16,854,000
14,153,000


Topics of The Times;   Customs, Customized
LEAD: Some 58,000 Californians who brought home trinkets from foreign travels last year are understandably furious at learning, after the fact, that they owe a 6.5 percent use tax.
They are also learning the rigors of life in the age of computers.


LAW: At the Bar;   Of life, limb and the pursuit of unhappiness: An injury lawyer's exchange.
LEAD: Ever represent anyone who's been thrown out of a Hovercraft or who's slipped on some terrazzo stairs?
Has any client been forced at gunpoint to withdraw money from a cash machine?
Or has a client been bitten by a hog and lost a leg?
If so, your fellow lawyers are looking for you.


Upheaval in the East: Tokyo;   Japanese Leader's Europe Trip Missed Mark
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu returned from a trip to Poland, Hungary and Western Europe last week saying Japan had lived up to its new international responsibilities as an economic superpower by offering nearly $2 billion in financial aid to support democracy in Eastern Europe.


BLAMING U.S., CUBA SUSPENDS PULLOUT
LEAD: Blaming the United States for a rebel attack on Cuban troops in Angola, Havana said today that it was temporarily suspending its troop withdrawal.


New-Music Ensemble
LEAD: Composer's Circle, a newly formed ensemble specializing in new music, is to make its New York debut at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, on Sunday at 2 P.M.
The program includes the premieres of sacred choral works by Blake Rowe, Philip Benson and Chandler Carter.
Tickets are $5.


Police Say Bias Crime Declines in New York
LEAD: The Police Department said yesterday that bias crimes in New York City decreased slightly from 1988 to 1989, but officials said gay-related bias crimes increased slightly.


American Telephone &amp; Teleraph reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; Teleraph (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,301,000,000
9,207,000,000
Net inc
b705,000,000
c3,342,000,000
Share earns
.65
-
Yr rev
36,112,000,000
35,210,000,000
Net inc
b2,697,000,000
c1,669,000,000
Share earns
2.50
-


Economic Scene;   States Weigh Use Of Pension Funds
LEAD: STATE politicians are increasingly eyeing the pension fund savings of state employees -which have grown to a mouth-watering $700 billion nationwide - as a means to promote local economic development.


Japan's Far Right Lauds Shooting Of Mayor Who Criticized Hirohito
LEAD: Less than a week after the Mayor of Nagasaki was shot and critically wounded for suggesting that Emperor Hirohito was partly responsible for World War II, more than two dozen far-rightist groups have publicly endorsed the attack.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 490 money market mutual funds increased by $1.64 billion, to $383.07 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 149 institutional funds decreased by $294.2 million, to $92.41 billion.
The assets of the 243 general-purpose funds were up by $1.16 billion, to $128.08 billion.


Illinois Central Railroad Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Central Railroad Co.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,800,000
136,600,000
Net inc
8,000,000
2,700,000
Yr rev
547,000,000
556,400,000
Net inc
9,700,000
47,700,000
The 1988 results included a $61.3 million benefit from a change in accounting.


Official Takes First Step For Better U.S. Statistics
LEAD: Michael J. Boskin, the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, yesterday announced the first step in an effort to improve the quality of Government statistics, from the monthly employment rate to the quarterly measures of the gross national product.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
439,292,000
412,999,000
Net inc
39,812,000
43,063,000
Share earns
.39
.43
Yr rev
1,687,877,000
1,603,110,000
Net inc
b316,980,000
b228,178,000
Share earns
3.15
2.35


Where to Find the City's Chinese Culture and Commerce
LEAD: The Chinese community of New York, with 300,000 people the largest in the United States, embraces three neighborhoods in three boroughs, and both Chinese and Chinese-American culture and commerce can be found in hundreds of museums, shops, galleries and restaurants throughout the city.





Alka-Seltzer Puts Humor Back in Ads
LEAD: Alka-Seltzer is at it again.
In the 1960's and 1970's Alka-Seltzer entertained television viewers with a barrage of funny commercials that introduced such well-known lines as, ''Try it, you'll like it'' and ''I can't believe I ate the whole thing.''


U.S. Blocking Chinese From American Study
LEAD: Despite concern that China might stop allowing students to go to the United States, many Chinese students say the main obstacle to going abroad is the United States Embassy.


Walter John Lee, Publisher, 83
LEAD: Walter John Lee, the owner and publisher of The Westfield (N.J.) Leader for 62 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Westfield after a long illness.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Lee took over The Westfield Leader, a weekly newspaper, from his father in 1928, shortly after graduating from Lehigh University.


LaFarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LaFarge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
394,235,000
332,501,000
Net inc
20,384,000
20,381,000
Share earns
.40
.41
Shares outst
50,848,000
50,086,000
Yr sales
1,497,223,000
1,309,187,000
Net inc
100,004,000
93,486,000
Share earns
1.98
1.96
Shares outst
50,404,000
46,640,000


G.M., Ford Add Closings
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company said Wednesday that nine additional car and truck assembly plants would halt production for at least a week each in the next five weeks, laying off 24,700 employees.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
193,300,000
152,100,000
Net inc
10,200,000
1,000,000
Share earns
.36
.03
Shares outst
28,500,000
30,500,000
Yr rev
757,000,000
726,300,000
Net inc
b44,100,000
c33,300,000
Share earns
1.50
-
Shares outst
29,400,000
30,900,000


Phillips Reports Loss; Occidental Net Jumps
LEAD: The Phillips Petroleum Company said today that it lost $255 million in the fourth quarter because of regulatory delays and economic misjudgments involving its long-held stake in the Point Arguello project off the southern coast of California.


Deals
LEAD:
Basketball


International Rectifier reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Rectifier (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
54,331,000
45,325,000
Net inc
202,000
b6,549,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sale
103,942,000
92,213,000
Net loss
456,000
8,486,000
b-Net loss


Tibet's Martial Law Must Also Be Lifted
LEAD: To the Editor:


Square D Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
393,037,000
396,548,000
Net inc
11,374,000
c26,011,000
Share earns
.37
1.00
Shares outst
24,763,000
26,776,000
Yr sales
1,630,532,000
1,529,391,000
Net inc
b101,904,000
c118,934,000
Share earns
3.98
4.44
Shares outst
24,763,000
26,776,000


Chronicle
LEAD: BARBARA BUSH chose a chum from Texas to head the new White House Endowment Fund, which is to keep up the public rooms at the executive mansion and its sizable collection of art, furniture, porcelain and crystal.


Children Inspire Gifts to Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: There is something about working with children - as a social worker, a teacher, a pediatrician, a volunteer -that creates special sensitivity for deprived children.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   Berlin Party Sets Conditions for Staying in Cabinet
LEAD: The East German Christian Democratic party, one of four small parties joined with the Communists in the interim Government now running the country, said today it would withdraw from the cabinet in two weeks and rejoin only in a grand coalition with the entire opposition.


Washington's 2 Law Worlds Clash in Barry Case
LEAD: As befitting a city with a split personality, Washington has two distinct groups of lawyers.


Security System at Nuclear Sites Adapted for Use at Airports
LEAD: Security systems that guard nuclear arms sites are being adapted for an airport in a test program given high priority by the Federal Aviation Administration.


Seven in Detroit Hospital Die of Common Bacteria
LEAD: A mysterious outbreak of a bacterial infection in a hospital's surgical ward has been implicated in the deaths of seven patients and has forced the isolation of 20 others, officials said today.


Ava Gardner Is Dead at 67; Often Played Femme Fatale
LEAD: Ava Gardner, a North Carolina sharecropper's daughter who became one of the most bewitching movie actresses in the world, died of pneumonia yesterday at her home in the Kensington section of London.
She was 67 years old.


Class of '90 Slowly Marches to Derby Showdown
LEAD: The Kentucky Derby class of 1990 is slowly being unveiled these days in morning workouts here at Gulfstream Park.


Claiborne Hosiery
LEAD: Altschiller Reitzfeld Davis/Tracy-Locke has won the advertising account for Liz Claiborne Inc.'s hosiery line, which was recently licensed to Hanes Hosiery, a division of the Sara Lee Corporation.
The agency already handles the Liz Claiborne fragrance business.
Billings for the hosiery account were not disclosed.


TV Weekend;   'Image,' a Drama on Ethics Of Investigative Reporting
LEAD: For its first hour, ''The Image'' zips along as though it were on fast foward.
The dialogue is snappy, the pace frenetic and the performances by Albert Finney as a star television reporter and John Mahoney as his producer and pal leave them little time to draw breath.
New York is much in evidence, not only in the glimpses of Lincoln Center and Central Park West, of subway stations and stretch limos, but in the high-pressure drive of the television studio and those who run it and are run by it.


Mencken and the Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


Still in Disfavor
LEAD: South Africa is closer to rejoining the Olympics than at any other time since its expulsion 20 years ago, Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, said at a news conference yesterday while visiting the Commonwealth Games in New Zealand.
But he also said the Pretoria Government had a long way to go toward eliminating apartheid before the committee could consider letting the country back into the games.


Italian Bank in Iraq Accord
LEAD: Italy's largest state bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, which was stunned last August by the discovery that a branch had made $3 billion in unauthorized loans to Iraq, has struck a deal with Baghdad for two-thirds of the money.


Judith Kaufman Weds B. S. Levin
LEAD: Judith Mandelkorn Kaufman and Bernard S. Levin were married last evening by Rabbi Howard Kaplansky at the United Hebrew Temple in St.
Louis.


Reviews/Theater;   Mabou Mines Creates a 'King Lear' All Its Own
LEAD: To that perennial list of suspects thought by some to be the true authors of Shakespeare's plays - the Earl of Oxford, Christopher Marlowe, Francis Bacon - one is now tempted to add John Waters, the Baltimore film maker best known for ''Hairspray,'' the classic retro movie about early 1960's rock-and-roll and racial conflict.


Total Petroleum (North AmerFica) Ltd.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum (North AmerFica) Ltd.(A)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
605,674,000
491,583,000
Net inc
9,619,000
c39,647,000
Share earns
.26
1.38
Yr rev
2,170,630,000
1,833,540,000
Net inc
b48,162,000
c72,749,000
Share earns
1.51
2.55


At Least 60 Dead as Fierce Storm Sweeps Across England and Northern Europe


Coke-Disney Pact
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company and the Walt Disney Company signed a 15-year marketing agreement, extending an association that dates to 1942.
The deal calls for Coke products to be available exclusively in all Disney theme parks.
Coca-Cola will also have exclusive rights to use certain Disney characters in advertising.


23 Killed on Continent
LEAD: The death toll from the storm reached at least 62 tonight as it drove into continental Europe.


Pasquale to Chargers
LEAD: When the Jets cleaned house after the season, releasing Coach Joe Walton and his assistants, Larry Pasquale, the Jets' special-teams' coach the last nine years, was swept out, too.
Now the San Diego Chargers, under their new general manager, Bobby Beathard, are getting their house in order, and have dropped Joe Madden as special-teams coach.


Addendum
LEAD: *
Scali, McCabe, Sloves has acquired a majority interest in a Dutch advertising agency, Kaspers Koetse Burger &amp; De Roos, which has billings of $15 million.


Wheat and Soybean Prices At Lowest Since Autumn
LEAD: Wheat futures prices sank to four-month lows yesterday, and soybean futures reached their lowest levels since mid-October in a selloff linked to wetter weather and slack demand for feed grains both domestically and abroad.


Hospital Death Not Homicide, Examiner Says
LEAD: The New York City Medical Examiner reversed himself yesterday, ruling that the death of a 78-year-old Brooklyn man whose family disconnected his life-support equipment was not a homicide.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
115,444,000
100,822,000
Net inc
5,048,000
b3,978,000
Share earns
1.27
.97
Yr sales
426,464,000
363,625,000
Net inc
14,101,000
b12,065,000
Share earns
3.54
2.83
Shares outst
3,978,212
4,262,631


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avnet Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
431,700,000
495,400,000
Net inc
16,700,000
11,800,000
Share earns
.46
.33
Shares outst
38,610,000
35,750,000
6mo sales
869,700,000
986,900,000
Net inc
33,000,000
23,500,000
Share earns
.91
.66
Shares outst
38,590,000
35,750,000


Sotheby's Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sotheby's Holdings (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
61,000,000
31,000,000
Share earns
1.07
.56
Yr net inc
113,000,000
62,000,000
Share earns
1.96
1.10
The company said aggregate auction sales for the latest periods were $1.5 billion for the quarter and $2.95 billion for the year, compared with $850 million and $1.82 billion for same year-ago periods, respectively.


Review/Music;   Band With a Motif of Terror
LEAD: If a panic attack coupled with an existential crisis were turned into music, it might well sound like Voivod, the Canadian band that performed last Friday night at the Ritz.
Voivod's music overlays a brutal fibrillating beat with dissonant guitar lines and lyrics that describe futuristic terrors - a dystopia of sadistic technocrats, enslaved workers and uncontrollable machines.


Topics of The Times;   Top Tabulator
LEAD: The late Herman Hollerith has just been elected to the National Inventors Hall of Fame.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-13


A Giant in 49er Cloth Enjoys His New Flock
LEAD: Jim Burt is 30 years old.
He is beginning to look his age despite a new hairstyle seemingly borrowed from a raccoon.


Unisys's Creator Stepping Down
LEAD: With his dream of competing head-on against the International Business Machines Corporation and the Digital Equipment Corporation still an illusive goal, W. Michael Blumenthal said yesterday that he was stepping down as chief executive of the Unisys Corporation to become a limited partner at Lazard Freres &amp;


San Francisco Journal;   Raiders of the Night On Mellifluous Mission
LEAD: The commandos crouched in an unmarked van, cruising Columbus Avenue on a recent night, scouring the darkness for victims.
Suddenly the doors flew open and a dozen infiltrators, dressed in red polka dots and leopard print stretch pants and armed to the teeth with Hohner accordions, dashed into a bustling restaurant and began loudly squeezing out ''Lady of Spain.


Shell Canada Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shell Canada Ltd.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,299,000,000
1,296,000,000
Net inc
34,000,000
128,000,000
Share earns
.30
1.15
Yr rev
4,917,000,000
5,060,000,000
Net inc
212,000,000
427,000,000
Share earns
1.89
3.77


Shed Light in All Corners of Academic Tenure;   Cover of Anonymity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steinbrenner Promises A Kinder Season for Yanks
LEAD: George Steinbrenner pledged a kinder, gentler world for the Yankees yesterday, promised to communicate more directly with his players, scolded his fellow owners for overspending on salaries and even guaranteed that Bucky Dent would survive the season as manager.


Quantum Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
626,700,000
806,700,000
Net inc
18,100,000
c97,300,000
Share earns
.72
4.10
Shares outst
25,123,514
23,767,482
Yr sales
2,671,000,000
2,921,900,000
Net inc
b247,400,000
c382,700,000
Share earns
9.85
14.43
Shares outst
25,112,260
26,524,293


Market Place;   Pitfalls Awaiting Any Deal for UAL
LEAD: UNITED AIRLINES' unions have a good chance of achieving their goal of buying the company's parent corporation in their second try, but it will take time.
They face some pitfalls along the way though, and this may not be the best time to strike a deal.


Bronx Ex-Officer Is Accused of Bank Fraud
LEAD: Robert Fioretti, the former New York City police officer who married his pregnant patrol partner a month after his wife vanished from their Bronx home, was arrested yesterday on charges that he had stolen more than $17,000 from his missing wife's bank account.


Scholarship Fund Honors Slain Bostonian


Consortium Set Up for New TV
LEAD: Two rival consumer electronics manufacturers and the National Broadcasting Company said yesterday that they would join forces to produce the next generation of television technology.


Occidental Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occidental Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,049,000,000
5,284,000,000
Net inc
30,000,000
b7,000,000
Share earns
.10
.02
Shares outst
270,000,000
268,000,000
Yr sales
20,068,000,000
19,417,000,000
Net inc
285,000,000
302,000,000
Share earns
1.03
1.21
Shares outst
269,000,000
243,000,000


Japan Still No. 1 in Cars
LEAD: Japan remained the world's largest auto maker in 1989, the country's leading automobile trade group said today.
Analysts predicted it would maintain the lead in 1990.
Japan's output in 1989 was 13.03 million vehicles, up 2.6 percent from 1988.
Output surpassed the 10.85 million vehicles produced in the United States in 1989, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association said.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons Co.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
897,858,000
880,342,000
Net inc
68,052,000
64,499,000
Share earns
.87
.83
Yr sales
3,122,331,000
2,878,432,000
Net inc
b221,857,000
c205,303,000
Share earns
2.85
2.64


Washington at Work;   Living With Washington Mayor: Sense of Realism as a Tonic for Rumors
LEAD: Last Sunday, after Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. publicly and tearfully confessed to ''weaknesses'' and prepared to enter a substance abuse clinic, he turned and planted a big kiss on the cheek of his wife, Effi. ''She's just great,'' he said. ''For our family,'' she responded, ''this is just the beginning.


A Five-Year Plan Bears Fruit
LEAD: The latest fashion statement on the University of Connecticut campus is a T-shirt with this week's Top 20 college basketball poll of The Associated Press on the front.


Approval Given To Four Seasons As a Landmark
LEAD: The elegant Four Seasons Restaurant, regarded as a classic monument of modern restaurant design, and the Seagram Building in which it is situated were granted landmark status yesterday by the New York City Board of Estimate.


Japonica's Plan To Buy Allegheny
LEAD: Japonica Partners, a New York investment firm, filed a proposal in Federal Bankruptcy Court under which it would buy Allegheny International Inc. for $650 million.
Japonica said its plan provided ''substantially greater value'' than a competing plan filed by the company, which Japonica has valued at $570 million.


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,367,800,000
3,243,000,000
Net loss
43,700,000
b342,200,000
Share earns
-
1.74
Shares outst
197,029,000
196,938,000
Yr rev
13,210,600,000
12,660,800,000
Net inc
807,600,000
1,315,000,000
Share earns
4.10
6.63
Shares outst
196,994,000
198,319,000


Frederick C. Abdelnour, Merchant, 79
LEAD: Frederick C. Abdelnour, former owner and president of Frederick's of Greenwich, a Connecticut clothing store for women, died of Parkinson's disease on Tuesday at a nursing home in Rye Brook, N.Y.
He was 79 and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Cabot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cabot Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
406,625,000
480,084,000
Net inc
18,397,000
22,783,000
Share earns
.71
.81
Shares outst
24,626,000
26,960,000


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   The Old Guard in a New Government
LEAD: One month after Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife were executed as despots, this nation is lurching awkwardly under the influence of those who finally overthrew the old regime as well as those who had helped sustain it in power for 24 years.


New Executive Team At Wickes Lumber
LEAD: The Wickes Lumber Company, a major supplier of building materials, yesterday announced the appointment of a new management team: William A. Hensler, from inside the company, and Philip M. Chrusz, from outside.


Review/Concert;   June Anderson, With Sinopoli, Tries a New Field
LEAD: It is always heartening when a musician with an established reputation in one area dares to sail out into uncharted seas.
June Anderson, who has made a major career as a specialist in bel canto opera, took such a voyage on Wednesday evening at Carnegie Hall when she appeared as the soprano soloist in Berlioz's ''Nuits d'Ete.


Georgia-Pacific Gains 21.7%
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation said yesterday that its fourth-quarter net ionome rose 21.7 percent, reflecting strong building-product sales and a share repurchase program.


40,000 Years of Treasures From a California Tar Pit
LEAD: About 40,000 years ago, oil oozing from the earth's bowels congealed into a cluster of tar lakes along what is now Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles.
Since then, the monster trap this created has been catching and preserving everything from mites to mammoths, and some of the tar's most interesting victims go on view at the American Museum of Natural History in


Data General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
290,700,000
308,600,000
Net loss
20,500,000
19,500,000
Shares outst
29,600,000
28,500,000


2 School Districts Told To Fix Bilingual Flaws
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez ordered two Brooklyn school districts yesterday to submit plans to correct problems in their bilingual education programs by Feb. 2.
Failure to do so, he warned, would lead to his taking over the programs.


Bay State Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bay State Gas Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
111,593,000
87,301,000
Net inc
10,682,000
7,788,000
Share earns
.99
.85
Shares outst
10,285,000
9,081,000


U.S. Health Agency Declares Flu Epidemic
LEAD: The Centers for Disease Control declared yesterday that a nationwide influenza epidemic exists and that it is the most widespread outbreak of the disease since 1984-85.


Falmer Journal;   When No Detail Is Too Trivial, Write It All Down
LEAD: The personal observations and quiet reflections of ordinary people leading ordinary lives are coming together here as a vivid collage of life.


The Last Domino
LEAD: The democratic tide in Eastern Europe finally laps against the sealed borders of Albania.
This hermetic Balkan enclave has for decades scorned every liberalizing current in the Communist world.
But now its Stalinist rulers are busy denying reports of a ruthless police crackdown against dissenters in northern cities.


Wet Field Irks Coach
LEAD: For the second straight day, the Denver Broncos slipped all over the Tulane University practice field today.
The distraction angered Coach Dan Reeves as he continued to prepare his team for the game Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIV.


First Victory in the Drug War
LEAD: Just as President Bush was announcing his updated national drug control strategy yesterday, Democratic Senator Joseph Biden was distributing a drug control plan devised by the Senate Judiciary Committee.
This was no quick rebuttal but a 236-page book based on a year of study and 24 hearings.


Israeli Warplanes Hit Guerrillas Near Sidon
LEAD: Israeli fighter jets destroyed a southern Lebanon base of a radical Palestinian guerrilla group today, in the second such air strike in a week, the police said.


Upheaval in the East;   Five of the Financiers Investing in Hungary
LEAD:
Andrew Sarlos


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
625,847,000
545,711,000
Net inc
41,630,000
b71,500,000
Share earns
.38
.66
Shares outst
109,602,000
109,157,000
Yr rev
2,101,121,000
1,801,807,000
Net inc
152,972,000
b219,039,000
Share earns
1.39
2.01
Shares outst
109,894,000
108,812,000


Corrections
LEAD: A headline about Poland yesterday referred incorrectly in some editions to the people occupying Communist Party buildings.
They were protesters, not members of Parliament.


Curtain to Be Lifted on Noriega Wealth
LEAD: The Government said today that it planned to submit documents Friday in Federal District Court here to prove that Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega would have access to adequate resources to flee the country if released on bond.


Raychem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raychem Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
285,764,000
276,765,000
Net inc
5,259,000
b15,209,000
Share earns
.15
.44
Shares outst
35,579,386
34,895,048
6mo sales
528,029,000
512,000,000
Net inc
10,108,000
21,025,000
Share earns
.29
.60
Shares outst
35,442,934
34,895,761


Intel Can't Meet Demand for Chips
LEAD: The Intel Corporation said it was not able to meet the demand for its popular 386 and 386SX microprocessors.
But the company said it expects to fulfill all orders by midyear.


Wide Abuse of Medical Students Found
LEAD: Abuse and mistreatment of medical students are widespread and often leave long-lasting emotional scars that may affect their care of patients as physicians, new studies being published today show.


Stock Split At Teledyne
LEAD: Teledyne Inc. said today that its directors had approved a 5-for-1 split of its common stock and a plan to spin off its insurance and finance units.


Boston Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
306,468,000
279,313,000
Net loss
88,029,000
b16,712,000
Share earns
-
.33
Shares outst
38,475,000
37,826,000
Yr rev
1,269,345,000
1,202,655,000
Net loss
16,135,000
b84,212,000
Share earns
-
1.86
Shares outst
38,246,000
37,684,000


The Man Who Would Be Elway
LEAD: rrA sportswriter whispered to another yesterday morning that John Elway was not feeling so hot.
In fact, the source said from behind the back of his hand that the Denver star quarterback had lost 10 pounds in the last few days with some kind of mysterious virus, perhaps, or maybe it was something he ate.


Conner Growth Claim
LEAD: Conner Peripherals Inc., a manufacturer of hard disk drives for computer data storage, laid claim this week to being the fastest-growing manufacturing start-up company in American history.
The San Jose, Calif., company reported revenues of $704.9 million in 1989, its third full year of operations.


Even Good News Is Late With a Science Contest
LEAD: Five weeks ago, a late package caused panic to sweep through Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan.
Yesterday, a late letter inspired celebration.


Sara Lee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sara Lee Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
3,105,900,000
3,075,400,000
Net inc
149,300,000
137,300,000
Share earns
.61
.59
6mo sales
5,853,800,000
5,825,500,000
Net inc
243,100,000
212,800,000
Share earns
.99
.92


Cuts in Military Threaten Big Bases
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney is considering closing some of the nation's largest military bases and making deep cuts in the National Guard and reserves of virtually every state, Administration and Congressional officials said today.


Campbell Is Against a Sale
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company, which is facing calls for its sale from a dissident shareholder group, said today that it had decided to remain independent.
The announcement sent


National Intergroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Intergroup (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
717,741,000
667,463,000
Net inc
b30,712,000
c22,484,000
Share earns
1.35
.97
Shares outst
21,751,000
21,681,000
9mo rev
2,146,342,000
1,890,076,000
Net inc
b52,298,000
cd18,374,000
Share earns
2.21
-
Shares outst
21,753,000
21,676,000


UAL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UAL Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,367,542,000
2,221,937,000
Net inc
6,819,000
b20,869,000
Share earns
.31
.97
Shares outst
21,712,000
21,570,000
Yr rev
9,793,635,000
8,981,743,000
Net inc
324,181,000
b1,124,300,000
Share earns
14.96
37.87
Shares outst
21,656,887
29,681,394


Auctions
LEAD:
Sotheby's Solution


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potomac Electric Power (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
295,043,000
278,851,000
Net inc
35,898,000
33,272,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Shares outst
97,122,000
94,452,000
Yr rev
1,394,909,000
1,349,811,000
Net inc
214,587,000
211,073,000
Share earns
2.16
2.14
Shares outst
95,203,000
94,450,000


Union Carbide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,085,000,000
2,139,000,000
Net inc
47,000,000
161,000,000
Share earns
.33
1.17
Yr sales
8,744,000,000
8,324,000,000
Net inc
573,000,000
662,000,000
Share earns
4.07
4.88


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.75
9.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.69
7.67
8.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.58
8.36
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.37
8.34
9.03
30-YR.


Israeli Tied to Suspect Colonel Is Discovered Slain in Miami
LEAD: An Israeli businessman linked to a mercenary suspected of training gunmen for Colombia's leading drug traffickers was found slain at Miami International Airport on Wednesday, his body stuffed into the trunk of a car, the police said today.


Former Dissidents Meet as Heads of State


PSI Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PSI Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,059,000,000
1,043,000,000
Net inc
125,000,000
99,000,000
Share earns
2.32
1.84
Shares outst
54,081,000
53,928,000
The latest and prior year results were charged 4 cents a share and 57 cents a share, respectively, for reserves to cover the anticipated cost of the tentative settlement of a lawsuit by Wabash Valley Power Association.


History, Justice and Heroism In the Films of John Ford
LEAD: IN John Ford's final film, a doctor in a cowboy hat rides a horse into town, battles a cholera epidemic and dies to save innocent people from a horde of marauding bandits - a scenario almost too typical to mention, except that the doctor is Anne Bancroft.
The female hero of ''Seven Women'' is as unusual for Ford as the film itself, a now-laughable 1965 melodrama about a gaggle of American missionaries in China in 1935.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a caption in The Home Section yesterday, with a picture of two cartoon characters sold at auction, was erroneous in some copies.
The picture was a rare black and white celluloid from ''Orphan's Benefit,'' by Walt Disney.


Rep. Luken of Ohio to Retire
LEAD: Representative Thomas A. Luken, Democrat of Ohio, who has served in Congress since 1976, announced Wednesday that he would retire when his term ends Jan. 1.
Mr.
Luken, 64 years old, a lawyer who is a former Cincinnati Mayor, said, ''I expect that this is my swan song in elective office.''


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crawford &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
103,323,000
74,275,000
Net inc
6,847,000
4,468,000
Share earns
.39
.25
Yr rev
374,029,000
294,349,000
Net inc
27,703,000
18,840,000
Share earns
1.57
1.07


Computer Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
368,858,000
345,475,000
Net inc
14,868,000
11,958,000
Share earns
.92
.75
Shares outst
16,140,000
16,019,000
9mo rev
1,082,681,000
944,247,000
Net inc
41,526,000
35,640,000
Share earns
2.58
2.23
Shares outst
16,111,000
15,998,000


Boeing 707: the First U.S. Commercial Jetliner
LEAD: The Boeing 707 was the first American commercial jetliner and has had a strong safety record over the 32 years since it first went into service.


Henry G. Russell, Professor, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Henry G. Russell, a professor and college administrator, died Monday at Doctor's Hospital, after a long illness.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


General Public Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Public Utilities (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
706,257,000
672,805,000
Net inc
50,599,000
35,012,000
Share earns
.92
.62
Yr rev
2,911,194,000
2,833,974,000
Net inc
282,464,000
283,786,000
Share earns
5.01
4.75


It Pays to Count Minutes Rather Than Percentages
LEAD: Robert Barnett, a Washington lawyer, is something of a pioneer in using traditional legal billing practices as a way to add new specialties to his practice.


Upheaval in the East: Hungary;   U.S. Envoy in Hungary Quits To Handle Investment in East
LEAD: R. Mark Palmer, the United States Ambassador here, is resigning from the State Department to manage a new consortium of North American financiers that today announced the purchase of half interest in a Hungarian bank, the first in what was projected as a series of ambitious investments in Eastern Europe.


Rachel Fitler, Socialite, 93
LEAD: Rachel Fitler, heiress to a rope-manufacturing fortune, died Wednesday at her home in Villanova, Pa.
She was 93 years old.


39 Die as Storm Pounds Britain With Gusts Exceeding 100 M.P.H.
LEAD: At least 39 people were reported killed today as storm winds of 100 miles an hour, with even higher gusts and driving rains, swept Britain and surrounding seas.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
The Mermaid's Voice


Mead Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mead Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,078,300,000
1,044,600,000
Net inc
31,300,000
b43,400,000
Share earns
.50
.68
Shares outst
67,400,000
67,400,000
Yr sales
4,612,100,000
4,463,900,000
Net inc
215,800,000
b352,700,000
Share earns
3.33
5.37


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,438,000,000
2,567,000,000
Net inc
157,000,000
129,000,000
Share earns
1.84
1.36
Shares outst
85,300,000
95,100,000
Yr sales
10,171,000,000
9,509,000,000
Net inc
661,000,000
467,000,000
Share earns
7.42
4.76
Shares outst
89,100,000
98,100,000


Bruins Use 3d-Period Scoring Burst to Show Up Islanders
LEAD: The Islanders, who for the last month have been the hottest team in the National Hockey League, tonight stood skate-to-skate with the best team in the league and were ultimately dwarfed by it.


Carol Wincenc, Flutist
LEAD: Carol Wincenc is to be the soloist with the American Composers Orchestra in the world premiere of Joan Tower's Flute Concerto at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon at 3.
The program, which will be conducted by Hugh Wolff, also includes John Adams's ''Short Ride in a Fast Machine,'' Walter Piston's Symphony No.


MCA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
956,320,000
932,111,000
Net inc
b71,536,000
c75,714,000
Share earns
.95
1.04
Shares outst
79,095,457
73,025,053
Yr rev
3,382,344,000
2,900,339,000
Net inc
b191,773,000
c164,916,000
Share earns
2.62
2.26
Shares outst
73,231,880
72,982,254


Inquiry Finds Taxiway Takeoff
LEAD: Federal investigators said yesterday that evidence had confirmed that an Eastern Airlines jet took off from a taxiway, rather than from the runway parallel to it, on a flight from Philadelphia last week.
The pilots of the jet have consistently denied doing so.


Kenyan Leader to Visit U.S.
LEAD: President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya will begin a three-day private visit to the United States on Monday, diplomatic sources said today.
Kenya is one of Washington's closest allies in Africa and the United States Navy has access to the base at the Kenyan port of Mombasa.
Mr.
Moi last visited the United States in March 1987.


Home Resales Off 4.6% in '89
LEAD: Sales of existing homes edged down in December, bringing the 1989 total to 3.43 million units, or 4.6 percent less than the previous year's sales, a real estate trade group said today.


Procter &amp; Gamble reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Procter &amp; Gamble (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,025,000,000
5,268,000,000
Net inc
350,000,000
325,000,000
Share earns
.98
.96
6mo sales
11,742,000,000
10,535,000,000
Net inc
914,000,000
725,000,000
Share earns
2.57
2.14


Dance Bands Whose French Isn't Gallic
LEAD: Spanish, the saying goes, is the loving tongue, but French, increasingly, is the language the world dances to.
It's not the French of Maurice Chevalier or Edith Piaf; it's Creole-ized French from places where colonizers and emigrants ran into the African diaspora - in the Caribbean, in Africa and on the Louisiana bayou.


PRESIDENT UNVEILS NEW DRUG EFFORTS
LEAD: Declaring that the fight against drug abuse is the big test of his Administration, President Bush today unveiled a new narcotics program that immediately drew criticism for its continued emphasis on law enforcement and stopping drug shipments.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
349,887,000
336,234,000
Net inc
23,959,000
25,200,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Shares outst
57,454,000
56,590,000
Yr rev
1,427,745,000
1,340,169,000
Net inc
157,779,000
171,467,000
Share earns
2.53
2.81
Shares outst
57,138,000
56,239,000


Books of The Times;   Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, as Observed by the Maid
LEAD:
Mary Reilly
By Valerie Martin
263 pages. Doubleday. $18.95.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
233,001,000
193,465,000
Net inc
21,627,000
10,577,000
Share earns
.64
.29
Shares outst
31,243,015
30,743,756
Yr rev
845,697,000
775,820,000
Net inc
71,444,000
76,114,000
Share earns
2.10
2.25
Shares outst
31,089,878
30,512,804


Sun Microsystems Stock Up Sharply
LEAD: The stock of Sun Microsystems Inc. rose 13.7 percent yesterday after the maker of computer work stations reported second-quarter earnings that were better than most analysts had expected.
Although the Mountain View, Calif., company reported earnings late Wednesday that were 31 percent below those of the 1989 quarter, there were increases in sales and orders.


Review/Film;   Toil And Trouble In Emerging Africa
LEAD: Francis Girod's 1978 film ''L'Etat Sauvage'' (''The Wild State''), based on Georges Conchon's 1964 Prix Goncourt novel, is a seriously half-baked movie that oversimplifies problems of genuine political and social interest.
The film opens today at the Public Theater.


Worst Loss Of Season For Knicks
LEAD: Maybe the Knicks will find happiness Saturday night in Denver against the Nuggets, the next stop in what shows signs of being a trip to nowhere.


LOBBYING EFFECTIVE
LEAD: The Senate voted by a narrow margin today to sustain the President's veto of a bill protecting Chinese students in the United States from deportation.
The outcome spared Mr.
Bush an embarrassing political defeat and left him relatively free to continue pursuing his own policy toward China.


Cummins Sues Large Holder
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company filed a lawsuit yesterday against Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., contending that it had violated disclosure laws and the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act while acquiring 14.9 percent of the engine maker.


What of Ford's Is Showing When
LEAD: ''The Unknown John Ford,'' a five-week film series curated by Tag Gallagher and organized by Richard Koszarski, begins today and runs through March 2 at the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue and 36th Street, in Astoria, Queens (718-784-0077).
Screenings are included in museum admission: $5 ($4 for the elderly, $2.50 for students and children).


Large Secluded Houses And One Busy Road
LEAD: The neighborhood in Cove Neck, L.I., where the Avianca jetliner crashed is one of secluded estates, large homes on sizable wooded lots -and only one road.
Last night, that road was jammed with emergency vehicles and with onlookers hoping for a glimpse of the doomed plane.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Sports Pages yesterday about the baseball labor negotiations referred incorrectly to a method of making revenue-sharing acceptable to the players.
The method was not offered by the owners, but was posed in a question to both sides by the reporter.


S.E.C. Halts Bolar's Stock
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission suspended trading today in the stock of the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company for the next 10 days.
The move was in response to reports that the New York-based generic drug manufacturer had provided false test data to Government health officials about one of its products.


Try Again With Solo Police Cars
LEAD: The idea of using one-officer patrol cars has come and gone in New York City, and now it's back.
The new Police Commissioner, Lee Brown, is considering the idea, and a civic group, the Citizens Budget Commission, is energetically lobbying for it.
The police union objects, arguing that solo patrol isn't safe.


Good People Are Not Hard To Place
LEAD: ''DO you have a tie on today?'' asked Judy Wald. ''I'm used to talking to all these creatives who never wear ties, and I have to remind them that Laurent, the restaurant, requires a tie.''


Huntsman Move On Aristech Bid
LEAD: The Huntsman Holdings Corporation said the Aristech Chemical Corporation had agreed to provide it with confidential financial information on the company.
Aristech has rejected an offer of $25 a share, or $842 million, from Huntsman, the largest private chemical concern in the United States.
Huntsman, in turn, said it would raise its bid.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Middle Eastern Exotica


Chronicle
LEAD: After distributing a couple of million dollars in scholarships for minority students, OPRAH WINFREY has gone one step further.
She bought all the tickets for the first Broadway performance of AUGUST WILSON'S new play, ''The Piano Lesson.'' Then she gave them to A Better Chance, an organization in Boston that arranges for minority students to attend leading private schools.


F.D.A. and Heart Group Clash Over Labeling
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has announced opposition to a program of the American Heart Association in which foods deemed safe will be labeled, but the organization says it will go ahead anyway.


GE Aerospace To Cut 5,600 Jobs
LEAD: The General Electric Company's aerospace division said it would eliminate 5,600 jobs in the Eastern United States by 1991, citing tighter Pentagon budgets and mounting competition.
The cuts amount to nearly 14 percent of the work force at GE Aerospace, the nation's third-largest military contractor.


Dollar Declines Against Yen On Reports of Heavy Selling
LEAD: The dollar closed mostly lower yesterday as rumors heightened trader fears about foreign investment in the United States.
Gold prices were mixed.


Allied-Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied-Signal (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,058,000,000
3,007,000,000
Net inc
115,000,000
104,000,000
Share earns
.78
.70
Yr sales
11,942,000,000
11,909,000,000
Net inc
b528,000,000
463,000,000
Share earns
3.55
3.10


The Supplemental Income Poor Deserve More
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Partner Joins Stride Rite Bid
LEAD: Walsh, Greenwood &amp; Company and FS Champ Associates said Roger Holland had agreed to join them in their effort to acquire the Stride Rite Corporation.
The group has offered $32 a share for Stride Rite, a bid that values the shoe company at about $850 million.
Stride Rite's board is to review the offer next Monday.


Acme Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Steel Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
111,803,000
108,032,000
Net inc
1,706,000
3,983,000
Share earns
.32
.75
Yr sales
439,412,000
412,453,000
Net inc
16,200,000
b19,599,000
Share earns
3.00
3.39


Contel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
831,000,000
840,000,000
Net inc
b84,000,000
c50,000,000
Share earns
.53
.32
Yr sales
3,114,000,000
2,922,000,000
Net inc
b287,000,000
c276,000,000
Share earns
1.80
1.75


Treasury Prices Move Downward
LEAD: A news service report about comments by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, sent shudders through the credit markets yesterday and pushed down prices of Treasury notes and bonds.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Advance Circuits Inc., Minnetonka, Minn., a manufacturer of printed circuit boards, named its president, Robert W. Heller, to the additional post of chief executive.
He replaces Thomas F. Leahy, who will remain chairman.


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
115,232,000
105,625,000
Net inc
8,291,000
b2,468,000
Share earns
.41
.12
Yr rev
417,108,000
385,412,000
Net inc
23,394,000
b10,092,000
Share earns
1.16
.51


Rorer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rorer Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
403,488,000
325,189,000
Net inc
44,680,000
26,909,000
Share earns
1.38
.85
Yr sales
1,182,152,000
1,041,612,000
Net inc
86,467,000
61,841,000
Share earns
2.67
1.96


Excerpts From President's News Conference on China and Other Matters
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference in Washington yesterday, as recorded through the facilities of CNN.
OPENING STATEMENT


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
On Piano


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
590,900,000
618,500,000
Net loss
8,300,000
b15,500,000
Share earns
-
.62
Yr rev
2,233,900,000
2,131,200,000
Net inc
11,300,000
81,300,000
Share earns
-
3.46
Shares outst
17,500,000
20,000,000


Eastern Sees More Losses Through First Half of Year
LEAD: Eastern Airlines said yesterday that it expected to lose about $155 million in the first half of the year but would come closer to breaking even in the second half.
The prediction was made in a reorganization plan presented to the airline's unsecured creditors.


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
78,447,000
67,544,000
Net inc
4,179,000
2,245,000
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
32,493,000
32,025,000
9mo sales
217,608,000
201,013,000
Net inc
9,679,000
5,618,000
Share earns
.30
.18
Shares outst
32,403,000
31,796,000


McDonald's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,580,799,000
1,451,220,000
Net inc
171,093,000
151,480,000
Share earns
.46
.40
Yr rev
6,142,450,000
5,566,262,000
Net inc
726,715,000
645,863,000
Share earns
1.95
1.71
Shares outst
365,257,000
376,201,000


Glenfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
695,605,000
640,392,000
Net inc
47,010,000
35,160,000
Share earns
1.53
1.19
6mo rev
1,368,784,000
1,240,883,000
Net inc
66,577,000
66,606,000
Share earns
2.17
2.27


Our Towns;   Pitched Battle: Six Apartments For the Homeless
LEAD: It was five days before Christmas, and Marge Rogatz was delighted.
After 18 months of frustration and delay, she had just signed the closing papers on a six-unit apartment building that would be the very first permanent housing for the homeless in the whole of Nassau County.
It was also the first acquired by a private agency, Community Advocates


Bush in Panama: A Tragicomedy
LEAD: Vice President Quayle's projected Latin American trip to explain that we gringos are good guys after all is a farcical and fitting sequel to the Panama invasion.
Even more so, since it has been scaled down to a brief visit to our dependencies Honduras and Panama (with Jamaica thrown in).
Now Mr.
Quayle's audience is likely to laugh only behind his back, instead of in his face, when he relays President Bush's message to ''all of the countries of Latin America'' that we're still their ''friendly, supportive and respectful neighbor.


The Roll-Call On China
LEAD: Following is the 62-to-37 roll-call vote by which the Senate refused today to override President Bush's veto of a bill protecting Chinese students in the United States.
Although a majority voted to override, the vote was four short of the two-thirds necessary.
A yes vote was to override.
Voting yes were 54 Democrats and 8 Republicans.


MT.A. Proposes to $15 Billion Plan to Improve and Add Service
LEAD: The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said yesterday that up to $15 billion would be needed, starting in 1992, to continue improving service and to pay for the first major expansions of the region's subway and commuter rail systems since the early 1970's.


Dining Out Guide: Chinese New Year
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New York Times.
Stars are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Auntie Yuan


Chronicle
LEAD: Former Mayor JOHN V. LINDSAY of New York was released yesterday from New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, where he had been taken Tuesday after he felt dizzy at lunch at the Century Club.
He had simply suffered a transient drop in blood pressure, said Diana Goldin, a hospital spokeswoman.


Upheaval in the East;   A Former K.G.B. Chief Champions Azerbaijanis
LEAD: When Geidar A. Aliyev passed through the Moscow office of the Azerbaijani republic this afternoon, a turbulent crowd fell silent and men were startled from their seats, nodding and muttering ''salaam aleikhem'' to the tall, trim figure in navy blue pinstripes.


UAL Net Plunges by 67%
LEAD: The UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, today reported a 67 percent drop in fourth-quarter profit.


Phillips Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,030,000,000
2,860,000,000
Net loss
b255,000,000
c135,000,000
Share earns
-
.55
Shares outst
243,943,000
243,297,000
Yr rev
12,492,000,000
11,490,000,000
Net inc
b219,000,000
650,000,000
Share earns
.90
2.72
Shares outst
243,738,000
234,984,000


No Quick Fixes For Drug Addicts
LEAD: Yesterday President Bush announced his 1990 National Drug Control Strategy, including $1.5 billion for support of drug treatment services.
The President's plan does not, however, endorse what has come to be known as treatment ''on demand.'' Here's why.


End Is Seen to Siege Decree in Haiti
LEAD: Haiti's military ruler indicated today that on Friday he would lift the state of siege that he imposed five days ago.


N.F.L.'s Drug-Testing Program Called Inconsistent and Unfair
LEAD: The pregame hype that usually fills the air at the Super Bowl was overshadowed today by a swirl of rumors and accusations involving the National Football League's drug testing of players.


Hooker Corp. Asks Aid on Real Estate
LEAD: A Federal Bankruptcy Court has given the L. J. Hooker Corporation permission to hire a real estate concern to help it sell five properties in four states.
The holdings are the Forest Fair Mall near Cincinnati; Richland Fashion Mall near Columbia, S.C.; Thornton Town Center Mall near Denver; the Gateway Mall site in Atlanta, and the almost-completed Ten Peachtree Office Center in


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The Bush Administration has refined its new savings plan and other programs that it hopes will address the lagging rate of savings and investment.
The centerpiece is an account that it hopes will increase Americans' savings by granting tax-free interest on money left on deposit for at least seven years.


Nets Give Orlando A Rare Road Victory
LEAD: The Nets begin a six-game trip on Saturday, and this may be a good time for them to leave town.
If they continue playing the way they did tonight, they will have even less fan support at home than they do now.


McDonald's Net Up 13%
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation today reported record fourth-quarter earnings of $171.1 million, or 46 cents a share.
That is an increase of 13 percent from $151.5 million, or 40 cents a share, in the 1988 quarter.
For the year, McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Ill., earned $726.7 million, or $1.95 a share, up from $645.9 million, or $1.71 a share, in 1988.


On Stage
LEAD:
Musical About Mahalia Jackson


Chronicle
LEAD: Prime Ministers don't often have babies, so Pakistanis were understandably elated yesterday when BENAZIR BHUTTO gave birth to a girl.
Her personal bodyguard passed out candy after the baby was born, by Caesarean section, at Lady Dufferin Women's Hospital in Karachi.


Anna Hedgeman Is Dead at 90; Aide to Mayor Wagner in 1950's
LEAD: Anna Arnold Hedgeman, an educator, civil rights advocate and the first black woman to be a member of a mayoral cabinet in New York City, died Jan. 17 in Harlem Hospital.
She was 90 years old and had lived in Harlem for many years.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Bonds in Illinois For Water Agency
LEAD: The Central Lake County Joint Water Agency of Lake County, Ill., is offering $50 million in tax-exempt water-revenue bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The bond issue offers a maximum yield of 7.35 percent for securities due in 2019 and 2020.
For other long maturities, the yield is 7.25 percent for an issue due in 2010.


Bush to Propose Savings Plan Providing Tax-Free Interest
LEAD: The Bush Administration has added the final details to a new savings plan and other programs that it hopes will address what many economists have identified as the nation's No. 1 economic problem, the lagging United States savings and investment rate.


Gatx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gatx Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
197,300,000
157,700,000
Net inc
15,200,000
9,000,000
Share earns
1.23
.97
Yr sales
711,600,000
587,100,000
Net inc
65.700,000
47,000,000
Share earns
6.36
5.04


MANDELA APPEAL CALLS ON PRETORIA FOR NEGOTIATIONS
LEAD: In his first major public pronouncement since he was imprisoned for life more than a quarter of a century ago, Nelson Mandela has appealed to South Africa's white rulers to move urgently toward negotiations for majority rule so as to save the country from ''civil strife and ruin.''


Laclede Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Laclede Gas Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
142,711,000
127,770,000
Net inc
7,732,000
7,279,000
Share earns
.99
.93
Yr rev
507,138,000
485,644,000
Net inc
23,195,000
24,435,000
Share earns
2.96
3.10


Cuts in Social Security Could Go to Medicare
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unisys Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unisys Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,969,100,000
2,907,100,000
Net inc
34,000,000
218,000,000
Share earns
.05
1.20
Yr rev
10,096,900,000
9,935,200,000
Net loss
639,300,000
b680,600,000
Share earns
-
3.58


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a summary chart on Tuesday about automobile insurance in New Jersey misstated the percentage of drivers insured by the Joint Underwriting Association, a state agency established to cover high-risk drivers.
At its peak, the association insured half of the state's drivers; it now insures 40 percent.


Cooper Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,450,600,000
1,193,200,000
Net inc
89,900,000
74,700,000
Share earns
.78
.73
Shares outst
109,952,000
101,910,000
Yr rev
5,129,400,000
4,258,300,000
Net inc
267,800,000
224,400,000
Share earns
2.51
2.21
Shares outst
105,101,000
101,688,000


Pope, Citing Third-World Needs, Begins Visit to 5 African Nations


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
171,294,000
173,073,000
Net inc
16,824,000
26,838,000
Share earns
.37
.53
Shares outst
46,096,000
50,016,000
Yr rev
846,318,000
701,908,000
Net inc
202,708,000
b153,418,000
Share earns
4.38
3.06
Shares outst
46,326,000
50,079,000


Plane Crashes on L.I. With 149 Aboard;   At Least 9 Killed on a Boeing 707 From Colombia
LEAD: A Colombian jetliner carrying at least 149 people crashed in heavy fog last night in Cove Neck, L.I., while approaching Kennedy International Airport for a landing, the authorities said.


Sonic Guard Charged
LEAD: Dale Ellis, the guard who leads the SuperSonics in scoring, was charged in Seattle yesterday with drunken and reckless driving during a car accident on Jan. 12 in which Ellis suffered three broken ribs and a punctured lung.


Threat of Oil Shortage by '93 Seen
LEAD: The deputy chairman of the British Petroleum Company predicted today that oil supply shortages could occur as early as 1993 or 1994 because of OPEC's inability to expand production.
A possible increase in demand for oil from Eastern Europe could add to the strain on supplies, he added.


British Ford Plant Remains on Strike
LEAD: One of the Ford Motor Company's main British plants remained closed today by an unofficial strike, even though the company's manual workers have accepted a pay increase.
About 550 maintenance craftsmen are on strike at the Halewood factory in northern England.
In response, Ford has laid off 8,000 manual workers there.


Traditions in Spanish Film: An 82-Year Retrospective
LEAD: The names of Luis Bunuel, Carlos Saura and Pedro Almodovar are familiar to many American filmgoers.
But there is a richer tradition of Spanish film making than even those names suggest, a tradition with provocative ties to the political and social ideologies that have long played an important part in Spanish life and thought.


Restaurants
LEAD: Dining in a busy hotel lobby on lime-green chairs under hot pinpoint lights and decorative sconces that look like truncated steers' horns might not be everybody's idea of elegance.
But when the food is as absorbing as that turned out by Jeffrey Zakarian, the chef at 44 in the Royalton Hotel, one's architectural sensibilities mellow quickly.


Valentino's Spring Breezes, Givenchy's Bouquets
LEAD: The main thrust of the spring and summer couture openings, which ended this morning, was on pretty clothes, not wild ones.
There was little to alarm or perplex.
Even the ultrashort hems that looked devastating on the runway will be somewhat modified when they are worn by real people in the real world, for these are, after all, made-to-measure clothes.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Carbon, Percussively


Review/Art;   Tina Barney and Scenes Of Her Life, at the Modern
LEAD: Looking at the photographic tableaux of Tina Barney at the Museum of Modern Art, there is a temptation to say: ''This is upper-middle-class American life.'' The roomy houses are surburban or rural.
The people are for the most part healthy, sensitive and decent, and they have grown up with the feeling that outdoor barbecues, big-screen televisions and pink bathrooms are as much God-given rights as air is.


Witness Backs Prego View of How She Got AIDS
LEAD: An AIDS researcher testified yesterday that he thought Dr.
Veronica Prego had contracted the disease as a result of puncturing her finger on a contaminated syringe needle in 1983.


Barnes Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
126,127,000
118,767,000
Net loss
510,000
b4,039,000
Share earns
-
.63
Shares outst
6,058,937
5,558,703
Yr sales
511,221,000
496,060,000
Net inc
12,373,000
18,848,000
Share earns
1.94
3.06
Shares outst
5,732,916
5,465,188


Ewing Will Start In All-Star Game
LEAD: Patrick Ewing will be making his fourth trip in five seasons to the National Basketball Association All-Star Game, but this year the Knicks' center will be going as a starter for the first time.
The game will be played Feb. 11 in Miami.


Shaw's Self-Important Doctors and Their Totally Dubious Cures
LEAD: Although Shaw called ''The Doctor's Dilemma'' a tragedy, it is of course intended as a comedy, a fact that is not amply in evidence in Larry Carpenter's cumbersome revival of the play at the Roundabout Theater Company.


Upheaval in the East: Turkey;   Turks at Rally Assail Soviet Moves
LEAD: In the snow-clad lee of Mount Ararat, where legend lays Noah's ark to rest, thousands of Azeri Turks gathered here today for a demonstration of support for ethnic kinfolk in Soviet Azerbaijan.


The Lady in Red
LEAD: In the arrest of Mayor Marion Barry of Washington, the Department of Justice argues that a good end justifies bad means.
Wrong.


Large Gap Separates Owners and Players
LEAD: Two weeks before the day the owners will decide whether or not to begin spring training as scheduled, negotiators for the owners and the players are no closer to reaching an agreement on a new labor contract than when they began talking two months ago.


Elizabeth-Ann Knapp, A Former Architect, 76
LEAD: Elizabeth-Ann Campbell Knapp, a former architect and chairman of the Campbell Family Foundation, died of cancer on Sunday at her home in Princeton, N.J.
She was 76 years old.


Kiley Puzzles Over Meaning In Subway-Platform Slaying
LEAD: The head of New York City's transit system said yesterday that he understood how a subway rider might have felt a ''fatherly instinct'' to protect himself and his 3-year-old son when he responded with what prosecutors called deadly force to an attack by a homeless man.


Review/Film;   Britten's 'War Requiem,' To Images by Derek Jarman
LEAD: Taking Benjamin Britten's ''War Requiem,'' composed for the opening of the new Coventry Cathedral in 1962, Derek Jarman has made a movie of epic irrelevance that, when it rises to the occasion, is merely redundant.
It opens today at the Quad.


Family Split Over French Publisher
LEAD: The latest episode in the bitter struggle for control of one of France's most prestigious publishing houses, Editions Gallimard, became public today as a Gallimard family member disputed the value of the privately owned empire.


Excerpts From Essay By Mandela or Botha
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement drawn up by Nelson Mandela before his meeting last year with P. W. Botha, then President of South Africa, and delivered to Mr.
Botha before the meeting.
The full text was printed today by a Cape Town newspaper.


Allergan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allergan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
211,500,000
216,400,000
Net inc
3,400,000
29,400,000
Share earns
.05
-
Yr sales
806,900,000
755,800,000
Net inc
68,800,000
83,800,000
Share earns
1.04
-


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   Kremlin Turns Conciliatory Toward Azerbaijani Group
LEAD: The Gorbachev Government took a more conciliatory tone today toward the Azerbaijani Popular Front, saying it undoubtedly included ''healthy forces'' with whom occupation authorities might negotiate.


Kill the Spotlight; The Party's Over
LEAD: When the Trumbull Little League All-Stars won the Little League World Series in Williamsport, Pa., last August, the young victors and their families expected a small hometown parade, a couple of plaques, a few local newspaper interviews and not much else, save for a lifetime's worth of memories.


43.46 Decline Leaves Dow At 2,561.04
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 blue-chip stocks plunged 43.46 points, to 2,561.04, yesterday, as upward pressure on interest rates and the flow of poor corporate profits kept many investors on the sidelines.


$500 Million Issue By Two Utilities
LEAD: The AEP Generating Company and the Indiana Michigan Power Company yesterday issued an equal amount of secured lease obligation bonds totaling $500 million through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Both utilities are units of the American Electric Power Company.


Illinois Awaits Inquiry
LEAD: The University of Illinois basketball program is bracing for a full National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation into its recruiting practices. ''We believe the N.C.A.A. has sufficient information to warrant an official inquiry,'' the Illinois athletic director, John Mackovic, said Wednesday in Champaign.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
From '88
Allied-Signal Inc.
$ 115,000,000
+10.6
A.T.&amp;T. Co.
705,000,000
*-
Cooper Industries
89,900,000
+20.3
Data General Corp.
(20,500,000)
-
R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons
68,100,000
+5.6
Dow Corning Corp.


Bush Names 2d Nominee to Rights Post
LEAD: President Bush announced today that he would nominate John R. Dunne, a New York lawyer and former State Senator, for the politically sensitive Justice Department post of Assistant Attorney General for civil rights.


Not Too Late for Flu Shots
LEAD: Experts on influenza say it is not too late to obtain immunization against the disease in the face of a nationwide epidemic declared yesterday by the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.


Students Find U.S. Embassy a Barrier
LEAD: In his news conference on Wednesday, President Bush pleaded with Congress not to ease the visa rules for Chinese students now in the United States.
One of his arguments was that the action might lead China to cut back on future programs of study abroad, which he characterized as an important force for change in China.


Getting Mad, Getting Even
LEAD: In heading off what looked three days ago like a sure defeat on the China issue, President Bush proved today that a popular leader, if sufficiently aroused, can still change votes on Capitol Hill, even in this day of lax party discipline and constantly shifting coalitions.


Mylan Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mylan Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
24,101,000
22,228,000
Net inc
8,192,000
3,758,000
Share earns
.23
.10
9mo sales
68,313,000
66,352,000
Net inc
16,535,000
14,510,000
Share earns
.46
.40


It's the Year of the Horse in Chinese New York
LEAD: Just when you thought that New Year salutations were finally over with, along comes yet another New Year to celebrate this weekend.
Admittedly, the beginning of the Year of the Horse, 4688 on the Chinese calendar, may not be a major event for New Yorkers who are not of Chinese or East Asian background, but the holiday will be a time for festivities throughout the city's


G.N.P. Rate Up by 0.5% In Quarter
LEAD: The nation's economy grew at a rate of five-tenths of 1 percent in the final three months of 1989, the Commerce Department estimated today.
It was the weakest economic performance since the spring of 1986.


American Business Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
96,614,000
93,002,000
Net inc
4,113,000
3,790,000
Share earns
.57
.53
Shares outst
7,157,749
7,143,066
Yr sales
387,140,000
358,242,000
Net inc
13,617,000
13,010,000
Share earns
1.90
1.82
Shares outst
7,152,167
7,141,066


Sovereign Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovereign Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,269,000
1,223,000
Per share
.46
.46
Year net inc
5,406,000
5,007,000
Per share
1.97
1.86
The company said year-ago per share earnings were adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split paid on Dec.


International Shipholding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Shipholding Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
80,054,000
40,298,000
Net inc
3,267,000
2,647,000
Share earns
.57
.51
Yr rev
268,955,000
170,433,000
Net inc
12,597,000
b20,901,000
Share earns
2.24
4.49


Goal of the Geneva Treaties: Helping the Victims of War
LEAD: The Geneva Conventions are international treaties to protect victims of war, including wounded and sick members of the military, prisoners of war, and civilians in areas of conflict.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,724,400,000
1,732,800,000
Net inc
b35,900,000
95,300,000
Share earns
.33
1.04
Yr rev
6,521,900,000
6,446,900,000
Net inc
b291,700,000
366,300,000
Share earns
3.04
4.05


News Summary
LEAD:
International
3-9
East Germany's opposition parties will share power with Prime Minister Hans Modrow under a compromise reached after a week of negotiations aimed at preventing the Government's collapse in the three months before elections.
Page 1
The use of troops in Azerbaijan was challenged by the Soviet Parliament, which called for an immediate session to draft democratic controls on the handling of domestic emergencies.


Foothill Independent Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Independent Bancorp
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,080,641
2,051,026
Per share
1.02
.68


Mortgage Rates Rise
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages surged back over 10 percent this week and are currently averaging 10.05 percent, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
That rate was up from 9.90 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.41 percent this week, up from 8.39 percent the week before.


KLLM Transport Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLLM Transport Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
29,108,000
26,271,000
Net loss
373,000
b743,000
Share earns
-
.29
Yr rev
115,745,000
97,410,000
Net inc
1,391,000
2,943,000
Share earns
.54
1.15


Upheaval in the East;   Report on Ceausescus' Burial
LEAD: The bodies of the deposed dictator Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, were taken to Bucharest and buried in secret after their execution on Dec. 25, Deputy Prime Minister Gelu Voican said in an inteview broadcast on French television today.
Other members of the ruling National Salvation Front had said they did not want to bury the couple in Rumania and were considering dumping the bodies in the Black Sea.


Legent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
40,745,000
33,030,000
Net inc
b7,888,000
7,320,000
Share earns
.36
.34
b-Included costs of $975,000 related to acquisition of Business Software Technology Inc.


Review/Film;   Love Nudges Accountant Out of Shell
LEAD: A black cat in a diamond choker adds a touch of glamour to the opening credits of ''Strike It Rich,'' but this proves mostly to be wishful thinking.
And the specter of Cary Grant, summoned by both the Monte Carlo of 1956 (where most of this story is set) and the heroine who is named for him, has a similar effect.


Timken Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Timken Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
326,003,000
409,142,000
Net loss
9,843,000
b24,833,000
Share earns
-
.88
Shares outst
30,569,173
28,336,234
Yr sales
1,532,962,000
1,554,143,000
Net inc
55,345,000
65,912,000
Share earns
1.88
2.34
Shares outst
29,495,197
28,212,294


Of Cookie Monsters And Pac-Men, Too
LEAD: The introductory part of a President's budget message is usually a dryly written document.
But the current budget director, Richard G. Darman, has created a colorful, lecturing essay that seems certain to heighten conflicts between the White House and Congress.


Piper Jaffray reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piper Jaffray (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
48,804,000
40,571,000
Net inc
3,183,000
1,614,000
Share earns
.79
.41
Shares outst
4,016,000
3,955,000


Burmese Military Bars U.S. Observers for Vote
LEAD: The military Government, which has barred several top opposition leaders from running in the next election in Myanmar, formerly Burma, said today that American observers would not be allowed to monitor the balloting.


Ford-Nissan Van Venture
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation U.S.A. said it would invest $25 million in a project to make engines for a new mini-van to be produced jointly by Nissan and the Ford Motor Company.


Contrans Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contrans Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
41,297,000
45,103,000
Net inc
b805,000
805,000
Share earns
.14
.13
b-After an extraordinary credit of $925,000, or 17 cents a share.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Calnetics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calnetics Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,421,000
829,000
Net inc
136,000
41,000
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
2,834,578
2,260,299
6mo sales
4,976,000
1,720,000
Net inc
213,000
104,000
Share earns
.08
.05
Shares outst
2,670,200
2,260,299


Gotti Witness Recounts a Life of Violence
LEAD: Husky voiced, his eyes panning around a Manhattan courtroom, the star witness against John Gotti yesterday described his life of violent crimes and his relationship with a Mafia family that prosecutors say Mr.
Gotti leads.


Plane's Debris Includes a Tangle of Relationships
LEAD: When the aluminum skin of the Avianca jetliner split open on a foggy Long Island hillside 15 miles short of Kennedy International Airport, it lay bare the complex web of relationships and commerce between Colombia and the United States.


Though Rare, a Jetliner's Running Out of Fuel Can Happen THE CRASH OF FLIGHT 52
LEAD: While it is uncertain what led to the crash of Avianca Flight 52 on Thursday night, one fact is becoming clear: the Boeing 707 burned much more fuel than the pilots had originally planned.


Books of The Times;   It Happened Here: Hitler's Cohorts in the U.S.
LEAD:
Roosevelt and Hitler
Prelude to War
By Robert Edwin Herzstein
500 pages. Illustrated. Paragon House. $24.95.


Patents;   Using Sound Waves To Break Stones in Body
LEAD: William S. Filler, a former research physicist with the Navy's Surface Warfare Center, has patented a system using sound waves to break up kidney stones and gallstones without surgery.


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
743,628,000
682,091,000
Net inc
79,357,000
78,960,000
Share earns
1.26
1.12
Shares outst
63,220,000
64,500,000
Yr rev
2,934,379,000
2,694,455,000
Net inc
300,217,000
268,635,000
Share earns
4.75
4.10
Shares outst
63,192,000
65,500,000


United Financial Banking Cos reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Financial Banking Cos
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,438,193
1,247,807
Per share
1.49
1.29
Shares outst
962,830
964,124


Johnston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnston Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,152,000
26,856,000
Net inc
242,000
1,831,000
Share earns
.05
.36
Shares outst
5,074,785
5,114,478
6mo sales
52,487,000
55,362,000
Net inc
870,000
4,137,000
Share earns
.17
.81
Shares outst
5,084,546
5,112,494


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,601,000
3,459,000
Per share
.75
.72
Year net inc
13,225,000
12,789,000
Per share
2.76
2.67


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Betz Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
128,495,756
115,149,612
Net inc
13,505,536
12,367,963
Share earns
.85
.81
Shares outst
14,788,558
15,357,722
Yr sales
516,668,750
447,580,310
Net inc
55,860,044
48,385,076
Share earns
3.53
3.15
Shares outst
15,111,760
15,373,419


Island Telephone Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Island Telephone Co.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
48,074,000
44,459,000
Net inc
5,467,900
5,190,200
Share earns
1.72
1.65
Results are in Canadian funds.


Applied Biosystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Biosystems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
40,802,000
38,820,000
Net inc
2,256,000
5,136,000
Share earns
.16
.37
6mo sales
77,589,000
75,179,000
Net inc
4,564,000
9,551,000
Share earns
.32
.69


Treasury Bonds Continue to Decline
LEAD: Treasury bond prices yesterday fell to their lowest level since last June 1 as institutional and individual investors anticipated further declines next week.


McDonnell Douglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,297,000,000
4,146,000,000
Net inc
b60,000,000
c145,000,000
Share earns
1.56
3.79
Yr rev
14,589,000,000
14,438,000,000
Net inc
b219,000,000
c350,000,000
Share earns
5.72
9.13


Seitzer a Millionaire
LEAD: Kevin Seitzer became the Kansas City Royals' latest million-dollar player yesterday when the third baseman avoided arbitration by signing a one-year contract that sources put at $1,001,250.


Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance ConFcepts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance ConFcepts
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
24,744,000
19,533,000
Net inc
881,000
331,000
Share earns
.28
.11


CMS Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
860,555,000
860,485,000
Net inc
74,312,000
73,249,000
Share earns
.91
.89
Yr rev
2,961,100,000
2,942,676,000
Net inc
312,142,000
271,623,000
Share earns
3.80
3.31


First National Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bank Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
653,000
487,000
Per share
.57
.42
Year net inc
2,707,000
2,448,000
Per share
2.35
2.13


Fox's Syndication Request Angers Hollywood Studios
LEAD: Hollywood studios reacted angrily yesterday to the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation's request that the Federal Communications Commission change the rules that prevent television networks from having a financial interest in the programs they broadcast.


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Family Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,623,000
b1,007,000
Per share
-
.30
Shares outst
2,756,504
3,366,000
Year net inc
879,000
3,417,000
Per share
.28
.94
Shares outst
3,090,089
3,640,000


Eagle Precision Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Precision Technologies Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,300,000
8,100,000
Net inc
19,000
741,000
Share earns
.01
.13
9mo sales
16,000,000
19,200,000
Net inc
540,000
1,185,000
Share earns
.10
.21


Koss Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Koss Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
8,543,956
7,131,043
Net inc
455,129
c530,756
Share earns
.13
.14
6mo sales
17,282,991
14,681,355
Net inc
b1,160,750
c1,193,734
Share earns
.32
.30
b-After an extraordinary tax loss carryforward of $59,000, or 2 cents a share.


F&amp;M Fincl Services Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M Fincl Services Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,340,000
994,000
Per share
.57
.47
Year net inc
4,034,000
2,872,000
Per share
1.79
1.35
Shares outst
2,256,216
2,128,002
Latest year's assets and shares outstanding reflected the December 1989 acquisition of St.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
577,844,000
525,915,000
Net inc
54,539,000
47,353,000
Share earns
.93
.80
Yr rev
2,082,485,000
2,076,087,000
Net inc
187,126,000
189,365,000
Share earns
3.15
3.18


Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,664,000
6,470,000
Per share
.14
.54
Year net inc
19,057,000
24,093,000
Per share
1.58
2.00


TV Commercials That Go On and On
LEAD: Picture this: a handsome man wearing a trench coat boards a small jet, to the approving glance of a flight attendant.
As the plane streaks skyward, an announcer invites viewers to watch ''TV Insiders With Investigator Vince Inneo.''


First Mississippi Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mississippi Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
131,491,000
96,339,000
Net inc
1,372,000
6,053,000
Share earns
.07
.30
6mo sales
234,034,000
178,270,000
Net inc
2,283,000
10,520,000
Share earns
.11
.52


Suncoast S&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suncoast S&amp;L (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
202,000
301,000
Per share
.11
.15
Shares outst
1,882,000
1,934,000
6mo net inc
689,000
784,000
Per share
.37
.40
Shares outst
1,885,000
1,935,000


International Microelectronic Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Microelectronic Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 24
1989
1988
Revenue
18,500,000
12,400,000
Net inc
1,300,000
205,000
Share earns
.05
.01
9mo rev
50,537,000
40,337,000
Net inc
623,000
3,444,000
Share earns
.03
.13


Flagship Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flagship Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,432,247
c1,345,020
Per share
.41
.39
Year net inc
b6,059,311
c7,237,438
Per share
1.75
2.10
b-Included pre-tax gains on sales of loans and securities of $51,103 for the quarter and $485,323 for the year.


The Birds Are Still Singing in Riverside Park
LEAD: To the Editor:


DMR Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DMR Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
82,791,000
59,791,000
Net inc
1,393,000
1,753,000
Share earns
.11
.14
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Brae Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brae Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b15,367,000
c613,000
Share earns
1.61
.05
Shares outst
9,490,000
8,329,000
Yr net inc
b3,079,000
c1,247,000
Share earns
.26
.07
Shares outst
8,842,000
6,943,000


Zygo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zygo Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,242,000
6,274,000
Net inc
143,000
24,000
Share earns
.06
.01
6mo sales
12,276,000
11,653,000
Net inc
189,000
b299,000
Share earns
.07
-
b-Net loss


Terminally Ill Can Collect Death Payout While Alive
LEAD: The nation's largest insurance company has announced a new plan that would let terminally ill policyholders get the bulk of their life insurance proceeds before they die.


Sonoco Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
404,732,000
403,928,000
Net inc
24,666,000
24,374,000
Share earns
.56
.56
Yr sales
1,655,830,000
1,599,751,000
Net inc
103,561,000
96,277,000
Share earns
2.36
2.20
Shares outst
43,897,002
43,816,224


Brush Wellman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brush Wellman (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
75,800,000
81,300,000
Net loss
b4,200,000
c9,900,000
Share earns
-
.56
Shares outst
16,240,633
17,665,790
Yr sales
317,800,000
345,800,000
Net inc
b18,500,000
32,500,000
Share earns
1.10z
1.79
Shares outst
16,854,799
18,210,000


Genus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genus Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
24,290,000
15,319,000
Net inc
b4,341,000
c1,565,000
Share earns
.38
.21
Shares outst
11,503,000
7,450,000
Yr sales
87,344,000
51,512,000
Net inc
b12,798,000
c3,452,000
Share earns
1.22
.50
Shares outst
10,487,000
6,865,000


Leland Moss, 41, The Theater Director Of 'The AIDS Show'
LEAD: Leland Moss, a theater director known for ''The AIDS Show,'' died of AIDS on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 41 years old.


Conditional Offer Made To Buy First Executive
LEAD: Rosewood Financial Inc., the investment concern controlled by Caroline Rose Hunt of Texas, made a conditional bid for the First Executive Corporation today.
Analysts said the move was at least partly intended to bolster public confidence in the struggling insurance company.


Not in My Classroom
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Hampshire Thrift BancFshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Hampshire Thrift BancFshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
66,755
252,099
Per share
.03
.12
Year net inc
1,031,019
1,071,125
Per share
.48
.50


Buffton Corp.
LEAD: The Buffton Corporation, a holding company that owns avionic, electronic and plastic pipe manufacturing companies, said it was considering a restructuring to maximize investor value.
The Fort Worth-based company said it had hired Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. to develop a new strategic direction for the eight-year-old concern and to assist in evaluating the sale of certain assets.


Vernon C. Myers, 78, Former Look Publisher
LEAD: Vernon C. Myers, a magazine executive who was publisher and president of Look in the 1950's and 1960's, died on Thursday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in Norwalk, Conn.


HEI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HEI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 2
1989
1988
Sales
2,157,000
2,107,000
Net loss
28,000
b18,000
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Servicemaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Servicemaster L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
423,165,000
394,159,000
Net inc
16,373,000
15,484,000
Share earns
.51
.47
Yr sales
1,609,267,000
1,531,276,000
Net inc
68,047,000
64,626,000
Share earns
2.10
2.02


Summcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summcorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,166,000
5,243,000
Per share
.58
.60
Year net inc
17,835,000
19,304,000
Per share
2.01
2.20


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The president and publisher of El Espectador, LUIS GABRIEL CANO, was awarded the 1990 Golden Pen of Freedom prize yesterday for writing courageously about Colombia's violent cocaine traffickers.
El Espectador, published in Bogota, is Colombia's oldest newspaper.


Detection Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detection Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,591,000
4,771,000
Net inc
426,000
355,000
Share earns
.15
.13
9mo sales
16,002,000
13,981,000
Net inc
1,336,000
917,000
Share earns
.48
.35


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,089,000
1,501,000
Per share
.33
.46
Year net inc
5,233,000
5,618,000
Per share
1.58
1.71


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ALFRED E. ECKES JR., an economic historian who has been the chairman of the International Trade Commission for nine years, is returning to teaching as the Eminent Research Professor in Contemporary History at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio.


G.E. Joins Huntsman In Offer for Aristech
LEAD: Jon M. Huntsman, the Salt Lake City investor, announced today that a unit of the General Electric Company would join him in his efforts to acquire the Aristech Chemical Corporation.


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
600,000
b3,828,000
Per share
-
.49
Year net inc
8,714,000
13,466,000
Per share
1.20
1.79
b-Net income


SUPER BOWL XXIV: Notebook;   Carter To Return As Starter For 49ers
LEAD: Michael Carter, who is recovering from a severely sprained right foot, will start at nose tackle for the San Francisco 49ers Sunday in Super Bowl XXIV against the Denver Broncos.


Peoples Bancorp of WorcesFter reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp of WorcesFter (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,270,000
1,459,000
Per share
.45
.49
Shares outst
2,801,535
2,972,918
Year net inc
5,527,000
5,909,000
Per share
1.90
1.89
Shares outst
2,908,466
3,130,213


Computer Identics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Identics
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,381,000
3,612,000
Net inc
207,000
b172,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
9,463,243
8,961,653
Yr rev
17,796,000
13,372,000
Net inc
908,000
b1,134,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
9,443,517
8,470,748


Bridge
LEAD: A famous tournament was revived in Britain Wednesday after an eight-year hiatus, and a famous American partnership took the lead with some brilliant play.
The event was the London Sunday Times International Pairs, at the Regent's Park Hilton Hotel, and the Americans were Bob Goldman of Dallas and Paul Soloway of Mill Creek,


Morris M. Mintz, Lawyer, 81
LEAD: Morris M. Mintz, a lawyer and former New York State Assemblyman, died of Alzheimer's disease Wednesday at the Liberty Hill Nursing Home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old and lived in Delray Beach.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jan Bell Marketing Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
95,340,000
58,779,000
Net inc
8,817,000
4,727,000
Share earns
.40
.27
Shares outst
22,322,876
17,502,188
Yr sales
181,303,000
120,019,000
Net inc
16,037,000
b10,305,000
Share earns
.80
.63
Shares outst
20,076,977
16,404,851


Cray in Buyback
LEAD: Cray Research Inc.'s board has authorized the repurchase of up to three million of the company's common stock, the supercomputer maker announced.
The Minneapolis company had more than 28.1 million common shares outstanding as of Dec. 31.
Shares in Cray rose 62.5 cents today, to $43.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Can Reeves Get It Right The 8th Time Around?
LEAD: Dan Reeves, the coach of the Denver Broncos, could not help but notice the positioning of the decorative signs that had been placed around the Louisiana Superdome as reminders of Super Bowls past.


Lam Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lam Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
35,723,000
31,832,000
Net inc
2,348,000
2,411,000
Share earns
.20
.22
Shares outst
11,500,000
10,950,000
6mo sales
73,120,000
58,224,000
Net inc
4,652,000
4,119,000
Share earns
.40
.38
Shares outst
11,700,000
10,950,000


Fastenal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fastenal Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
10,837,579
8,269,952
Net inc
1,231,876
875,848
Share earns
.26
.19
Yr sales
41,189,549
30,440,590
Net inc
4,267,729
3,162,293
Share earns
.90
.67


BMC Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BMC Software Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,920,000
16,066,000
Net inc
5,575,000
3,726,000
Share earns
.34
.23
9mo rev
64,004,000
42,271,000
Net inc
13,926,000
8,404,000
Share earns
.86
.53


Philip Adler, Theater Manager, 84
LEAD: Philip Adler, a theater manager and producer, died yesterday in his home in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 84 years old.


Cal Rep Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,076,249
6,154,326
Per share
2.55
2.22


HOCKEY: Notebook;   Boston College Gets Scoring Punch
LEAD: With a month remaining in the regular season, the team climbing to the top in Eastern hockey is Boston College, powered by a productive first line.


MORE ON THE CRASH
LEAD: Relatives endured a long and painful wait to hear news of survivors. Page 31.


C-Tec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C-Tec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
47,166,000
37,128,000
Net loss
3,837,000
c4,060,000
Share earns
-
.24
Yr sales
162,787,000
142,993,000
Net inc
b4,460,000
14,608,000
Share earns
.27
.88


Ocean Drilling &amp; Exploration Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ocean Drilling &amp; Exploration Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
83,865,000
80,144,000
Net inc
b24,434,000
c4,542,000
Share earns
.48
.09
Shares outst
51,537,217
51,515,938
Yr rev
320,393,000
290,898,000
Net loss
b29,591,000
c30,440,000
Shares outst
51,525,139
51,515,032


Insteel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Insteel Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
55,704,000
45,178,000
Net inc
353,000
1,289,000
Share earns
.08
.30


Graf Beats Fernandez And Wins Open Title
LEAD: Steffi Graf, ranked No. 1 in the world, won her third successive Australian Open women's singles title today with a straight-sets victory, 6-3, 6-4, over Mary Joe Fernandez of the United States.
The victory also earned Graf her third successive Grand Slam title.


FMC Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
36,100,000
44,700,000
Net inc
10,000,000
15,300,000
Share earns
.16
.23
Yr sales
151,500,000
171,100,000
Net inc
48,900,000
61,200,000
Share earns
.75
.93


Samuel G. Domash, Executive, 89
LEAD: Samuel G. Domash, a retired businessman and philanthropist, died of complications of diabetes on Tuesday at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 89 years old and lived in the Manhattan Beach section of Brooklyn.


Granite State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Granite State Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
75,000
b806,000
Per share
-
.34
Shares outst
1,833,000
2,075,745
Year net inc
1,202,000
1,808,000
Per share
.46
.82
Shares outst
1,910,437
2,093,729


Microage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Microage Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
146,381,000
83,260,000
Net inc
1,833,000
1,119,000
Share earns
.42
.26


Your Money;   A Retirement Plan Aids Charity, Too
LEAD: As people move toward retirement, they often reinvest their portfolios to provide greater income.
For those who are charitably inclined, a particularly effective approach is to combine retirement planning with charitable giving in a plan that benefits both the donor and the charity.


TV Broadcast Grisly Scenes, But Received No Complaints
LEAD: The first television images to come out of Cove Neck, L.I., after the crash of an Avianca Boeing 707 were unedited and graphic, as New York's six commercial stations rushed to get the story to viewers.
The stations broke into their programs just after 10 P.M. on Thursday with information, all of it sketchy and speculative, adding more as it became available.


Children's Fate Points Up Seating Concerns
LEAD: At least six children under the age of 5 survived the crash of Avianca Flight 52 and though it could not be determined yesterday whether any of them were saved by child-restraint seats, their fate points again to concerns about the safety of small children on airplanes.


TSC Shannock reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSC Shannock
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,600,000
6,700,000
Net inc
127,440
b232,376
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
16,500,000
11,100,000
Net inc
157,422
b188,072
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Ingres Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingres Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
39,497,000
29,213,000
Net inc
1,480,000
2,123,000
Share earns
.12
.17
Shares outst
11,881,000
12,345,000
6mo rev
68,369,000
55,716,000
Net loss
653,000
b3,663,000
Share earns
-
.29
Shares outst
11,089,000
12,395,000


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   Major Bucharest Leader Quits Council in Protest
LEAD: A leading member of the ruling Council of National Salvation resigned tonight, charging that ''Stalinist practices'' persisted in the Rumanian Government.


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to Jan 1
1990
1989
Revenue
50,764,000
41,223,000
Net inc
8,054,000
6,277,000
Share earns
.21
.17
Yr rev
199,339,000
139,388,000
Net inc
30,714,000
20,829,000
Share earns
.80
.56


U.S. Regulators Accuse Bush Son in Savings Case
LEAD: Federal regulators said today that they would file an administrative action against President Bush's son Neil, accusing him of conflicts of interest while he was a director of a giant Denver-based savings institution, the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association.


Intellicorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intellicorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
6,099,000
5,082,000
Net inc
433,000
13,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
7,855,000
7,337,000
6mo rev
11,902,000
10,452,000
Net inc
826,000
424,000
Share earns
.11
.06
Shares outst
7,783,000
7,274,000


Wetterau Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wetterau Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,400,000,000
1,300,000,000
Net inc
14,100,000
13,300,000
Share earns
.60
.56
9mo sales
4,000,000,000
3,700,000,000
Net inc
35,900,000
33,200,000
Share earns
1.52
1.40


Economic Investment Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Economic Investment Trust
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
11,207,000
4,219,000
Share earns
6.61
2.43
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Remarks Inflame Massachusetts Contest
LEAD: John R. Silber, the president of Boston University and a candidate for the Democratic nomination for Governor, found himself scrambling to salvage his campaign today as he tried to explain remarks that have been assailed as racist.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Silver for the Bride
LEAD:
This is time of year when most brides-to-be shop for silver.
Diana Shiel, public relations director for the Silver Trust, a trade association, said the difference between sterling silver and silver plate is the amount of silver used.
And she advised: ''Don't take the salesperson's word for it.
Check.


Interstate-Johnson Lane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate-Johnson Lane Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
34,755,139
35,285,934
Net loss
b958,261
c283,724
Share earns
-
.05
b-Included approximately $1.3 million of pre-tax losses incurred by certain specialized fixed-income operations that were terminated in December and January.


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) S.A.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (Holdings) S.A.(O)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
138,000,000
120,900,000
Net inc
15,100,000
12,500,000
Share earns
.56
.47
Yr rev
525,000,000
442,900,000
Net inc
b70,900,000
c65,300,000
Share earns
2.61
2.69
Shares outst
27,188,754
24,225,804


Bando McGlocklin Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bando McGlocklin Capital (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
439,466
350,724
Share earns
.22
.17
6mo net inc
745,624
659,828
Share earns
.37
.32


First Citizens Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
423,000
423,000
Per share
.20
.20
Year net inc
2,367,000
3,026,000
Per share
1.14
1.45


Juno Lighting reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Juno Lighting (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
20,784,000
14,839,000
Net inc
3,676,000
2,213,000
Share earns
.40
.24
Yr sales
76,941,000
58,173,000
Net inc
12,806,000
b11,271,000
Share earns
1.39
1.23


Government by Default
LEAD: Mayor David Dinkins has surprised critics with some tough calls lately, but now he's in danger of reverting to indecision.
Many New York City agencies are drifting because he hasn't chosen people to run them.
He hasn't named commissioners of housing, sanitation, correction, finance, probation or the sprawling Human Resources Administration.


Butler Manuafacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Butler Manuafacturing Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
143,247,000
173,089,000
Net inc
b801,000
3,891,000
Share earns
.17
.87
Yr sales
580,255,000
645,624,000
Net inc
b9,817,000
15,343,000
Share earns
2.15
3.41


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
1050
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
9.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.68
7.69
8.32
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.62
8.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.37
9.00
30-YR.


Research Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Research Industries
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,121,000
1,814,000
Net inc
342,000
196,000
Share earns
.06
.04
Shares outst
5,666,000
4,905,000
6mo rev
4,016,000
3,376,000
Net inc
632,000
301,000
Share earns
.11
.06
Shares outst
5,664,000
4,905,000


National-Standard Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National-Standard Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
66,010,000
70,392,000
Net loss
2,700,000
b185,000
Share earns
-
.05
b-Net income and included a tax credit of $45,000, or 2 cents a share.
Year-ago results included $3.5 million in sales from business units closed or divested during the 1989 fiscal year.


Patents;   A Device to Foil Radar
LEAD: The race car champion Bobby Unser has patented a new device to foil police radar.
The invention combines a radar detector, police scanner and citizens' band radio into one unit.
A single microprocessor can simultaneously control the scanning for signals from each source, in theory increasing the chances of detecting a police presence in the area.


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CRSS Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
125,386,000
155,778,000
Net inc
4,588,000
2,571,000
Share earns
.35
.21
Shares outst
13,258,000
12,396,000
6mo rev
265,854,000
312,563,000
Net inc
8,733,000
4,706,000
Share earns
.68
.38
Shares outst
12,829,000
12,376,000


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Convenience Stores (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
247,429,000
271,937,000
Net loss
655,000
2,054,000
6mo sales
533,021,000
547,265,000
Net inc
6,739,000
b717,000
Share earns
.30
-
b-Net loss


Andrew Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andrew Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
82,867,000
64,901,000
Net inc
3,529,000
2,468,000
Share earns
.35
.25


Guilford Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guilford Mills (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
124,690,000
143,955,000
Net loss
b22,606,000
c3,414,000
Share earns
-
.35
6mo sales
257,139,000
278,989,000
Net loss
b18,541,000
c8,521,000
Share earns
-
.87


Lee Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,991,000
7,255,000
Net loss
200,000
b18,000
b-Net income


E. Clinton Towl, 84, a Founder And Ex-Head of Grumman, Dies
LEAD: E. Clinton Towl, a founder and a former chief executive of the Grumman Corporation, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in Stuart, Fla.
He was 84 years old.


Piccadilly Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Piccadilly Cafeterias (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
77,578,000
68,474,000
Net inc
3,109,000
3,548,000
Share earns
.33
.38
Shares outst
9,484,000
9,360,000
6mo sales
153,426,000
132,678,000
Net inc
6,257,000
6,326,000
Share earns
.66
.68
Shares outst
9,482,000
9,359,000


Security Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
73,687
161,506
Per share
.05
.11
6mo net inc
356,148
660,002
Per share
.24
.45


Pain of AIDS Prompts Gifts To Neediest
LEAD: With The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund's drive approaching its third month, homelessness continues to be the predominant issue in letters from donors, but the scourge of AIDS also troubles many contributors.
Some people specify that their donations go to homeless people with AIDS; other suggest that they help children with AIDS, other impose no limits beyond relevance to AIDS.


Weighing Health: Big Derriere vs. Fat Belly
LEAD: It is healthier to be shaped like a pear than an apple, and now experts believe they know why: cholesterol levels are closely linked with where people carry their fat.


MAN IN THE NEWS: John Richard Dunne;   'Sensitive' but Untested
LEAD: There is little in John R. Dunne's long career as a New York State Senator and Long Island insurance lawyer that constitutes a conventional qualification for the job that President Bush has asked him to take as the nation's top enforcer of the civil rights laws.


American Science &amp; EngineerFing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Science &amp; EngineerFing (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 27
1989
1988
Sales
4,997,000
7,033,000
Net loss
330,000
b149,000
Share earns
-
.04
9mo sales
14,455,000
18,518,000
Net loss
483,000
b347,000
Share earns
-
.09


First United Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First United Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,002,455
1,763,394
Per share
.94
.83
Year net inc
6,600,000
6,900,000
Per share
3.06
3.21


No Headline
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan declared yesterday that poor people have a constitutional right to beg and struck down the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's ban on panhandling in the city's subways.


Birtcher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birtcher Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,099,000
1,491,000
Net loss
945,000
b236,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
5,119,000
4,805,000
6mo sales
5,301,000
2,960,000
Net loss
668,000
b457,000
Share earns
-
.10
Shares outst
4,976,000
4,805,000


Cheshire Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cheshire Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
969,000
879,000
Per share
.27
.23
Year net inc
4,441,000
3,940,000
Per share
1.23
1.00


P.&amp;G. Is Buying Hawaiian Punch
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company has agreed to acquire Del Monte's Hawaiian Punch business for $150 million, the companies announced.
The Hawaiian Punch purchase will complement P.&amp;G.'s fruit juice lines, which include Citrus Hill orange juice and Sunny Delight punch, a P.&amp;G. spokeswoman, Wendy Jacques, said.


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Engraph Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
49,430,000
38,623,000
Net inc
1,623,000
1,338,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
13,740,000
12,555,000
Yr sales
203,059,000
150,671,000
Net inc
7,884,000
6,610,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Shares outst
12,987,000
12,414,000


Pact in South African Strike
LEAD: Striking black rail workers and management have reached a tentative accord in a 12-week walkout that has claimed more than 30 lives and caused millions of dollars in property damage, a mediator said today.
The mediator, Charles Nupen, said the management of the state-owned South African Transport Services agreed to recognize the union representing 25,000 strikers.


Copperweld Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Copperweld Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
68,031,000
74,337,000
Net inc
5,298,000
6,088,000
Share earns
.60
.62
Shares outst
8,830,541
8,781,623
Yr sales
294,178,000
294,251,000
Net inc
17,587,000
21,151,000
Share earns
1.85
2.13
Shares outst
8,816,117
8,762,683


Caldwell Partners InternaFtional reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caldwell Partners InternaFtional
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,346,834
3,728,177
Net inc
704,355
563,265
Share earns
.20
-
Share earnings for the year-ago period was not provided because the company was not public.


Energen reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Energen (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
84,754,000
73,617,000
Net inc
1,674,000
b2,083,000
Share earns
.17
.25
Shares outst
9,707,000
8,456,000
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $176,000, or 2 cents a share.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Sixers Pull Near Knicks
Charles Barkley had 37 points and 21 rebounds and Hersey Hawkins scored 28 points as Philadelphia beat the Chicago Bulls, 120-109, last night at the Spectrum for its seventh consecutive victory.
The 76ers moved into second place in the Atlantic Division, one game behind the Knicks.


Health-Care Workers Stage 1-Hour Strike in East Germany


Sister R. Mildred Barker, Shaker Leader, 92
LEAD: Sister R. Mildred Barker, the spiritual leader of Maine's Shaker community, died on Thursday after a long illness.
She was 92 years old.


A Respected Air Carrier Based in a Troubled Land
LEAD: Since its founding in 1919 by a group of former World War I flying aces from Germany, Avianca, the Colombian national airline, has been the object of international intrigue and a target of political violence.
But it has maintained a respectable safety record throughout, aviation experts said yesterday.


Roadblock for Random Drug Tests
LEAD: New regulations requiring random drug tests for three million truck drivers are stalled in a legal limbo after the Transportation Department ordered the program to begin even though there was skimpy evidence of widespread drug use in the trucking industry.


Mortgage Investments Plus reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mortgage Investments Plus (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,308,900
1,247,300
Share earns
.15
.14
Yr net inc
5,041,400
4,276,700
Share earns
.56
.47


DS Bancor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DS Bancor Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
967,000
892,000
Per share
.44
.40
Year net inc
4,266,000
3,084,000
Per share
1.92
1.39
Shares outst
2,196,956
2,222,681


The 1991 Budget: Nuclear Weapons;   Administration Plans No Money for Plutonium Processing Plant
LEAD: The Bush Administration has notified Idaho lawmakers that it will not provide money in next year's budget to build a plutonium processing plant that was once the centerpiece of the Energy Department's plan to rebuild its deteriorating nuclear weapons industry.


Pinnacle Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Financial Svcs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
932,000
682,000
Per share
1.46
1.07
Year net inc
3,346,000
2,501,000
Per share
5.23
3.91


Fast Food For Light Minds
LEAD: Here are the newspapers. Let's see what's up:


About New York;   Khashoggi Hunts Good Publicity On the Subway
LEAD: Let's say you were the gentleman who helped set up the scheme to sell arms secretly to Iran.
The publicity was bad, but what really stings is that Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North, the wizard of the White House basement, gave your $10 million take to the Nicaraguan contras.


Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
63,609,000
75,373,000
Net loss
3,109,000
5,873,000
Shares outst
18,146,287
18,106,839
6mo rev
127,758,000
145,191,000
Net loss
6,252,000
b2,793,000
Share earns
-
.15
Shares outst
18,173,257
18,645,204


Environmental Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
30,598,000
20,400,000
Net inc
b121,000
c28,300,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
15,951,000
12,461,000
Yr rev
92,600,000
66,400,000
Net inc
b2,649,000
c24,800,000
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
14,920,000
12,351,000


Firstcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstcorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
809,000
17,220,000
9mo net loss
b2,731,000
14,602,000
b-After a gain of $1,603,000, or 49 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Jefferson National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson National Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
589,000
472,000
Per share
.24
.19
Shares outst
2,504,716
2,452,216
Year net inc
2,211,000
1,912,000
Per share
.90
.78
Shares outst
2,465,341
2,452,216


Versus Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Versus Technology Inc.
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,317,000
7,616,000
Net loss
3,453,000
424,000


Airtran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airtran Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
18,405,000
7,916,000
Net inc
341,000
293,000
Share earns
.08
.08
Shares outst
4,202,000
3,817,000
9mo rev
52,510,000
24,337,000
Net inc
2,668,000
1,441,000
Share earns
.66
.44
Shares outst
4,054,000
3,321,000


LCS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LCS Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,878,450
7,593,064
Net loss
b242,885
c80,096
Shares outst
1,510,063
1,510,452
b-Included a net writeoff of $270,000 related to the closing of a division.


Washington Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Energy (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
111,498,000
105,509,000
Net inc
10,306,000
10,440,000
Share earns
.69
.72


Leiner (P.) Nutritional ProdFucts Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leiner (P.) Nutritional ProdFucts Corp.(A)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
40,162,000
39,135,000
Net inc
21,000
1,190,000
Share earns
-
.23
9mo sales
109,080,000
87,381,000
Net inc
1,962,000
2,549,000
Share earns
.38
.49


Johnson Going to Banquet
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who won the Jesse Owens International Trophy Award in 1988 and tested positive for an anabolic steroid seven months later at the Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, has accepted an invitation to a banquet Feb. 6 to honor this year's award winner.


Hutchinson Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hutchinson Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
26,265,000
26,148,000
Net inc
816,000
b651,000
Share earns
.21
-
b-Net loss


Japanese-Style Health Care for Patients Far From Home
LEAD: Entering the new office at New York Health Care in midtown Manhattan might be confusing - unless the patient speaks Japanese. ''Konichiwa,'' the receptionist says, greeting newcomers.
Then reaching for her ringing phone, she answers, ''Moshi, moshi.''


Bush Budget Sees Growing Revenue And Cut In Deficit
LEAD: President Bush is preparing to send Congress a $1.2 trillion budget that envisions a dramatic decline in the Federal deficit to roughly half its level in the current fiscal year.


Corrections
LEAD: The Eating Well column in The Living Section on Wednesday about sources for nonfat foods gave an incorrect telephone number for Bacino's of Lincoln Park in Chicago, which sells stuffed pizza.
Its number is (312) 472-7400.


Webster Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Webster Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
735,000
1,231,000
Per share
.21
.34
Shares outst
3,535,000
3,572,000
Year net inc
4,360,000
4,514,000
Per share
1.23
1.23
Shares outst
3,554,000
3,681,000


Toll at 72 in L.I. Air Crash; 89 Survive
LEAD: Federal investigators said yesterday that a jetliner from South America may have run out of fuel before crashing on Long Island's North Shore in rain and heavy fog Thursday night, killing 72 people and injuring scores more of the 161 passengers and crew members on board.


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caere Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,512,000
4,763,000
Net inc
1,132,000
734,000
Share earns
.23
.21
Shares outst
3,903,000
3,376,000
Yr sales
19,591,000
11,937,000
Net inc
3,237,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.83
.37
Shares outst
4,904,000
3,461,000


Washington Fedl Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Fedl Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,815,000
c41,000
Per share
.59
-
6mo net inc
2,408,000
d301,000
Per share
.80
.10
b-After an extraordinary charge of $200,000.
c-Net loss and after an extraordinary charge of $21,000.


Sydney C. Davis, Professor, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Sydney C. Davis, professor emeritus of education at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I., died of a heart attack on Wednesday at the Hollis Branch of the Queens Borough Public Library.
He was 77 years old.


Lothar Kahn, Professor, 67
LEAD: Dr.
Lothar Kahn, a retired professor of modern languages at Central Connecticut State University, died of acute leukemia on Tuesday at St.
Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., where he was vacationing.
He was 67 years old and lived in Kensington, Conn.


CFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFS Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
841,000
b1,600,000
Per share
.29
.54
6mo net inc
1,700,000
b2,500,000
Per share
.56
.84
b-Included after-tax gains of $1.1 million from real estate sales.


Analysis &amp; Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analysis &amp; Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,800,000
19,246,000
Net inc
873,000
767,000
Share earns
.40
.35
Shares outst
2,185,000
2,213,000
9mo rev
69,611,000
59,375,000
Net inc
2,594,000
2,341,000
Share earns
1.18
1.07
Shares outst
2,205,000
2,188,000


Aspen Ribbons reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Ribbons (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,709,520
4,493,157
Net inc
146,482
296,096
Share earns
.04
.08
Shares outst
3,883,500
3,838,158
6mo rev
9,668,477
8,828,549
Net inc
486,357
b675,467
Share earns
.13
.18
Shares outst
3,883,500
3,723,984


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,100,000
3,400,000
Per share
1.04
.86
Year net inc
13,700,000
16,300,000
Per share
3.49
4.16


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sierra Pacific Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
113,425,000
105,503,000
Net inc
12,686,000
12,565,000
Share earns
.57
.59
Shares outst
22,341,704
21,401,931
Yr rev
445,411,000
408,423,000
Net inc
44,990,000
42,007,000
Share earns
2.05
1.98
Shares outst
21,999,503
21,228,779


Cipher Data Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cipher Data Products (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
41,502,000
53,881,000
Net loss
11,976,000
b3,180,000
Share earns
-
.22
6mo rev
82,847,000
105,854,000
Net loss
26,149,000
b7,023,000
Share earns
-
.49


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DR.
STEVEN A. SCHROEDER, a professor of medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles, has been chosen as the next president of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
The foundation, with headquarters in Princeton, N.J., is the largest in the nation dedicated to improving health and health care, awarding $100 million in grants annually.


Chiang Mai Journal;   Verdant Land Where Victoria Stares and Stares
LEAD: Amid the many gracious temples of Chiang Mai, still one of the most charming cities of booming Thailand, there is a bit of consecrated ground presided over not by the Buddha but by an equally plump representation of a more earthly suzerainty, Queen Victoria.


Hees International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hees International
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
609,229,000
477,654,000
Net inc
248,804,000
190,959,000
Share earns
2.70
2.30
Results are in Canadian funds.


Analytical Surveys reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Analytical Surveys
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,786,900
1,749,332
Net loss
49,035
b101,690
Share earns
-
.04
b-Net income


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Price Anomalies
LEAD: One of the more reliable shopping maxims is that consumers get more for their money when they buy goods in large packages.
Usually the purchaser receives part of the saving from the reduced costs of factors like packaging, handling and storage.
That is basic economics.


Quisenberry Signs Two-Year Giants Pact
LEAD: Dan Quisenberry, once the best relief pitcher in the majors, joined the San Francisco Giants yesterday with a two-year guaranteed contract.


Madge Bellamy, 90, 1920's Film Actress
LEAD: Madge Bellamy, an actress who starred in silent films in the 1920's, died on Wednesday at San Antonio Community Hospital in Upland, Calif.
She was 90 years old and lived in Ontario, Calif.


Broad National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broad National Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,376,000
1,369,000
Per share
.50
.50
Year net inc
5,779,000
5,174,000
Per share
2.12
1.90
Year-ago periods' per share earnings adjusted for a 10 percent stock dividend paid in December 1989.


Dataproducts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataproducts Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 23
1989
1988
Revenue
79,280,000
94,480,000
Net loss
4,069,000
b1,627,000
Share earns
-
.08
Shares outst
19,808,000
19,784,000
9mo rev
242,570,000
268,111,000
Net loss
11,732,000
b3,580,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
19,927,000
19,745,000


Murphy Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Murphy Oil (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
453,625,000
415,142,000
Net inc
b20,956,000
c25,661,000
Share earns
.61
.75
Yr rev
1,681,827,000
1,524,773,000
Net inc
b46,606,000
c38,752,000
Share earns
1.37
1.14


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I had time to say a prayer.
I put my attache case over my knees because I didn't have a pillow.
I bent over in the crash position.
In about five seconds, we were crashing into the trees.''
- Jorge Lorano, a Bogota businessman. [1:1.]


Devon Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Devon Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
42,450,000
39,299,000
Net inc
2,039,000
2,390,000
Share earns
.29
.23
Shares outst
7,126,000
10,425,000
9mo sales
135,701,000
125,092,000
Net inc
9,267,000
9,938,000
Share earns
1.00
.95
Shares outst
9,309,000
10,425,000


Massmutual Participation InFvestors reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massmutual Participation InFvestors (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
83,583,927
84,148,902
Share earns
9.14
9.21
Assets represented net assets.


Xicor Inc. reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xicor Inc. (OTC)
16wks to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
25,014,000
27,738,000
Net loss
5,626,000
b3,314,000
Share earns
-
.18
Yr sales
90,185,000
90,138,000
Net inc
423,000
13,999,000
Share earns
.02
.79


Rail Consultant Picked As President of L.I.R.R.
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday named Charles W. Hoppe, a transportation consultant from Arlington, Va., president of the Long Island Rail Road.


Automated Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automated Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,026,000
3,662,000
Net inc
75,000
b758,000
Share earns
.02
-
6mo sales
9,187,000
7,247,000
Net loss
415,000
1,105,000
b-Net loss


Gender Messages
LEAD: To the Editor:


Connecticut Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Connecticut Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
97,000
68,000
Per share
.07
.07
Shares outst
1,395,000
995,000
Year net inc
104,000
b550,000
Per share
.09
-
Shares outst
1,198,835
995,464


Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,744,963
26,746,216
Net inc
1,011,423
1,260,962
Share earns
.26
.31
Shares outst
3,918,450
4,141,560
6mo sale
57,872,579
53,158,273
Net inc
2,142,557
2,263,777
Share earns
.55
.55
Shares outst
3,918,206
4,141,530


A Correction
LEAD: A letter Tuesday misstated the area in New Jersey's Allamuchy Mountain State Park that is being exchanged for parcels held by a developer.
The figure is 58.363 acres, not 58,363 acres.


Lesco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lesco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
33,193,838
34,334,773
Net inc
1,600,387
1,759,585
Share earns
.40
.43
Yr sales
106,475,472
100,288,010
Net inc
1,416,022
2,726,937
Share earns
.35
.67


Calling Himself a War Prisoner, Noriega Says U.S. Can't Try Him
LEAD: In an effort to avoid prosecution in the United States, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega asserted today that he was a prisoner of war in this country, and his lawyers demanded that he be taken to a neutral country to stand trial.


Cadmus Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadmus Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
43,603,000
39,644,000
Net inc
1,342,000
820,000
Share earns
.22
.13
6mo sales
82,087,000
78,238,000
Net inc
2,052,000
2,062,000
Share earns
.34
.34
Shares outst
6,064,000
6,054,000


Boole &amp; Babbage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boole &amp; Babbage (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,197,000
17,053,000
Net inc
1,378,000
1,003,000
Share earns
.36
.28
Shares outst
3,855,000
3,569,000


CB&amp;T Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CB&amp;T Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,303,000
907,000
Per share
.56
.38
Year net inc
4,944,000
3,802,000
Per share
2.06
1.58


Homeowners Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homeowners Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,381,000
8,403,000
Net inc
1,385,000
623,000
Share earns
.23
.10
Yr rev
40,650,000
31,333,000
Net inc
4,735,000
3,320,000
Share earns
.79
.62
Shares outst
5,999,000
5,405,000


Sour Milk For the Fat Cats
LEAD: So far, the star of the Super Bowl is Roberta Baskin, and she is not even a football player.
No one would ever mistake her for Joe Montana or John Elway or even Sammy Baugh.


Agouron Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Agouron Pharmaceuticals (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
822,000
530,000
Net loss
1,352,000
1,122,000
Shares outst
3,269,000
2,623,400
6mo rev
1,444,000
1,132,000
Net loss
3,031,000
1,967,000
Shares outst
3,269,900
2,623,400


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankWorcester Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,797,000
4,020,000
Per share
.27
.55
Shares outst
6,654,000
7,344,000
Year net inc
5,196,000
11,036,000
Per share
.74
1.45
Shares outst
6,987,000
7,604,000


New Hampshire Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Hampshire Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
18,943,000
1,182,000
Year net loss
54,975,000
b3,155,000
Per share
-
.51
b-Net income


A Strategy That Beats Shocking Fuel Bills
LEAD: Millions of homeowners who shivered through the record cold spell of December are shuddering in January at a related problem: December's fuel bill.
It is too late, of course, to do anything about the cost of heating last month, but future bills can be spread out or reduced, experts say.


Neworld Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
19,297,000
b2,324,000
Per share
-
.50
Year net loss
13,342,000
b9,530,000
Per share
-
2.05
b-Net income
The company said it added $22 million in the latest fourth quarter to its reserve for possible loan losses, and that it had also sold its entire portfolio of equity securities in the quarter, resulting in a pre-tax securities charge of about $2.4 million.


Treatment for Player
LEAD: Tom Bill, the Penn State quarterback suspended by Coach Joe Paterno last Sept. 19 for violation of team rules after he was cited by the campus police for an alcohol-related incident, has withdrawn from classes and voluntarily admitted himself to an alcohol treatment program, Paterno announced yesterday.


Yes to Mandela's Way
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk has led his Government to the verge of talks on ending apartheid in South Africa.
But now he balks at the very moment when the climate for negotiations with the black majority has never been better - and when it could easily get far worse.


Dollar Down Against Pound And Yen, but Up Elsewhere
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday, weakening against the British pound and Japanese yen but rising against many other currencies in heavy trading.


Review/Music;   Three Views of Orpheus
LEAD: Erich Leinsdorf, one of the canniest builders of orchestra programs among currently active symphony conductors, put together a particularly appetizing one for the New York Philharmonic's audience on Thursday evening.
The theme woven through his concert at Avery Fisher Hall was the Orpheus myth, as treated by three composers: Liszt, Stravinsky and Offenbach.


Ciprico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ciprico Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,585,000
2,671,223
Net loss
46,000
b120,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income
The company said the latest quarter's net was hurt by $275,000 in pretax expenses associated with a discontinued tender offer and related restructuring costs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article Tuesday about the growth of art galleries in Santa Monica, Calif., misidentified one.
It is Luhring Augistine &amp; Hetzler.


Gilbert Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gilbert Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
64,771,000
62,354,000
Net inc
2,778,000
2,648,000
Share earns
.43
.41
Shares outst
6,463,334
6,572,021
Yr rev
257,383,000
256,228,000
Net inc
10,951,000
9,611,000
Share earns
1.67
1.46
Shares outst
6,555,554
6,595,994


MPG Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MPG Investment Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
858,705
737,895
Net inc
697,203
570,476
Share earns
.15
.12
6mo rev
1,441,639
1,248,352
Net inc
978,165
894,128
Share earns
.18
.16
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Where Executives Dress Up And Let Their Hair Down
LEAD: On most days they can be found running large corporations, banks and brokerage houses.
But once a year they attend a secretive, all-male dinner party at which new members sometimes dress in drag and perform silly skits.
They have been known to add even more levity by tossing rolls at each other.


Lewis Mumford Dies at 94; A Visionary Social Critic
LEAD: Lewis Mumford, a philosopher, literary critic, historian, city planner, cultural and political commentator, essayist and perspicacious writer on the subject of architecture, died yesterday at his home in Amenia, N.Y.
He was 94 years old.


Jesse C. Reese Jr., 60, Concert Hall Manager
LEAD: Jesse Creighton Reese Jr., a former director of Town Hall, a concert hall in Manhattan, died of heart disease on Jan. 17 at the Tulane Medical Center in New Orleans.
He was 60 years old and had lived in New Orleans since last fall.


Donald A. Stoddard, Banker, 79
LEAD: Donald A. Stoddard, a former senior vice president of the Morgan Guarantee Trust Company in Manhattan, died yesterday at his home in Bloomingdale, N.J., after a short illness.
He was 79 years old and had lived in Nutley until moving to Bloomingdale last year.


Escagenetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Escagenetics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,536,170
1,054,108
Net loss
533,099
443,533
Shares outst
3,682,337
3,655,037
9mo rev
3,225,344
2,785,615
Net loss
1,882,858
1,473,581
Shares outst
3,675,428
3,645,955


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   Sofia Drops Party's Army Control
LEAD: The Communist-dominated Government and the army today announced the removal of Communist Party control from Bulgaria's armed forces, its police and other uniformed or armed groups.


Contel Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Cellular (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
19,460,000
13,077,000
Net inc
162,000
b577,000
Yr rev
65,519,000
41,415,000
Net inc
2,621,000
2,047,000
Share earns
.03
.02
b-Net loss


The 1991 Budget;   Veterans Facing Plan To Alter Home Loans
LEAD: For the first time, veterans would be required to make down payments to receive Government home loans from the Department of Veterans Affairs even for the most modestly priced houses under a proposal in President Bush's new budget.


In Home Health reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* In Home Health
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,062,000
1,176,000
Net inc
150,000
b92,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
4,017,042
3,700,750
b-Net loss


Merchants Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bank of New York
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,361,713
2,548,947
Per share
1.43
1.54
Year net inc
10,463,744
10,352,390
Per share
6.33
6.26


Northeast Utilities Adds HEC Energy
LEAD: Northeast Utilities reached an agreement to acquire the assets of a Boston-based energy conservation company.


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Justin Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
79,723,000
76,824,000
Net inc
3,376,000
3,569,000
Share earns
.39
.43
Yr sales
277,930,000
249,736,000
Net inc
7,198,000
7,469,000
Share earns
.84
.89


Enhancing Television for the Visually Impaired
LEAD: ''When I first heard it, it was such a shock; I found myself walking around the room in tears,'' said an elated Jane Morin, who has been blind since birth.


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
55,885,000
57,588,000
Net loss
10,157,000
b1,471,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
9,793,000
8,073,000
Yr sales
233,006,000
218,732,000
Net loss
7,836,000
b6,420,000
Share earns
-
.80
Shares outst
8,924,000
8,061,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday headed Peach Bottom Journal, about a Pennsylvania man who built a house without a sewer system, described his legal status incorrectly.
The man, Jacob J. Herschberger Jr., served half of a 30-day jail sentence before winning the right to appeal it.


Jefferies Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferies Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
25,391,000
36,255,000
Net loss
3,161,000
b4,856,000
Share earns
-
.68
Shares outst
6,092,000
7,124,000
Yr rev
130,627,000
144,633,000
Net inc
3,659,000
15,986,000
Share earns
.58
2.17
Shares outst
6,315,000
7,351,000


Rich and Famous Can Take a Number
LEAD: Julio Iglesias needed a room at the Inter-Continental but there wasn't one.
And Dale Dugan, a hotel official, couldn't worry about it.
He had 500 Bronco fans to think about.
Arriving simultaneously on three planes, they needed to be checked into the Inter-Continental without a tiresome wait.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   Legislators Challenge Gorbachev On Use of Troops in Azerbaijan
LEAD: Members of the Soviet Parliament today challenged President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's justification for sending troops to Azerbaijan and demanded an immediate session of the Supreme Soviet to draft more democratic controls on the handling of domestic emergencies.


Weitek reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weitek (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,200,000
10,100,000
Net inc
1,952,000
1,428,000
Share earns
.23
.17
Shares outst
8,508,000
8,389,000
Yr rev
49,200,000
35,200,000
Net inc
6,880,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.81
.52
Shares outst
8,459,000
7,676,000


Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,567,000
2,537,000
Per share
1.92
1.59
The 1988 per share earnings adjusted for a 5 percent stock dividend paid in April 1989.


Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
44,135,000
38,456,000
Net inc
3,303,000
2,742,000
Share earns
.27
.23
Yr rev
173,206,000
158,295,000
Net inc
17,254,000
16,040,000
Share earns
1.42
1.30


Taylor Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taylor Devices
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,328,608
1,344,849
Net inc
105,436
b15,306
Share earns
.04
-
6mo sales
2,451,635
2,567,329
Net inc
187,059
8,553
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Religion Notes
LEAD: With a frequency many consider alarming, Southern Baptist pastors around the country are being dismissed from their pulpits.


Damaso Alonso Dies; Spanish Poet Was 91
LEAD: The poet and scholar Damaso Alonso, director emeritus of the Royal Academy of the Spanish Language, died at home Wednesday after a long illness.
He was 91 years old and had suffered from respiratory problems for three years.


Barnwell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnwell Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
16,950,000
3,290,000
Net inc
4,550,000
440,000
Share earns
3.10
.31


Alza Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alza Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
24,519,000
22,137,000
Net inc
5,463,000
4,380,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
35,132,000
33,656,000
Yr rev
92,687,000
84,189,000
Net inc
18,774,000
17,003,000
Share earns
.55
.51
Shares outst
34,381,000
33,629,000


Develcon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Develcon Electronics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,498,000
3,205,000
Net loss
397,000
923,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


A&amp;W Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A&amp;W Brands Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,214,000
20,832,000
Net inc
b2,761,000
2,348,000
Share earns
.30
.26
Yr sales
110,924,000
102,354,000
Net inc
b9,960,000
7,454,000
Share earns
1.08
.81


Standard Pacific L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Pacific L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
171,326,363
165,228,648
Net inc
b36,016,970
32,416,275
Share earns
1.31
1.19
Yr rev
486,402,967
492,490,503
Net inc
b106,298,763
75,418,888
Share earns
3.87
2.75


Sherwin-Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
478,735,000
444,585,000
Net inc
19,831,000
18,714,000
Share earns
.46
.43
Shares outst
43,373,029
43,567,619
Yr sales
2,123,483,000
1,950,474,000
Net inc
108,935,000
101,080,000
Share earns
2.52
2.30
Shares outst
43,163,170
43,914,921


BEI Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BEI Electronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
19,172,000
14,769,000
Net inc
1,861,000
1,482,000
Share earns
.27
.30
Shares outst
6,957,000
4,991,000


U.S. SAID TO GIVE UP TWO ATHENS BASES
LEAD: Two Greek party leaders said today that the United States had agreed to shut its two military bases in the Athens region.


Encore Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Encore Computer Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
60,107,000
-
Net inc
255,000
-
Share earns
.01
-
Yr sales
157,920,000
-
Net loss
31,965,000
-
Year-ago results are not comparable; in the spring of 1989, Encore changed from a fiscal year ended Oct.


Corel Systems reports earnings for Year to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corel Systems
Year to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
21,738,458
6,605,102
Net inc
b2,920,619
b169,401
Share earns
.42
.03
Shares outst
6,931,073
5,456,557
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $362,000, or 5 cents a share for the latest year and $46,000, or 1 cent a share for the year-earlier period.


The Elephant Wars
LEAD: They burned rhino horns here Thursday, as they had burned elephant tusks last year.
The huge pyre, also piled with leopard, lion and zebra skins seized by anti-poaching squads, was worth $2.5 million.
Thick black smoke rolled up to the idyllic blue sky, splotched with idle cottony clouds.


Wyoming National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyoming National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
990,000
1,057,000
Per share
.48
.53
Year net inc
3,968,000
3,493,000
Per share
1.93
2.08
The company said that primary earnings per common share were calculated on 1,777,408 shares for 1989, while the 1988 calculations were based on a weighted average of 1,185,345 shares through June 15, 1988 and 1,777,408 shares thereafter.


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Augat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
74,346,243
74,893,727
Net inc
b5,600,000
1,842,296
Share earns
.31
.10
Yr sales
306,647,205
320,987,830
Net inc
b14,900,000
c22,822,184
Share earns
.83
-


Prime Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
953,000
242,000
Per share
.56
-
Year net inc
2,200,000
1,500,000
There were no historical per share earnings for the latest year and both year-ago periods for the periods prior to the bank's conversion from a mutual to a stock-owned corporation on July 26, 1989.


Cobe Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cobe Laboratories Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
63,709,000
59,352,000
Net inc
2,622,000
2,355,000
Share earns
.40
.36
Shares outst
6,554,000
6,574,000
Yr sales
237,915,000
226,562,000
Net inc
9,784,000
11,139,000
Share earns
1.49
1.70
Shares outst
6,586,000
6,559,000


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
139,363,000
146,667,000
Net inc
6,211,000
7,106,000
Share earns
.58
.66
Prior-year earnings were restated to reflect an accounting change.


Louisiana Flooding


Trans Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Financial Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
723,000
793,000
Per share
.58
.67
Year net inc
2,787,000
2,027,000
Per share
2.23
1.63


Upheaval in the East: Turkey;   In a Turkish Village, Soviet Strife on TV
LEAD: Cemal Bayat owns two things that make him a sought-after man in this village near the Soviet border: a grocery store selling cookies, batteries and washing powder, and one of the only television sets receiving the news live from the Soviet Union.


Hathaway Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hathaway Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,402,000
13,254,000
Net loss
239,000
b7,000
Shares outst
4,168,780
4,223,652
6mo rev
24,225,000
24,887,000
Net loss
583,000
689,000
Shares outst
4,192,577
4,040,634


Haiti's Ruler Says He'll Lift State of Siege on Tuesday
LEAD: Responding to international and domestic pressure, Haiti's military ruler said tonight that the 30-day state of siege he imposed last weekend would be lifted on Tuesday.


Allstar Inns reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allstar Inns (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,048,000
20,481,000
Net loss
b2,723,000
c1,892,000
Yr rev
44,410,000
44,213,000
Net loss
b5,402,000
c2,421,000
b-Included extraordinary charges from legal expenses of $137,000 for the quarter and $717,000 for the year.


Tyler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyler Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
44,607,000
44,975,000
Net loss
b1,698,000
cd759,000
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
20,782,000
21,710,000
Yr sales
189,375,000
179,234,000
Net inc
b1,438,000
c20,988,000
Share earns
.07
1.11
Shares outst
20,782,000
21,710,000


2 Airmen Given Prison Terms In Theft of 3 Fighter Engines
LEAD: Two former Air Force base security policemen who pleaded guilty to stealing three fighter jet engines worth nearly $10 million were sentenced to Federal prison terms on Friday.


American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Savings Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b1,371,000
c9,626,000
Per share
-
1.39
Year net inc
b2,268,000
33,258,000
Per share
-
4.67
b-Included pre-tax charges of $1 million related to the conversion of New York State Charter, the bank's evaluation and revision of its business strategy and changes to the board and senior management.


Gentner Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gentner Electronics
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,393,403
1,110,200
Net loss
15,617
b89,519
Share earns
-
.03
Sharrs outst
2,976,067
2,915,750
6mo rev
2,647,758
2,131,704
Net loss
33,397
b153,920
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
2,971,517
2,910,750


MAJOR CRASHES AT REGIONAL AIRPORTS
LEAD: Feb. 1, 1957: Twenty people were killed when an airliner bound for Miami crashed on Rikers Island shortly after taking off from La Guardia Airport in a blinding snowstorm.
There were 74 survivors.
Feb. 3. 1959: Sixty-five people died when an American Airlines plane fell into the East River.


Mycogen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mycogen Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,510,000
1,416,000
Net loss
258,000
736,000


Storm Kills at Least 93 In 6 European Nations
LEAD: A storm with hurricane-force winds left at least 93 people dead in Western Europe, officials said, and workers in six nations today tried to restore crippled transportation and utility services.


Harland (John H.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harland (John H.) (N)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
85,585,012
83,206,309
Net inc
15,038,238
14,072,913
Share earns
.40
.37
Yr sales
344,734,268
333,315,000
Net inc
58,051,509
53,323,335
Share earns
1.54
1.41


Don't Blame Farmers if Crop Insurance Fails
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Warning From Cockpit, Survivors From Flight 52 Say
LEAD: There was not a word of warning from the cockpit, Maria Patino said.
But inside the plane was all dark, and she knew the passengers were in trouble when the emergency lights over the doors flashed on.


River on Indonesian Island O Java Floods, Killing 44
LEAD: Floods triggered by two days of heavy rains devastated the city of Semarang in central Java today, leaving 44 people dead and 4 missing, an official said.


California Fincl Hldg reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Fincl Hldg (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,731,948
1,664,504
Per share
.43
.42
Shares outst
4,003,614
4,029,555
Year net inc
4,903,795
5,376,875
Per share
1.23
1.34
Shares outst
4,001,857
4,026,289


Bronx Principal Is Found Guilty In Crack Case
LEAD: Matthew Barnwell, the ousted Bronx principal whose drug arrest touched off a wave of investigations of New York City's local school boards, was convicted of cocaine possession yesterday.


Hayes-Dana Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hayes-Dana Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
107,249,000
134,554,000
Net inc
4,701,000
b4,556,000
Share earns
.31
.28
Yr sales
494,849,000
570,406,000
Net inc
20,684,000
b21,854,000
Share earns
1.31
1.31


Datascope Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datascope Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
27,300,000
26,750,000
Net inc
1,551,000
2,698,000
Share earns
.30
.52
Shares outst
5,176,000
5,188,000
6mo sales
52,500,000
51,450,000
Net inc
2,482,000
4,660,000
Share earns
.48
.87
Shares outst
5,169,000
4,891,000


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
2,244,081,000
2,378,939,000
Net inc
13,698,000
22,760,000
Share earns
.29
.48
Yr sales
9,128,596,000
9,066,101,000
Net inc
35,325,000
62,328,000
Share earns
.74
1.32


Merry Land &amp; Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merry Land &amp; Investment (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,918,000
7,811,000
Net inc
1,617,000
1,562,000
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
9,731,000
9,673,000
Yr rev
37,490,000
31,535,000
Net inc
9,102,000
8,580,000
Share earns
.93
.90
Shares outst
9,767,000
9,495,000


M-A-R-C Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* M-A-R-C Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
16,414,000
16,744,000
Net inc
756,000
789,000
Share earns
.26
.25
Shares outst
2,907,000
3,165,000
9mo rev
46,831,000
46,293,000
Net inc
2,158,000
2,013,000
Share earns
.73
.63
Shares outst
2,967,000
3,184,000


For Some, Hours of Waiting And Still There's No Word
LEAD: In an unadorned banquet room of a Holiday Inn near Kennedy International Airport the wait for passengers of Avianca Flight 52 gave way yesterday morning to a painful lottery.


Corcoran Said to Select Interim Chief
LEAD: The board of the Corcoran Gallery of Art is expected to name David W. Scott, a retired museum director and art historian, as acting director when it meets on Monday.


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
73,051,000
70,124,000
Net inc
11,264,000
11,063,000
Share earns
.46
.44


The Price of Fudging on S &amp; L's
LEAD: The savings and loan troubles became a crisis because Washington dawdled.
Losses at just one thrift, California's big Lincoln Savings and Loan, topped $2 billion because regulators dawdled.
Even after President Bush proposed remedial legislation, hundreds of insolvent S &amp; L's bled needlessly last year while Congress dawdled some more.


Homestead Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Homestead Holding Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
239,000
481,000
Per share
.21
.39
Year net inc
1,937,381
1,664,888
Per share
1.68
1.44


Ailing Bank of New England Borrows From Fed
LEAD: In the midst of a race to raise cash to cover a decline in deposits, the Bank of New England Corporation has begun borrowing from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the company said yesterday.


Patents;   Hall of Fame Names Two Black Inventors
LEAD: For the first time since its creation in 1973, the National Inventors Hall of Fame has elected two black inventors, George Washington Carver and Percy L. Julian.


EIP Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EIP Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,358,000
3,113,000
Net inc
219,000
b192,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
2,195,000
2,183,000
b-Net loss and included a gain from an accounting adjustment due to the cumulative effect on prior years of adopting the new accounting standard on income taxes of $748,000, or 34 cents a share.


Stephenson on Mend
LEAD: Surgery to repair a double fracture of the left ring finger injured when Jan Stephenson was robbed on Tuesday night in Miami has been called a success.
Dr.
Eric Freeh made the assessment yesterday after he completed a two-hour operation on Thursday at the Humana Hospital in Phoenix.


Georgia Bonded Fibers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Bonded Fibers
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,065,000
9,346,000
Net inc
218,000
b95,000
Share earns
.14
-
6mo sales
19,595,000
16,512,000
Net inc
201,000
b357,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-Net loss


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JANUARY 27, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Bell Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
94,415,000
101,879,000
Net inc
1,370,000
989,000
Share earns
.23
.16
Shares outst
5,851,000
6,101,000
6mo sales
195,706,000
211,717,000
Net inc
3,533,000
2,192,000
Share earns
.60
.35
Shares outst
5,851,000
6,269,000


William Lyttleton Savage, Editor, 91
LEAD: William Lyttleton Savage, retired religion editor of Charles Scribner's Sons, who also served as secretary of the publishing concern, died on Thursday at the Meadow Lakes retirement community in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 91 years old and had been a resident of Morristown, N.J., for many years.


Lindberg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
18,712,469
19,377,493
Net inc
654,999
685,970
Share earns
.14
.15
Yr sales
78,957,580
81,450,503
Net inc
2,865,225
3,558,701
Share earns
.61
.76


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Donnelly Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
50,952,000
48,728,000
Net inc
610,000
1,283,000
Share earns
.11
.23
6mo sales
95,682,000
89,626,000
Net loss
737,000
b2,246,000
Share earns
-
.40


Alternate Energy Sources Can Be Economical
LEAD: To the Editor:


Silicon Valley Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Valley Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
38,143,000
17,940,000
Net inc
2,460,000
1,483,000
Share earns
.24
.15
Shares outst
10,401,000
9,882,000
Results for the year-ago quarter included Thermco Systems for the 15 days from Dec.


Soderstrom to Sing Mahler
LEAD: The soprano Elisabeth Soderstrom and the baritone William Stone will sing the Mahler song cycle ''Des Knaben Wunderhorn'' as guest soloists with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, under the direction of Julius Rudel, on Feb. 17 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The performance will be Miss Soderstrom's only New York appearance this season.


Newmont Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmont Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
154,693,000
128,609,000
Net inc
40,195,000
37,230,000
Share earns
.38
.35
Yr sales
559,221,000
388,806,000
Net inc
118,041,000
108,112,000
Share earns
1.13
1.03


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarcor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
53,479,000
53,759,000
Net loss
b4,172,000
cd6,203,000
Share earns
-
.52
Yr sales
204,112,000
195,141,000
Net inc
b7,117,000
d20,598,000
Share earns
.63
1.73


Critic's Notebook;   A Film Festival Feels the Pressure
LEAD: Steven Soderbergh, the director of ''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' walked into the little clapboard Main Street Deli the other day, a ''Do the Right Thing'' sweatshirt peeking out from under his coat.
He was wearing a modest tribute to Spike Lee, whose film he beat out for the grand prize at last year's Cannes Film Festival.


Emmanuel Ellenis, Executive, 61
LEAD: Emmanuel Ellenis, a public relations executive, died of a heart attack Thursday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 61 years old and lived in Dix Hills, L.I.


Orders for Durables Increase by 2.5%
LEAD: Orders to the nation's factories for durable goods rose 2.5 percent in December, climbing for the second consecutive month.


Techknits N reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techknits N
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
2,483,909
3,481,822
Net loss
47,890
b366,300
Share earns
-
.06
9mo sales
7,215,067
6,201,374
Net inc
206,941
500,569
Share earns
.03
.08
b-Net income


Premier Canadian Ltee reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Canadian Ltee
Qtr to Nov 27
1989
1988
Sales
9,460,548
10,405,824
Net loss
1,129,062
598,065
6mo sales
19,762,537
21,071,280
Net loss
1,709,184
994,834
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Tagliabue's Agenda
LEAD:
Drug Testing: The commissioner called a recent television report on the subject ''a smear'' and defended the league's policy, but also said he would explore changes.
Labor Talks: He said he hoped to help the owners and the players to achieve a collective-bargaining agreement as soon as possible.


MDU Resources Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MDU Resources Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
86,400,000
87,300,000
Net inc
9,700,000
9,900,000
Share earns
.51
.52
Yr rev
338,300,000
343,800,000
Net inc
35,900,000
33,800,000
Share earns
1.89
1.81


Iran Sees U.S. Hostages as Non-Issue, Official Says
LEAD: A senior Iranian Government official says that the prospect of freeing American hostages held in Lebanon is no longer a matter that preoccupies Iranian leaders.


Firstier Fincl reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstier Fincl (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b20,534,000
b25,349,000
Per share
4.05
5.04
b-After income from discontinued operations of $173,000 for the latest year and $6,251,000 for 1988.


Interface Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interface Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,703,349
5,739,424
Net inc
411,214
539,297
Share earns
.10
.13
Shares outst
4,325,190
4,314,089


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Wednesday about Gordon M. Buehrig, an automobile designer, misstated his birthplace.
It was Mason City, Ill., not Iowa.


Repayment Proposal By Eastern
LEAD: Eastern Airlines proposed a reorganization plan that would give some creditors less than 50 cents on the dollar, people who have seen the plan said yesterday.


New Delhi Tells Residents of Kashmiri Capital to Stay Indoors
LEAD: Government security officials told the city's residents not to leave their homes today, the day after four Indian Air Force men were killed by unidentified gunmen.


Meridian National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,785,550
15,331,434
Net loss
231,575
b180,424
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
6,636,579
4,107,290
9mo rev
33,828,776
44,180,378
Net loss
437,394
b326,340
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
5,160,304
4,106,472


Oryx Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oryx Energy Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
298,000,000
270,000,000
Net inc
14,000,000
2,000,000
Share earns
.13
.02
Shares outst
105,200,000
105,700,000
Yr sales
1,140,000,000
1,070,000,000
Net inc
b139,000,000
c305,000,000
Share earns
1.32
-
Shares outst
105,500,000
105,700,000


Commercial International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial International Corp.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
11,461,260
18,826,031
Net loss
1,281,218
b182,496
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
21,582,116
32,790,686
Net loss
1,268,105
395,516
b-Net income


First Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Savings Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
515,000
482,000
Per share
.77
.73
Year net inc
1,502,000
1,497,000
Per share
2.24
2.27
Per share decrease in latest year due to dilution from stock options based on the higher current market price of the stock.


Upheaval in the East;   Communists' Wealth Safe for Now in Poland
LEAD: Parliament voted today to drop a proposal to nationalize Communist Party wealth, bowing to the Solidarity-led Government's argument that a commission should review the property's status.


Kustom Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kustom Electronics
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
3,760,000
3,171,000
Net inc
103,000
205,000
Share earns
.05
.11


Calton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calton Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
55,408,000
67,959,000
Net loss
b3,923,000
c10,730,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
33,680,000
34,825,000
Yr rev
133,655,000
169,300,000
Net loss
b6,312,000
c21,655,000
Share earns
-
.62
Shares outst
33,735,000
35,003,000


Communist Laos Mixes Strict Political Dogma With Capitalist Economics
LEAD: Fifteen years after the Communist victory in this smallest of the three countries of Indochina, Laotian leaders continue to profess rigorous political dogma, but they have openly returned to capitalist economics.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crompton &amp; Knowles (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
85,084,000
85,597,000
Net inc
6,008,000
b2,771,000
Share earns
.49
.24
Shares outst
12,311,000
11,734,000
Yr sales
355,817,000
289,787,000
Net inc
24,501,000
b15,328,000
Share earns
2.00
1.30
Shares outst
12,266,000
11,810,000


Wisconsin Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wisconsin Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
385,864,000
401,771,000
Net inc
47,058,000
20,488,000
Share earns
.70
.30
Yr rev
1,493,353,000
1,540,712,000
Net inc
193,957,000
183,186,000
Share earns
2.88
2.73


Patricia Andrews Is Wed in Florida
LEAD: Patricia Shanley Andrews and Craig Stewart Bray were married yesterday at St.
Edward's Roman Catholic Church in Palm Beach, Fla., by the Rev.
Walter J. Hartnett.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin C. Andrews Jr. of Darien, Conn., and Palm Beach.
Her husband is a son of Irene Bray-Jerue of Stamford, Conn., and Gene E.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Jersey Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
88,097,000
75,219,000
Net inc
b5,276,000
c5,235,000
Share earns
.64
.63
Shares outst
8,313,992
8,306,477
Yr rev
259,024,000
251,303,000
Net inc
b13,633,000
c15,051,000
Share earns
1.64
1.88
Shares outst
8,311,482
7,994,511


Essef Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Essef Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
36,922,000
21,061,000
Net loss
224,000
2,187,000
Shares outst
4,859,200
4,948,602


Service Merchandise reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Service Merchandise (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,402,865,000
1,296,636,000
Net inc
74,241,000
80,617,000
Share earns
1.40
1.59
Shares outst
52,942,000
50,824,000
Yr sales
3,307,110,000
3,092,817,000
Net inc
71,991,000
76,487,000
Share earns
1.39
1.51
Shares outst
51,966,000
50,654,000


New Eastern Europe Forum Is Urged by Czech President
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia suggested today that Eastern Europen countries emerging from Communist domination form an informal, market-oriented union.


Houghton Mifflin reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houghton Mifflin (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
82,818,000
71,797,000
Net loss
1,135,000
2,920,000
Yr sales
404,359,000
368,289,000
Net inc
23,010,000
24,101,000
Share earns
1.62
1.70
Fourth quarter 1988 results restated to reflect change in accounting for book returns.


DST Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DST Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
31,665,000
34,212,000
Net loss
b833,000
c499,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
19,042,914
19,015,922
Yr rev
127,007,000
138,362,000
Net inc
6,031,000
11,738,000
Share earns
.32
.61
Shares outst
19,037,227
19,180,350


CHC Helicopter reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CHC Helicopter
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
159,700,000
118,100,000
Net inc
7,100,000
4,000,000
Share earns
.96
.54
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Franklin Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Holding Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
415,173
547,770
Net loss
59,675
73,675
9mo rev
1,302,968
1,563,905
Net inc
98,739
b36,377
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Sun Energy Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Energy Partners (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
301,000,000
274,000,000
Net inc
19,000,000
c2,000,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
378,200,000
352,200,000
Yr rev
1,195,000,000
1,164,000,000
Net loss
b115,000,000
358,000,000
Shares outst
366,900,000
338,300,000


Pervasive Deficiencies Hurting the Knicks
LEAD: Ten days ago, the Knicks had the best record in the Eastern Conference and the third-best one in the National Basketball Association.


At Mayors' Meeting, Barry Arrest Underscores Top Problem: Drugs
LEAD: More than 200 mayors who converged on Washington for their annual winter meeting this week focused much of their attention on their absent host, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.
Mr.
Barry's arrest on drug charges underscored the major theme of the three-day meeting of the United States Conference of Mayors: the need to rid cities of the blight of drugs.


Heritage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b17,014,000
c2,970,000
Per share
-
.40
Year net loss
27,871,000
c11,315,000
Per share
-
1.53
b-Reflected provision for loan losses and chargeoffs that were larger than those estimated.


Upheaval in the East;   U.S. Envoy to Hungary Moves Up Resignation
LEAD: The State Department announced today that R. Mark Palmer, the Ambassador to Hungary, is resigning his post immediately after the disclosure on Thursday that he planned to leave Budapest in March to run a new investment company that would do business in Hungary.


Encor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Encor Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
80,800,000
-
Net loss
7,200,000
-
Yr rev
317,500,000
302,000,000
Net loss
48,800,000
123,600,000
The company formed as a separate entity in May, when it was spun off from its parent company, Transcanada Pipelines Ltd.


It's the Gun Owners' Lobby. Or Is It?
LEAD: ''Our cause is neither trendy nor fashionable, but a basic American belief that spans generations.'' So writes a top executive of the National Rifle Association in Time magazine.
That sort of language, conjuring basic values and patriotism, explains why some 2.8 million gun-owning Americans support the association.


Wyse Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wyse Technology Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
112,425,000
65,496,000
Net loss
7,073,000
26,400,000
9mo sales
343,860,000
347,049,000
Net loss
14,717,000
14,684,000
Included in operating expenses for the quarter are approximately $1.0 million of costs associated with the pending acquisition of Wyse by Channel International Corp., the Taiwan- based investor group that has commenced a tender offer to acquire Wyse.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Wichita Symphony Orchestra traveled rather a distance for its new conductor.
CHEN ZUOHUANG, the principal conductor of the Central Philharmonic Orchestra in Beijing, will head the Kansas orchestra.


Great-West Lifeco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great-West Lifeco
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,175,494,000
1,281,712,000
Net inc
24,156,000
26,315,000
Share earns
.31
.34
Yr rev
5,299,215,000
4,967,191,000
Net inc
108,727,000
95,578,000
Share earns
1.39
1.23


The 1991 Budget: Military;   Lawmakers Scurrying To Protect Home Bases
LEAD: D-day in the battle of the military budget came to Congress three days early as lawmakers mobilized today to protect bases in their districts that are among scores of candidates that Defense Secretary Dick Cheney is considering for closure.


Century Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
570,300
1,302,300
Per share
.10
.23
Year net inc
3,440,300
3,931,400
Per share
.60
.69
The company said latest quarter figures included an additional loan loss provision of $1.1 million.


Man Is Killed in an Exchange Of Gunfire With 2 Policemen
LEAD: One of two men in a car was shot and killed last night in upper Manhattan in an exchange of gunfire with police officers after the officers stopped the car, apparently for a traffic violation, a police spokesman said.


Fog on a Narrow Road: Rescue Was an Ordeal
LEAD: Fog and a narrow winding dead-end lane that quickly clogged with emergency and civilian vehicles severely hampered rescue operations after a Colombian jetliner crashed here Thursday night, the authorities said today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Noriega Says He's a P.O.W.


Carla Hills to Lead Soviet Trade Talks
LEAD: In a setback for Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher, President Bush has decided to give the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, the lead role in negotiating a new trade treaty with the Soviet Union, Administration officials said today.


THE 1991 BUDGET: Excerpts from Darman;   Darman Conducts a Tour of Wonderland: The Federal Budget
LEAD: Here are excerpts from an unpublished version of the introduction to President Bush's budget written by Richard G. Darman, head of the Office of Management and Budget, using his own chapter headings.
Green Eyeshades And the Cookie Monster


Release Opposition's Funds, Carter Warns Nicaraguans
LEAD: Concerned over reports of intimidation of opposition candidates, former President Jimmy Carter warned today of a ''great uproar'' in the United States unless official delays in releasing United States funds to the opposition were stopped.


Interleaf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interleaf Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,516,000
21,327,000
Net loss
b15,316,000
c82,000
Share earns
-
.01
9mo rev
65,945,000
56,773,000
Net loss
b16,159,000
c314,000
Share earns
-
.03


BankUnited Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankUnited Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
172,568
155,190
Per share
.17
.17
Shares outst
810,111
786,126
The 1988 per share earnings restated to reflect adjustments for conversion of subordinated debt to common stock equivalents and preferred stock dividends.


Seeing Jane Austen as Defender of the Economic Facts of Empire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grow Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grow Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
88,857,000
90,419,000
Net loss
1,277,000
1,232,000
6mo rev
194,573,000
196,300,000
Net inc
b9,075,000
c1,939,000
Share earns
.78
-
b-Included a gain of $10 million on sale of U.S.


First Mutual Savings-Wash.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Mutual Savings-Wash.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
445,927
500,039
Per share
.31
.36
Shares outst
1,420,130
1,399,741
Year net inc
1,505,238
1,284,189
Per share
1.07
.92
Shares outst
1,405,110
1,391,405


Chinese in U.S. Lament Bush Victory
LEAD: In the student union at the University of Wisconsin, Jian Tang wore a sweatshirt emblazoned with the slogan ''We Have a Dream: Freedom, Democracy -China, China, China.''


Upheaval in the East: Spain;   Challenge to Madrid's Success Story
LEAD: Having flourished as Western Europe's economic success story of the late 1980's, Spain is now worried that it may lose out as wealthier members of the European Community turn their attention to Eastern Europe.


West Newton Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Newton Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
4,818,000
b91,000
Per share
-
.05
Year net loss
5,743,000
b1,060,000
Per share
-
.61
b-Net income
The bank said 1989 results included operating losses from real estate ventures of $97,000 and securities losses of $1,092,000.


Waterford Labor Protests Halted
LEAD: Waterford's 2,300 glass crystal workers have called off protest stoppages and agreed to court arbitration in a dispute over management cost-cutting proposals for the heavily indebted company.
The workers, who agreed six months ago to a three-year wage freeze, called their first two-hour stoppage on


Upheaval in the East: Yugoslavia;   Protesters Fire at Yugoslav Police
LEAD: Ethnic Albanian protesters opened fire with handguns at police officers today on the third day on unrest in the Kosovo region of southern Yugoslavia, witnesses said.


NS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NS Group Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
56,664,000
44,784,000
Net inc
2,991,000
801,000
Share earns
.22
.06
Shares outst
12,398,707
13,381,186


Intrex Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intrex Financial Svcs
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b3,605,000
c4,740,000
Year net loss
b11,450,000
c4,794,000
b-After income of $400,000, or 9 cents a share, from discontinued operations for both periods.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about the reaction of far-right groups in Japan to the shooting of a mayor misidentified his city in some editions.
It is Nagasaki, not Hiroshima.


Parkvale Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parkvale Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b734,000
c907,000
Per share
.42
.53
6mo net inc
b1,438,000
c1,558,000
Per share
.83
.91
b-Included charge of $36,000 from early retirement of debt.


G.M. to Meet With Pension Fund
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it would meet with a big pension fund that has criticized the company for performing poorly.
G.M. rebuffed the California Public Employees Retirement System earlier this month when it asked for a greater say in running the company.


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bankshares
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
8,250,000
b610,000
Per share
-
.36
6mo net loss
8,068,000
b1,212,000
Per share
-
.72
b-Net income


Capstead Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Deg 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capstead Mortgage (NYSE)
Qtr to Deg 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,665,000
4,916,000
Share earns
.15
.57
Yr net inc
b16,375,000
21,128,000
Share earns
1.73
2.43
b-After an extraordinary charge from a writedown of marketable securities, net of management fee reimbursement of $3,407,000 for both the quarter and year.


Newport News Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newport News Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,830,000
b34,000
Per share
-
.03
6mo net loss
4,790,000
b408,000
Per share
-
.30
b-Net income


Protesters in Pakistan Vow To Free Kashmiris in India
LEAD: Several thousand demonstrators vowing to ''liberate the Kashmir Valley from Indian imperialism'' thronged this mountainous capital of the ''other Kashmir'' today in one of the largest anti-Indian demonstrations the small city has known.


Corrections
LEAD: The Our Towns column yesterday misstated the appraised value and purchase price of an apartment building in Roslyn Heights, L.I., acquired as housing for homeless familes.
The appraised value was $450,000; Community Advocates Inc. paid $475,000.
The column also misstated the role of Marge Rogatz in Community Advocates.


Rollins Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
92,003,222
85,783,641
Net inc
3,803,744
3,233,759
Share earns
.16
.14
Yr sales
402,323,802
380,833,687
Net inc
23,532,134
24,708,496
Share earns
1.00
1.05


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
119,165,000
119,943,000
Net inc
15,437,000
20,101,000
Share earns
.49
.66
Yr rev
463,902,000
460,468,000
Net inc
b88,864,000
72,887,000
Share earns
2.90
2.35


Nuclear Experts Differ
LEAD: To the Editor:


Massmutual Corporate Inestors reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Massmutual Corporate Inestors (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
125,442,776
127,843,776
Share earns
29.47
30.29
Assets represented net assets.


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Products (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
166,849,000
131,408,000
Net inc
3,615,000
7,180,000
Share earns
.36
.67
Shares outst
10,167,911
10,639,466
6mo sales
317,885,000
245,303,000
Net inc
5,010,000
12,234,000
Share earns
.49
1.15
Shares outst
10,254,066
10,637,770


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSB Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b104,000
c2,466,000
Per share
-
.79
Year net inc
b6,527,000
7,251,000
Per share
2.09
2.32
b-Included a non-recurring tax accrual of $2,375,000, or 76 cents a share, for the quarter and year; the year also included an $859,000, or 27 cents a share, after-tax credit, resulting from loan recoveries in connection with settlement of litigation.


The Tate Gallery Brings A New Order to Its Works
LEAD: The Tate Gallery opened its doors Thursday for the public to see its first major reorganization in more than 20 years.


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aaron Rents Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
34,645,000
32,796,000
Net inc
1,183,000
1,050,000
Share earns
.25
.23
9mo rev
106,536,000
110,792,000
Net inc
2,236,000
3,535,000
Share earns
.48
.75


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,826,000
b1,711,000
Per share
.67
.14
Year net inc
29,646,000
b17,236,000
Per share
2.51
1.42
b-Reflected an accrual for the 1988 trust contigency reserve of $5.5 million for the quarter and $10 million for the year.


Bois Franc Royal Ltee.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bois Franc Royal Ltee.
Year to Oct 28
1989
1988
Sales
35,887,000
34,200,000
Net inc
1,022,000
1,682,000
Share earns
.15
.25
Results are in Canadian dollars.


The Silver Spoon In Bush's Mouth, And Policies
LEAD: The threat of a Bush disaster comes not from his character or style but from his beliefs.
That could change.
Let's hope it does.


Ned N. Fleming, Grocery Executive
LEAD: Ned N. Fleming, former chairman and chief executive of the Fleming Companies Inc., a food distributing concern based in Oklahoma, died Wednesday at a hospital in Phoenix, Ariz.
He was 90 years and had homes in Paradise Valley, Ariz., and Topeka.


Gasoline Is Sharply Higher, Leading Energy Price Rise
LEAD: Gasoline futures prices rose sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, showing surprising resilience to bearish fundamentals and leading the entire group of energy commodities to a higher close.


Pope Comforts Africans on Migration
LEAD: Pope John Paul II lamented the rigors of immigration today before a people whose economic livelihood depends heavily on the money that they receive from expatriate relatives.


Coach on Probation
LEAD: Jim Harrick, the coach at U.C.L.A., has been placed on probation for the rest of the season and publicly reprimanded by Tom Hansen, the Pacific-10 Conference commissioner, for criticizing the officials after an 87-79 loss at Stanford on Jan. 18.
The defeat was the only one for U.C.L.A. in eight conference games.


Now It's 'FaxMail' at the Post Office
LEAD: The fax has arrived at the post office.


Volunteer Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Volunteer Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
751,000
817,000
Per share
.35
.37
Year net inc
2,376,000
3,015,000
Per share
1.11
1.37


BCE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BCE Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,638,000,000
3,797,000,000
Net loss
b92,000,000
cd112,000,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
301,700,000
288,900,000
Yr rev
16,681,000,000
14,445,000,000
Net inc
b761,000,000
d846,000,000
Share earns
2.43
2.95
Shares outst
297,500,000
285,400,000


Imtec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imtec Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,821,717
1,118,025
Net inc
157,880
85,659
Share earns
.14
.08
6mo sales
3,427,667
2,004,415
Net inc
258,304
112,674
Share earns
.22
.10


Coast Savings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coast Savings Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
6,195,000
9,544,000
Per share
.40
.63
Year net loss
74,172,000
b41,676,000
Per share
-
2.73
Shares outst
15,193,486
13,110,000
b-Net income
Coast Savings said for the 1989 year it recorded charges of $45,320,000 for the elimination of goodwill and $32 million for valuation of high-yield bonds at cost or market value, whichever is lower.


Schintzius Walks Out And Slams the Door
LEAD: At the University of Florida, where turmoil in the athletics program led to the departures of the football and basketball coaches last year, there's nothing new in the new year.
This time, the center of the storm is the center of the basketball team, Dwayne Schintzius, a senior who officially quit the squad on Thursday night, comparing his coach to Captain


Delta Woodside Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delta Woodside Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
111,503,000
135,001,000
Net loss
b1,301,000
c5,904,000
Share earns
-
.32
6mo sales
230,343,000
257,682,000
Net inc
b2,523,000
11,746,000
Share earns
.14
.65


Andover Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andover Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
2,466,000
b1,955,000
Per share
-
.41
Year net inc
2,183,000
7,848,000
Per share
.49
1.59
b-Net income


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
939,700,000
848,800,000
Net inc
120,500,000
90,600,000
Share earns
1.20
.92
Shares outst
100,300,000
97,900,000
Yr rev
3,699,900,000
3,344,100,000
Net inc
410,700,000
438,400,000
Share earns
4.14
4.52
Shares outst
99,200,000
97,000,000


CNB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,849,000
3,398,000
Per share
.58
.51
Year net inc
14,045,000
13,002,000
Per share
2.13
1.96


Stocks Drift Lower to End Dismal Week
LEAD: Stocks continued to drift lower yesterday in brisk trading as bonds weakened, interest rates showed no sign of coming down any time soon and investors pored anxiously over a new batch of discouraging earnings reports.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: East Germany;   East Berlin's Opposition Agrees to Join the Communist-Led Cabinet
LEAD: East Germany's troubled revolution crossed another milestone today when the opposition reluctantly agreed to share power with the disintegrating Communist Party.


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Associated Banc-Corp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,561,000
4,058,000
Per share
.60
.54
Year net inc
17,331,000
15,113,000
Per share
2.29
2.03


Fernandez in Albany: Likely Gains but No Sea Change
LEAD: As the annual battle over how to invigorate New York City's school system takes shape in Albany, the State Legislature appears ready to make some long-sought changes in the system but unwilling to tackle issues that might disturb the fundamentals of neighborhood school board control.


Chip Maker In Texas Has Profit Drop
LEAD: Texas Instruments said today that its fourth-quarter earnings fell 62.3 percent as sales of computer chips slowed and prices declined dramatically in the period.


Valley National Bancorp (ClifFton, N.J.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (ClifFton, N.J.) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,463,524
7,833,428
Per share
.67
.62
Yr net inc
33,896,125
32,270,653
Per share
2.67
2.54


Courier Dispatch reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Courier Dispatch (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,400,000
11,257,000
Net inc
97,000
172,000
Share earns
.04
.07
6mo rev
24,868,000
22,512,000
Net inc
198,000
283,000
Share earns
.08
.11


Guards Foil Hijacking On an Iran Air Flight
LEAD: Security guards on a domestic Iran Air flight foiled a hijacking and killed all four hijackers, the official Iranian press agency reported today in a broadcast monitored here.


Community Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Bank System
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,085,000
1,058,000
Per share
.40
.36
Shares outst
2,718,994
2,908,540
Year net inc
4,535,000
4,088,000
Per share
1.64
1.40
Shares outst
2,767,160
2,916,210


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller Building Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,360,812
10,732,382
Net inc
485,027
420,802
Share earns
.12
.10
6mo sales
23,066,160
22,617,399
Net inc
1,113,120
1,050,952
Share earns
.28
.26


Oshkosh Truck reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh Truck (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
96,339,000
79,731,000
Net inc
690,000
3,075,000
Share earns
.08
.34


Tagliabue's Rosy Picture of League Clouded by Furor Over Drug Testing
LEAD: In his first Super Bowl news conference on the National Football League's stature and promise, Paul Tagliabue, the league's new commissioner, painted a rosy picture today.
Attendance figures and fan interest are healthy, he said, eventual league expansion in the United States and around the globe is imminent and the N.F.L.


U.S. to Press U.N. Chief on Human Rights in Cuba
LEAD: In an effort to keep the international spotlight on Cuba's rights record, the Bush Administration is heading for a clash with the United Nations Secretary General and the Cuban Government when the Human Rights Commission starts its annual meeting in Geneva on Monday, American diplomats and United Nations officials say.


Marguerite C. Hearsey, Educator, 97
LEAD: Marguerite Capen Hearsey, an educator and former principal of Abbot Academy, a school for girls in Andover, Mass., that merged with Phillips Academy in 1973, died Monday at her home in Bedford, Mass.
She was 97 years old.


Israeli Slain in Miami Was Under U.S. Scrutiny
LEAD: Federal-law-enforcement officials said today that an Israeli linked to Colombian drug traffickers and found slain in Miami on Wednesday had been under the scrutiny of at least three United States Government agencies in the weeks before his death.


16 Years of Exile Ending for Rostropovich
LEAD: Mstislav Rostropovich sighed audibly and beamed a smile as he pondered a question about his thoughts upon returning to the Soviet Union for the first time since his exile in 1974.


United Investors Mgmt reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Investors Mgmt (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
58,642,000
52,223,000
Net inc
b13,616,000
c11,662,000
Share earns
.36
.31
Shares outst
37,806,000
37,739,000
Yr rev
233,336,000
199,872,000
Net inc
b53,920,000
c41,911,000
Share earns
1.43
1.11
Shares outst
37,779,000
37,739,000


Pricing Pain
LEAD: Dr.
Veronica Prego's tragic dispute with New York City has been billed as a ''$175 million lawsuit.'' It's been that way ever since someone added up all the dollars in her original complaint that the city's negligence, in leaving a contaminated needle on a hospital bed, caused her to contract AIDS.


Washington Drug Inquiry Sought
LEAD: City Administrator Carol B. Thompson asked the police today to investigate how widespread the use of drugs is among city employees, and whether there are drug distribution networks.


Patents;   University Sues Inventor Of Retin-A
LEAD: Retin-A , the acne medicine that has become much talked about in recent years as a possible ''anti-aging'' cream that smooths out facial wrinkles, is now the subject of a nasty patent battle.


TCI International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCI International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,147,000
14,488,000
Net inc
350,000
875,000
Share earns
.10
.25


Slack Power Play Leaves Devils at Leafs' Mercy
LEAD: Nine times the Devils went on the power play tonight against Toronto and nine times they came away empty-handed, showing why they are in the lower echelons of the league playing with a man advantage.


Elcotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elcotel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,802,000
3,413,000
Net inc
278,000
b1,637,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
5,485,000
5,445,000
9mo sales
12,124,000
13,968,000
Net inc
494,000
b776,000
Share earns
.09
-
Shares outst
5,442,000
5,478,000


Wicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
182,600,000
212,500,000
Net inc
13,700,000
12,700,000
Share earns
1.00
.93
Shares outst
13,669,000
13,523,000
Yr rev
710,600,000
754,200,000
Net inc
32,700,000
33,800,000
Share earns
2.40
2.46
Shares outst
13,615,000
13,452,000


First Chattanooga Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chattanooga Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
302,000
1,242,000
Share earns
.11
.44
6mo net inc
1,170,000
2,592,000
Share earns
.42
.92
Latest quarter and 6 months results included an addition of almost $1.2 million to its reserves for possible loan losses.


Sterling Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Electronics (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
20,879,000
22,343,000
Net loss
124,500
b797,100
Share earns
-
.20
Shares outst
3,895,151
3,888,763
9mo sales
63,323,000
66,591,000
Net loss
344,300
b2,298,300
Share earns
-
.59
Shares outst
3,920,649
3,880,584


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Now that it's become chic to not only shop in discount stores but admit it, to carry unprestigious shopping bags, and to own up to such things as eating frozen dinners and preferring inexpensive chocolate, certain other things follow.
For instance, little quirks like eating while watching television, managing very well for a week or more without dusting, and virtually living in the bedroom, all of which have been done for years, are now being talked about openly and even proudly.


Long Island Journal
LEAD:
Saving Greyhounds


Insuring Against A Canceled Trip
LEAD: ''STANDARD trip-cancellation insurance'' is like a standard sized window: there is no such creature.
If you are preparing for a major trip this year, and you are thinking about protecting yourself against losing your deposit money, or more, assume nothing.
Get a copy of the insurance brochure and read it.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The ''Executive Computer'' column last Sunday, about multimedia computer techniques, misidentified a company that develops multimedia applications using the Audio Visual Connection made by the International Business Machines Corporation.
The company is Competitive Solutions Inc., of McLean, Va.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
LOTS OF DANCE


Pincay Hurt in Spill
LEAD: One day after he broke his right collarbone in a spill during a harness race for charity, Laffit Pincay Jr., who makes his living aboard thoroughbreds, said he expected to be sidelined four to six weeks.


DOMESTIC EFFORTS BEAR TOP BURDEN IN BUSH'S BUDGET
LEAD: About half the $36 billion in deficit reduction that President Bush will propose in the budget he sends to Congress on Monday would come out of domestic programs, including some efforts in education, housing, transportation and health.


Cathleen Callery To Marry in May
LEAD: The engagement of Cathleen Callery to Michael Gioffre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruno J. Gioffre of Rye Brook, N.Y., has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Ina H. Callery of Port Chester, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.


Letters;   CONFIDENT AT 11, CONFUSED AT 16
LEAD: Yes, yes, yes!
Carol Gilligan's theories are valuable recognitions of our growing up.
My own 11th year has remained vivid throughout my life.
I remember telling myself these exact words, ''I'm 11 years old, in the 6th grade, and the world is beautiful.'' I had the confidence that I was a very smart girl, that I would know how to handle any situation and that I would create my own world.


Chastity Organization: Starting Over in Purity
LEAD: With her heart aching from a painful breakup, Mary Meyer placed an advertisement in a singles' column: ''Female wanting to meet a man who would like to marry.
Celibate before marriage only.'' More than 100 men responded.
Most of them thought it was splendid for a woman to be chaste.
But none were thrilled with the notion for themselves.


In Sitcoms, Cupid Is Often Only a Tease
LEAD: After half a decade of denying, deploring, hinting at, acknowledging and sheepishly celebrating their mutual sexual attraction, Tony Micelli and Angela Bower have agreed they don't know their feelings well enough to discuss the future.
Sam Malone, having spent five years getting together and breaking up with Diane Chambers, has been chasing Rebecca Howe for 28 months - to no avail.


FASHION: On the Street;   With Down Out, The Cloth Coat Grows in the Job
LEAD: In the last couple of years, the pouf seems to have gone out of the down coat, the overstuffed garment that wreaked winter havoc with coat-checkers and turned a lot of fashionable people into reasonable facsimiles of the Michelin Man.
Still very much around, however, is the cloth coat, adaptable as ever to the winds of change.


Hands and Hearts Across the Pacific
LEAD: THE grayness of a late January Sunday afternoon settles over our town.
I have just returned from a long walk, needed, somehow, to try to sort things out, to get reoriented to being a family of two again.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The ''Your Own Account'' column last Sunday, discussing limited partnerships, misidentified the tax form required of investors.
It is a Schedule K-1, Form 1065, not a K-9.


Mary Balderston, Gallery Executive, To Marry Richard Somerby, an Artist
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Balderston 3d of Rochester have made known the engagement of their daughter, Mary McKinney Balderston, to Richard Andrew Somerby, a son of Mrs.
Peter L. Wastrom of Stamford, Conn., and Richard A. Somerby of Hartsdale, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


When the Legislators Meet
LEAD: The Board of Legislators, under new leadership in 1990, has decided to forgo afternoon meetings in favor of morning and evening sessions.
To encourage attendance by the public, the Board has published a schedule of meetings (generally every other Monday) for the entire year.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: When the mercantile nations of Europe sent ships around the world in the 15th and 16th centuries, they introduced the notion ofmoney to many people who had relied on barter forthousands of years.
Sometimes the results were strange.
Among some tribes of western Africa, an object shaped like a Celtic torque or bracelet was held in high esteem.


BARRY CASE LEADS TO WIDER INQUIRY
LEAD: The Federal grand jury investigation of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. is widening into a broader examination of official corruption and drug use, but deep-seated suspicions from Mr.
Barry's supporters about the prosecutors' motives continue to haunt the case.


Louella Luhrman Dies; Oldest Veteran, 108
LEAD: Louella Luhrman, an Army nurse in World War I who became the nation's oldest veteran, died Friday.
She was 108 years old.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
The Bastille To Lift Curtain On First Opera


Durenberger Repays $11,005 to the Senate
LEAD: Senator Dave Durenberger said Friday that he had repaid the Senate $11,005 in Government money used to rent a condominium in Minneapolis.


Review/Music;   Designing Instruments And the Sounds Therein
LEAD: Tan Dun, a composer who came to New York from China four years ago, uses both Eastern and Western elements in his music.
But in his works that have been heard in New York City - the opera ''Nine Songs,'' which was performed last year, and ''Soundshape,'' which had its premiere on Sunday evening at the Guggenheim


Jennifer L. Clarke To Wed L. M. Hitt
LEAD: A July wedding is planned by Jennifer Louise Clarke and Lorin M. Hitt, the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Edward Clarke of Newton Centre, Mass., have announced.


A Magic Circle of Adult Students
LEAD: OLDER than 40 and starting from scratch: I thought I was a unique item, but as soon as I peeked out of my shell I found a sea of women in similar positions.


Veteran Lawmaker Retiring
LEAD: Representative Augustus F. Hawkins, veteran chairman of the House Education and Labor Committee and the longest-serving black in Congress, said Friday that he would retire at the end of the year.
The 82-year-old Democrat has represented the primarily black and Hispanic Watts area of Los Angeles and surrounding Hispanic suburbs since January 1963.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Augusta, Me.;   State Shields Open Spaces
LEAD: TWO years after Maine voters approved the expenditure of $35 million to protect land from development, the state finds itself owning more than 6,600 acres, including 16 miles of unspoiled oceanfront, and has begun to turn its attention to inland properties.


YEARNING FOR AN IRON HAND
LEAD: THE REVOLUTION DAY PARADE IN THE western Siberian city of Tyumen has dwindled in recent years from a two-hour spectacle to a perfunctory 45-minute exercise, reflecting the collapse of the Communist faith.
Last Nov. 7 the Tyumen city fathers, desperate to boost their ratings, agreed to permit a small show of dissent.


Partial List of Those Who Died
LEAD: Following is a list of victims of Avianca Flight 52 who have been identified by family members at the Nassau County or Suffolk County Medical Examiner's offices.
Seven victims at the Nassau County morgue have not been identified.
ACOSTA DE MATIZ, Ana, 80 Female
ALDOR, Eva, 76, Female
ALVAREZ, Amanda, 71, Female
ALVAREZ, Rodrigo, 34, Male
ARBOLDA, Anibal, 47, Male
ARDILA PATINO, Humberto, Male
BEDOYA, Guillermo, Male
BEDOYA, Magnolia, 28, Female
BENTACUR, Gloria, 34, Female
BOTERA, Robinson, 25, Male
CALDERON, Elvia, 50, Female
CALLE, Marco, 60, Male
CALLE,


POSTINGS: 2d Biggest in Jersey;   Convention Hall
LEAD: Like many hotels in northern New Jersey, the Raritan Holiday Inn at Raritan Center business park competes for guests in an overbuilt hotel market where local occupancy hovers around 60 percent.


Susan K. Ullman To Wed in May
LEAD: Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs.
Leo S. Ullman of Sands Point, L.I., of the engagement of their daughter Susan Katharine Ullman to Arik Mark Levinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen R. Levinson of San Francisco.
A May wedding is planned.


TALKING: Unsold Units;   Low Prices Tempting Investors
LEAD: A NEW, controversial and high-risk market is evolving in occupied apartments in converted New York City cooperatives, with many of them being offered to investors at deeply discounted prices.
The big price breaks are a direct result of the troubles some conversion sponsors are experiencing in meeting maintenance and debt service charges on the apartments they still own in converted buildings.


Limit Capital Gains Tax Cut to New Issues;   Wiser Countries
LEAD: To the Editor:


Catskills
LEAD: To the Editor: On Nov. 12 you responded to a query about the Catskill Mountain House (Q &amp; A).
You might care to pass on the information that there is a very handsome book, ''The Catskill Mountain House,'' by Roland Van Zandt, published by Hope Farm Press, Strong Road, Cornwallville, N.Y. 12418.
This is a reprint of an earlier edition.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Soviet Union;   Azerbaijanis Offer Talks With Kremlin
LEAD: The leaders of the rebellion in Soviet Azerbaijan proposed peace negotiations with the Kremlin today, provided that the central Government first withdraws the troops who seized control of the capital in street battles a week ago, after President Mikhail S. Gorbachev declared emergency rule.


Five Are Killed in Ethnic Violence In a Strife-Torn Yugoslav Province
LEAD: At least five ethnic Albanians were killed in gun battles with the police today, the fifth day of riots in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo, the official press agency Tanyug said.


All Work and No Play Makes Jack a Nerd;   Who Will Teach Them?
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


A Losing Temper
LEAD: Like a couple of his forehand shots, John McEnroe went over the line during the Australian Open in Melbourne last week.
After repeated displays of his well-known ill temper and foul mouth in a tough match against Mikael Pernfors, McEnroe was booted off the court, becoming the first player in 27 years to be disqualified from a Grand Slam event.


Campus Life: Clark;   Institutional Entrees Served With a Twist
LEAD: Most college students hate institutional food, and Clark University students are no exception.
But the university and its food service contractor, Daka, are putting their money where the students' mouths are.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about an Interstate 95 interchange in Mamaroneck misstated the village's population.
It is 17,616.


Currency;   Finally, Some Muscle for the Yen
LEAD: The Japanese yen, which has been chronically weak against the dollar, finally found some muscle last week.
Betting that the Japanese would raise interest rates after the Parliamentary election on Feb. 18, traders bought yen aggressively last week for the first time in months.
By the end of the week, the dollar had fallen to 142.85 yen, down from 146.00.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Monroe, Conn.
$118,000
76 Downe Street
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 51-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, 0.2 acre; taxes $1,204.
Stratford, Conn.
$305,000
53 Ashwood Terrace
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old colonial; large family room, c/a, 1 acre; taxes $3,300.


At Airports, Can Time Be Made to Fly?
LEAD: REMEMBER the White Horse Cellar in London where Samuel Pickwick and his Pickwickians arrived early for the half-past 7 o'clock stagecoach to Bath? ''The travelers' room - the last resort of human dejection,'' Charles Dickens wrote with distaste. ''The travelers' room at the White Horse Cellar is of course uncomfortable; it would be no travelers' room if it were not.


Dance Booms Come, and Dance Booms Go
LEAD: Every 30 years or so, an expansive period of extraordinary dance activity seems to be suddenly on the wane.
Anyone looking for the end of the great dance boom that has marked American dance since the end of the 1960's might also consider the lessons of the past.


P.L.O. Pressing Moscow on Jewish Emigres
LEAD: Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization are trying to persuade Moscow to stop the flow of Soviet Jews to Israel, senior Palestinians say.


Better Than Brothers
LEAD: To the Editor:


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 28, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
14
THE DRAWING OF THE THREE, by Stephen King. (Signet/NAL,
$5.95.) Continuing the horror story begun in "The
Gunslinger."
2
11
THE SANDS OF TIME, by Sydney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.95.) A
struggle between the Spanish Army and Basque separatists.


George Sadler Jr. Weds Leslie Dunne
LEAD: At Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Boston, Leslie Ann Dunne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Clement Dunne of East Harwich, Mass., was married yesterday to George Joseph Thomas Sadler Jr., a son of Mrs.
Robert L. Young of Amherst, N.H., and George J. T. Sadler of Nashua, N.H.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark, wood-paneled walls in my den and would like to lighten the wood.
Is it possible to paint over it and retain the look (knots and lines in the wood panels)?


East Germany Is Still Spying On the West, Magazine Says
LEAD: East Germany has bugged telephone conversations of West German Government officials for years, and evidence indicates it continues to do so, a news magazine reported today.


GIVING IN TO THE PASSIONS
LEAD:
BETWEEN ANGELS
By Stephen Dunn.
111 pp. New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Company. $15.95.
THE TONGUES WE SPEAK
New and Selected Poems.
By Patricia Goedicke.
165 pp. Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions. Paper, $9.95.
THE NIGHT PARADE
By Edward Hirsch.
84 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Numbers That Lied
LEAD: It now appears that in the far-reaching work that established him as the father of modern astronomy, Johannes Kepler was not above taking short cuts.
In a recent issue of The Journal of the History of Astronomy, William A. Donahue said that when Kepler presented his theory nearly 400 years ago that planets moved in elliptical rather than circular orbits, he falsely claimed that he had confirmed his insight through independent calculations.


Elway Gets a 3d Chance
LEAD: Someone else always goes to Disney World.


Another Perspective On Fuel Cooperatives
LEAD: I am writing in response to an article, ''Price of Heating Oil Prompts an Outcry'' that appeared Jan. 7 in the Westchester Weekly.
Overall the article was even-handed and among other things offered information on fuel co-operatives as an alternative to local fuel marketers.
Please allow me to offer some insight as to how a typical co-op works.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Bruins 2, Flyers 1: Bob Carpenter and Dave Christian scored third-period goals yesterday as the Boston Bruins extended their unbeaten streak to six games by rallying to beat Philadelphia.
Carpenter tied the game at 10:39 on a deflection and Christian got the winner at 15:44, beating Pete Peeters from the right circle.


Harley A. Farber, Designer, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Morton H. Farber of New York have made known February wedding plans for their daughter, Harley Alison Farber, and Robert Martin Raiff, a son of Elizabeth Haron of Greenwich, Conn., and Frederic Raiff of New York.


NEW PROJECTORS PUT THE VIEWER IN THE BIG PICTURE
LEAD: Is bigger better?
Lots of video fans thinks so, judging by the growing popularity of large-screen projection devices.


Hope Wins in Beckett's 'Happy Days'
LEAD: BURIED waist-deep, and then knee-deep, in a mound of earth, Winnie, ''about 50, well preserved,'' chatters on sunnily about this and that - her happy memories, life's ''many mercies'' - even though ''sorrow keeps breaking in.''


All About/Cellular Telephones;   A Gadget That May Soon Become the Latest Necessity
LEAD: Once gadgets of the rich and powerful, cellular telephones are moving into the mainstream.
Still primarily business tools, the phones are increasingly showing up in the cars, handbags and pockets of the elderly, housewives, outdoor enthusiasts and others who need instant communications.


Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in the [Arts and Leisure]  section about actors playing against type misidentified the film in which Cher appeared.
It was ''Moonstruck.''


RICH AND SILLY
LEAD:
MISGUIDED LIVES
By Alain Elkann.
Translated by William Weaver.
291 pp. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Revolving Portfolios
LEAD: THE political opening of Hungary means ''the gold rush is on'' for Western investors, said R. Mark Palmer, the United States Ambassador to Budapest.
And Mr.
Palmer means to be right up there in the front of the pack.


The Hall of Famer Who Took the Bus
LEAD: Franco Harris, wearing a dark suit, red tie, neatly trimmed black beard and a large smile that broke out and stayed out - like the Louisiana sun - held a news conference yesterday in a French Quarter restaurant.


UConn Gains Tie At Top in Big East
LEAD: Before the game between Connecticut and St.
John's tonight, a desperate student circled the brand-new Harry A. Gampel Pavilion and pleaded with passers-by to sell him a ticket.
After someone offered him a ticket for $150, he shrugged and walked away.
Later, he might have regretted not dipping into his wallet.


THE VIEW FROM STAGE LEFT
LEAD:
THE STORY OF UNITY THEATRE
By Colin Chambers.
Illustrated. 446 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $39.95.


In Place of an Iron Curtain, Benign Fences Remain


On Language;   Dark Words Of Disapproval
LEAD: A WEEK BEFORE HIS arrest, Marion S. Barry Jr., Mayor of Washington, took umbrage at an article written about him by Bella Stumbo of The Los Angeles Times.
The reporter quoted the Mayor, who is black, as saying of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, a new resident of Washington, ''He don't wanna be no mayor.''


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: New conventions are commonplace among tournament players, but seldom stand the test of time.
They are much rarer in rubber bridge or four-deal games played in club or private homes where partnerships change constantly and the emphasis is on simple bidding.


When the Weather's Cold, Try Braising
LEAD: BRAISING is a technique that deserves to be in every cook's repertory, especially in cold weather.
It is a slow cooking method, suitable for thick pieces of food.


The Coming Rebound - and Risk - in Municipal Bonds
LEAD: Four years after changes in the tax code knocked the wind out of municipal bonds, the market appears poised for a big turnaround.
For Wall Street, scrambling more than ever for new sources of income, a jump in market volume can't come soon enough.
For investors and issuers, however, the expected surge in activity may be fraught with risks.


Helping Prisoners With AIDS
LEAD: It is no doubt true that, as Catherine Hanssens of the Department of the Public Advocate notes in the article ''Plan for AIDS Testing in Prison Raises Questions'' (Dec. 17), for people who have AIDS there is no more difficult place to be than prison.


Spas
LEAD: To the Editor: I am a lover of spas, and I have visited many in this country and in Europe.
I decided to try Eastern Europe about a year ago and discovered a whole new spa experience in Yugoslavia, on the Adriatic coast.


FOCUS: Houston;   'Bottom-Fishing' Brings Up Bargains
LEAD: OUT-OF-TOWN investors flocking to this city to scoop up real estate at rock-bottom prices have given rise to its newest sport - ''bottom fishing.''


Pope Urges African Land to Shun Rigid Marxism
LEAD: Sweeping through this impoverished and nominally Marxist nation on Africa's western coast, Pope John Paul II appealed today for an end to ''static and conditioned ideologies'' in favor of ''authentic human progress.''


THE WEDDING: FORMALITIES
LEAD: THE BRIDE FLOATED INTO THE ROOM IN AJU hand-beaded, full-skirted wedding dress with a tumbling train and a long swoop of a veil.
The groom wore white tie.
At the reception, hundreds of off-white roses filled the ballroom, and a 20-piece orchestra played into the night.
It was the kind of fairy-tale event usually reserved for young couples.


In and Out of the Hospital in a Day, but Oh, That Anxiety
LEAD: AMBULATORY surgery means that you don't have to stay in the hospital.
You get there in the morning, and in the afternoon they let you go home.
No big deal, right?


Jordan Prevails At Finish For Bulls
LEAD: The Nets could have given in easily tonight.
They were shorthanded, they were playing a good team on the road and they were trailing by 15 points at halftime.


THE WEDDING: DECORATIONS
LEAD: There we were, lined up at the entrance of the church, 10 of us clad in flowing pink taffeta with matching pink pumps and tiny strands of pearls.
I wasn't sure whether we resembled overgrown sugarplum faires or bridesmaids, until small bouquets of white roses and baby's breath were thrust in our hands.


BACH LOOKED AHEAD, OR WAS IT BACK?
LEAD: I am prepared to believe, after sifting through all the available scientific evidence, that (1) oat bran lowers cholesterol and that (2) it does not.
Meaning only that when confronted by the conflicting arguments of acknowledged experts, I tend to think both sides may be on to something.
In any event, argument is the essence of truth-seeking, whether medical or musical.


Aimee Harrison to Wed Austin Reed
LEAD: The engagement of Aimee Porter Harrison to Austin Reed, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Pryor Reed of Centreville, Md., and Hobe Sound, Fla., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Sarah Schutt Harrison and Herbert Preston Harrison, both of Richmond.
A June wedding is planned.


Harlem Rehab
LEAD: To the Editor:


About Cars;   Justy Is a Quality, High-Tech Econocar
LEAD: When you spend a lot of money for a car, certain things are to be expected.
You get fancy trim, maybe leather.
You get performance.
And, generally, you get high-tech electronics and mechanical doodads.


Donors Give to the Neediest In Lieu of Street Handouts
LEAD: Rather than give change to some panhandlers and not to others, many donors are delegating the responsibility of deciding to whom aid will go to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Often the gifts come with expressions of pained ambivalence about the growing armies of beggars.


Scaasis and Tutus, Silver Plumes And Snowballs
LEAD: The Plaza Hotel ballroom recaptured the grand style of a turn-of-the-century party on Wednesday.
The event celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York and honored the fashion designer Arnold Scaasi, a benefactor.
More than 40 women wearing Scaasi dresses gathered with the Scouts on the ballroom stage to pay him tribute.


Views Of Sport;   Being There: Even If You Lose, You're a Winner
LEAD: Super Bowl underdogs. What is it like to be a loser of four Super Bowls?


For Lunch in Downtown Danbury
LEAD: YOU don't need spurs, chaps or a 10-gallon hat to eat at Cheyenne Grill, the storefront restaurant on the corner of Main and Elm in Danbury.
Just months ago the L-shaped space was home to another restaurant, called Saffron, and the decor remains much the same, with familiar orchid-colored banquettes in the rear and the same pink marbleized tabletops.


Susan L. Werber To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Werber of Great Neck, L.I., have made known the engagement of their daughter, Susan Lynn Werber, to Dr.
Andrew Scott Rokito, a son of Dr.
Evelyn Wolf Rokito and Dr.
Michael Rokito of Roslyn, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


The Legacy of C. S. Lewis
LEAD: To the Editor:


102 Companies Offering Help in Disasters
LEAD: KING INDUSTRIES of Norwalk, which has been in the chemical business for 60 years, has a collection of protective suits, fire suppression foam and chemical analysis equipment and a staff of environmental scientists that no fire department could afford to maintain.


Julia Hotchkiss, Teacher, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald G. Hotchkiss of Bedford Hills, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Julia Anne Hotchkiss and David Reed Eaton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kendall C. Eaton of Farmington, Conn.


Hakan Hagegard Recital
LEAD: The baritone Hakan Hagegard will sing selections from Schubert's ''Schwanengesang'' and works by Ives, Duparc and Wolf at 3 P.M. today at Alice Tully Hall.
Warren Jones will be the accompanist.
Tickets are $18.
Information: 874-6770.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Rumania;   CEAUSESCU'S AIDES RECALL LAST DAYS
LEAD: Angered that his troops were not firing on demonstrators, Nicolae Ceausescu threatened on Dec. 17 to execute two of his top ministers, according to testimony read today in the first public trial of members of the ousted government.


Landry, Harris and Lambert Among 7 in Pro Hall
LEAD: Tom Landry, who built the Dallas Cowboys from a National Football League expansion team into a two-time Super Bowl champion, and Franco Harris and Jack Lambert, teammates on the four-time Pittsburgh Steeler champions of the 1970's, were among the seven figures voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame today.


THE FLAP OVER TOM WOLFE: HOW REAL IS THE RETREAT FROM REALISM?
LEAD:
I cannot offhand recall an article in a small magazine making a bigger splash in the literary pool than Tom Wolfe's manifesto, ''Stalking the Billion-Footed Beast,'' in the November 1989 issue of Harper's Magazine.
Mr.
Wolfe, an old hand at self-publicizing, has been busy widening the ripple effect by lecturing to full houses in places as disparate as Columbia University and the Century Club in New York City; he has appeared on ABC News's ''Nightline'' in his ice-cream suit and high-necked shirt, his demeanor, as always, bland and gentlemanly, to spar tangentially with Margaret


Elizabeth Waldron Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David Roger Waldron of Flemington, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Norris Waldron and Douglas Stephen Boothe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Garland C. Boothe of Westfield, N.J.
A graduate of Assumption College, Miss Waldron is a buyer and planner for the Warner-Lambert Company in Lititz, Pa.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Waiting for the Fed's Next Move


Techniques With Brush and Roller
LEAD: USING a paint brush or roller effectively and without creating a mess takes practice.
But skill is important, too.
Here are some hints on handling brushes and rollers that may improve your abilities with both tools.


Lewis Garnsworthy, Anglican Archbishop, 67
LEAD: Archbishop Lewis Garnsworthy, an outspoken Anglican cleric who tangled with political leaders over school funding and once scolded his own church for being too ''respectable,'' died on Friday.
He was 67 years old.


Marianne Kulla Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Kulla of Miami have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Marianne Kulla, and Michael Strauss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen N. Strauss of New York and Belle Terre, L.I.
Miss Kulla, 24 years old, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at New York University.
She is a cum laude graduate of Wellesley College, where she was a Dana Foundation Fellow.


Shoreham Asset: Land and Location
LEAD: THE Herculean labor involved in building the Shoreham nuclear-power plant may have been largely a waste, but a group of energy experts in Midland, Mich., hopes to convince Long Islanders not to overlook the value of an indestructible component: the land on which the plant sits.


Coming to the East Coast: An Electronic Salon
LEAD: Nearly every day, Gerard Van Der Leun, a literary agent who lives in Southport, Conn., turns on his computer and begins having conversations with people he has never met. ''It can span from utter foolishness to extremely serious discussions,'' he said.


Cook's Data Might Shed Light on Race to Pole
LEAD: The Library of Congress has been bequeathed a trove of photographs and papers from Frederick A. Cook, a rival claimant with Robert E. Peary to being the first to reach the North Pole.
Experts say the material might shed light on the 80-year-old argument.


Lisa W. Clark, Lawyer, to Wed
LEAD: L. Straight Clark of Laguna Niguel, Calif., has announced the engagement of his daughter Lisa Whitcomb Clark to Peter Godfrey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Godfrey of Villanova, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.


A Village That Treasures Its Privacy Blinks Unhappily in the Glare of Fame
LEAD: For much of the last two days, Vincent Augello, shaken and annoyed, has been sitting alone in his freshly waxed, four-wheel-drive minivan parked between the red-brick gates in front of his five-acre estate on Tennis Court Road.
He has been on guard, turning back the curious crowds and camera crews trying to cut through his weedy peach orchard for a glimpse of the wreckage of Avianca Flight 52.


FICTION
LEAD:
GOOD INTENTIONS.
By Joy Fielding. (Doubleday, $18.95.) Joy Fielding's eighth novel introduces us to Lynn Schuster, a social worker, and Renee Bower, her divorce lawyer, as their seemingly perfect marriages are ending in sexual betrayal.
Resentful children, unloving parents, embittered clients and sabotaging male bosses are carefully interspersed throughout the plot to develop well-paced parallels between the two women's experiences.


El Salvador Hits Home
LEAD: IN one of those strange quirks of history, El Salvador has suddenly become one of the hottest political topics in Connecticut.
Newspapers that normally eschew foreign affairs are discussing it and Panama regularly.
Politicians whose eyes otherwise glaze over at anything more global than state patronage can't stop talking about it.


Buddies in the 30's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lewis Mumford, a Visionary Social Critic, Dies at 94
LEAD: Lewis Mumford, a philosopher, literary critic, historian, city planner, cultural and political commentator, essayist and perspicacious writer on the subject of architecture, died on Friday at his home in Amenia, N.Y.
He was 94 years old.


Fire Safety
LEAD: To the Editor: In the article on hotel fire safety (Practical Traveler, Nov. 19) Betsy Wade addressed a little-known fact about fire safety.
Namely, it doesn't exist in many hotels across the United States.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark, wood-paneled walls in my den and would like to lighten the wood.
Is it possible to paint over it and retain the look (knots and lines in the wood panels)?


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
3-16


FACING FASCISM
LEAD:
ROOSEVELT &amp; HITLER
Prelude to War.
By Robert Edwin Herzstein.
Illustrated. 500 pp. New York:
Paragon House. $24.95.


Some Tiles Are Still Missing From the Mayor's Mosaic
LEAD: NEARLY a month after he took office and nearly three months after he was elected Mayor of New York City, David N. Dinkins has yet to name the heads of about a dozen big municipal agencies that handle problems from jails to garbage.
So who's minding the store?


PUBLIC &amp; PRIVATE
LEAD: Art imitates life in the offices of the National Abortion Rights Action League and the National Right to Life Committee.
At Naral, the prints and posters are mainly renderings of women.
In the offices of Right to Life, the pictures are of babies.
The issue of abortion is framed, quite literally, on the walls of their Washington headquarters: which comes first, the woman or the fetus?


Question Of the Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: The question is not whether betting on the Super Bowl is excessive, but instead, why is betting on the Super Bowl excessive?


All Work and No Play Makes Jack a Nerd;   Multiple Choices
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
A Poem a Day Keeps Daddy Away
Some parents insist that their children dress warmly before going out.
Edmund Wilson sent his daughter Rosalind out to play dressed in poetry.
This is from ''Near the Magician: A Memoir of My Father, Edmund Wilson'' by Rosalind Baker Wilson (Grove Weidenfeld).


Accessing Jail?
LEAD: As it happens, the rogue program that Robert Tappan Morris fed into a national computer network in 1988 did not launch missiles, disrupt the stock market or shut down the telephone network.
But it did scare the wits out a lot of people who run computer systems.
Now some of them would like to see the favor returned by means of a jail sentence for Mr.


ON MY MIND
LEAD: Time is running out for Yasir Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization to grab the best political bargain they ever have been offered or are likely to get.


Addiction Recovery At a Hospital Unit
LEAD: The Dec. 31 article ''State Lags in Treating Cocaine Addicts'' gives the impression that Reynolds Hospital (the correct spelling is Runnells Hospital) does not maintain its own drug and alcohol facility.


The Crowded Field in Balloon Angioplasty Therapy
LEAD: C.R.
Bard Inc., a leading maker of inflatable catheters used by doctors to unclog arteries, was riding high last year.
But then the tips on some of its newest catheters began breaking off inside patients under treatment for heart and vascular disease.


IN THE REGION: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bayport
$280,000
6 Kent Court
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, basement, 2-car garage, 0.5-acre; taxes $5,900.
Farmingdale
$173,000
88 Woodward Parkway
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $4,000.


A Cuisine of Humble Origins.
LEAD: ''ONLY a Ligurian,'' writes one of Columbus's biographers, ''could have conceived of the idea of sailing West to reach East.'' Incongruous contrast, in fact, is one of the most striking characteristics of Genoa, the capital of Liguria, the birthplace of Columbus and a city of more than one puzzling paradox.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Dispute Stalls Tenant Legal Aid Plan
LEAD: A New York State plan to provide lawyers to people in danger of losing their homes has been stalled by a dispute over rules proposed by agencies paying for the program.


Buyers Hang Back in Muddled Market
LEAD: A TWO-YEAR slump in property values has pushed down home prices in the New York region and mortgage interest rates also have fallen, but the reductions show little sign of attracting the huge numbers of buyers who were locked out of the region's giddy real estate market in the mid-80's.


So What if College Players Turn Pro?
LEAD: Now that the January orgy of bowl and all-star games has almost faded from memory, we spectators can turn to other, more elevating activities, like today's Super Bowl.
The players, meanwhile, some 2,000 of them representing more than 30 bowl-qualifying football powers, have returned to their campuses and resumed what the National Collegiate Athletic Association likes to describe as ''normal academic lives.


Janice Fuchella To Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Janice Fuchella to James P. Carroll Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carroll of Fort Salonga, L.I., has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Ann Selobyt of Newton, N.J.
Miss Fuchella also is a daughter of the late Joseph Fuchella of Greenwich, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


Speeding Work on Landmarks
LEAD: NEW YORK CITY'S Landmarks Preservation Commission this week begins implementing guidelines designed to speed the approval process for the repair or replacement of windows in buildings covered by the landmark laws.


Political Memo;   Mayoralty Raises Questions, While Jackson Ups the Ante
LEAD: The political galleries are full of people asking will he or won't he run for mayor here.
But the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, as he so often does, is playing a more elaborate political game, one in which his potential candidacy for office provides both a platform and his strongest bargaining chip.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Poland;   Calling Party Too Weak to Go On, Polish Communists Act to Disband
LEAD: Many of the 1,600 delegates at a Communist Party congress severely criticized their party today and moved toward dissolving it and replacing it with a new left-of-center political grouping.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark, wood-paneled walls in my den and would like to lighten the wood.
Is it possible to paint over it and retain the look (knots and lines in the wood panels)?


In a Mexican Town After an Election, Two Rival Mayors and Four Bodies
LEAD: Outside City Hall, barricades have been put up and men with machetes stand guard, ready to protect Roberto Salinas Herrera, mayor in the ''people's democratic government'' that took office here Jan 1.
Six blocks away, Natividad Salas Estrada, mayor in the ''constitutional government'' sworn in the same day, signs official papers and receives petitioners at his temporary office, a bare concrete room in a private home.


As Their Visit Ends, Kirkland Pledges Aid to Soviet Miners
LEAD: The president of the AFL-CIO, Lane Kirkland, has noted the end of a monthlong visit and union training session for nine Soviets miners by pledging to assist the free trade union movement in the Soviet Union.


Limit Capital Gains Tax Cut to New Issues
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERSPECTIVES: Cooperative Conversions;   The Problems of Sponsors and Owners
LEAD: CLOUDS have begun to drift over the market for those co-ops and condominiums in which conversion sponsors still own large numbers of apartments occupied by rent-regulated tenants.


About Time To Face The Music?
LEAD: Let's rock.
On Tuesday MGM/UA will release 10 titles: ''Rolling Stone Presents 20 Years of Rock-and- Roll,'' a new music video produced by the magazine and featuring the Beatles, The Who, The Doors, the Rolling Stones, Bruce Springsteen, Madonna and others; ''The Fastest Guitar Alive'' (also new on video), starring Roy Orbison and directed by David Lynch, and eight older rock titles from the M


Wendy Glazier to Wed R. L. Brainard
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Earl W. Glazier Jr. of Toronto and New Hope, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Wendy Firth Glazier, and Robert Lovell Brainard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Edwin Brainard 2d of Edgartown, Mass.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 10 about contacts between Baltic nationalists and the United Nations Secretariat misstated the United Nations' stand on the Soviet annexations of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania.
In response to inquiries from international lawyers, further checks by The Times - delayed through an oversight - have found no evidence that the General Assembly ever explicitly recognized the 1940 annexations.


Reviews/Dance;   'Coppelia,' With Stars Of Future
LEAD: The New York City Ballet celebrated its school and students on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater with a benefit performance of ''Coppelia,'' a production that owes much of its existence to Alexandra Danilova, who choreographed it with George Balanchine.
The evening was dedicated to Miss


Alyssa F. Domershick to Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Domershick of Malverne, L.I., and New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alyssa F. Domershick, to Kenneth Gray Golub, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Golub of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Delray Beach, Fla.
A fall wedding is planned.


From Abe to Zeus, Beards Are Business
LEAD: SAL ALFANO can size up a beard in no time. ''That's a farmer's beard,'' he'll say to a new customer.
Or, ''You look like Zeus.''


Crew and Air Controllers Discussed Fuel
LEAD: The crew of Avianca Airlines Flight 52 expressed concern to air traffic controllers about the plane's fuel supply 45 to 50 minutes before the Colombian jetliner crashed on Long Island on Thursday, the National Transportation Safety Board said last night.


Miss Limbocker to Wed Anthony Dick
LEAD: The engagement of Hilary duPont Limbocker to Anthony Dick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Mathews Dick Jr. of Washington, has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Derek L. Limbocker of New York.
A June wedding is planned.


A Pipe Organ Stars In Series at St. James
LEAD: THE innovative Music at Saint James series is held in the lovely village church in North Salem and is devoted - uniquely in the county -to chamber music with pipe organ.
It begins its fourth season today at 4 P.M.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: Those simple symbols called bar codes on the bottom of envelopes can be deciphered by a bright first grader, but finding the rare error is challenging enough to interest adults.


Mrs. Mandela Gloomier on Husband's Prospects
LEAD: Nelson R. Mandela's wife said today that plans for her husband's release from prison had run into problems, and she criticized the South African Government.


Alexei Yudenich, Ballet Dancer, 46
LEAD: Alexei Yudenich, a former principal ballet dancer with the National Ballet of Canada who was a dance teacher in the South Jersey-Philadelphia area, died of cancer Thursday.
He was 46 years old.


For Troubled Tryouts, Few Happy Endings
LEAD: There was a standing ovation when ''Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge'' closed at the Kennedy Center Opera House on Saturday night, Jan. 20.
While standing ovations are now more the rule than the exception in American theaters - where audiences often want to salute their own good taste as much as the performers on stage - why ''Annie 2''?


Letters;   CONFIDENT AT 11, CONFUSED AT 16
LEAD: In her article on Carol Gilligan's work, Francine Prose is disturbed because ''however logical it might seem to the casual observer that profound differences in male and female life experiences might foster different ways of perceiving the world, this possibility has been vehemently contested in academia.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Yugoslavia;   A Sign of Bad Times in Yugoslavia: Trade War Between Two Republics
LEAD: Shoppers in the ''Beograd Woman'' department store will find that the mention of certain brand names can make the staff snap as though a curse had just been directed at them.


Paris Pays Belated Respects To a True Bohemian
LEAD: Among the artists most responsible for the development of abstraction during the early decades of this century, probably none has received less credit than Frantisek Kupka.
Consult the standard histories and you are likely to find only a sentence of two about the Bohemian-born painter.
Kandinsky, Mondrian, Malevich, even Robert Delauney, have their own chapters in those histories, but Kupka, whose works at one time or another anticipated, echoed and paralleled the paintings of each of these artists, has, by comparison, been written off.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu;   Spicy Pork With an Oriental Flavor
LEAD: Buying pork that is already ground will not give you lean meat.
But if you buy a pork tenderloin, remove the small amount of excess fat and grind the meat in a food processor or an old-fashioned grinder, your final dish will not be swimming in fat.


Legislators Seek Ban On Foam Cups in County
LEAD: I was interested to read your article ''North Salem May Ban Foam Cups'' [Jan. 14] .
Your readers might be interested to note that Legislator Patricia V. Hotchkiss and I have introduced legislation before the Westchester County Board of Legislators that would ban styrofoam countywide.


Banker, Heed Your Customer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Women Composers Find Things Easier - Sort Of
LEAD: Composition, like conducting, has historically been a man's field, but when Ellen Taaffe Zwilich's Symphony No. 1 won the Pulitzer Prize for music in 1983, a woman had finally acquired a credential that could not be ignored.
Today, Ms.
Zwilich is awash in prestigious performances and commissions - including pieces for four of the Big Five orchestras in the next few years.


Capacity Doubling at Drug Treatment Centers
LEAD: OVER the last decade, as drug and alcohol abuse soared on Long Island and across the country, almost no treatment centers were opened on the Island.
In the last few months, however, a spurt of construction will result in a doubling of treatment capacity to 400 beds on the Island.
About 150 more are in the planning stages.


Melanie Cohen Plans to Marry
LEAD: The engagement of Melanie Cohen to Lawrence T. Greenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Greenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., has been made known by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence S. Cohen of New Haven.
An August wedding is planned.


Rethinking the Engineer Shortage
LEAD: To the Editor:


When the Weather's Cold, Try Braising
LEAD: BRAISING is a technique that deserves to be in every cook's repertory, especially in cold weather.
It is a slow cooking method, suitable for thick pieces of food.


Municipal Tracks Are Indoors, Too
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Nicaragua Approaches an Election That May Rise or Fall on Its Fairness
LEAD: With less than a month to go before Nicaragua's elections, leaders of the governing Sandinista Front and their opponents are entering the final phase of what all sides say will be a decisive referendum on a decade of Sandinista rule.


A Biting Look at Life in a London Dump
LEAD: THE British playwright Joe Orton poked holes in the veneer of British social mores with the intensity of a construction worker wielding a jackhammer.
In ''Entertaining Mr.
Sloan,'' the Orton comedy currently on Theater Three's Second Stage in Port Jefferson, the holes are particularly wide.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing;   Reveling in Serenity and Culture at the Cloisters
LEAD: Near Manhattan's northern boundary, nestled comfortably within an expanse of greenery, sits the Cloisters, John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s homage to the Middle Ages.
Like the medieval monastery it resembles, this uptown branch of the Metropolitan Museum has many functions: a landmark to the traveler, a magnet to the aficionado of medieval art, an oasis to the seeker of calm.


Broncos' Only Hope: Creating Turnovers
LEAD: For nearly two weeks now, the Denver Broncos' defensive players have been studying films of the San Francisco 49ers' offense: Joe Montana slinging those quick arrows, Jerry Rice and John Taylor catching them, Roger Craig and Tom Rathman rumbling upfield.
But today those films will come to life.
Today the Broncos will take their Super Bowl XXIV test.


Stacy Beth Bergmann Marries Robert J. Rosen
LEAD: Stacy Beth Bergmann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Bergmann of Howard Beach, Queens, was married there last evening at the Rockwood Park Jewish Center to Robert Jay Rosen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Rosen of North Hills , L.I.
Rabbi Rafael Saffra officiated.


SPECTER IS RAISED OF NUCLEAR THEFT
LEAD: The unrest in the Soviet Union has raised the question of whether nuclear arms there could fall into the hands of political extremists, military experts in the United States say.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
UNFINISHED CONVERSATIONS: Mayas and Foreigners Between Two Wars.
By Paul Sullivan, (Knopf, $22.95.) In the annals of peasant and Indian uprisings, the Mayan Caste War of 1847 ranks as one of the most prolonged revolts against a postcolonial government.
For more than half a century, the oppressed Maya posed a serious threat to Mexican authority in the Yucatan Peninsula.


An Impassioned Bird Watcher's Tips
LEAD: FRANK MANTLIK says he would go to just about any height to spot any bird rarely seen in Connecticut.
Mr.
Mantlik, a professional wildlife photographer, has been a bird watcher for 20 years.


Views of Sport;   America's Pastime: Selling the Big Game
LEAD: What's ''American''?
Mom?
Apple pie?
What's truly ''American?'' Not apple pie.
Nobody goes into a restaurant anymore and orders apple pie.
Anyway, the best apple pie I ever had was in Ulm, Germany.


Village Prose
LEAD: To the Editor:


Can the Old Spirit Of the MTM Studio Be Recaptured?
LEAD: Television viewers may soon wonder if their favorite kitten has returned home.
By spring, MTM Entertainment, whose meowing logo became synonymous with quality programming in the 1970's through the mid-80's, will, after a fallow period, have new shows on each of the big three commercial networks.


Tech Notes;   Searching for Hidden Oil and Gas
LEAD: A new instrument that can find oil and gas hidden behind the metal walls of a well has been invented by a Washington company.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark, wood-paneled walls in my den and would like to lighten the wood.
Is it possible to paint over it and retain the look (knots and lines in the wood panels)?


Muslim Separatists Are Said To Raid 6 Philippine Villages
LEAD: About 1,000 Muslim rebels attacked six predominantly Christian villages today, killing at least one person and causing thousands of residents to flee, the military said.


Robyn Hall Wed To Peter S. Stern
LEAD: Robyn Ann Hall, a daughter of Jean H. Umbreit and W. Robert Hall, both of Bedford, N.H., was married yesterday at the Carlyle in New York to Peter Simon Stern, a son of Mrs.
Morton Wiener of Palm Beach, Fla., and Otto Stern of Valley Cottage, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by Judge Arthur D. Spatt of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New


A SPATTERED LIFE
LEAD:
JACKSON POLLOCK
An American Saga.
By Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith.
Illustrated. 934 pp. New York:
Clarkson N. Potter. $29.95.
JACKSON POLLOCK
By Ellen G. Landau.
Illustrated. 283 pp. New York:
Harry N. Abrams. $75.


Schools Help State Learn About Acid Rain
LEAD: ANITA KELLY, a science teacher at the Independent Day School in Middlefield, placed a ladder against the one-story school building.
Then she and Elizabeth McCormick, a sixth grader at the school, made their way up the ladder to the roof, to empty a container with a funnel on top. ''We're taking the rainwater that falls and sending it to Wesleyan University to be analyzed,''


If the Role Is At All Unlikely, Call Judi Dench
LEAD: ''That's not me; I don't look like that at all,'' laughs Dame Judi Dench, as she recalls her begrimed, ruddy Mistress Quickly in the Kenneth Branagh film of ''Henry V,'' which has won acclaim in Britain and the United States.
Backstage in her dressing room at the West End's Aldwych Theater, where she is starring in a revival of ''The Cherry Orchard,'' the short, stocky actress looks fresh-faced and ever so slightly elegant, as befits her part as a lady of the


Vaness to Sing in 'Cosi'
LEAD: The soprano Carol Vaness is to sing the role of Fiordiligi in the season's final performance of Mozart's ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' at the Metropolitan Opera, Saturday at 8 P.M., replacing Margaret Price, who is ill.
Miss Vaness is also in the new production of Gounod's ''Faust,'' which opens on Thursday.


Owens Scores 36 As Syracuse Wins
LEAD: For 21 seasons and through several changings of the guard, Syracuse basketball teams had been frustrated by their inability to beat Georgetown on its home court.
For an entire week before this afternoon's game between the two Big East Conference powers, Syracuse's upperclassmen recounted stories about the string of failures since 1967-68, when Syracuse defeated Georgetown, 95-78, at McDonough Gymnasium.


To Many in Panama, the New President Is an Enigma Wrapped in a Smile
LEAD: To many people who know him only from afar, Guillermo Endara Galimany, a 53-year-old lawyer with a dimpled smile and a quick laugh, is something of an enigma.


Pilots Say Fuel Gauges on 707's Often Provide Inaccurate Readings
LEAD: As Avianca Flight 52 circled above Kennedy International Airport on Thursday evening, Matias Moyano Rojas, the flight engineer on the Boeing 707, had to rely on fuel gauges that pilots said are often imprecise.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner;   Excellent Fresh Fish, Bistro Fare and More
LEAD: This is a summary of reviews of Manhattan restaurants by Bryan Miller that have appeared in The New York Times.
Ratings are followed by the date of original publication.
Prices are current.
Docks Oyster Bar and Seafood Grill


In Small Steps, Program Puts Homeless Into Jobs
LEAD: As hundreds of communities struggle to check the spread of homelessness, an ambitious program to steer Louisville's homeless into jobs and stable lives has shown some real success.
But success comes in tiny steps, and at the same time, failure abounds.


Even Homeowners Need Heroes
LEAD: I AM having a hard time adjusting to being a homeowner.
I find myself doing things I used to laugh at my father for doing: raking every single leaf off the lawn, maniacally clipping every blade that escapes my lawn mower, picking up stray beer cans and McDonald's bags while shaking my head and muttering, ''Kids.


D. M. Ross to Wed Carol Ann Glazer
LEAD: Carol Ann Glazer, a community development executive in New York, and David Michael Ross, a lawyer in New York, plan to marry in June.
Ms.
Glazer is the daughter of May Glazer of New York and the late Dr.
Harold Glazer.
Mr.
Ross is a son of Raye N. Ross of Chicago and the late Dr.
Jacob N. Ross.


Final Minutes: Music but No Warning
LEAD: The first hint of impending disaster was the soft but sudden intrusion of classical music over the loudspeaker.


THE WEDDING: TASTINGS
LEAD: They have never been considered culinary meccas or odes to the nuances of flavor.
Wedding receptions have always been more devoted to decoration than cooking.
Ice sculptures, tomato roses, stuffed snow peas and sugar flowers may have become extinct were it not for weddings.
In the movie ''True Love,'' a caterer persuades the beleagured young couple to serve sky-blue mashed potatoes to match the bridesmaids' dresses.


THE ROMANCE AND BANALIZATION OF THE TAJ MAHAL
LEAD: On the face of it, ''Romance of the Taj Mahal'' at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art ought to have been an easy, unquestioned and almost ecstatic success with a very large public.
For what is the Taj Mahal, if not the building that most people, worldwide, most want to see?
Who ever came back from Agra and said, ''Watch out, folks.


Navigators
LEAD: To the Editor: Please thank Ruth Wolff for her delightful article on navigating a car (''Navigator to Pilot: We're Lost,'' Travel, Nov. 5).
Her observations were so accurate that I had to stop reading from time to time because I was laughing so hard that I could not read the words.
It has brightened my day and will lighten the burden of navigating in the future.


IN THE REGION: Connecticut and Westchester;   A $20 Million Center on the Housatonic
LEAD: AFTER the B. F. Goodrich Company plant in Shelton was firebombed in an insurance fraud scheme 15 years ago, the company decided not to reopen its Connecticut operation and 4,500 jobs were lost.
An already weak economy looked as if it might die until local officials worked to create a new and different Shelton, competitive with the rest of Fairfield


Ann L. Heilman, A Law Student, Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Ann Leonard Heilman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Heilman of Exeter, N.H., was married there yesterday at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church to David Michael Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Murphy of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
James D. Decker performed the ceremony.


DATA UPDATE: January 28, 1990
LEAD:
*2*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*2*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Dec.89
Dec.88
Change
New York
256.8
546.9
-53%
New Jersey
155.5
359.3
-57%
Connecticut
74.4
127.2
-42%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Nuns Died in Contra Ambush, Rights Group Says
LEAD: An investigation by Americas Watch, the New York-based human rights group, has concluded that contras were responsible for the deaths of two Roman Catholic nuns whose car was attacked on a remote Nicaraguan highway on Jan. 1.


Lewis Mumford Is Dead


A Low-Key 'Cocktail Hour' at the Paper Mill
LEAD: IN ''The Cocktail Hour,'' in which the making of a martini is mentioned three times within the play's first three minutes or so, a middle-aged publisher (John) visits his well-to-do parents, asking for approval of a play he's written.
The play, John announces to his father (Bradley), is about a family that's ''recognizably us.


Images on TV Highlight Calls to Protect Infants
LEAD: Televised scenes of child after child being carried from the wreckage of Avianca Flight 52 by rescue workers have highlighted calls by consumer groups and flight attendants that child-restraint seats be required aboard aircraft, as they are required in cars.


When the Weather's Cold, Try Braising
LEAD: BRAISING is a technique that deserves to be in every cook's repertory, especially in cold weather.
It is a slow cooking method, suitable for thick pieces of food.


At Home, Cut Off From Civilization
LEAD: HAVING survived the storm on the road, I drove up to our house.
Relief!
I saw my husband through the kitchen windows cooking dinner by candlelight.
Romance!


SPEAKING THE LANGUAGE OF DESERT AND MOUNTAIN
LEAD: What makes Antoine Predock so much of an architect is exactly what makes him not so much of an international celebrity: his insistence on designing buildings that relate to the spirit of the place in which he is working.
Since nearly all Mr.
Predock's projects have been in the Southwest (his office is in Albuquerque, N.M.), his architecture has become a kind of contemporary expression of the traditional architectural language of the desert and the mountains.


Works With Shadings of Pygmalion
LEAD: THE source of ''My Fair Lady,'' Shaw's ''Pygmalion'' is about a man bettering a woman, burnishing her rough edges, eliminating her telltale accent.
Professor Higgins took the rough diamond that was Eliza Doolittle and turned her into a gem - no small feat in Edwardian England, where the quality was as alert to interlopers as are gazelles to the scent of lion.


Wall Street;   A Closer Look at Broker Ratings
LEAD: How much of Wall Street's dirty linen should be aired in public?


Lisa R. Lipskin To Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Lisa Rogers Lipskin to Thomas Michael Jardine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Jardine of Providence, R.I., has been announced by her parents, Mrs.
Marcus Anast of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Robert Lipskin of Cedarhurst, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.


P. H. London Weds Katherine Shapiro
LEAD: The marriage of Katherine Elisabeth Shapiro, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram Shapiro of Raleigh, N.C., to Peter Horace London, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ephraim S. London of New York, took place yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Judge John A. K. Bradley of the New York City Civil


Refac and Patents
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Orleans Race Yawning Down to the Wire
LEAD: One of the oddest political campaigns in recent New Orleans history is ending as it began: quietly, with an uncharacteristic lack of passion.


Q and A
LEAD:
Machu Picchu


Coming to Terms on Health Care
LEAD: Unlike the great industrial wars of America's past, the recent strikes against the Pittston Company and the Nynex Corporation were not over wages or even work conditions, but over health benefits.
Such disputes are becoming commonplace.
Union officials view health insurance as a basic necessity.
As one of the Nynex strikers' picket signs put it, ''Cutting Our Health Benefits Is Sick.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday about morning television talk shows misidentified a syndicated television series.
It is ''Entertainment Tonight,'' not ''Entertainment Today.''


Foul Line Busy as Pirates Top Villanova
LEAD: It was only fitting that tonight's game between Seton Hall and Villanova - teams with two of the poorest records in the Big East -was a sloppy affair marred by a constant parade to the foul line.


Miss Kamerschen To Wed in March
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Kamerschen of New Canaan, Conn., and Orleans, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathryn Ann Kamerschen, to Edward James Streator 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Streator of London.
A March wedding is planned.


Residential Resales
LEAD:
Closings in the week ended Jan. 13
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$695,000
40-50 East 10th Street
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse co-op in prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, fireplace, private roof space; maintenance $1,040, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Fields &amp; Eychner)


Campus Life: Swarthmore;   Students Forgo Part of Vacation To Study Diversity
LEAD: More than 100 students voluntarily cut short their winter vacations to join a workshop at Swarthmore College last weekend intended to promote tolerance for diversity on and off campus.


Women Aren't Team Players
LEAD: To the Editor:


Techniques With Brush and Roller
LEAD: USING a paint brush or roller effectively and without creating a mess takes practice.
But skill is important, too.
Here are some hints on handling brushes and rollers that may improve your abilities with both tools.


Lynn Lorenzo Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Roberto Lorenzo of Rochester have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Lynn Robin Lorenzo and Michael David Pollack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Pollack of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Miss Lorenzo, 23 years old, and the prospective bridegroom, 24, are graduates of Princeton University.


Isles Regain A Share Of First
LEAD: In a sometimes sloppy, somewhat surreal game that was part slap shot and part slapstick, the Islanders embarrassed the Pittsburgh Penguins, 9-3, this afternoon at Nassau Coliseum.


Sunday Silence Horse of Year
LEAD: Sunday Silence, who won three of four memorable duels with Easy Goer last year, today was named thoroughbred racing's Horse of the Year for 1989.


Agent to Plead Guilty In H.U.D. Fraud Case
LEAD: Marilyn Louise Harrell, a real estate agent whom investigators called ''Robin HUD,'' has agreed to plead guilty to fraud and tax evasion charges after Federal prosecutors accused her of stealing $5.67 million in Government housing money, a Federal law-enforcement official said today.


Katherine Mellon Planning to Wed Patrick Jones Jr.
LEAD: Katherine Hopkins Mellon and Patrick Suydam Jones Jr. plan to marry in June, the prospective bride's mother, Mrs.
Charles H. Mellon 3d of Far Hills, N.J., has announced.
Miss Mellon is also the daughter of the late Mr.
Mellon.
Her fiance is the son of Mrs.
J.
Clark Grew of Lake Forest, Ill., and the late Mr.


Cowens Outpolled
LEAD: Fame may not always be fleeting, but in Massachusetts, at least, it appears to fade fast.
That seems to be the case with Dave Cowens, who was the toast of the state in the 1970's as the Boston Celtics' center on two National Basketball Association champions, a player so good and so popular that he had his number 18 retired at Boston Garden.


From Afghanistan to Azerbaijan, Discord Undermines the Red Army
LEAD: AS revolution sweeps Eastern Europe and turmoil erupts across the Soviet Union, the Red Army, the foundation of Soviet superpower status, is in serious trouble.
Its huge stocks of modern weapons remain, but the foundation of a fighting force is the people in uniform.
In this respect, the state of the Soviet military today and its ability to carry out its traditional mission are worse than at any time since the


Salvador Promises Quayle Full Inquiry on Jesuits
LEAD: The President of El Salvador assured Vice President Dan Quayle today that he would investigate the killings of six Jesuit priests to see if the evidence implicated anyone ranking higher than the nine military men accused in the slayings.


Numbers Tomorrow, To Be Followed By Heavy Politics
LEAD: Gradually over the last several weeks, the basic elements of the budget President Bush will send Congress tomorrow have seeped out.


Jennifer A. Leahy To Marry in April
LEAD: Jennifer Anne Leahy, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Vincent Francis Leahy of Newton, Mass., and Ronald Joseph Kim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hyung Kim of Glens Falls, N.Y., plan to be married in April.


The Rev. Julie M. Brooks Marries Charles A. Zelle
LEAD: The Rev.
Julie Markell Brooks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Brooks Jr. of St.
Paul, Minn., was married there yesterday to Charles Andruss Zelle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis N. Zelle of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Julie Neraas, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Weyerhaeuser Chapel.


Man Killed in Subway Shooting
LEAD: A beer-drinking subway rider, angered by three men who witnesses said were ''looking for trouble'' and bumped into him on a train in the Bronx yesterday, shot and killed one man and wounded the two others, the transit police said.


Anne C. Lassen To Wed in March
LEAD: The engagement of Anne Carter Lassen and William Julian Cortazzi has been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Jacqueline C. Lassen of Rosemont, Pa., and Charles W. Lassen of Mount Laurel and Barnegat Light, N.J.
The bridegroom is the son of Sir Hugh and Lady Cortazzi of London and Vines Cross, East Sussex, England.


Special Care For Special Needs
LEAD: While I do not disagree that education spending can be reduced, such reduction should not and must not target students with special needs.


East Europe Could Shed Light on Trotsky and Some Americans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Genoa's Neighborhoods and Palaces
LEAD: ''THE most mysterious city in Italy,'' a British critic said to me, a man who knows Italy better than most Italians.
And, no matter how often I visit Genoa, I find it hard not to agree with him.
And yet the Genoese are hospitable and the city - especially in bright weather - lies deceptively open on its hills along the sea, exposed, inviting.


Bombs Inquiry Leads to Action But No Suspect
LEAD: Widely televised tableaux this past week showed Federal investigators scouring country ponds and septic tanks in Enterprise, Ala., in their investigation of bombings that left two people dead.


DUMPED FOR THE HOMECOMING QUEEN
LEAD:
WHITE GIRLS
Stories.
By Lynn Lauber.
187 pp. New York:
W.W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


'Personal Fouls' Is Defended
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


IS IT TIME TO TRUST HOLLYWOOD?
LEAD: The road to adaptations is paved with good intentions, just as the road leading away is a vale of dashed hopes - the disappointment of readers for whom no cast or single interpretation can match the ideal images in the mind; the disillusionment of authors standing by the wayside clutching checks and crying Foul!


Managing;   Saying No to the 'Mommy Track'
LEAD: Nearly three years ago, Cairy S. Brown, an audit manager at Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, decided she wanted to spend more time with her new baby.
The problem: What constitutes part time work for someone who might work a 90-hour week during a client's crunch time?


Expect the Bold and Abstract In New Zealand Knitwear
LEAD: IN New Zealand, a quiet, conservative country where sheep outnumber people and wool is plentiful, it is not surprising that a large segment of the population knits.
What is surprising is that the sweaters they turn out are anything but conservative.


Will Perestroika Cost Us More at the Pump?
LEAD: Pumping 12 million barrels a day out of a global total of 63 million, the Soviet Union is the world's largest petroleum producer.
It is also No. 1 in natural gas.
Should economic and political disarray hinder Soviet energy production, the ripples would reach from Houston to the Persian Gulf.


Taking a Small Step To Soviet Super Bowl
LEAD: It was just one more small step toward their own Super Bowl.
The Moscow Bears beat the Russian Braves, 20-0, today before they had to give up the field to a group of 10-year-old soccer players from the Central Army Sports Club.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary and its headline last Sunday about a leading member of the Social Democratic Party in West Germany misidentified him in some editions.
He was Herbert Wehner.


As Drivers Pay More for Insurance, New Jersey Decides That No-Fault Isn't
LEAD: THE plan Gov.
Jim Florio announced last week to roll back automobile insurance premiums in New Jersey marks a turning point in the tortured history of an issue that has bedeviled regulators and confused consumers here since 1973.


Work Begins On Housing In Yonkers
LEAD: Four years ago, Jamil Abdul-Malik, a teacher and self-styled social engineer, approached Yonkers officials for help in building affordable housing on the West Side, where the city's black population is clustered.
He received little encouragement.


Buffalo's Parks Commissioner Under Investigation
LEAD: On the city's talk shows, morning radio programs, front pages and nightly newscasts, the topic of conversation these days is the widening controversy surrounding the city's Parks Commissioner, Robert E. Delano.


Nancy Babcock Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Ridgefield (Conn.) Community Center, Nancy Worden Babcock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Butler Babcock of Ithaca, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Martin Perlin, the son of Sylvia Perlin of Tampa, Fla., and the late Abraham Perlin.
The Rev.
Alan Christensen of the evangelical Hope Church in Wilton,


Where Looking Down on an Old Building Has a Price
LEAD: THE best things in life may be free, but Wilson H. Faude apparently is not among those who think so.


Pistons Edge Wolves, 85-83
LEAD: Joe Dumars made his first basket of the second half with only 1 minute 40 seconds to play, snapping a tie and lifting the Detroit Pistons to an 85-83 victory tonight over the Minnesota Timberwolves.


STREETSCAPES: B. Altman's;   The Life and Death(?) Of a Palace for the Chic
LEAD: EVEN among turn-of-the-century big stores, B. Altman's full-block building at the northeast corner of 34th Street and Fifth Avenue was a particularly imposing palace of consumption.
Its move to Fifth Avenue in 1906 also marked a new development in the history of the thoroughfare - a shift from elite, small shops to a mix of both the specialized and the colossal.


AUDIO DEALERS BESTOW THEIR LAURELS
LEAD: Every year, audio dealers throughout the country are asked to single out those components that strike them as particularly noteworthy and well done.
This survey - conducted by Audio/Video International, a prominent trade journal - forms the basis for the annual audio Grand Prix awards.
They are the nearest thing to an


Parasitic Mites Imperil Honeybees
LEAD: A PARASITIC mite that preys on honeybees has invaded hives in four towns in the state, forcing the authorities to destroy the colonies in 11 hives.


For Winter's Blues, Handmade Jewelry
LEAD: THE warm glow of gold and silver handcrafted jewelry is an antidote for midwinter blues as well as an answer for Valentine's Day gift giving.
Visitors to the National Invitational Valentine Jewelry Show at the Sheila Nussbaum Gallery will find more than 300 pieces of work from which to choose.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
New York Stories
1989. Touchstone. $89.95. Laser disk. $29.95. 2 hours, 6 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG.


Allison E. Wolin To Marry in May
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
Michael S. London of Holliswood, Queens and East Hampton, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for her daughter, Allison Emily Wolin, and Alan Michael Luckman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Luckman of Sands Point, L.I.


Canadians Buy a Share of the American Dream
LEAD: CANADIANS have for decades been accustomed to sleeping in Holiday Inns, eating Kentucky Fried Chicken and getting their Fords fixed at Midas, and many of them have come to resent the widespread presence of these and other American companies.


Question Of the Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: Fifty dollars says you get more ''no'' letters than ''yes'' letters.
KEN FERBER
New York


Bush Wants Billions of Trees For War Against Polluted Air
LEAD: Aiming at both a greening of America and a cooling of the world, President Bush will announce in his State of the Union Message next week a program to increase the nation's tree cover by a billion trees a year for the next 10 years, Administration officials say.


Democratic Pep Talk Carries Warning
LEAD: THE county's Democrats congratulated their November election winners at a well-attended ''victory breakfast'' last Sunday, and then heard a warning from the state Democratic chairman, John A. Marino, that political parties were fast disappearing as factors in candidates' lives.


Jude Nwimo: Designer
LEAD: At 22, Jude Nwimo already has six years' experience as a tailor and designer under his belt - a belt usually worn under the cinched vests and jackets of the retro-look suits he creates as a self-styled ''jazz tailor.'' This is one young Londoner who doesn't own a pair of jeans. ''That's what's known as casual clothing,'' he said, ''and casual to me means sloppy.


Obligation to Educate The Handicapped
LEAD: Jane Goldblatt's letter of Dec. 24 is timely in that it addresses an issue that Federal courts have recently decided.
The issue concerns the education of all children, regardless of the extent of their handicaps.


'Cinema Paradiso' Blows a Kiss To the Movies
LEAD: There is only one movie house in the Sicilian town of Bagheria, outside Palermo.
Giuseppe Tornatore, who at the age of 33 does not exactly go back very far, can remember when, as recently as the mid-1960's, his hometown managed to sustain eight theaters with a population half its present size.


For Work Force, 2 Million Who'd Quit Retirement
LEAD: Nearly two million nonworking Americans 50 to 64 years old are ready and able to work, a new survey shows.


Katonah Show Puts the Viewer in Charge
LEAD: COMMUNISM has crumbled; now it is art appreciation's turn. ''Do You See What I See?'' is an all-out effort by the Katonah Museum of Art to give viewers the courage of their own perceptions, and anything goes.
Well, almost anything: pedagogues hover in the wings with the facts behind the objects in the display, which originated last year in a somewhat different form at Dartmouth College's Hood Museum of


Miss Waggaman To Wed in July
LEAD: Mrs.
Robert Waggaman of Bethesda, Md., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Victoria Mackenzie Waggaman, to Christopher Knopes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Knopes of Fairfax Station, Va.
A July wedding is planned.


HOW TO ENCOURAGE NEW HERESIES
LEAD:
DISCOVERING
By Robert Scott Root-Bernstein.
Illustrated. 501 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $35.


'WHAT DO YOU WANT FORM AN UNDERTAKER?'
LEAD:
HELL-BENT MEN AND THEIR CITIES
By Susan Dodd.
240 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


To Save Social Security, Save
LEAD: Washington Week is here: President Bush presents his new budget tomorrow; on Tuesday, he reports to Congress on the State of the Union.
Yet even with these main events at hand, public debate remains preoccupied by a dazzling, poorly understood preliminary, the Moynihan plan.


Hers;   Dreaming Someone Else's Dreams
LEAD: IT IS SATURDAY NIGHT, and I am writing my best friend in California.
I am at home with my husband and three children.
She is alone in a studio apartment, with romantic notions about my life as a wife and mother.
We are not as close as we used to be.
Dear - - -, On most nights, I'm just reading the last Dr.


WOMEN HARASSED ON TOURS IN ASIA
LEAD: Harassment of Western women traveling in South Asia has turned increasingly violent, marring their vacations and undermining efforts by several countries to cash in on a recent boom in beach vacations, diplomats and tourists say.


Computer Network Speeds Local Courts
LEAD: A TWO-YEAR-OLD state-financed computer system intended to increase efficiency and standardize procedures in the state's overburdened municipal court system has enabled courts to collect fines and process traffic summonses far more quickly than ever before, court officers and state officials say.


Changes in Eastern Bloc Heighten Nationalist Yearnings of Basques
LEAD: Never in need of much encouragement to proclaim their separate identity, nationalist groups in the Basque country and Catalonia are using events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to justify calls for regional self-determination in Spain.


'The Jews in America'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   Robbins and Balanchine Program by City Ballet
LEAD: Competence may not be enough.
The New York City Ballet danced competently for much of the time on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
Nevertheless, the program was often lacking in both excitement and eloquence.


Spas
LEAD: To the Editor: Your reports on Marienbad and Carlsbad in Czechoslovakia reminded me of my youth.
My brother and I spent summer vacations at the home of our grandparents in Marienbad.
They had a large house there called Villa Souvenir, which catered to summer guests with room and board and in later years served as a glorified bed and breakfast.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: New York City Assessments;   A Slower Climb in Valuations for Office Buildings
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the overall value of New York City real estate has risen in the last year, flat rents and slow sales have led to a noticeable slowdown in the rate of increase for commercial properties, according to the tentative assessments announced earlier this month by the city's Finance Department.


Leslie Brody and Milo Geyelin Marry
LEAD: Leslie Brody, a reporter in Princeton, N.J., for The Trenton Times, was married yesterday at her parents' home in New York to Emile Camille Geyelin 3d, a reporter in Philadelphia for The Wall Street Journal.
The Rev.
Arthur Seaman, a Presbyterian minister, performed the civil ceremony.


Another Small Step for Man
LEAD: THE IGOR I. SIKORSKY HUMAN-Powered Helicopter Competition, sponsored by the American Helicopter Society, offers a $20,000 award for the first non-engined rotor craft that hovers for 60 seconds and attains an altitude of 3 meters.
In 10 years, no one has claimed the prize, but last November a team of students at California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo managed, momentarily, to get off the ground - a first.


The Executive Computer;   Bringing Microsoft's 'Windows' to Critical Mass
LEAD: The recent arrival of the Microsoft Corporation's Word for Windows signals more than just a new entrant in the overcrowded word processing category.
Word for Windows (which lists for $495 and is intended for high-end I.B.M. PC and PS/2 compatibles that use the DOS operating system) is the first program that combines advanced ''what you see is what you get'' word processing, desktop publishing features, an easy-to-use graphical command structure and powerful tools for customization.


A Stream of Soviet Emigres Disturbs the Occupied Territories
LEAD: THE Soviet immigrants from Leningrad had been in Israel only 48 hours, and here in one of the West Bank's largest Jewish settlements their suitcases still sat unpacked in an otherwise empty bedroom.
But the couple already spoke with the conviction of hardened Israeli nationalists.


For Non-Super Bowl Watchers, No Lines for Ski Lifts or Jazz Clubs
LEAD: When an estimated 120 million Americans flop on sofas and subside into chairs this afternoon to watch the Super Bowl on television, David Jannone and Maria Somma will not be among them.


Everything About the Place Spells Bistro
LEAD: GEORGE MARTIN is a bubbling, boisterous bistro that has taken Rockville Centre by storm.
Its old-fashioned yet new-fashioned look, spirited young staff and huge portions of well-prepared stick-to-the-ribs food serve as magnets to pull in a crowd.


Florida State Has His Vote
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Armour Stretches Phoenix Open Lead
LEAD: Tommy Armour 3d, who has led or shared the lead all the way, opened up a three-stroke advantage today in the third round of the Phoenix Open.


Fine Print Governs Your Rights in the Air
LEAD: EVERYBODY has heard the stories, and almost every frequent flier can tell them in the first person: a flight delayed, a connection missed, a plane overbooked or a suitcase lost, and sometimes a confrontation with airline agents over compensation for the inconvenience.


On China, Congress Is Almost Assertive
LEAD: DURING his secret visit to Beijing last month, President Bush's national security adviser toasted Chinese leaders with sympathetic words. ''In both our societies there are voices of those who seek to redirect or frustrate our cooperation,'' he said. ''We must take bold measures to overcome these negative forces.


Anne Segrest to Marry Ned McCulloch
LEAD: The Rev.
Henry N. Segrest Jr. of Brinkley, Ark., has announced the engagement of his daughter Anne Elizabeth Segrest to Edgar Hassell McCulloch 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCulloch Jr. of Ashford, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.


Not-So-Simple Title for Graf
LEAD: With her third consecutive Australian Open title, Steffi Graf still reigns over women's tennis.
But her crown rested uneasily after she had to struggle against Mary Joe Fernandez today in the title match.


Davis a Natural for Denver
LEAD: It snowed heavily Friday afternoon while the Knicks practiced at Westminster College in Salt Lake City.
They had a plane to catch for their game here tonight against the Nuggets, but Coach Stu Jackson was in no hurry to leave.
The Knicks were working on their transition defense and the coach wanted to make sure his team understood how important an element it was when playing the


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Personal income figures for December will be announced.
President Bush is scheduled to submit his 1991 budget to Congress.
WEDNESDAY: Leading economic indicators and new housing sales for December will be released.
Richard Darman of the Office of Managment and Budget testifies before the Senate Budget Committee.


East Europe Could Shed Light on Trotsky and Some Americans;   Masaryk a Suicide
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lineups and Matchups: How the Teams Stack Up
LEAD:
Key Matchups
Joe Montana vs.
Alphonso Carreker and Michael Brooks.
The Broncos are unlikely to get to Montana in the pocket because he usually throws the ball so quickly.
The Broncos are not that concerned if he scrambles to the left because he seldom throws from there.
But they know he is dangerous when he scrambles to the right, so they will work hard to contain him there.


La Salle Runs Away From Fordham, 98-72
LEAD: Lionel Simmons scored 16 of his 30 points in a 34-8 Explorer run at the start of the second half yesterday and La Salle went on to crush Fordham, 98-72, in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference game for its seventh consecutive victory.


SEX, VIOLENCE AND THE LAW
LEAD:
THE NEW POLITICS OF PORNOGRAPHY
By Donald Alexander Downs.
266 pp. Illinois:
University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $42; Paper, $14.95.


Helsinki II, Road Map for Revolution
LEAD: Eastern Europe's rush to freedom has inspired hope for a trans-European partnership.
The superpowers concur that Europe's ''common house'' should extend from Moscow to Washington.
But mixed with optimism is fear of a backslide, as democracy and free markets struggle to take root.


How 'Annie 2' Skidded Off a Bumpy Road To Broadway
LEAD: The sun came out on Monday morning, Nov. 6, 1989, and so did the reporters and television news crews, for the first day of rehearsal of ''Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge.'' The $7 million musical continuation of ''Annie,'' which was one of the most successful shows in Broadway history, had been announced with much hoopla in





In Texas, the Door to Central Americans Opens a Crack
LEAD: ALMOST a year ago the Immigration and Naturalization Service tried to cut the flow of illegal immigrants from Central America into south Texas by putting thousands of people in detention camps.
Since then lawsuits and budget constraints have whittled away that harsh policy, and the Government has to find a new strategy for handling a new wave of migrants.


Northeastern Skies Light Up, And So Do the Switchboards
LEAD: Thousands of people in the Northeast reported seeing a strange blue-green light in the sky tonight.


A World Of Butterflies In Florida
LEAD: BUTTERFLY WORLD, a three-acre live butterfly park in south Florida, is the first of its kind in the United States and the largest in the world, according to Ronald Boender, its founder and co-owner.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about Aspen, Colo., misstated Marvin Davis's role in the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.
He sold his interest in 1985.


Tracy Margolin Married
LEAD: Tracy Freya Margolin and Dr.
Mark Jay Landsman were married last evening at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park, L.I., by Rabbi Harold Sapperstein.
Mrs.
Landsman is a daughter of Linda Margolin of Jericho, L.I., and Eugene Margolin of Great Neck, L.I.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Landsman of North Woodmere, L.I.


World Markets;   How Long for German Funds?
LEAD: ''Being a Scotsman, it goes against the grain to spend $1.50 to buy a $1,'' said Gavin Dobson, president of Murray Johnstone International, a Chicago money manger.
He was explaining why he did not buy into the New Germany Fund Inc., which was launched last week.
Plenty of other people did buy.
The German stock market has fallen 4 percent since it hit a record high on Jan.


Be a Cossack! Be a Bandmaster!
LEAD: The serviceable and sometimes ornate uniforms worn by doormen, chefs, chauffeurs and butlers have become coveted fashions in some quarters.


Replying to Critics, Yale Moves to Recruit More Minority Professors
LEAD: Responding to a report that sharply criticized Yale's record on affirmative action, the university's president has outlined a five-year plan to recruit minority professors.


Letters;   CONFIDENT AT 11, CONFUSED AT 16
LEAD: We would like to thank Francine Prose for her fine article ''Confident at 11, Confused at 16'' (Jan. 7), on our work with girls growing up, and to offer a point of correction.
The discussion of the contrast between the voices of 11- and 16-year-old girls comes from a 5-year study of girls at Laurel School in Shaker Heights, Ohio (financed by the Cleveland and George Gund Foundations), and studies conducted in urban neighborhoods and schools in Boston (paid for by the Rockefeller and Boston Foundations and the Lilly


Leisure Time on Ice


Campus Life: Columbia;   An Old Bar Is Reopening To a New Beat
LEAD: A few names have been carved in the freshly lacquered oak tables.
Beer prices have been lowered to compete with other bars.
But after a 13-month closing and a change of management, the West End Bar, the fixture near Columbia University that was a stomping ground for Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, is striving to recapture its fans.


Women Get Sidetracked
LEAD: To the Editor:


NICHOLL'S LIFE STYLE GIVES RANGERS A NEW DIMENSION
LEAD: Bernie Nicholls's life is defined more by his MasterCard than any master plan.
Nicholls does not have an agent.
He retains no financial consultant.
By his own frank admission and rough estimation, he has spent as much as $10,000 a month on dress suits.


Connecticut, No. 5 on the Charts, Tries a Pre-emptive Strike
LEAD: WITH automobile insurance rates high and rising, Connecticut officials last week began a yearlong study to try to find calm solutions in advance of a storm.


Sharon Brodwin Wed To Gerald Laderman
LEAD: At the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York, Sharon R. Brodwin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon Brodwin of Malverne, L.I., was married last evening to Gerald Laderman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Laderman of White Plains.
Rabbis Herschel Cohen and Mark L. Winer performed the ceremony.


10th Season for Yale Rep Winterfest
LEAD: ''IT didn't come suddenly,'' said Lloyd Richards, artistic director of the Yale Repertory Theater and the dean of the Yale School of Drama. ''It took me a whole year.''


Virginia P. G. Wiese, Student, to Marry Douglas Sesler, Investment Executive
LEAD: The engagement of Virginia Pierson Goldthwaite Wiese to Douglas William Sesler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Sesler of Erie, Pa., has been made known by her mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Maxwell of Bronxville, N.Y., and her father, Peter C. Wiese of New York.
A July wedding is planned.


Navigators
LEAD: To the Editor: Ruth Wolff must have been an invisible passenger on automobile trips my husband and I have made both here and abroad.


BARD OF THE BRITISH BOURGEOISIE
LEAD: While other playwrights live in fashionable sections of London, jet back and forth to New York to arrange for Broadway productions and write screenplays for movies that are filmed in Hollywood or Moscow, Alan Ayckbourn stays home in Scarborough tending to his business of writing plays, directing them and running his small 300-seat theater.


THE INVESTIGATIVE BOOK REVIEWER
LEAD:
A PRESENT OF THINGS PAST
Selected Essays.
By Theodore Draper.
305 pp. New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $25.


A DETECTIVE IN SPITE OF HIMSELF
LEAD:
DEVICES AND DESIRES
By P. D. James.
433 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Technology;   The Tilt-Rotor: Wall Street to Capitol Hill in 45 Minutes?
LEAD: Among the military hardware vulnerable to Congressional budget cuts this year is a peculiar hybrid aircraft called the V-22 Osprey that is part helicopter and part airplane.
It is powered by large rotor blades on each wing tip.
When the blades are pitched up for takeoff or landing, it flies like a helicopter.


THUGS WITH A GLOBAL VISION
LEAD:
OCTOPUS
The Long Reach of the International Sicilian Mafia.
By Claire Sterling.
Illustrated. 384 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Food Health Claims Are Best Ignored
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perhaps It's Time For 'Faust' To Rise Again
LEAD: The piece is no longer common property, so perhaps the once-standard jokes about its ubiquity will bear re-introduction.
This is what W. J. Henderson wrote 93 years ago in these pages after one ''Faust'' too many at the Metropolitan Opera:


POSTINGS: Four on Lexington;   Deslivering Saves a Brownstone Row
LEAD: When it appeared in the early 80's that sliver buildings would dominate the landscape, the owner of 1451 Lexington Avenue was poised to lead the march into the future.
As things turned out, new owners decided to lead a march back to the past.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: Judging from the amount of mail I received, my holiday column on camera clubs must have struck a nerve.
I can't tell you how many readers have taken me to task for suggesting that camera clubs no longer serve photographers to the extent that they did, say, 100 years ago.


Shiite Cleric Unhurt After Attack in Beirut
LEAD: A car bomb exploded today near the home of the spiritual head of Lebanon's Shiite Muslims.
He was not injured.


Early Birds
LEAD: To the Editor: Your piece on Early Bird dinners brought to mind the following story.
A husband and wife getting ready to go to dinner:


M. S. Astrachan to Wed Bethany Jane Carlucci
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Carlucci of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Bethany Jane Carlucci, to Michael Sanders Astrachan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Boris Astrachan of Hamden, Conn.
A July wedding is planned.


Review/Dance;   Love, Robots and Nuptials, by Reka
LEAD: Reka Feketekuty is one of the best storytellers working today in New York modern dance.
She has a knack for subtly suggesting atmosphere, usually dark, and her stories are resonant with extra meanings.
But a program presented by Reka and Company Dance Theater on Monday night at the Ethnic Folk Arts Center suggested that she may be better at telling stories than at enunciating great themes.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
JAMES JOYCE BIRTHDAY


Amtrak Plans Meeting On Troubled Rail Line
LEAD: UNDER a Congressional order to break even or shut down its debt-plagued express line to Atlantic City, Amtrak officials want to bring New Jersey's casino executives to the bargaining table next month in hopes of finding a way to save the line.


Putting Spike Lee in Retrospect
LEAD: The rise and rise of Spike Lee as America's most prodigiously talented new film maker can now be studied in one exuberant, triple feature evening of home video.


Pittsburgh Surprises Arizona by 100-92
LEAD: Pittsburgh had developed a reputation for beating top-level opponents and losing to lesser teams, until this season.
This season, the Panthers had lost to good and bad alike.


The Legacy of C. S. Lewis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: Gambling, or betting, can be an addiction, like alcohol, or any drug.
But what does this have to do with the Super Bowl?
The Super Bowl is only one event, although the grandest, during the long, long year of the sports calendar.


Plays-in-Progress at Yale Winterfest
LEAD: ''PERHAPS one of this year's Winterfest plays will become a classic, playing 400 years from now,'' says this year's promotional brochure for the series now under way at the Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven. ''Perhaps not.''


September Bridal For Linda Dallas
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Dallas of Englewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Linda Karen Dallas, a third-year law student at Georgetown University, to Dr.
Louis William Kantaros, a resident in internal medicine at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
A September wedding is planned.


A Playwright Crunches the Numbers
LEAD: ''There's no business like show business,'' goes that marvelous Irving Berlin song.
As the author of ''Other People's Money,'' a play about business, and as a businessman turned playwright myself, I would have written the lyric differently: ''There's no business in show business'' would have been more like it.


BELONGINGS OF THE THUNDER DRAGON
LEAD: The exotic temple art of Bhutan - scrolls, embroideries, vessels and musical instruments - derives its forms from Indian and Middle Eastern artifacts and its surface decoration from Chinese art.
The first exhibition in New York of such Buddhist material, ''Art From the Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan, Land of the Thunder Dragon,'' is at Asia Society Galleries through


Surgery for Lomax
LEAD: The former Phoenix Cardinals quarterback, Neil Lomax, who retired earlier this month because of degenerative arthritis in his left hip, will undergo a hip transplant in Los Angeles in the next four to six weeks, the team's orthopedic surgeon said. . . .
Claude Vilgrain and Jon Morris, who had been assigned to the Devils' Utica farm team, were recalled to the parent club to fill in for three injured forwards.


Raccoons Are Gone From the Attic but Not From My Heart
LEAD: THE creaking noises became noticeable in midsummer, late one evening when I was reading a ghost story.
The house is settling, I thought.
The trees are scraping the windows.
A squirrel must be running across the roof.
I shivered.
Within a week, however, I became accustomed to a still-occasional creaking sound in the attic.


Koussevitzky Treasures Through a Sonic Mire
LEAD: Serge Koussevitzky was one of the musical giants of the 20th century.
As a publisher in his native Russia he brought out the early works of Stravinsky.
For his Concerts Kousevitzky in Paris in the early 1920's he commissioned Maurice Ravel to create his orchestration of Modest Mussorgsky's ''Pictures at an Exhibition.


The Process That Ate Washington
LEAD: Arrival of the President's budget on Capitol Hill creates what is charitably known as the Congressional budget process.
In truth it is less a process than a Rube Goldberg nightmare of unrealistic deadlines, overlapping jurisdictions and competing mandates involving every committee in Congress.
The numbers, contradictory and ever changing, will be irrelevant by September, when the decisions that matter are made.


WHAT'S DOING IN: Dallas
LEAD: When the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center was inaugurated in September, Dallas boosters insisted that the $106 million building designed by I. M. Pei was proof that the city had survived the oil bust unscarred.
Others maintained that the stunning concert hall took Dallas another step in becoming a cultural center of international importance.


NOT LOVERS IN THE ORDINARY SENSE
LEAD:
HENRY JAMES AND EDITH WHARTON
Letters: 1900-1915.
Edited by Lyall H. Powers.
Illustrated. 412 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $29.95.


Question Of the Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: Everything about the Super Bowl is excessive.
The best part of the Super Bowl is that it means the football season is finally over and that pitchers and catchers report in two weeks.
RICHARD KAVESH
Nyack, N.Y.


Men and Women, Subjects and Verbs
LEAD: The article by Nancy Ross (''Men, Women and the Revolution,'' Opinion page, Dec. 17), which included her observation that all four physicians attending the birth of her son were female, sent me down memory lane.


Techniques With Brush and Roller
LEAD: USING a paint brush or roller effectively and without creating a mess takes practice.
But skill is important, too.
Here are some hints on handling brushes and rollers that may improve your abilities with both tools.


Where Lewis and Clark Wintered
LEAD: AS a hopelessly provincial Easterner I had always thought of Astoria as (a) the last name of a well-known New York hotel, (b) the only name of an area of New York City or (c) the title of a half-forgotten travel book by Washington Irving.
Recently, however, I visited (d) the real thing - a handsome and historic city situated where the mighty Columbia River meets Oregon's thundering Pacific coast.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE TALKING EGGS
A Folktale From the American South.
Retold by Robert D. San Souci.
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney.
Unpaged. New York:
Dial Books for Young Readers.
$12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)
THE BOY AND THE GHOST
By Robert D. San Souci.
Illustrated by J. Brian Pinkney.
Unpaged.


UPHEAVAL IN THE EAST: Berlin;   Abject and Crumbling, Berlin Wall Surrenders
LEAD: The once-mighty Berlin wall is a pitiful sight these days.


Review/Music;   Hollander and Fleisher In Three-Hand Concerto
LEAD: Publicity gimmicks have a long and occasionally worthy tradition in classical-music history, and this one was both elaborate and effective.
In an acknowledged bid for attention for the Carnegie Hall concert of the Illinois Chamber Orchestra on Thursday evening, the group's first New York appearance since a little-heralded Alice Tully Hall event in 1987, its music director, Kenneth Kiesler, devised an unusual project that captured the imagination of several veteran musicians.


Drivers Feel The Sting Of New Law On Drinking
LEAD: MORE than 600 people have been arrested and face suspension of their drivers licenses under Connecticut's new drunken driving law, and few of those motorists are fighting it, the state Motor Vehicles Department says.


Katherine Evans Wed in Brooklyn
LEAD: The marriage of Katherine Phillips Evans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Evans of Indianapolis, to William H. Baldwin 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Baldwin Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., took place yesterday at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St.
James in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dennis M. Corrado performed the ceremony.


Letters;   WORD OF THE YEAR: FREEDOM
LEAD: I was saddened to see that William Safire has fallen for the simplistic Anglo-Saxon chauvinism of Strunk and White (On Language: ''Word of the Year: Freedom,'' Dec. 31).
He writes that ''these Germanic words [like freedom]  are punchier than their Romance-language counterparts: rich and hard are more telling than affluent and arduous.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about Washington and its Mayor, Marion S. Barry Jr., misstated the percentage of blacks in the city.
It is about 70 percent.


The Intellectual Issue For the 1990's Is Why America's Intellectuals Have Faded Away
LEAD: IT has become commonplace to lament the passing of the day when thinkers like James B. Conant and Lewis Mumford played as influential a role in politics as today's media advisers.
Even to those who consider themselves among the last holdouts, the question is no longer whether intellectuals are in hiding, but why.


Campus Life: Dayton;   Students Open And Run a Store For Student Needs
LEAD: An idea four years in the making at the University of Dayton became a reality this month, when the student-run convenience store, Rudy's Fly-Buy, opened for business.


East Germany Arrests Nation's Former Press Chief
LEAD: Joachim Herrmann, a former member of the Communist Party Politburo, has been arrested on suspicion of high treason in connection with his running of the state press and broadcasting, the official East German press agency reported today.


Low on Marquee Value But High on Tackling
LEAD: At first glance, the San Francisco 49ers' defense does not possess the glitz and pizazz that the 49ers' offense features with each snap of the football.
Even among the 49er defenders, the safety Ronnie Lott overshadows his peers, with Lott easily the most recognizable and heralded of the bunch.


When the Weather's Cold, Try Braising
LEAD: BRAISING is a technique that deserves to be in every cook's repertory, especially in cold weather.
It is a slow cooking method, suitable for thick pieces of food.


Wrightstown Journal;   McGuire Reservists Tell of Their Experiences in Panama
LEAD: MARTIN STEVENS is accustomed to long hours and tedious duties.
As a pilot for United Airlines, he is used to flexible schedules taking him from one part of the country to another with little notice.


The Subway Killing's Lesson
LEAD: The nameless person attracted scant attention in life, despite his efforts to provoke people in the subway.
One night last week he tried again, by spitting on and then punching Rodney Sumter, waiting for a train with his little boy.
Enraged, Mr.
Sumter fought back; within minutes the deranged, homeless man lay dead.


It's a Constituent!
LEAD: There is no easygoing ''mommy track'' for heads of state.
Last week, only a day after Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan gave birth to her second child, a girl, the opposition staged a huge rally in Karachi aimed at pressuring the Bhutto Government while the Prime Minister recovers from the Caesarean birth.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Jan. 7 about Oakland, Calif., referred incorrectly to the Oakland Symphony and the Paramount Theater's relation to it.
The symphony discontinued operations in 1986; the theater is the home of the Oakland Ballet and the Oakland East Bay Symphony.


Tennessee Republicans See an Election Weapon in State's Bingo Scandal
LEAD: A yearlong round of indictments involving bingo operations and official corruption here has put Democrats on the defensive in a legislative election year and presented the generally somnolent state Republican Party with a wake-up call to arms.


PASTIMES: Stamps;   A Correction
LEAD: The Stamps column last week misidentified the man on the 2-cent ''Black Jack'' that paid the drop-letter rate in 1863-65.
It was President Andrew Jackson, not Gen.
Stonewall Jackson.


It's Midwinter. And Drab. Time To Look Ahead.
LEAD: Midwinter is the fashion doldrums, when clothes worn since October seem tired and lackluster.
It's too soon to switch to spring clothes, but the wardrobe definitely needs an injection of freshness.


Things of Value: Worker or Tools?
LEAD: AS a child of the Depression I was always told that, unlike the children of some of the more affluent families down the street, I would truly appreciate the hard-fought-for things I would accumulate in my life.


Owners Propose Blend of the Borrowed, the Old and the New
LEAD: The owners call what they are proposing a partnership.
If they called it a marriage, they could speak of something old, something new, something borrowed and no more blues over player salaries if the players would only accept their proposal.





Burmese Sell Off Part of Embassy in Tokyo
LEAD: With its economy in shambles and its Government increasingly desperate for hard currency, Myanmar, formerly Burma, has sold one of its most valuable overseas assets: the better part of its embassy in Tokyo.


Skating by the Light of the Moon
LEAD: VIVID memories flashed to the screen of my mind as I laced my skates.
I hadn't skated since high school, over 20 years had passed, and here I was, incredulously, tying my old, forgotten skates.
I had to laugh at the lunacy; no small child clamored at my side justifying the escapade.


The Right to Bear Arms: A Working Definition
LEAD: FOR the American gun lobby, ''the right to keep and bear arms'' in the Second Amendment has become such a familiar refrain that the entire text is often overlooked: ''A well-regulated Militia being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms shall not be infringed.


Employers Seek Ways to End I-287 Congestion
LEAD: THE county may be a victim of its own success.
In the 29 years since the 10.3 miles of the Cross-Westchester Expressway opened, the roadway - I-287 - has been a magnet for business growth in the county.
It has also been the scene of horrendous congestion.
Now the companies that attracted the traffic in the first place are considering getting involved in transportation management themselves, to help solve the problem.


Taking the Crucial Next Step at Genentech
LEAD: Alarms shrieked through the headquarters of Genentech Inc. here one Friday morning last month, sending hundreds of employees scurrying to the parking lot.


INSIDE
LEAD:
49ers Are Heavy Favorites Over Broncos in Super Bowl


BEST SELLERS: January 28, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
DADDY, by Danielle Steel (Delacorte, $19.95.)
Unexpected crises wreck the safe, predictable world a man has
built for himself and his family.
2
3
11
CARIBBEAN, by James A. Michener (Random House, $22.95.) The
history of the sea islands told in fictional form.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: Tony Miles found himself in a must-win situation in the last round of the United States championship on Dec. 3 at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Long Beach, Calif.
It was vital that he gain one more point to tie for fifth place because that would assure him a playoff match for the remaining slot in this year's Interzonal


'OMIT THE ACTION OF SCARLETT BELCHING'
LEAD:
THE DAME IN THE KIMONO
Hollywood, Censorship, and the Production Code
From the 1920s to the 1960s.
By Leonard J. Leff and Jerold L. Simmons.
Illustrated. 350 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $22.50.


Neural Nets and Human Experts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Anne D. Berlin, Student, to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Berlin of Newton Centre, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Anne Deborah Berlin, and David Alan Ring, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jordan L. Ring of Needham, Mass.


Safety in Lower Numbers
LEAD:
MEETING GORBACHEV'S CHALLENGE
How to Build Down the NATO-Warsaw Pact Confrontation.
By Jonathan Dean.
445 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Cloth, $45. Paper, $16.95.
CONVENTIONAL ARMS CONTROL AND EAST-WEST SECURITY
Edited by Robert D. Blackwill and F. Stephen Larrabee.
491 pp.


'Call for Gay Ministry': Taking Issue
LEAD: I read with interest the interview with the Rev.
Robert Williams (New Jersey Q &amp; A, ''Answering the Call for a Gay Ministry,'' Dec. 10).
And I agree with his premise that the mainstream church has inadequately addressed the needs of the homosexual community.
Yet I am compelled - theologically - to take issue with him on three fronts.


Hilary G. Maslow To Wed in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Maslow of Dallas, Pa., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Hilary Gail Maslow and Mark Eric Naud, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Henry Naud of Detroit.


THE FRUITS OF SIN
LEAD:
ANY WOMAN'S BLUES
By Erica Jong.
362 pp. New York: Harper &amp; Row. $18.95.


Question Of the Week;   Is Betting On the Super Bowl Excessive?
LEAD: It sure is.
More money changes hands on Super Bowl Sunday than on any other day, or for any other sporting event, throughout the year.


N. R. Prouty Jr. Weds Allison Simmons
LEAD: Allison Lovejoy Simmons, a daughter of Grant G. Simmons Jr. of Hilton Head, S.C., and Mrs.
Edwin Thorne of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Norman Reginald Prouty Jr., a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Prouty of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New


A Widow's Fate Stirs a Director to Action
LEAD: In the early 1980's, Paul Brickman made his directorial debut with a buoyant film about a clean-cut Chicago teen-ager who turns over his parents' pristine home to a bevy of call girls.
Called ''Risky Business,'' the kinetic comedy ended up a box-office hit.


Question Of the Week: Next Week;   Should N.F.L. Drug Testing Be Revised?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


For Women Who Build Bodies: Brawn or Beauty? Muscle or Curves?
LEAD: IT's not easy being muscular and a woman, said Lisa Ripi, who is both.
Sure, no one is going to kick sand in your face, or insist you dance with them when you are a competitive body builder like Ms.
Ripi of Island Park.
But combining brawn and beauty has its drawbacks, she said.


Small Quake Jolts Indiana
LEAD: An earthquake measuring 3.5 on the Richter scale of ground motion jolted southern Indiana and northern Kentucky today, the United States Geological Survey said.
No injuries or damage was reported.
An agency spokeswoman said the epicenter of the quake, which struck about 9:06 A.M., was in Harrison County, Ind., about 30 miles west of Louisville, Ky., and was an aftershock to a temblor that registered 3.8 in the same area on Wednesday.


Winfield Mistrial
LEAD: He'd been hoping to have his tangled personal life cleared up before the baseball season, but now it appears that the dispute between the Yankee slugger Dave Winfield and his former common-law wife, Sandra Renfro, is going to drag on a bit longer.


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: If the weather outdoors suits, dormant trees can be pruned especially large shade trees that are overgrown and ornamentals whose lower limbs block drive and path views.
Keep the planting medium of annual and vegetable seed started indoors moist, but do not allow it to become soggy.
If gift plants from the holidays are dropping leaves and yellowing, discard them.


Mutual Funds;   Puritan's Troubling Junk Bonds
LEAD: Buried in the news of the recent default of the Campeau Corporation was a startling bulletin for many shareholders of Fidelity's Puritan Fund.


Justice in Anti-Dumping
LEAD: While American politicians lecture the world on fair trade, our dumping laws are an inquisitorial nightmare for foreign companies, making a mockery of due process and justice at every turn.
In the last 17 years, Congress and the Commerce Department have repeatedly expanded the definition of dumping.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the [Arts and Leisure]  section about the film director Mike Figgis misidentified a candidate for the role of Dennis Peck, a police officer in the movie ''Internal Affairs.'' He was Kurt Russell.


George Carter Carr, Federal Judge, 60
LEAD: Federal District Judge George Carter Carr, the chief judge of the Middle District of Florida, died of a brain tumor on Friday.
He was 60 years old.


FICTION
LEAD:
THE VOYAGE OF MAEL DUIN'S CURRAGH.
By Patricia Aakhus. (Story Line Press, Paper, $12.95.) While the story elements central to Greek mythology have remained relatively stable, the oral tradition of Irish storytelling has frequently produced legends that have subtly shifted over time.
Such is the case with the tale of Mael Duin, an ancient story of a questing son who sets out in a skin-covered boat called a curragh with a crew of 16 men in order to avenge his father's death.


Nor a Lender Be
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Takeout Is Quail And Rack of Lamb
LEAD: FOR many commuters constant travel means tedium and exhaustion.
But for Patty Cassidy of Greenwich, a long train ride led to a new business.


Pamela Dragonetti Engaged
LEAD: June wedding plans for Pamela Veranna Dragonetti and Dr.
Timothy Dee Hedden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry D. Hedden of Mendham, N.J., have been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Dragonetti of Mendham.
Miss Dragonetti, 27 years old and a Syracuse University graduate, is a designer with the architectural firm of Jonathon E.


The Big Quandary Over Interest Rates
LEAD: Like Blanche DuBois, the American capital system now finds itself dependent on the kindness - or at least the money - of strangers.


Randi V. Moelis Married To Mark D. Kantor on L.I.
LEAD: Randi Valerie Moelis and Mark David Kantor were married yesterday at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbis Morris S. Friedman and Stanley Platek officiated.


Of Famous Arches, Beeg Meks and Rubles
LEAD: In the dingy gray of a Moscow winter morning, the new McDonald's restaurant is an otherworldly presence, huge and sleek and lighting up Pushkin Square with a red and yellow Technicolor glow.


Reven Wurman To Wed Ms. Heim
LEAD: The engagement of Mary Elizabeth Heim and Reven T. C. Wurman, a son of Dorothy Horsman Wurman of Wayne, Pa., and Richard Saul Wurman of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul K. Heim of Morehead City, N.C.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Heim, a project marketing coordinator with Solomon Equities Inc., a New York real-estate development company, attended Our Lady of Mercy Academy and the University of Rhode Island and graduated with honors from C.


Outdoors;   A Scottish Group Protects Salmon
LEAD: Distressed by alarmingly depleted stocks of Atlantic salmon in the rivers of the United Kingdom, the Atlantic Salmon Conservation Trust of Scotland has been buying netting rights from commercial fishermen.


Two Workers Killed In Fall From the Top Of 14-Story Building
LEAD: Two construction workers fell 14 floors to their deaths yesterday when a ladder one was using on a concrete ledge projecting from the top floor of a midtown apartment building toppled, the police said.


A Script by an 18-Year-Old Blends Tragedy and Humor
LEAD: When he was 6 years old, his mother committed suicide.
At 18, he wrote a play, called ''Women and Wallace,'' about the calamity and the effect it has had on his life.


Bishop Leads Methodist Churches in Washington Drug Fight
LEAD: Playing a new role in the drug war, the United Methodist Church has moved one of its bishops to the nation's capital to galvanize a grass-roots assault on violence and drug trafficking.


Social Events
LEAD:
Afternoon at the Ballet


Jockey Dies Of Head Injuries
LEAD: A jockey injured in a four-horse pileup Friday at Beulah Park died today of head injuries.


POSTINGS: Rising in Mott Haven;   112 Affordable Two-Family Town Houses
LEAD: The South East Bronx Community Organization, a private, nonprofit developer, began construction last week on St.
Mary's Park Homes, a $20 million affordable-housing project that will create 112 town houses between East 144th and East 146th Streets, off Willis and Brook Avenues, in the Mott Haven section of the South Bronx.


All Work and No Play Makes Jack a Nerd
LEAD: To the Editor:


Techniques With Brush and Roller
LEAD: USING a paint brush or roller effectively and without creating a mess takes practice.
But skill is important, too.
Here are some hints on handling brushes and rollers that may improve your abilities with both tools.


Caroline A. Keller To Marry in June
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Keller of Dallas have made known June wedding plans for their daughter Caroline Anne Keller and William H. Pruden 3d, a son of Dorothy D. Pruden of Ridgewood, N.J., and the late Dr.
Pruden.


POSTINGS: Waterfront Reference;   Policy Tool
LEAD: In the two decades between the proposing of the controversial Westway project for Manhattan's Hudson River waterfront and the scrapping of the plan in 1985, the fate of the affected area became a cause celebre, especially in Greenwich Village.
Now, a new reference book has been published on the buildings and architecture that were at stake in the dispute.


Campus Life: Florida;   Trauma Team In Its First Week Moves Into Action
LEAD: A trauma team set up by University of Florida administrators was pushed into unexpected duty during its first week of existence when a recent graduate was murdered on Jan. 17 near the campus.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I joined because it's the only organization that explores the missing half of sexual liberation - the right to say no.''
- David M. Dismore,
a member of the
National Chastity Association.
[20:4.]


PLAN TO SHARE IDEAS EMERGES FOR CUP
LEAD: America's Cup syndicates from the United States are reacting with cautious optimism to a new proposal asking them to share their basic technology for designing new boats.


Early Birds
LEAD: To the Editor: Carol Cott Gross's helpful guide to dining with parents in Florida (''Just Had Lunch? Sorry. Dinner Time!'' Travel,Dec. 3) is superb, but, if you'll excuse me, she left out a few important suggestions:


A Dulles Opposes a New Name for Airport
LEAD: A grandson and namesake of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles said Friday that he was dismayed by a proposal to rename Washington Dulles International Airport for Dwight D. Eisenhower.


Edward C. Corrigan, Astronaut's Father, 67
LEAD: Edward C. Corrigan, father of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed along with six other crew members in the Challenger space shuttle explosion four years ago, died of cancer Thursday.
He was 67 years old.


School Costs Are Worsening Quality of Life
LEAD: IN a recent newspaper article, Michael V. McGill, superintendent of the North Shore School District, spoke out against what he called a charge of ''military imagery'' against higher school taxes.
The people, he said, ''need to understand more fully what is at stake.'' He offered no real solutions to the problem, nor did he come to grips with the reality of people being torn from their roots and forced out of their homes.


Navajo Leader Faces Fraud Suit in Arizona Court
LEAD: Peter MacDonald Sr., the leader of the nation's largest Indian tribe, has been ordered to face a trial in an Arizona state court in a civil suit accusing him of conspiring to defraud the Navajo Nation in a $33.4 million purchase of a ranch.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
BODY MIKE: An Unsparing Expose by the Mafia Insider Who Turned on the Mob.
By Joseph Cantalupo and Thomas C. Renner. (Villard, $18.95.) Any minute now, it seems, there will be more mob canaries with tell-all books than there are mobsters to sing about. ''Body Mike'' comes from Joseph Cantalupo, a Brooklyn real estate salesman, loan shark, con artist and hustler at large, and Thomas C.


Auto Insurance: New Plan Offers Tough Choices
LEAD: THE man who crafted Gov.
Jim Florio's new proposal for automobile insurance envisions a year of major changes for New Jersey drivers, a time when insurance costs rise for some people, drop for most others, and in the end, the administration hopes, leaves the state with an insurance system that is fairer and more sensible.


Big Game Shapes Up As a Big Mismatch
LEAD: The Super Bowl matches the two conference champions, supposedly the two best teams in the National Football League.
But in recent years most of these championship games have been runaways, and Super Bowl XXIV in the Louisiana Superdome Sunday could be the same.


Jets Have a Stake
LEAD: Jets fans could have a special interest in the Super Bowl today.
That's because two assistant coaches who will be on opposite sides of the field have emerged among the possible contenders for the team's head coaching job.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: DESPITE New Jersey's reputation for being crowded, in only two of the state's six large industrial cities - the six sisters they're sometimes called - is it possible to take a few steps and stroll out of one city and into another.


How to Unify Germany: Deliberately
LEAD: Standing in the way of a stampede to unify Germany makes no sense.
Neither does starting one.
The westward rush of 2,000 East Germans a day creates twin pressures to speed unification.
One is a sense that East Germany will collapse despite opposition efforts to shore it up; the other is a fear that West


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
A MOTHER'S STORY: The Truth About the Baby M Case, by Mary Beth Whitehead with Loretta Schwartz-Nobel. (St. Martin's, $4.95.) The surrogate mother who decided to keep the baby she was hired to bear tells her side of the story.
Last year our reviewer, Josh Greenfield, said this account changed his opinion about the case.


MENTALLY HYPERACTIVE AND PROUD OF IT.
LEAD: ''Clever'' may be the most feared compliment in rock.
A band can labor for a year over a set of songs, agonizing over every syllable and note and reverberation; it can rack its brains over the cover art and lie awake nights remembering whom to thank in the fine print.
But let anyone suggest that the results are clever, and the party might be over.


IN THE REGION: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Howell
$112,900
466 Magnolia Court
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old town-house condo; c/a, deck, dining room; monthly maintenance $113, taxes $1,931.
Jackson
$139,000
21 Andover Road
5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old contemporary; 1-car garage, patio, family room, c/a; taxes $2,154.


Data Bank/January 28, 1990
LEAD:
$
Steel Production
Dec.
Nov.
Year Ago
Thousands of net tons
7,221
7,385
7,954
Automobile Production
Dec.
Nov.
Year Ago
In units
430,449
538,465
573,102
New Orders for Durable Goods
Dec.
Nov.
Year Ago
By Manufacturers, in billions
$133.54
$130.31
$130.80
Employment Cost Index
1989
1988
1987
Compensation cost, increase in percent
4.8
4.9
3.3
G.N.P.


Review/Theater;   Bonding With the Land In Cather's 'O Pioneers!'
LEAD: For Willa Cather, ''O Pioneers!'' was the novel in which she spoke for the first time in her own voice, free of influence and literary tradition.
In it, she said, she had hit ''the home pasture,'' and the book was to set her off on her creative journey.
Written in 1913, ''O Pioneers!'' remains one of the enduring works of American literature.


A Story of Love or a Tale of Deceit?
LEAD: ON THE MORNING OF SEPT. 16, 1986, George Gardner picked up Patricia Nicely at a nursing home in Roanoke, Va.
Only a year earlier, Nicely, a wealthy woman of 58, had been a high-level official at the National Science Foundation.
Now, apparently in the grip of Alzheimer's disease, she had grown so incapacitated that a local judge had made Gardner, a 65-year-old lawyer and friend of Nicely's, her legal guardian.


Q and A
LEAD:
Demolition Threat on First


State to Offer Loans To Home Buyers
LEAD: A NEW round of low-interest loans will become available next month that could make 1,500 Connecticut residents homeowners.


Menuhin to Conduct and Play in Stamford
LEAD: SIR YEHUDI MENUHIN will conduct the English String Orchestra when it appears at the Palace Theater in Stamford next Sunday in a program that includes Elgar's Serenade in E minor, Benjamin Britten's ''Simple Symphony'' and the Walton Sonata for String Orchestra.


Review/Music;   Mighty Lemon Drops Provide Rock and Fog
LEAD: The Mighty Lemon Drops, an English group that played at the Ritz on Saturday night, make music cloaked in a fog, both literally and figuratively.
Its fog machines, which were working overtime and generated enough murk for the band to construct standard-issue MTV postures, cloaked them in diaphanous swirls.


Dark Visions Light Up the Movies
LEAD: A man who likes making a public nuisance of himself and harassing corporate officials.
A woman whose idea of a family is four perfect loons.
A performer who dresses up in fishnet stockings and plastic hoop earrings, singing about his enthusiasm for illicit drugs.
A loner who used to get some of his best ideas thanks to huge amounts of coffee and sugar, and who for a long while lived in a mostly unfurnished place, avoiding visitors because, as he later said, he was doing things he didn't want people to see.


Frank X. Gargiulo, 60, Of Civil Service Panel
LEAD: Frank X. Gargiulo, a former member of the New York City Civil Service Commission, died Thursday of a brain tumor at the St.
Rose of Lima Home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn.


Race for Governor of Texas Is Surprising in Both Parties
LEAD: When Clayton Williams, the leading candidate in the campaign for the Texas Republican Party's gubernatorial nomination, suggested converting an environmentally sensitive wilderness area into a prison camp where young drug offenders would learn ''the joys of busting rocks,'' the proposal sparked little dispute because it came in a campaign already marked by oddities.


The Image of Movie Music Is Changing Once Again
LEAD: In ''Wonder Waltz,'' one of 15 surreal musical fragments composed by Elliot Goldenthal for the soundtrack of the movie ''Drugstore Cowboy'' (RCA Novus 3077-2; all three formats), a synthesizer, bells and delicately layered percussion combine to suggest a broken-down merry-go-round playing woozily in an underwater carnival.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
BLACK HISTORY MONTH


David's Island Is Timely Lunch Topic
LEAD: MEETING over lunch last week, about 100 New Rochelle business and civic leaders talked about how the city could keep its bruising political frays from damaging its prospects for development.


49ers the People's Choice
LEAD: By a wide margin, more Americans want the San Francisco 49ers to win the Super Bowl than prefer the Denver Broncos, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll shows.


Other Walls May Fall, But in Fortress Cuba Castro Stands Firm
LEAD: THE changes sweeping Eastern Europe are stirring hopes here and in some quarters of Havana that Fidel Castro's long reign over Cuba may be coming to an end. ''We are sure something has to happen in our sad country,'' a dissident in Havana wrote to a friend in the Miami area, where more than 500,000 Cubans have fled since Mr.


TAGLIABUE SWEEPS INTO ACTION
LEAD: On warm 1950's summer nights on Columbia Avenue in Jersey City, where idle teen-agers argued on street corners over Willie, Mickey and the Duke, Paul Tagliabue's father used to take a couple of brooms and hand them to the youngsters.


2 in Car Fell Woman, 77, and Grab Purse
LEAD: A 77-year-old Brooklyn woman was knocked to the ground and dragged nearly 20 feet late yesterday when one of two men driving by in a car leaned out the window and snatched her purse containing $400, the police said.


Walter Engel, Political Commentator, 78
LEAD: Walter Engel, an announcer and political commentator for the Voice of America and an American diplomat in West Germany, died of heart failure Saturday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 78 years old.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 28, 1990:
MONDAY
Armstrong World Inds Inc
Black &amp; Decker Corp
Consol Freightways Inc
Foster Wheeler Corp
Kentucky Utils Co
United Indl Corp
United Technologies Corp
Zurn Inds Inc
TUESDAY
Becton Dicknson Co
Duke Rlty Invts Inc
McDonald &amp; Co Invts Inc
USX Corp


Azerbaijani Blockade Imperils Armenians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elizabeth Meyers, Administrator, 83
LEAD: Elizabeth Meyers, director of college activities at Barnard before she retired in 1972, died of cancer on Wednesday at Sentara Leigh Memorial Hospital in Norfolk, Va., while visiting a son in Virginia Beach.
She was 83 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.


Life in Girls' Gang: Colors and Bloody Noses
LEAD: It was Shadow's coming out party, her initiation into the Tiny Diablas girls' gang in the Watts district, and she was dressed in the height of gang fashion: narrow corduroy pants, a sweatshirt in the gang color purple, extravagantly teased hair and exaggerated black-red makeup.


Reviews/Music;   Works Both Familiar and Rarely Heard
LEAD: One of Nicola Frisardi's rewards for winning the Palm Beach International Piano Competition last year was his recital at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night.
Mr.
Frisardi is an Italian in his early 30's, and was educated in his own country and in Austria.


Arabs Warning Against Influx of Soviet Jews
LEAD: In many parts of the Arab and Muslim world, a clamor is building against a projected influx of Soviet Jews into Israel, reflecting fears that the emigres will displace Palestinians from the occupied territories and thwart the faltering diplomacy of peace.


More Sidewalks of New York Are Becoming Streets of Stars
LEAD: Hardly a day passes that one does not come upon another photograph of another Hollywood star at home in New York.
Stars are seen running in their sweat suits through Central Park, dining at restaurants bankrolled by other stars, sweeping into benefits for the South American rain forests, curled up on the couches of their newly decorated duplexes and talking about their projects.


A Man Of Character
LEAD: On the night of Friday, Sept. 10, 1971, a nervous group of civilian ''observers'' entered D-Yard at the Attica State Correction Facility in upstate New York, where more than a thousand rebelling inmates were holding 35 hostages.


VOTE IS MOVED UP BY EAST GERMANS; COALITION WIDENED
LEAD: Meeting late into the night, the Government and all major political groups in East Germany agreed today to hold the country's first democratic elections on March 18 instead of in May, and to form a coalition government until then.


East German Venture Decree
LEAD: East Germany's coalition Government has approved a decree that allows foreign companies with fewer than 500 employees to have a majority stake in a joint venture with an East German company.


Hoyas and Redmen Take a Thrashing
LEAD: The walls didn't come tumbling down as they had seemed to do the previous week, when six of the country's seven top-ranked teams were upset, but there was some significant shaking going on in college basketball over the weekend.


Battery-Operated Ski-Boot Warmers
LEAD: A new warmer for ski boots is designed with its heat source mounted on the outside of each boot.
The heater comes with a recharger, which allows you to plug the boots' battery packs into a wall socket each night.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There's a fine line between having an angle, having a strategy, and being improperly devious.
Some of those who think there's deviousness here don't like him because it's so hard to second-guess him, to outwit him, to outplan him, and maybe it's very hard for some to risk sitting down with him to negotiate.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Bozell French Move
LEAD: A partnership between Bozell and Eurocom in France has ended.
Bozell said Friday that it had traded its share of their jointly owned Synergie Bozell for Eurocom's majority interest in another French agency, Iceberg.
Bozell is taking several clients from Synergie to Iceberg, including the Chrysler Corporation and Texas Instruments Inc.


Avalanche Closes Ski Resort
LEAD: An avalanche prompted officials to close the Jackson Hole Ski Resort today, but no one was injured, officials said.
The resort was closed for the day after the avalanche at 1:10 P.M. in an area called the Headwall, said Mike McCollister, director of operations.
About 50 searchers with tracking dogs sifted through the snow for three hours and determined no one had been trapped.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Boston Technology Inc., Cambridge, Mass., is offering 2.8 million common shares at $6.5 each through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Saatchi Wins Mylanta
LEAD: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising has won the account for Mylanta antacid, which the agency said is the first product assignment from the Johnson &amp; Johnson/Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Company.
The joint venture acquired the product earlier this month when it bought the over-the-counter pharmaceutical business of Imperial Chemical Industries of London.


Warning by Big Oil;   Larger Bites From Profits Expected Because of Environmental Standards
LEAD: The charges against earnings taken by some oil companies in the most recent quarter to deal with environmental problems are a warning that pollution standards will be increasingly costly to meet and that more such charges are likely.


Jack Iams, Novelist, Editor of Magazine And TV Critic, 79
LEAD: Jack Iams, a journalist, a novelist and an editor, died of a stroke on Saturday.
At the time of his death, he and his wife, Joan Walker Wenning Iams, were en route to New York City from London.
Mr.
Iams, whose journalistic career spanned more than half a century, was 79 years old.


Statehouse Candidate Assailed for Remarks
LEAD: John Silber, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for Governor, has come under attack for separate statements that in one case have been called too lenient toward alcoholism and in another have been termed racist.
The Silber camp has denied both charges.


For Gauging Goofiness, Majority Back Iowa Poll
LEAD: In Iowa, where they covet convertibles, loathe telephone-answering machines, keep an eye out for extraterrestrials and pine for more affectionate goldfish, the poll people are at it again.


Sports of The Times;   Are 49ers the Best Ever? No
LEAD: WITH their 55-10 rout of the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXIV, Joe Montana and the San Francisco 49ers answered all the questions except the two that can never be answered with certainty: is Montana the best quarterback in pro football history and are these 49ers the best team?


Review/Television;   A 'Nightline'-Style Program on New York
LEAD: ''Jack Cafferty's Newsline New York'' is on the right track.
Each edition of this new nightly half-hour program, at 11:30 on Channel 5, moves in on one New York story, and Mr.
Cafferty makes a hard-driving engineer.


Business Scene;   Exporters Shrug At Dollar's Drop
LEAD: THE dollar just might be on the verge of a big drop in value.
It is already off 15 percent against the West German mark since mid-September, and Japan is taking steps to strengthen the yen and weaken the dollar.
That should be wonderful news for the nation's exporters, the main beneficiaries of a cheaper dollar, but surprisingly, many greet the prospect with a shrug.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL  A2-13
National elections in East Germany have been moved forward from May to March 18.
The Government and all the major political groups agreed to form a coalition Government until then.
Page A1


Scenes From a Moscow 'Tragi-Farce'
LEAD: It is midwinter in the dispirited capital of Communism: Chekhov is coming to life again as sure as Lenin's corpse was reinserted into his mausoleum display case the other day, freshly recosmeticized for a new decade of uncertain revolution.


President Condemns 'Entire Baggage of Bigotry'


Yields Expected to Climb Further
LEAD: Many credit market analysts say the gloom in the bond markets, prompted by an unexpectedly large increase in long-term interest rates, is not likely to evaporate quickly.
As a result, yields could rise further, they said.


Midseason Report;   Knicks Achieving Hard-earned Goals
LEAD: For a good part of the first half of the National Basketball Association season, it appeared all Coach Stu Jackson had to do for the Knicks to win was play the numbers game.


Slow Pace For Reform In East Bloc
LEAD: The rush toward political reform has swept through the nations of Eastern Europe with startling speed.
But their attempt to move from the central planning of Communism toward free markets promises to be a much slower, more difficult and socially divisive transition.


Lloyd Richards Is Leaving Yale Drama School and Rep
LEAD: Lloyd Richards, the dean of the Yale School of Drama and artistic director of the Yale Repertory Theater, will leave both posts in June 1991, Yale University's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., announced yesterday.


Publisher Denies Delaying 'Satanic Verses' Paperback
LEAD: A spokesman for Viking Penguin, the publisher of the novel ''The Satanic Verses,'' denied today that it had told Salman Rushdie, the author of the book, that it would not bring out a paperback edition.


Caterpillar to Promote President to Chairman
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc., the largest maker of earth-moving machinery, has named Donald V. Fites as its chairman and chief executive, effective July 1.
It also reorganized the executive suite, eliminating the posts of president and executive vice president, in a move to push decision-making further down the ranks.


Quayle Gets Warm Welcome in Panama
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle got a warm welcome today from many Panamanians, who thanked the United States for invading their country and said they wanted American troops to stay.


Despite Year of Scandal, 'Money Politics' Seems as Strong as Ever in Japan
LEAD: Two hundred leading corporate executives met the other day to listen to an urgent appeal to come together and help a valued client.
It was not a business that was in distress, but the govering Liberal Democratic Party, which was in desperate need of cash.


Stock Accord At Bank Leumi
LEAD: The parent company of Bank Leumi Le-Israel, Israel's second-largest bank, has agreed to equalize the voting rights of all its shares.


Noriega Is Transferred To Cell in U.S. Prison
LEAD: Manuel Antonio Noriega, the fallen Panamanian leader, was transferred from the Federal courthouse to a Federal prison south of Miami tonight, the warden said.


49ers Add a Few Chapters to Record Book
LEAD: There were 18 individual records and 8 team records set at the Super Bowl yesterday in New Orleans.
Individual Records
Game
Most touchdown passes - 5, Joe Montana (previous record 4, Terry Bradshaw, 1979; Doug Williams, Washington, 1988).
Most consecutive pass completions - 13, Montana (previous record 10, Phil Simms, Giants, 1987.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Marine Transport Lines Inc., Secaucus, N.J., a bulk shipping company, announced the resignation of Dirk Langeveld, its executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Savings Unit Seeks 2d Chance
LEAD: The Imperial Corporation of America, one of California's largest savings and loans companies, made a series of spectacular mistakes in the last few years, including betting heavily on speculative high-yield ''junk bonds,'' buying a portfolio of consumer loans that went sour and financing the importer of the ill-fated


Bernard J. Ferguson, Lawyer, 88
LEAD: Bernard J. Ferguson, a lawyer and former president of the Queens County Bar Association, died on Saturday at Mary Immaculate Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens, and had previously been a resident of Flushing for more than 60 years.


A Jittery Senate Confronts Its Ethics
LEAD: Some of the smiles were very tight. Some in the audience were squirming.


Reviews/Music;   Preludes for Strings Nod at Jazz and Hymns
LEAD: The New York debut recital of the New England String Quartet in Weill Recital Hall on Tuesday evening may have been a bit premature.
Both the collective and the individual work of the young players - Ellen Jewett and Heidi Yenney, violinists; Holly Barnes, violist, and Kris Yenney, cellist - seemed far from ripe, and it was therefore hard to gauge the potential of the group, formed in 1985.


Johannesburg Journal;   Glossy Magazine with a Difference: It's for Blacks
LEAD: Between the glossy advertisements for Japanese cars, Scotch whisky, British knitwear, French-style lingerie, sparkling wines and designer kitchens, an editorial message of black pride is being pitched to a prospering minority among South Africa's impoverished black majority.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Needham in Canada
LEAD: DDB Needham, a unit of the Omnicom Group, has increased its presence in Canada through the acquisition of Carder Gray Advertising of Toronto, which it will merge with DDB Needham Canada.
The new agency, to be called Carder Gray DDB Needham Advertising, will have billings of $85 million, with $55 million of that coming from Carder Gray.


Acid Rain: Plenty Bad Enough
LEAD: The rain that falls over much of the northeastern United States is mildly acidic from pollutant gases.
Like many weak poisons, its effects are subtle and hard to pinpoint.
The preliminary results of a monumental 10-year Federal study now establish just how harmful this acid deluge is.
They lend urgency to proposals now before


A Computer As Recruiter
LEAD: MOST college coaches no doubt would revel in a system wherein, by simply asking a computer, they could find just the scholar-athlete they need.


Police Officer Fatally Shoots Youth in Back
LEAD: A police officer shot an unarmed Brooklyn teen-ager in the back, killing him, as she was arresting him Saturday evening, the police said yesterday.


Uranium Concern in Canada Shuts 2 Mines
LEAD: A Canadian uranium producer, Rio Algom Ltd., has announced the closing of two mines as a consequence of a decade-long slump in prices.


Diana Giasullo Wed to Bryan Adams
LEAD: Diana Marie Giasullo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Giasullo of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Bryan Henry Adams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry B. Adams of Wayne, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard J. Mieliwocki performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church in South Orange, N


New Market Journal;   Nurturing New Seeds In a Garden Of Hopes
LEAD: ''Public Auction Wipes Out Last of Highlander School'' read a 1962 newspaper headline, noting the apparent demise of the Highlander Folk School, one of the legendary incubators of the civil rights movement.


Mt. Vernon Pit Tells How Slaves Lived in Washington's Time
LEAD: In a 36-square-foot open pit, just a few feet from the tourist restrooms at what was once George Washington's home, archeologists say they have unearthed a treasure trove of information about how the slaves of the nation's first President lived.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
Personal Income ... Dec.
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
Leading Indicators ... Dec.
New-Home Sales ... Dec.
Farm Prices ... Jan.
Thursday
Construction Spending ... Nov.
Friday
Employment ...


Rangers Beginning to See (a Dim) Light
LEAD: ''A team can't just turn it on again like a light switch,'' James Patrick said.


Bench Helps Duke Beat Georgia Tech
LEAD: A strong performance from the bench helped eighth-ranked Duke beat Georgia Tech by 88-86 today.


Budget Director is Praised As Smart and Faulted for It
LEAD: When word spread recently that the Administration's budget would be presented this year in one large book instead of the usual collection of smaller volumes, the response around town, from Congress and the bureaucracy, from lobbyists and reporters, was the same: What is Darman up to now?


Critic's Notebook;   After Pizza and Polite Squabbling, a Film Wins
LEAD: For more than six hours on Friday, the judges of the dramatic competition at the Sundance U.S.
Film Festival squabbled politely, ordered in pizza, listened to one another's impassioned speeches and finally wondered how to break or evade the rules.
When their private deliberations were over and the awards to independent film makers were announced at a modest ceremony on Saturday night, the grand-prize winner turned out to be one of the least talked about, least traditional, most personal films in the festival: Wendell B.


Change in Nurse Rules Will Hurt Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


Dawn Quixote Takes the Palm Beach
LEAD: Dawn Quixote may or may not have the stamina to contest the Triple Crown races this spring, but the 3-year-old colt proved today that he has plenty of speed and is especially dangerous when the footing is sloppy.


Outdoors: The Trusty Automatic Comes Through
LEAD: WITHOUT a stiff breeze, waterfowlers are becalmed in frustration.


Review/Theater;   Struggle With Conscience In an Almost Forgotten War
LEAD: In one of the early episodes of the television series M*A*S*H, Col.
Henry Blake, the Army surgeon played by McLean Stevenson, bitterly observes that there are two rules of war.
The first is that people die.
The second is that there is nothing that doctors, chaplains or field officers can do about Rule No.


Frank X. Gargiulo, 60, Of Civil Service Panel
LEAD: Frank X. Gargiulo, a former member of the New York City Civil Service Commission, died Thursday of a brain tumor at the St.
Rose of Lima Home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in the Carroll Gardens section of Brooklyn.


From Opera to Recital Hall
LEAD: Vinson Cole's performances in opera and oratorio have been frequent and notable over the last decade.
Mr.
Cole, a lyric tenor, was a regular at the New York City Opera in the early 1980's, and he joined the Metropolitan Opera roster in 1987.
He has made recordings with Herbert von Karajan and Carlo Maria Giulini.


J. W. Mirandon, 69, A Banker and Official
LEAD: J. Wilmer Mirandon, a banker, New York State official and retired chairman of a tuition-aid program, died of lymphoma on Friday at Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Canter in Hanover, N.H.
He was 69 years old and had homes in Weathersfield, Vt., and Manhattan.


Stake Is Cut In Chock Full
LEAD: Randon A. Samelson, the chairman of Orange-Co.
Inc., said Friday that his company had lowered its stake in the Chock Full o'Nuts Corporation to 5.9 percent from 12.7 percent.


An Investment in Crossland
LEAD: The Coast-to-Coast Financial Corporation, a savings and loan holding company affiliated with the Pritzker family of Chicago, has agreed to provide $150 million in capital to Crossland Savings, based in Brooklyn, Crossland announced on Friday.


Metro Matters;   Why a Sure Way To End Up in Jail Is Not So Sure
LEAD: On April 1, 1989, Dowie Pringle was arrested after a neighbor in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn said Mr.
Pringle threatened him with a loaded .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol.


India Tells of Foiling Uprising in Kashmir
LEAD: Officials in Srinagar, the Kashmiri capital, said today that separatists had planned to declare independence from India on Friday and send thousands of supporters into the streets in a show of force timed to coincide with India's independence day.
The officials say the plan was foiled after a number of leading Kashmiri militants were captured by the security forces.


Cuomo Urged To Increase Court Budget
LEAD: Saying that New York State's court system is at risk of breaking down, a group representing virtually every bar association in the New York City area is calling for the state to allot $991 million for the courts.


Washington at Work;   Japanese Author Brushes Up His Image With Journey to U.S. Enemy's Lair
LEAD: He wears $800 Saville Row suits and $80 Georgio Armani ties.
He plays tennis, he sails, he paints, he writes best sellers.
He has represented a Tokyo constituency in the Parliament for the past 22 years.
But Shintaro Ishihara is an angry man caught in a name-calling game.


Poland's Communists Vote to Dissolve Party
LEAD: Poland's Communist Party, after ruling the country for 45 years, voted to dissolve itself.
Party delegates had decided to create a new democratic, left-of-center party in the hope of winning public support, but a group of about 100 dissidents broke off to form a competing Social Democratic Party.


Cuban Ballet Student Wins at the 18th Prix de Lausanne
LEAD: Carlos Acosta Junior, a 16-year-old ballet student from Cuba whose exuberant virtuosity made him a favorite from the beginning among 93 other young contestants, was awarded the gold medal in the 18th annual Prix de Lausanne ballet competition tonight.


Books of The Times;   The Crack of the Bat, the Curve of the Ball
LEAD:
The Physics of Baseball
By Robert Kemp Adair
Illustrated. 110 pages.
Harper &amp; Row/ Perennial Library.
Hard cover, $16.95; paperback, $7.95.


A Sympathetic Pope Visits Some of Africa's Poorest
LEAD: From a compound for lepers to the outer fringes of the encroaching desert, Pope John Paul II journeyed today among West Africa's poor and afflicted, urging them not to yield to ''despair, pessimism or passivity.''


Sony's Newest Portable Is an Electronic Book
LEAD: A bit more than 10 years after it brought out the Walkman, the Sony Corporation has provided a glimpse of one of the device's most offbeat descendants: the Data Discman, for people who would rather jog through the park reading encyclopedia entries than listening to Simon and Garfunkel.


One Problem Then Another Forces Cancellation of Flight
LEAD: Passengers on a Delta Air Lines Boeing 727 slid down evacuation chutes onto an airport taxiway today after smoke was spotted in the cabin as the flight was about to take off, officials said.


Reviews/Music;   Salsa From Willie Colon and His Band
LEAD: Willie Colon's set at S.O.B.'s on Thursday night was neither forgettable nor especially exuberant; instead, it just cruised along functionally.
Though Mr.
Colon, who for the last 20 years has been pushing salsa in new directions, had the audience on its feet and shaking, the show never reached the cathartic levels of great dance music.


Poles Attack Soviet Consulate
LEAD: About 1,000 Poles turned violent after a soccer match today in Cracow, smashing windows of the Soviet consulate and Communist Party headquarters and damaging cars, stores and apartments.
The official press agency P.A.P. said the police dispersed the rioters after they surged through the southern city ''destroying everything in their path.


Polish Communists Vote to Disband
LEAD: Poland's Communist Party voted early today to dissolve itself after party members decided to create a new democratic and left-of-center party in the hope of winning public support.


Right Word Is Crucial in Air Control
LEAD: The investigation into the crash of Avianca Airlines Flight 52 points up the critical role played by communications between airline crews and air-traffic controllers, as well as among the controllers themselves, in guiding jetliners to safe landings.


A Return to Favor For a Catalan's Art
LEAD: The Catalan artist Antoni Tapies, widely considered Spain's pre-eminent living painter and heir to modern Spanish masters like Picasso, Miro and Dali, is experiencing a renaissance.


'Chase' Races Add Sightseeing to Skiing
LEAD: THE notion that exercising can be fun is missing from many modern fitness routines.
But there is a way to trade the long and arduous workouts for ones with a view.
You may want to consider the Great American Ski Chase.


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
McHale Offers the Unexpected: Kevin McHale, hitting just the second 3-point field goal of his 10-year career, started a 16-2 run at the end of the first quarter and the Boston Celtics went on to beat the visiting Phoenix Suns yesterday, 126-118.
Phoenix was coming off a club-record 10-game winning streak.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Blunders on the Caspian
The story of the collapse of Soviet authority in Azerbaijan in the face of nationalism is a chronicle of missed signals and misjudgments.
Page A8.
Panamanians Greet Quayle
Vice President Dan Quayle, warmly welcomed in Panama, said the American invasion force would be withdrawn as soon as possible.


Du Pont Millions at Issue In an Heir's Sanity Case
LEAD: A du Pont heir who once ran for Congress is back in court here trying to prove that he is sane and competent.


Broncos Feel Effect of Elway's Off Day
LEAD: John Elway's inability to get the Denver Broncos' passing offense going in the early part of the Super Bowl yesterday put an unrealistic burden on his defensive teammates.
And Bobby Humphrey's fumble in the first quarter broke the game open for the 49ers.


The Big Easy: Fat City for Montana and 49ers;   Broncos Fall, 55-10, And So Do Records
LEAD: In redundantly spectacular fashion, the San Francisco 49ers trounced the Denver Broncos, 55-10, here today in Super Bowl XXIV, leaving no doubt that the superior team of the last decade enters the new one with the same zeal and the same excellence.


Review/Ballet;   The Wit and Whimsy of Roland Petit and Troupe
LEAD: Since the 1940's, Roland Petit has amused and amazed audiences by combining the refinement of classical ballet with the extravagance of the Parisian music hall.
Some of this French choreographer's productions have been lofty.
Others have been saucy.
Most have been unpredictable.


Bridge
LEAD: If an opponent opens the bidding, there is an argument for stretching to a borderline game.
The declarer will have considerable information about the location of the opposing high cards, and the opponents will have defensive problems: One of them will be very weak, and virtually entryless.


Screeners Help Advertisers Avoid Prime-Time Trouble
LEAD: Ron Blazer is paid to watch television - and take notes.


China Using Electrodes To 'Cure' Homosexuals
LEAD: When homosexuals are treated here for what most Chinese doctors regard as their mental illness, they are sometimes given painful electric shocks to discourage erotic thoughts.


OFFICIALS CITE GAP IN COMMUNICATIONS IN AVIANCA CRASH
LEAD: The crew of the Colombian jetliner that crashed Thursday on Long Island told regional air traffic controllers that the plane was short of fuel and asked for priority clearance to land, but the information was not passed on to the local controllers who guided the plane's final descent, Federal investigators said tonight.


Key Resignation Reported at Apple
LEAD: A top executive at Apple Computer Inc. has resigned in what could be the start of an overhaul of the company's American sales and marketing organization, industry officials said this weekend.


Tool Orders Rose by 14% In December
LEAD: Reversing a three-month decline, orders for American-made machine tools jumped 14 percent in December.
For the year, however, machine tool orders were down 21.7 percent from their level for 1988.


Language Purists Might Ask, What's the Usage?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article in some copies yesterday about the Bush Administration's proposed budget for 1991 misstated the Administration's estimate of the deficit for the fiscal year 1990, which ends Sept. 30.
The estimate is $123.8 billion.


Budget Chief Defends Plans For Spending on the Military
LEAD: On the eve of the submission of President Bush's new budget, his budget director, Richard G. Darman, today defended the size of the military budget, the proposed cut in the capital gains tax and the Administration's opposition to a reduction in the Social Security tax.


Reviews/Music;   Exploring Bricks and Mortar of New Music
LEAD: Adaptive use - as recycling-minded city planners like to call it -argued with Futurism in interesting new-music concerts on Wednesday and Thursday evenings.
At the Miller Theater, Anthony Korf's Parnassus offered pieces by Kurt Weill, Ursula Mamlok, Paul Hindemith, Luigi Dallapiccola and Donald Martino.


Don't Cut Israel and Others to Aid East Europe;   Big Soviet Bailout
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Ups and Downs of a Super Rout    The Broncos' woes were mirrored by Greg Kagen, who sat covered by a towel on the sideline long after the game was put out of reach. John Elway, who was harassed throughout the game, suffered a sack, at bottom. (NYT/Barton Silverman; NYT/Vic DeLucia; AP; Reuters)


Reviews/Music;   Schoenberg, Before And After Serialism
LEAD: Under the title of Focus 1990, the Juilliard School and its students are examining the world of Arnold Schoenberg.
Six concerts - stretching through this week - began Friday night at Alice Tully Hall.
JoAnn Falletta conducted the Juilliard Symphony in the composer's ''Verklarte Nacht'' and Violin Concerto, separating the two with Mahler's ''Kindertotenlieder.


Reviews/Music;   Toronto Symphony Offers Fresh 20th-Century Works
LEAD: Technically, the honeymoon hasn't even begun for Gunther Herbig and the Toronto Symphony, though one might have thought otherwise in the second half of their concert at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening.
The East German conductor, who has been the music director of the Detroit Symphony since 1984, is progressing to the Toronto altar in stages.


All in a Day's Work for 49ers' Quarterback
LEAD: After a performance everyone agreed was marvelous, Joe Montana responded in his typical aw-shucks manner.


Don't Cut Israel and Others to Aid East Europe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Midseason Report;   It's All Up Hill, but Nets Know the Way
LEAD: Things like rush-hour traffic, income taxes and Nets basketball are constant reminders that this world is not perfect.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
Burson-Marsteller has formed a sports marketing division, Sports Partners International, which will incorporate Ohlmeyer Sports Marketing, a former division of Ohlmeyer Communications.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   2 Colleagues Back at Blau
LEAD: Jan Leth thought Barry Blau &amp; Partners was too small.
So in 1987 the art director left the direct-response ad agency, based in Fairfield, Conn., for Rapp Collins Marcoa, owned by the Omnicom Group.
David Klang thought Blau was too big.
So last February the creative supervisor left for the Saugatuck Group, a Westport,


Reviews/Music;   Harpist's Version of Mozart's Piano Sonata
LEAD: Marie-Pierre Langlamet, a 22-year-old harpist from France, made an impressive recital debut on Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Ms.
Langlamet, who lives in New York and is a member of the Metropolitan Opera orchestra, has won a handful of European contests since 1983, as well as the Concert Artists Guild New York


Robert Riddell, 65, A U.S.O. Director For New York City
LEAD: Robert L. Riddell, executive director of the U.S.O. in New York City for more than 30 years, died of heart failure on Saturday at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Queens.
He was 65 years old and lived in Flushing.


Elizabeth Marks Weds Paul Taylor
LEAD: Elizabeth Leah Marks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Marks of New York, and Paul Andrew Taylor, a son of Marjorie Taylor of Newton, Mass., and the late Manuel Taylor, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Marc Angel officiated at Congregation Shearith Israel in New York.


Northeastern Skies Light Up, And So Do the Switchboards
LEAD: Thousands of people in the Northeast reported seeing a strange blue-green light in the sky Saturday night.


A Place for Hard Foster Care Cases
LEAD: Robert Rivera, a 17-year-old from the Bronx, has been in New York City's foster care system since he was 12.
Only in the last year, however, has he found a place that feels like home: the Glen Mills Schools in Concordville, Pa.


Treasury to Sell Bills Today
LEAD: The Treasury's schedule of issues this week is confined to today's auction of three- and six-month bills.
Late on Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 7.68 percent, while the six-month bill was bid at 7.63 percent.
This week, the Treasury is expected to announce the size of the quarterly refunding, including 3-year, 10-year and 30-year securities.


Affordable Housing Issue Ruffles Idyllic Westchester
LEAD: In a court battle over the future of Peach Lake, two suburban imperatives are colliding in this remote corner of Westchester County: the need for affordable housing and the yearning for open spaces.


Montana's Passing Leads 49ers in Super Bowl Rout
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers, capturing the National Football League title for the fourth time in a decade, enhanced their status as one of the great sports franchises with a record-breaking 55-10 trouncing of the Denver Broncos yesterday in Super Bowl XXIV.


Ethnic Albanian Protesters Battle With Yugoslav Police
LEAD: Thousands of ethnic Albanians fought with the police today in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo in demonstrations demanding that the Communist authorities lift a state of emergency and allow free elections.
A man was reported killed and four injured.


Challenge for Panamanians: A Canal in Transition
LEAD: Most first-time visitors to this famous vantage point on the Panama Canal, eight miles from the Pacific, come away dazzled by the majesty of the 51.2-mile waterway and the near-miraculous ingenuity and sacrifice that went into its construction more than 75 years ago.


Some Scientists Doubt the Value Of 'Genetic Fingerprint' Evidence
LEAD: Leading molecular biologists say a technique promoted by the nation's top law-enforcement agency for identifying suspects in criminal trials through the analysis of genetic material is too unreliable to be used in court.


The Year of the Horse Begins


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Ad Scene;   Films and Commercials Are A Growing Double Feature
LEAD: WHEN Michael Jackson appeared recently at movie theaters, singing and dancing on the screen, delighted audiences cheered.


Question Box
LEAD:
Picking Off Passes


Tribe Gets Free Use of Library
LEAD: People living on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian reservation will have free use of the Ledyard library, after an agreement between town officials and tribal leaders.
Although tribal lands are within town boundaries, town officials had required residents of the reservation to pay $19 for library cards, the same fee paid by out-of-town residents.


Don't Cut Israel and Others to Aid East Europe;   Plight of Philippines
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israel and East Germany to Talk About Ties
LEAD: Israeli and East German officials are to begin preliminary talks on Monday aimed at establishing the first diplomatic ties between the two nations, the Foreign Ministry said today.
But first the two sides must resolve longstanding disagreements over the Nazi genocide.


New Data Cited as Agent in Spy Case Asks Retrial
LEAD: A principal witness against the only F.B.I. agent who has ever been convicted of espionage declared last summer that the bureau had improperly concealed information that might have helped the agent's defense.


20,000 Stage a Rally in Rumania To Protest Against the New Rulers
LEAD: Shouting anti-Communist and anti-Government slogans, about 20,000 people marched today to the headquarters of the ruling Council of National Salvation for an opposition rally that revealed the widening split over the country's political course.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Continental And Ayer Part Ways
LEAD: CONTINENTAL AIRLINES abruptly dismissed Ayer as its advertising agency on Friday and said it would put its account into a formal review involving four or five agencies.


49er Fans Rise Up and Cheer
LEAD: It didn't seem to matter much tonight if all season long someone thought Montana was a state and Rice was something to eat.
Today in San Francisco, people out for a good time joined die-hard football fans to cheer on and celebrate the 49ers.


Nicaragua Will Let Congress Observe Voting, Carter Says
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter said today that the Nicaraguan Government had reversed its position and would allow American Congressmen to observe the February elections.


Los Angeles Orchestra Set for Salzburg
LEAD: The Los Angeles Philharmonic announced yesterday that it will be in residence at the Salzburg Festival in August of 1992.
In addition to an undetermined number of symphonic concerts, the orchestra will play in the pit for four performances of Messiaen's opera ''St.
Francois d'Assise'' in a new production.


Municipal Cars Are Cut Sharply In Dinkins Plan
LEAD: More than 1,000 municipal workers and administrators will lose their city-owned cars this year as part of the continuing austerity program called for by Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Market Place;   Some Promise In Gaming Stocks
LEAD: SEVERAL small companies serving the $9 billion casino-gaming business might be the strongest performers in the industry, several analysts say.


Chronicle
LEAD: PAUL TAYLOR has been commissioned to create a new work for the Paris Opera Ballet, and he's thinking about a rabbit.
Not just un lapin ordinaire, either, but Peter Rabbit.


Boston Banks Agree to Fight Racial Disparity in Mortgages
LEAD: Faced with a new study showing a wide racial disparity in mortgage lending, a group of Boston banks has agreed to take part in a $430 million program to narrow the gap.


More Malpractice Than Lawsuits, New York Medical Study Suggests
LEAD: A long-awaited study of malpractice in New York hospitals, perhaps the most comprehensive ever conducted in the United States, concludes that thousands of hospital deaths and tens of thousands of injuries are tied to negligence each year but that relatively few victims seek recourse in the courts.


Caucasus Partisans Press Truce
LEAD: Armenian and Azerbaijani partisans began withdrawing from a key battlefront today and agreed to discuss extending the truce between the two competing nationalist groups to other parts of the volatile region, spokesmen reported.


String Confetti Aerosol Cans Are Recalled as Fire Hazards
LEAD: The Government has announced the recall of three million cans of an aerosol string confetti because the propellant used in the product may be highly flammable.


Accord Is Reached On U-Groove Irons
LEAD: Karsten Manufacturing Corporation, makers of the controversial Ping Eye 2-irons, has dropped a $100 million lawsuit that threatened the future authority of the United States Golf Association.


Frustration Again for Elway
LEAD: Not long after the Denver Broncos had qualified for Super Bowl XXIV, John Elway decided that he would let his blond hair grow.
He would not get a haircut, as he had done before his two previous - and unhappy - appearances in the championship game.


Holmgren Awaits Word From Jets
LEAD: Mike Holmgren, the San Francisco 49ers' offensive coordinator, said tonight that he had not yet been contacted by Dick Steinberg, the Jets' new general manager, regarding the Jets' coaching vacancy.


Review/Concert;   A Revised Critical Edition Of Rossini's 'Gazza Ladra'
LEAD: In his chatty 1824 biography of Rossini, Stendhal included a firsthand account of the premiere of ''La Gazza Ladra'' at La Scala in 1817.
The Milanese public was predisposed against the work, he wrote; but it was such a triumph that ''scarcely a moment passed without the entire audience rising to its feet as one man to shower Rossini with applause.


Sports of The Times;   Parasols and Footballs
LEAD: A TAXICAB here was suddenly halted at an intersection as a parade, with horns blaring, knees pumping and bright parasols undulating, made its Orphic way down St.
Charles Street.


Chronicle
LEAD: Four American psychoanalysts are to teach in the Soviet Union, the first such exchange in at least a decade.
Organized by DR.
ARNOLD M. ROTHSTEIN, program chairman of the American Psychoanalytic Association, the group will teach classes to 200 Soviet psychiatrists for one week, beginning April 23.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


In Fast-Changing East Germany, The Economy Is Stuck in Neutral
LEAD: When Gert Schmidt, an economist in Dusseldorf, met recently with a group of executives from West German companies, they all eagerly sought his advice on doing business in East Germany.


Episcopal Priest Leaves As Head of Gay Mission
LEAD: A gay Episcopal priest ordained just last Dec. 16 has been forced to resign as director of a Hoboken ministry to homosexuals because of comments he made questioning celibacy and monogamy.


In Stands, A Study In Bronco Blue
LEAD: Two young men in Bronco colors - orange-and-blue caps, orange-and-blue sweaters and orange-and-blue-painted faces - sat behind an end zone in the Superdome today, took some photographs and watched the game.
And cheered early.
Very early.


Battle Rages in Italy To Control Publisher
LEAD: After a long-simmering struggle, two of Italy's most powerful business executives are engaged in an all-out war for control of the nation's leading publishing group.


Tie Keeps Islanders And Devils in First
LEAD: After the 4-4 tie between the Islanders and the Devils at Nassau Coliseum today, the Islanders' Pat LaFontaine, following an appropriate dictum, stepped from the locker room to the corridor - and kissed his sister.


Grandfather Is Charged In Fund-Raising Fraud
LEAD: A 65-year-old repairman has been charged with defrauding his fellow employees by telling them his granddaughter was sick and needed thousands of dollars for medical bills.


Enough Equipment To Fill Golf Course
LEAD: WHEN a group of 10 young Russian golfers was brought to Florida this month as guests of the PGA of America, the best player among them, Dennis Zherebko, 14 years old, had no problem playing to his 18 handicap on the Lake Nona course in Orlando.


Subway Panhandlers See Little From Legal Victory
LEAD: News of his court victory arrived, appropriately enough, on the television set Joe Walley had bought with the proceeds of his trade: panhandling.


Saar Vote Sets Stage For Challenge to Kohl
LEAD: Oskar Lafontaine, the brash, quick-witted Premier of Saarland state, scored an impressive victory in the state election today, virtually insuring that he will be named the Social Democratic challenger to Chancellor Helmut Kohl in national elections next December.


Lendl Wins Title as Edberg Pulls Out
LEAD: Ivan Lendl was handed the Australian Open title when a pulled abdominal muscle forced Stefan Edberg to retire from the Australian Open final late in the third set with the score, 4-6, 7-6, 5-2.


Test for New Sports Daily: Is Market Big Enough?
LEAD: The National, a new daily tabloid devoted solely to sports, is poised to start testing whether this country's appetite for sports news is truly ravenous or merely enormous.


Manila Arrests Fugitive General For Role in December Rebellion
LEAD: The highest-ranking officer involved in the latest attempt to overthrow President Corazon C. Aquino was arrested today, the Philippine military authorities said.


Reading Gorby's Mind
LEAD: My political philosophy will outlast Communism, even outlast capitalism.
I have come to believe in improvisationism, the politics of dealing dazzlingly with the present.


Christmas Spirit Is Still Alive Among Givers to the Neediest
LEAD: Although the year-end holidays are long gone, letters sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund last week continued to relate ways in which people were moved by Christmas and the New Year to reach out to others.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
BOSTON (AL) - Named Elaine Weddington assistant general manager.
GOLF
UNITED STATES GOLF ASSOCIATION - Named C. Grant Spaeth president.
HORSE RACING
NEW YORK RACING ASSOCIATION -Announced the resignation of Edward Seigenfeld, vice president of marketing and public relations.


Force as a Last Resort: Armed Power Salvages Moscow's Facing Authority
LEAD: It now seems clear that the main reason that the Soviet military stormed Baku on the morning of Jan. 20 was to prevent the Communist government of the Azerbaijan republic from falling, much as several national Governments in Eastern Europe have fallen in recent months under the pressure of popular uprisings.


The Editorial Notebook;   Wood Men and Desert Men
LEAD: For most Americans, what is happening in Azerbaijan might as well be occurring on the moon's dark side.
TV presents a montage of people slain in an ethnic civil war, of shouting demonstrators and Soviet troops under attack.
It all tends to be boiled down to a religious conflict between Muslim Azerbaijanis and Christian


E. Blair Bolles, 78, A Retired Journalist And Colt Executive
LEAD: Blair Bolles, a retired journalist, author and corporate executive, died of liver cancer Friday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 78 years old.


Evelyn Ames, Portrayer of Nature In Poetry and Prose, Is Dead at 81
LEAD: Evelyn Ames, a poet and prose writer whose works on wildlife and the environment were praised by reviewers as graceful and intense, but not sentimental, died on Thursday at St.
Johnland Nursing Home in Kings Park, L.I.
She was 81 years old and had homes in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and Martha's Vineyard.


Eric Brettschneider Weds Ms. Rostaing
LEAD: The marriage of Jeanne Rostaing and Eric B. Brettschneider took place yesterday at the Forest Hills, Queens, home of Justice and Mrs.
Richard A. Brown.
Justice Brown, of the State Supreme Court's Appellate Division in Brooklyn, officiated.


Pilot Guilty in Cocaine Plot
LEAD: A Colombian pilot accused of flying cocaine for the Medellin drug organization pleaded guilty on Friday to conspiring to import cocaine into the United States.
The pilot, Jorge de la Cuesta, faces a maximum sentence of life and a $4 million fine.
He was accused of flying cocaine for Carlos Lehder Rivas, who has been convicted of smuggling drugs.


Ametek Picks a Chief After a Realignment
LEAD: Ametek Inc., a manufacturer of instruments and industrial equipment, has named Walter E. Blankley as its president and chief executive, effective in April.


1855 Louisiana Law On Abortion Is Barred
LEAD: A panel of Federal judges has refused to let Louisiana resume enforcing an old criminal law against abortion, saying the 1855 statute had been superseded by newer laws.


Don't Cut Israel and Others to Aid East Europe;   Deserves a Try
LEAD: To the Editor:


At 21, He's Off And Winning
LEAD: NOT every 21-year-old college student can say he owns a string of harness horses.
But then, not every college student has a mother who operates a chain of Chinese restaurants.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Buckley/DeCerchio
LEAD: Buckley/DeCerchio just keeps on growing.
On Friday, the agency was awarded the $1.1 million account for the National Lampoon humor magazine.
The agency is also moving out of Tom DeCerchio's apartment to an office at 536 Broadway in Manhattan.


Israeli Rabbi Calls for Talks With P.L.O., and Roils the Likud a Bit
LEAD: A major religious leader among Israel's Jews of North African origin is causing a small political storm by calling for negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwall Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,337,000
3,025,000
Net inc
b76,000
c1,818,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
7,132,000
6,052,000
Yr rev
14,322,000
12,041,000
Net inc
b508,000
c3,358,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
6,759,000
5,909,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about Alfred E. Eckes Jr. referred incorrectly to his service with the International Trade Commission.


Nature Group Acquires Big New Mexico Tract
LEAD: The Nature Conservancy said today that it had closed a deal to acquire the biologically diverse 321,703-acre Gray Ranch in New Mexico's southwestern boot heel.


Armstrong World Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armstrong World Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
617,700,000
606,600,000
Net inc
b55,300,000
c34,600,000
Share earns
1.17
.74
Yr sales
2,512,500,000
2,289,500,000
Net inc
b187,600,000
c162,700,000
Share earns
3.92
3.51


Investor Joins Blackstone
LEAD: Henry R. Silverman, an investor known for stepping in and managing his acquisitions, is leaving the Reliance Capital Group to join the Blackstone Group.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a picture yesterday with an article about the coming elections in East Germany carried an incorrect caption in some copies.
The picture showed a New Forum meeting at which some members opposed German reunification.
Their sign read, ''We are the minority and against a compromise movement.


Centaur Holds 16.53% Of National Intergroup
LEAD: Centaur Partners, a New York investment partnership, has acquired a 16.53 percent stake in National Intergroup Inc. and says it will try to bring about the sale of the Pittsburgh-based holding company.


Howard Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
85,340,000
b15,478,000
Per share
-
1.07
Year net loss
66,149,000
b35,102,000
Per share
-
2.43
b-Net income


Charter Fedl Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Fedl Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
4,501,000
614,000
6mo net loss
6,304,000
420,000


Altos Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altos Computer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 23
1989
1988
Sales
37,981,000
40,400,000
Net loss
992,000
1,839,000
6mo sales
70,035,000
72,552,000
Net loss
1,383,000
b2,228,000
Share earns
-
.19
b-Net income


Bhopal Victims Still Wait for Carbide Money
LEAD: Munni Bai squatted on the tiny courtyard in front of her one-room hovel with a six-month-old infant on her lap, weary from sickness and struggle since the Union Carbide Corporation pesticide subsidary opposite her neighborhood spewed lethal gases more than five years ago.


Haverfield Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Haverfield Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
296,000
894,000
Per share
.25
.76
Year net inc
1,124,000
2,225,000
Per share
.95
1.90


Applied Solar Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Solar Energy (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 28
1989
1988
Sales
6,402,000
7,024,000
Net inc
b871,000
cd602,000
Share earns
.26
-
Yr sales
21,725,000
25,789,000
Net loss
b1,842,000
d3,090,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $1,739,000, which included a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $1,875,000 for the quarter and included income from discontinued operations of $1,217,000, which included a gain on disposal of discontinued operations of $1,873,000 for the year.


Israel Hopes to Join Bank
LEAD: Israel will apply to join the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the proposed bank to help Eastern Europe, Bank of Israel sources said Sunday.
France is the driving force in the plan to establish the new bank, which will serve the private sector in Eastern Europe.
The 12 European Community countries, 14 other developed nations and 8 East European states are involved.


Brenton Banks Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenton Banks Inc. (OTC)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
8,704,264
7,703,022
Per share
1.81
1.59
Prior year per share earnings restated to reflect 2-for-1 stock split payable Jan. 30.


Grieving Relatives Gird for Federal Hearing on a New Rule for Job Safety
LEAD: Brenda Fogle and Linda Link, two bitterly grieving mothers, will go to Chicago on Tuesday to tell Federal safety officials about the morning of June 28, 1988, the day their sons did not come home from work.


Topics of The Times;   Sauce for the Goose in Thailand
LEAD: Food industry groups have long opposed requiring package labels to specify the percentage of each major ingredient used.
Such disclosure, the National Food Processors Association warned recently in testimony before the Food and Drug Administration, could expose secret product recipes and force costly reprinting of labels whenever products are slightly reformulated.


Electronic Arts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electronic Arts (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,485,000
22,994,000
Net inc
3,196,000
2,641,000
Share earns
.33
.33
Shares outst
9,776,000
7,954,000
9mo rev
54,442,000
51,517,000
Net inc
5,118,000
3,849,000
Share earns
.58
.48
Shares outst
8,783,000
8,056,000


Upheaval in the East;   Honecker, in Disgrace and in Poor Health, Is Arrested as He Leaves a Berlin Hospital
LEAD: East Germany's relentless pursuit of its former hard-line leaders finally reached Erich Honecker today.
The ousted Communist Party chief was released from the hospital and immediately arrested.


Hammond Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hammond Co.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,599,087
4,794,273
Net loss
84,995
529,754
9mo rev
15,771,137
16,337,784
Net inc
863,973
b219,163
Share earns
.48
-
b-Net loss
The company said net income for the latest 9 months was increased by $546,000, or 30 cents a share, due to the adoption of two changes in accounting principles.


Archive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archive Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
47,018,000
35,970,000
Net inc
3,527,000
3,219,000
Share earns
.26
.25
Shares outst
13,765,000
12,887,000


Review/Theater;   Shifting Relationships In Pintauro's 'Targets'
LEAD: Just deserts are on the menu at Joe Pintauro's ''Moving Targets.'' In this amiable anthology of nine brief sketches (at the Vineyard Theater), fathers and sons, friends and lovers come to terms with strained relationships - and couples try to remember what drew them together in the first place.


Settlement On Resorts
LEAD: A panel of the Delaware Supreme Court yesterday upheld an 18-month-old Delaware Chancery Court ruling approving a settlement of stockholder suits against Donald J. Trump, the developer, and Merv Griffin, the entertainer and businessman.


Unocal Reports a 4th-Quarter Loss
LEAD: The Unocal Corporation said today that it lost $26 million in the fourth quarter, mainly because of large, nonrecurring losses related to the sale of a Canadian coal mine and the closing of a Texas refinery.


Party Tosses Cuomo's Hat
LEAD: With characteristic caginess, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who is widely expected to seek a third term in November, has refused to say whether or not he will run for re-election.
But state Democratic leaders appear to have said it for him.


Jones Intercable Inv reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jones Intercable Inv (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
19,803,000
15,822,000
Net loss
6,726,000
5,586,000
Shares outst
12,450,000
12,394,000
6mo rev
39,244,000
30,317,000
Net loss
b16,525,000
10,797,000
Shares outst
12,438,000
12,386,000


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
629,000
1,772,000
Per share
.15
.46
Year net inc
5,742,000
6,635,000
Per share
1.46
1.71


CFCF Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFCF Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
45,101,000
28,079,000
Net loss
892,000
b9,748,000
Share earns
-
.88
b-Net income and included an extraordinary gain on sale of radio operations of $5,811,000, or 53 cents a share.


Patterns
LEAD:
Beene Charts Middle Course


RJR Bonds Off Sharply For 2d Day
LEAD: Some RJR Nabisco debt securities continued to plummet in price yesterday, as they had on Friday after Moody's Investors Service lowered its rating on about $7 billion of the company's debt.


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
204,008,000
191,723,000
Net inc
5,497,000
4,875,000
Share earns
.30
.27
Yr rev
801,830,000
767,851,000
Net inc
b8,722,000
25,299,000
Share earns
.48
1.42


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As a teen-ager, Waylon Jennings was too busy singing to graduate from high school.
But yesterday he received an equivalency diploma from Martha S. Wilkinson, the wife of Gov.
Wallace G. Wilkinson of Kentucky.


Chart House Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chart House Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
32,094,000
34,436,000
Net inc
564,000
2,233,000
Share earns
.07
.44
Shares outst
8,047,000
5,011,000
Yr rev
139,567,000
146,337,000
Net inc
b3,050,000
c5,613,000
Share earns
.51
1.12
Shares outst
6,045,000
5,008,000


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
From '88
Allegheny Ludlum Corp.
$ 28,600,000
+21.2
Armstrong World Industries
55,300,000
+59.8
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc.
34,400,000
+19.0
Beckman Instruments Inc.


Cristiani to See Bush in U.S.
LEAD: President Bush will meet with the Salvadoran President, Alfredo Cristiani, at the White House on Thursday to discuss the investigation into the slayings of six Jesuit priests and two women on Nov. 16, the White House said today.
Future American aid to El Salvador has been tied to progress in the inquiry.


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversified Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
64,238,000
48,566,000
Net loss
b4,396,000
c356,000
Share earns
-
.07
Yr sales
230,542,000
219,509,000
Net loss
b3,126,000
c1,517,000
Share earns
-
.31


Statewide Bancp p reports earnings for trtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Statewide Bancp p
trtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net ls s
3,900,000
,3,320,000
Perhahare
- 5050
Year t t inc
9,296,000
20,6,6,000
Per share
.86
1.93
NeNet income


Colgate Will Buy Bleach Companies
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company agreed to acquire the Canadian bleach and fabric softener businesses from the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company for $172 million.
The purchase is part of Colgate's strategy to be a force in bleach, said Reuben Mark, the company's chairman, president and chief executive.


Making the Bride Into the Bouquet
LEAD: It is a tradition in couture that the wedding dress epitomize the major theme of the collection, and Hubert de Givenchy is not the only designer who ended his collection for spring and summer with a pink wedding dress.


Haiti, as Expected, Calls End to State of Siege
LEAD: The military Government of Haiti said tonight that it had lifted a state of siege and restored parts of the Constitution that it suspended nine days ago before launching a major crackdown on political opponents.


Premier Bancorp (La.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bancorp (La.) (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
712,000
b8,100,000
Per share
.03
-
Year net loss
105,600,000
49,700,000
b-Net loss


List of Added Starters May Make Final Cut
LEAD: The National Basketball Association championship round is projected to begin the first week in June.
Which two teams will be there?


Upheaval in the East;   Ex-Aide to Ceausescu Is Tearful at Genocide Trial
LEAD: A close associate of Nicolae Ceausescu, the executed Rumanian dictator, burst into tears in court today as he admitted that his past behavior was ''contemptible.''


Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,072,000
2,955,000
Net loss
b179,000
c209,000
Share earns
-
.10
Yr sales
11,626,000
11,641,000
Net inc
b434,000
1,012,000
Share earns
.20
.46


INSIDE
LEAD:
Little Appetite for Stocks
American companies, which widely bought their own stocks and those of other concerns during the boom of the 1980's, are apparently pulling back.


F.D.A. Limits Red Dye No. 3
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration today banned many uses of Red Dye No. 3, saying studies had shown that very high doses of the color additive can cause cancer in laboratory animals.


Upheaval in the East;   2 Die in Ethnic Protests In a Yugoslav Province
LEAD: At least 2 ethnic Albanians were killed and 20 seriously injured today in battles with the police on the sixth day of unrest in Kosovo province.


Suffield Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffield Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
20,492,000
b507,000
Per share
-
.08
Shares outst
6,011,107
6,035,427
Year net loss
19,491,000
257,000
Shares outst
6,023,367
6,030,989
b-Net income


Elco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elco Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
35,821,000
37,640,000
Net inc
913,000
1,605,000
Share earns
.19
.34
6mo sales
72,315,000
73,121,000
Net inc
2,248,000
3,310,000
Share earns
.47
.69


Federated Effort Stalled By Variety of Creditors
LEAD: The number and variety of the unsecured creditors of Federated Stores Inc. have delayed the appointment of creditors' committees and a debtor's examination by about two weeks, Conrad Morganstern, the United States Trustee overseeing Federated's bankruptcy, said yesterday.


What the Pigs Say
LEAD: Pigs have different and identifiable squeals, oinks and grunt sounds for different situations, ranging from greeting humans to romancing and vocalizing hunger or stress, researchers at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln have found.


Epic Data Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epic Data Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,135,000
3,882,000
Net loss
264,000
1,328,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Jamaican Criticizes Panama Invasion
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle ended a three-day diplomatic mission today in open disagreement with the Prime Minister of Jamaica, who said he disapproved of the American invasion of Panama and called for new elections to establish the legitimacy of the new Government there.


For Infants, New Optimism on Heart Transplants
LEAD: NEW theories on the workings of the immune system in newborn babies are bringing optimism to transplant surgeons who treat infants with severe heart defects.


Upheaval in the East: East Germany;   The New Politics
LEAD: If the decision to move up elections and form a coalition government in East Germany was presented by its authors as a response to spreading instability, it was also a baptism in the tough game of democratic politics.


Sunday Silence Does the Expected
LEAD: When Jim McKay tore the envelope containing the name of the Horse of the Year for 1989 in nationally televised ceremonies Saturday afternoon, it was about as suspenseful as opening a telephone bill.
The chance that anyone but Sunday Silence would win the award was as remote as receiving a $1 million cashier's check from the phone company.


Researchers Find a Protein That May Block Arthritis
LEAD: IN pursuit of a drug that would help ease arthritis pain, researchers say they have discovered a substance that inhibits inflammation and halts the cartilage decay caused by rheumatoid arthritis.
Currently, no drug exists to block the debilitating disease, which afflicts more than two million Americans.


Phoenix Technologies Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phoenix Technologies Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,791,000
14,626,000
Net loss
4,936,000
b2,865,000
Share earns
-
.26
Shares outst
9,983,000
11,102,000
b-Net income


Brunswick Mining &amp; Smelting Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Mining &amp; Smelting Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
338,151,000
327,437,000
Net inc
29,671,000
31,041,000
Share earns
.80
.87
The company said it recorded a loss of $4.5 million in the fourth quarter as a result of lower production due to start up delays and mine sequencing problems.


Topics of The Times;   Super for Some
LEAD: Sunday, Jan. 28, 1990, was super on many counts.


First Home Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
42,000
436,000
Per share
.05
.56
Year net inc
1,177,000
1,725,000
Per share
1.52
2.23


The 1991 Budget: Proposals;   How Bush's Plan Would Affect Domestic Efforts
LEAD: Here are President Bush's budget proposals for major domestic programs for the 1991 fiscal year:
Drugs and Crime


Making More Room In Your Data Attic
LEAD: HARD disks are like attics.
No matter how large they are, they eventually fill up with treasures and trifles, mostly trifles.
One solution is an electronic version of spring cleaning.
Another solution is to get a bigger attic in the form of a new hard disk drive.


Plastique Moderne reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plastique Moderne
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
41,866,651
42,700,901
Net inc
b917,778
b56,669
Share earns
.17
.01
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $827,915, or 15 cents a share, and $162,202, or 3 cents a share, for the latest and prior year, respectively.


Entertainment Publishing (Corp.A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entertainment Publishing (Corp.A)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
45,016,000
40,143,000
Net inc
10,776,000
7,776,000
Share earns
1.93
1.55
Shares outst
5,580,000
5,023,000
6mo rev
49,312,000
43,820,000
Net inc
6,731,000
b3,867,000
Share earns
1.22
.78
Shares outst
5,526,000
4,989,000


Trial Opens for Ex-Tanker Captain in the Nation's Worst Oil Spill
LEAD: Joseph J. Hazelwood, who once commanded the pride of the Exxon Corporation's fleet of oil tankers, went on trial today on charges that he was largely responsible for the worst oil spill in American history.


UAL Stock Drops As Bid Hopes Dim
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation plunged yesterday on worries about takeover deals and a perception that no transaction is likely for the airline company for at least a month, traders said.
UAL, the parent of United Airlines, sank $13.50 a share, to $136.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
A UAL spokesman, citing company policy, declined comment.


Noriega Defense's P.O.W. Strategy Called Faulty
LEAD: The assertion by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's lawyers that he is a prisoner of war is part of a wider defense strategy to jar and even embarrass the Government as it prosecutes the case, but it will be of little help for him, legal scholars said today.


The 1991 Budget: Tax Breaks;   Bush Offers Savings Plan and Asks for Smaller Cut in Gains Tax
LEAD: President Bush proposed a revised plan today for cutting capital gains taxes and offered tax breaks for a new type of savings account.


Marshall Field's
LEAD: The JMB Realty Corporation is negotiating with the First Chicago Corporation's new merchant banking group and top management at the Marshall Field's &amp; Company department stores to make a joint bid for the retailer, according to a report in Crain's Chicago Business.
The group seeking to buy Marshall Field's, which has been offered for sale by Britain's B.A.T.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black &amp; Decker Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,130,100,000
705,500,000
Net loss
3,200,000
b38,400,000
Share earns
-
.65
Shares outst
59,200,000
59,000,000
b-Net income
The company said lower earnings in the latest period primarily reflect increased interest expense and goodwill amortization related to the acquisition of Emhart Corp.


L.A. Gear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* L.A. Gear Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
166,351,000
63,861,000
Net inc
11,619,000
6,255,000
Share earns
.58
.36
Shares outst
19,886,000
17,282,000
Yr sales
617,080,000
223,713,000
Net inc
55,059,000
22,030,000
Share earns
3.01
1.29
Shares outst
18,308,000
17,110,000


Pagliarulo Signs
LEAD: Mike Pagliarulo, who often had difficult contract negotiations with the Yankees, reached agreement yesterday on a $575,000 salary with the San Diego Padres, the same amount he earned last year playing for both teams.
The Padres had submitted a $25,000 cut for salary arbitration and Pagliarulo had filed for $645,000.


Boeing Net Drops 55.7%; Strike Cited
LEAD: The Boeing Company today reported a 55.7 percent decline in earnings for the fourth quarter, when its commercial aircraft operations were disrupted by a strike and its military business continued to show losses.


Jets Set Up an Interview With Holmgren
LEAD: Not long after the Super Bowl celebrating tapered off early yesterday, Mike Holmgren, the San Francisco 49ers' offensive coordinator, received an expected call from the Jets.


Philip Nichols Jr., 82, Federal Appeals Judge
LEAD: Philip Nichols Jr., a senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals and a former Commissioner of Customs, died of a heart attack Friday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 82 years old and lived in Washington.


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,769,009
1,436,779
Per share
.47
.39
Year net inc
6,250,170
4,190,405
Per share
1.64
1.14


Del E. Webb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Del E. Webb Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
84,022,000
35,150,000
Net inc
b6,502,000
c15,263,000
Share earns
.64
-
Shares outst
9,368,358
9,283,512
Yr rev
189,491,000
106,918,000
Net inc
b7,597,000
c14,949,000
Share earns
.62
-
Shares outst
9,356,850
9,230,882


Rig Count Drops Again
LEAD: The number of working United States oil and gas rigs continued to decline last week, dropping by 27, to a total of 937, Baker Hughes Inc. reported.
Despite the decrease, the rig count was higher than the 797 total posted for the corresponding week last year, Baker Hughes said.
In the previous week, the count tumbled by 55.


National Quick Lube reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Quick Lube
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,162,404
49,391
Net loss
1,455,923
155,920
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Arx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arx Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,179,000
22,396,000
Net inc
606,000
b6,031,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
7,880,289
8,402,314
6mo sales
50,172,000
43,846,000
Net inc
838,000
b5,548,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
7,880,289
8,391,980


Intel Device Has Defect
LEAD: A newly discovered bug in the Intel Corporation's 486 microprocessor will delay shipments of computers from the Compaq Computer Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company.


The Moment, Missed;   Mr. Bush on Defense: Too Much, Too Late
LEAD: The foundations of Communist power are crumbling.
The threat of Soviet attack is radically diminished.
Yet President Bush, in his new budget, would continue to arm for nuclear war.
His unwillingness to declare a ''peace dividend'' creates a monumental missed opportunity.


Leo Jiranek, Designer Of Furniture, 89, Dies
LEAD: Leo Jiranek, a furniture and interior designer, died of cancer Saturday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Old Greenwich.


Nicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
518,300,000
463,900,000
Net inc
b73,200,000
67,700,000
Share earns
1.55
1.24
Yr rev
1,621,700,000
1,509,300,000
Net inc
b206,500,000
187,900,000
Share earns
3.98
3.48


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Ethnic Turks and Greeks Reportedly Clash
LEAD: People of Turkish descent clashed with other Greeks in the north today over the slaying of a Greek customs official and the jailing of two Muslim politicians accused of inciting unrest, a spokesman for the Ministry of Public Order reported.


IFR Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IFR Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
12,088,000
11,963,000
Net inc
1,465,000
1,735,000
Share earns
.24
.29
6mo sales
24,767,000
22,077,000
Net inc
2,992,000
3,290,000
Share earns
.50
.54


Albany International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
135,960,000
125,075,000
Net inc
12,233,000
8,581,000
Share earns
.46
.34
Shares outst
26,365,000
25,095,000
Yr sales
505,474,000
461,246,000
Net inc
44,492,000
36,258,000
Share earns
1.75
1.46
Shares outst
25,408,000
24,779,000


Corcoran Gallery Names Acting Head
LEAD: The board of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, as expected, today appointed David W. Scott, a retired museum director and art historian, as acting director and chief executive officer of the gallery, effective on Thursday.
At its annual meeting, the board also voted on a new slate of officers, electing Elinor Farquhar, a


Lazard Freres Partner
LEAD: Kendrick Wilson 3d will join the New York investment bank Lazard Freres &amp; Company as a general partner.
He will be further developing the firm's financial services advisory practice, both in the United States and overseas.
Mr.
Wilson had been president of Ranieri, Wilson &amp; Company, a small New York investment firm that he founded with Lewis R.


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beckman Instruments (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
199,700,000
199,100,000
Net inc
10,400,000
11,200,000
Share earns
.36
.39
Yr sales
785,900,000
770,300,000
Net inc
41,900,000
42,500,000
Share earns
1.47
1.49


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bell Atlantic Corp., Arlington, Va., announced the retirement of Samuel C. Ford as executive vice president of Bell Atlantic Network Services Inc.
He will be replaced by John F. Gamba.


Arrest of Strawberry Is Reported by Police
LEAD: The Mets' outfielder Darryl Strawberry was arrested early last Friday in what the Los Angeles police described as a domestic dispute with his wife, Lisa.


Pentagon Lists U.S. Bases That Are Candidates for Possible Closure or Cuts
LEAD: Here are the domestic and overseas military bases that are candidates for possible closure or reductions as announced by the Defense Department today.
The bases are listed by service or defense agency.
Domestic Closures
Army
Detroit Army Tank Plant, Mich.
Fort Ord, Calif.
Fort McClellan, Ala.


Expert Testifies Unknown Source Could Have Given Dr. Prego AIDS
LEAD: An AIDS expert acknowledged under cross-examination yesterday that Dr.
Veronica Prego could have picked up the AIDS virus from some unknown incident before she punctured her finger on a syringe needle in 1983.


Northwest Natural Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northwest Natural Gas Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
79,703,000
77,830,000
Net inc
9,805,000
8,388,000
Share earns
.83
.72
Shares outst
11,017,000
10,623,000
Yr rev
260,924,000
277,564,000
Net inc
28,420,000
23,720,000
Share earns
2.37
2.00
Shares outst
10,799,000
10,533,000


Bank Lockout in Sweden
LEAD: Financial business in Sweden virtually ground to a halt today after banks shut their doors to the public and locked out about 50,000 employees in a dispute over demands for more pay.


Business Programs Reaching Big Time
LEAD: THIS is a tale of two computer programs that grew up.
One started life as shareware, which is try-before-you-buy software; the other was always a commercial product, but a home-grown and home-distributed one.
Now both are offered through more traditional sales channels.


Overseas Tool Sales Are Pushed
LEAD: Troubled by the slump in the auto industry and competition from the Japanese, makers of machine tools have been looking to new businesses and markets overseas, particularly in Western and Eastern Europe.


In Shanghai, the Mystery of the Midnight Fire
LEAD: When a guest house for senior officials burned down last week, it stirred talk about arson and the injury and possible death of an elderly party leader.


In Couture, Three Elegant Standouts
LEAD: Yves Saint Laurent, Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel and Christian Lacroix presented what were widely agreed to be the best couture collections for spring and summer.
Retailers seeking guidance to fashion's future, private clients and most critics regarded the three collections, shown here this week, as the high spots in what were considered the strongest couture showings since the ready-to-wear industry developed sinews in the 1960's.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International Inc., Pittsburgh, a maker of electrical appliances and machinery, said it would sell its interest in Titanium Metals Corp. of America, Pittsburgh, to Baroid Corp. for $50 million.


Okanagan Skeena Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Okanagan Skeena Group
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,029,613
2,640,685
Net loss
105,563
b211,492
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Lincoln Tunnel Work To Limit a Tube's Use
LEAD: The north tube of the Lincoln Tunnel is being closed during off-peak hours five nights a week for the next two years to undergo the first major rehabilitation since it was opened in 1945.


Argentina's Unlikely Disciplinarian
LEAD: While all eyes are focused on economic and political events in Eastern Europe, dramatic changes are also convulsing Argentina.
The fate of President Carlos Saul Menem's bold play to build overnight a modern free-market economy hangs in the balance - and perhaps with it, the fate of Argentina's seven-year-old experiment in democracy.


Eagle Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Financial Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
968,000
1,020,000
Per share
.36
.38
Results from the year-ago first quarter included net gains on sales of investment securities of $152,000.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Catherine Comet, one of the rare female orchestra conductors, will be the new music director of the American Symphony Orchestra.


Chemical Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Fabrics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,980,000
9,742,000
Net inc
1,311,000
b1,157,000
Share earns
.26
.24
Shares outst
5,037,000
4,830,000
6mo sales
22,783,000
17,991,000
Net inc
2,274,000
b1,797,000
Share earns
.45
.37
Shares outst
5,016,000
4,828,000


Upheaval in the East: Bulgaria;   ZHIVKOV IS PLACED IN BULGARIAN JAIL
LEAD: Todor Zhivkov, the deposed Bulgarian leader, has been moved from house arrest to a prison for people accused of murder and other major crimes, the chief prosecutor's office said today.


Booby-Trapped Rifle Is Sent to a Prosecutor
LEAD: A loaded, booby-trapped gun, described by the police as a .22-caliber sawed-off rifle, was delivered to an assistant United States attorney in Brooklyn yesterday.
Federal agents disarmed it in her office before it could go off.


Count Polish Taxi Drivers Among the Many Victims of the Economic Plan
LEAD: Like their counterparts in the West, Polish taxi drivers fancy themselves as world-wise philosophers, and in recent weeks they have had more time than ever for philosophizing.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Spaghetti Warehouse (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,273,717
6,382,392
Net inc
569,708
381,078
Share earns
.23
.20
Shares outst
2,524,229
1,906,226
6mo rev
16,580,602
13,311,896
Net inc
1,139,156
785,552
Share earns
.51
.41
Shares outst
2,255,313
1,904,705


Black &amp; Decker
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation said it expects to sell its footwear materials unit to the United Machinery Group Ltd. for about $125 million in cash, and its capacitors business, excluding the United States segment, to the Nissei Electric Company for $80 million in cash.
Both businesses had been for sale since Black &amp; Decker acquired the Emhart Corporation last year.


OPEC Output Rise Held Vital
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries must raise its output capacity by up to six million barrels a day by the year 2000 to meet growing demand, the OPEC Secretary General, Subroto, said today.


Bank of New England Sells Credit Card Unit
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation yesterday announced the sale of its consumer credit card business to Citicorp for $828 million, producing a profit for the company of $176 million.


Grilli Property reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grilli Property
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,587,671
13,317,016
Net inc
2,615,783
2,450,797
Share earns
.28
.27
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Kansas Power &amp; Light Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas Power &amp; Light Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
293,509,000
262,583,000
Net inc
11,725,000
12,480,000
Share earns
.33
.34
Yr rev
1,127,623,000
1,166,114,000
Net inc
72,778,000
79,791,000
Share earns
2.05
2.25


International Cmos TechFnology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Cmos TechFnology
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
3,245,000
2,576,000
Net loss
901,000
b164,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,339,776
6,885,804
b-Net income


Honecker Jailed in East Germany


Nehemiah Finds Motivation as a 'Mere Mortal'
LEAD: Nine friends joined Renaldo Nehemiah at his home in Gaithersburg, Md., on Sunday to watch Super Bowl XXIV.
No disrespect intended, but a majority of them were cheering for Denver even though their host had played four seasons with San Francisco in the 1980's.


Florida Fedl Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Fedl Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
10,457,000
10,829,000
6mo net loss
17,609,000
21,936,000


TSI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,818,000
8,631,000
Net inc
308,000
545,000
Share earns
.12
.22
9mo rev
25,994,000
24,277,000
Net inc
1,109,000
991,000
Share earns
.44
.40


Mr. D's Super Mall: The 49ers
LEAD: Whenever a sports franchise is consistently successful, people nod, wink and say, ''It starts at the top.'' And after the San Francisco 49ers retained the Super Bowl championship with a 55-10 rout of the Denver Broncos, their man at the top, their owner and president, Edward J. DeBartolo Jr. was about to accept the Vince Lombardi


David Campbell, 95, Publishing Executive
LEAD: David Campbell, who retired in 1972 as president of the United States operations of the William Collins Ltd. publishing house, died Thursday of a heart ailment at St.
Francis Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 95 years old and lived in Jersey City.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manitowoc Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
46,513,200
43,147,440
Net inc
6,091,251
3,599,836
Share earns
.59
.35
6mo sales
104,568,470
83,724,592
Net inc
8,879,974
7,295,206
Share earns
.86
.71


Superior Teletec reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Teletec (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 24
1989
1988
Revenue
33,032,640
25,286,617
Net inc
1,296,938
312,126
Share earns
.13
.04
9mo rev
102,657,990
79,770,351
Net inc
3,630,320
2,011,040
Share earns
.37
.24


Baby's First-Year Costs Won't Approach $5,774
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burritt Interfincl Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burritt Interfincl Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,441,000
1,295,000
Per share
.45
.39
Year net inc
5,456,000
4,676,000
Per share
1.64
1.42


The 1991 Budget: Forecasts;   The Rosy Path to Cutting the Deficit
LEAD: To meet the budget deficit level required by law, the Bush Administration used favorable assumptions about economic growth, proposed many of the same spending cuts Congress has rejected time and again and suggested several accounting tricks.


The 1991 Budget: The Book;   The U.S. Budget Made Easy, More or Less
LEAD: By including in one big volume what had been presented in seven smaller ones, the Bush Administration might have made the budget document more straightforward, but not necessarily easier to read or cheaper to buy.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary headline yesterday about a former president of the Queens County Bar Association misidentified him in some copies.
He was Bernard J. Ferguson.
A corrected obituary appears today on page B6.


Barbara M. Weldon, Superintendent, 68
LEAD: Barbara M. Weldon, former school superintendent of District No. 2 of the New York City Board of Education, died on Saturday at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
She was 68 years old and lived in Stuart.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
592,100,000
544,400,000
Net inc
55,800,000
50,600,000
Share earns
.77
.71
Shares outst
72,300,000
71,700,000
Yr rev
2,427,700,000
2,272,400,000
Net inc
294,900,000
296,300,000
Share earns
4.10
4.09
Shares outst
71,900,000
72,400,000


Charter Fedl Savings Bank (N.J.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charter Fedl Savings Bank (N.J.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
688,322
806,683
Per share
.49
.58


Seeq Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seeq Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,327,000
14,525,000
Net loss
1,089,000
b1,123,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
12,908,000
13,047,000
b-Net income


Inverness Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inverness Petroleum
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,453,000
3,699,000
Net inc
6,000
b310,000
6mo rev
10,251,000
8,641,000
Net inc
260,000
246,000
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian funds.


America First Fincl Fund reports earnings for 12mo Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* America First Fincl Fund
12mo Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
20,200,000
-
Share earns
3.36
-
The company said prior year figures not applicable; the Fund's income consists primarily of earnings from Eureka Bank, which was acquired May 27, 1988.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about the bankruptcy proceedings of Federated Stores Inc. misstated the effect on discounts for retired employees.
The discounts were ended on Jan. 15 as the company filed its petition.
But along with that filing, it petitioned the judge to approve a restoration of the discounts.


John L. McCrea, 98, Retired Vice Admiral
LEAD: John L. McCrea, a retired vice admiral of the Navy, died of pneumonia Thursday at his home in Needham, Mass.
He was 98 years old.


Union Carbide Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Canada (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
123,497,000
127,059,000
Net loss
b9,965,000
c39,000
Yr sales
516,098,000
486,733,000
Net inc
b19,667,000
d48,527,000
Share earns
.97
2.41
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $2,853,000 for the quarter and $7,098,000 for the year, and extraordinary losses of $17,790,000 and $15,854,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Review/Opera;   Nicolai, Massenet and Argento In Washington Triple-Header


Red Eagle Resources reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Eagle Resources
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,012,000
17,612,000
Net inc
99,000
631,000
Share earns
.01
.05
Shares outst
19,641,000
14,022,000
Results for 1989 included the results of United Drilling Co., acquired on Aug.


Britain Seeks U.S. Visa Aid in Hong Kong
LEAD: Seeking help from Washington in easing Hong Kong's transition from British to Chinese rule, the British Foreign Secretary urged the Bush Administration today to grant American passports to residents of Hong Kong who are working for American companies.


Reviews/Music;   A Return to Swampy Blues
LEAD: It's back to the swampy blues for the drummer Ronald Shannon Jackson and the latest edition of his group, the Decoding Society.
Where earlier lineups of the Decoding Society drew on the odd meters and zigzag melodies of ethnic music, the current group usually stays with marches and stomps, bluesy vamps and ballads.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
306,413,000
264,339,000
Net inc
34,438,000
28,900,000
Share earns
1.13
.97
Yr sales
1,220,299,000
978,276,000
Net inc
114,367,000
97,886,000
Share earns
3.78
3.27
Shares outst
30,218,000
29,947,000


CPAC Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPAC Inc.
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
7,100,000
6,600,000
Net inc
348,000
b430,000
Share earns
.15
.19
9mo sales
20,900,000
19,900,000
Net inc
1,110,000
b1,061,000
Share earns
.48
.47
b-Included gains from tax benefits of $23,000 for the quarter and $75,000 for the 9 months.


Iowa Rallies to Beat Illinois
LEAD: Les Jepsen scored 18 points, including the winning layup with two seconds to play, to rally struggling Iowa to a 69-67 victory over Illinois tonight.


Northeast Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northeast Savings (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b244,000
cd5,111,000
9mo net loss
b225,000
d14,996,000
b-After extraordinary credits of $280,000 for the quarter and $936,000 for the 9 months.
c-Net loss


For Casting, Countless Auditions And One Couch, Never Used
LEAD: Outside the rehearsal room, in a stark Manhattan hallway under bare bulbs, four nervous young actors sat on metal folding chairs, clutching scripts and muttering their lines.
Inside the room behind the big gray doors, an actress named Jessica was pacing the oak floor before a video camera as Billy Hopkins smiled at her encouragingly, going about the business of casting a role for the director Oliver


Christian Quits Cabinet As Beirut Battles Flare
LEAD: A prominent Christian official resigned from the Government of President Elias Hrawi today as army factions waged artillery and rocket battles across the dividing line between the city's Muslim and Christian halves.


Alaska Air reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alaska Air (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
223,327,000
196,467,000
Net inc
2,485,000
6,070,000
Share earns
.16
.38
Yr rev
916,537,000
814,365,000
Net inc
42,935,000
37,473,000
Share earns
2.71
2.37


Chess
LEAD: When you lose the first two games of a match limited to six, your staunchest supporters are not going to expect much from you.
It's too short a stretch.
Yet the 1989 KRO Exhibition Match in Hilversum, the Netherlands, Dec. 13-20, proved to be an exception.


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Mercantile Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
845,000
913,000
Per share
.32
.39
Shares outst
2,631,380
2,343,309
Year net inc
3,479,000
2,719,000
Per share
1.34
1.11


Unocal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unocal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,852,000,000
2,665,000,000
Net loss
b26,000,000
c141,000,000
Share earns
-
.60
Yr rev
11,357,000,000
10,146,000,000
Net inc
b260,000,000
d480,000,000
Share earns
1.11
2.06
Shares outst
234,000,000
233,000,000


Credo Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Credo Petroleum Corp.
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,701,000
1,196,000
Net inc
475,000
204,000
Share earns
.14
.06
Fiscal 1988 results have been restated for the adoption of accounting rule FASB 96.


Diversco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diversco Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
11,660,363
10,123,600
Net inc
275,571
325,630
Share earns
.12
.14
Shares outst
2,325,264
2,342,200
9mo rev
33,380,893
29,564,495
Net inc
891,087
943,669
Share earns
.38
.41
Shares outst
2,363,130
2,288,559


Empire District Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire District Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
31,316,000
35,864,000
Net inc
3,842,000
3,009,000
Share earns
.64
.51
Shares outst
5,761,457
5,623,422
Yr rev
133,361,000
153,805,000
Net inc
17,347,000
17,656,000
Share earns
2.94
3.05
Shares outst
5,709,923
5,577,300


People
LEAD: *
James G. Oates has been named vice chairman for client services of Leo Burnett U.S.A.


Broncos' Questions Have No Answers
LEAD: The Super Bowl souvenir stand near the entrance of the Inter-Continental Hotel, an area that most of the Denver Broncos passed on their way to the buses this morning for a quiet trip home, featured a message, in large black handwritten letters, that some of these people might have seen before.


Henrietta Klein, Medical Center Founder, 85
LEAD: Henrietta Klein, a founder and officer of the Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn, died of cancer Sunday at Kingsbrook's David Minkin Rehabilitation Institute.
She was 85 years old and lived in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.


Medicine Shoppe InternaFtional reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medicine Shoppe InternaFtional (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,229,666
7,079,513
Net inc
2,016,853
1,675,025
Share earns
.25
.21


Barrister Information SysFtems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barrister Information SysFtems (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
7,272,000
7,454,000
Net loss
1,238,000
2,018,000
9mo rev
21,699,000
22,598,000
Net loss
4,318,000
3,820,000


Boston Journal;   Tribute to a Slain Daughter Helps Soothe a Shaken City
LEAD: At a doughnut shop in Mission Hill, the neighborhood where Carol Stuart was killed, the topic this morning was the Stuart case, as usual.


Apple Promotes European Unit Chief in Big Realignment
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. confirmed today that it was bringing one of its stars back from Europe to take charge of most of its somewhat listless operations in the United States.


McDonnell Order
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation exercised three options to acquire freighter versions of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's MD-11 aircraft and added another eight options.
Federal Express now holds a total of 8 firm orders and 11 options, McDonnell Douglas said.
The new firm orders are scheduled for delivery in 1992.


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,257,000
24,264,000
Net loss
b287,000
c458,000
Share earns
-
.25
Shares outst
2,410,000
1,835,000
b-After an extraordinary tax credit of $257,000, or 11 cents a share.


First Liberty Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Liberty Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
460,000
b916,000
Per share
.23
.46
b-Included a gain of $500,000 related to First Liberty's early application of Financial Accounting Standards No. 96, and a pre-tax gain of $1,168,000 on the sale of loan servicing contracts.


Berger Is Selected
LEAD: Jay Berger will replace Aaron Krickstein for the United States Davis Cup team's zonal match this weekend against Mexico.
Krickstein is still suffering from a groin pull that forced him to withdraw last week from the Australian Open, according to Ed Fabricus, the director of communications for the United States Tennis


Boeing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boeing Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,847,000,000
4,872,000,000
Net inc
77,000,000
174,000,000
Share earns
.34
.76
Yr rev
20,276,000,000
16,962,000,000
Net inc
973,000,000
614,000,000
Share earns
4.23
2.68


Topics of The Times;   Trees of Life
LEAD: With insufficient credit, President Bush has just broken with former President Reagan's doctrine of killer trees.
Mr.
Reagan seemed to condemn trees, calling them a source of pollution.
On the opposite principle that they absorb pollution, Mr.
Bush has announced a plan to plant a billion new trees a year for 10 years.


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Ind reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kulicke &amp; Soffa Ind (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,053,000
26,661,000
Net inc
1,472,000
2,692,000
Share earns
.19
.35
Shares outst
7,747,577
7,687,930


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
MARKETS
Some RJR Nabisco debt securities continued to plummet in price, as they did on Friday after Moody's lowered its rating on some RJR debt.
Bids on some issues fell by as much as $100 for each $1,000 face amount. [Page D1.]
Stock prices dropped again in sharply slower trading.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Higher Heights
Q. Are people getting taller?
A. ''It depends on what people you're talking about,'' said Tim Sullivan at the Center for Human Growth and Development in Ann Arbor, Mich., which studies the health factors involved in height.
In a given population, physical anthropologists and public health experts believe, the trend could go either way.


Adtec reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adtec
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
4,191,000
4,506,000
Net loss
1,760,000
b89,000
Share earns
-
.04
6mo rev
9,264,000
7,775,000
Net loss
1,671,000
b267,000
Share earns
-
.13
b-Net income and the 6 months included a gain from cumulative effect on prior periods of an accounting change of $98,000, or 5 cents a share.


Officials Chided in Virginia On Labor Day Racial Strife
LEAD: A special commission studying the racially tinged violence that shook this resort over the Labor Day holiday sharply faulted city officials today, asserting that they had failed to plan properly for the weekend and had failed to communicate adequately with blacks.


Founded by Idealists, Group Thrives on Need
LEAD: In the 70's, they were a phenomenon in philanthropy: rich young people with avowedly leftist politics using their inheritances to promote ''change, not charity.''


Suing for 2d Chance To Start Over
LEAD: On a drizzly, dreary Saturday afternoon recently, Kevin Ross returned to the Westside Preparatory School to empty trash cans and sweep the floor as a substitute janitor.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-15


Soybean Prices End Slide; Gain Seen as 'Key Reversal'
LEAD: Soybean futures prices rebounded sharply yesterday from life-of-contract lows, and analysts said the shift could mark a turnaround in the market's six-week slide.
Most grain futures also advanced on the Chicago Board of Trade.


Lab Says Electromagnetism Could Launch Satellites
LEAD: A POWERFUL electric gun being tested in New Mexico could be scaled up in a few years to launch small satellites into orbit much more cheaply than is possible with conventional rockets, scientists at Sandia National Laboratories say.


Acme Electric Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acme Electric Corp. (NYSE)
13wks to Dec 29
1989
1988
Sales
22,685,000
22,794,000
Net inc
851,000
752,000
Share earns
.18
.16
Shares outst
4,692,330
4,584,194
26wk sales
42,863,000
43,586,000
Net inc
1,583,000
b1,900,000
Share earns
.34
.42
Shares outst
4,684,110
4,574,745


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
812,648,000
842,142,000
Net inc
b98,871,000
46,366,000
Share earns
2.83
1.30
Yr sales
3,331,050,000
3,112,196,000
Net inc
b241,920,000
175,808,000
Share earns
6.90
4.90


Freedom for Beggars: New Law for a New Age
LEAD: The First Amendment has been on the books for 200 years.
State and local ordinances against begging have been around even longer.
And panhandling has been around since the dawn of time.
But only now, as New York's subways are overrun with the homeless seeking help, are all of these traditions clashing.


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
356,700,000
332,600,000
Net inc
48,700,000
45,000,000
Share earns
.57
.53
Yr sales
1,315,800,000
1,196,000,000
Net inc
152,600,000
143,400,000
Share earns
1.79
1.68


First Albany Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Albany Cos.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
18,135,000
16,237,000
Net inc
99,000
195,000
Share earns
.03
.06


Hot Hand by Syracuse Slaps Down St. John's
LEAD: In the wake of a 14-point loss to Connecticut on Saturday, St.
John's was faced with the awesome task of stopping a Syracuse team that had crushed Georgetown on its own court and seemed to be hitting now on all cylinders.


Pope Asks Affluent Lands Not to Scorn Africa
LEAD: Pope John Paul II arrived today in this struggling land and begged affluent nations ''not to scorn'' Africa's hungry millions.


AIDS Drug Is Approved After Clamor
LEAD: THE Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved a drug to treat fungal infections that plague people with AIDS and other conditions that weaken their immune systems.


U S Sprint Plans New Charge Card
LEAD: U S Sprint, the long-distance telecommunications company that is a joint venture of United Telecommunications Inc. and the GTE Corporation, said it would offer a voice-activated telephone charge card this summer.
The card is designed to recognize a customer's voice pattern and individual password to prevent unauthorized use, the company said.


Exco Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exco Technologies
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,830,000
7,538,000
Net inc
453,000
15,000
Share earns
.09
-
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Airlease Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airlease Ltd.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,866,000
4,423,000
Net inc
2,747,000
2,095,000
Share earns
.59
.45
Yr rev
18,033,000
18,720,000
Net inc
9,313,000
10,356,000
Share earns
1.99
2.22


Upheaval in the East: Poland;   Successor Party Picks New Leaders
LEAD: Two young leaders of Poland's newly defunct Communist Party were elected today to head a new left-of-center party that hopes to win back the public support lost by the Communists.


Allegheny Ludlum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
215,378,000
294,279,000
Net inc
28,641,000
23,587,000
Share earns
1.28
1.05
Yr sales
1,180,161,000
1,207,512,000
Net inc
133,766,000
108,619,000
Share earns
5.94
4.81


Connie Kay's Drums Purr and Tap, Not Thunder
LEAD: When the Modern Jazz Quartet opened a set at the Cafe Carlyle the other night with George Gershwin's ''Summertime,'' Connie Kay, the group's drummer for the last 35 years, turned in a characteristically virtuoso performance by quietly moving sounds around.


For 49ers, Comparison With Steeler Dynasty of 70's Is Inevitable
LEAD: He was in the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., in 1980 as part of the Super Bowl record crowd of 103,985.


Alpha Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
15,562,000
16,776,000
Net loss
490,000
b116,000
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
50,131,000
47,742,000
Net loss
133,000
b136,000
Share earns
-
.02


Laser Device Could Be Key to Faster Computer
LEAD: Scientists at Bell Laboratories yesterday introduced an experimental machine that uses pulses of light rather than currents of electricity to do its calculations.
While the machine is extremely crude, more advanced versions could radically increase the power of computers.


Ortega Pledges to Free Detainees
LEAD: President Daniel Ortega Saavedra said today that the Government would free more than 1,000 imprisoned rebels and their supporters before general elections on Feb. 25.


Site Picked for Space Museum Annex
LEAD: The Smithsonian Institution announced today that it had selected Dulles International Airport in northern Virginia for a proposed expansion of the National Air and Space Museum that would have room to display a space shuttle, a supersonic Concorde and other historic aircraft.


Capital Southwest reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Southwest (OTC)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
88,647,959
77,021,546
Share earns
24.51
21.62
Shares outst
3,617,051
3,563,051
Assets represented net assets.
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Underground Pollution Imperils Egypt's Relics
LEAD: THE boatman called Mohammed said the river was his life, as it had been his father's before him, and would in time become his son's.
The Nile, he said, does not abandon its children.
Yet, along the river's banks, where humanity has thrived across the millennia, a discordant note is being sounded by those concerned with old


U.S. Drug Agents Seize Land
LEAD: Federal drug agents on Saturday seized 2,700 acres of land that they say was bought with profits from the sale of Colombian cocaine.
The property, valued at $2.8 million, is a heavily wooded area in northeastern Pennsylvania.
It was owned by Frederick Luytjes, through his Mastwood Corporation of Dalton, Pa.


Pinnacle Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
282,000
268,000
Per share
.41
.38
6mo net inc
564,000
b3,338,000
Per share
.82
-
b-Net loss and after a loss of $3,767,000 from an adjustment in accounting.


First Fedl Savings (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fedl Savings (Ga.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
233,574
b284,043
Per share
-
.29
6mo net inc
4,350
1,033,401
Per share
-
1.05
b-Net income


BancTexas Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
19,018,000
6,928,000
Shares outst
16,884,000
16,862,000
Year net loss
43,724,000
29,543,000
Shares outst
16,884,000
16,774,000


Review/Dance;   Taking Survival Seriously
LEAD: The Ohad Naharin Dance Company concerned itself with struggle and survival on Sunday afternoon at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Mr.
Naharin dealt with serious matters that obviously troubled him.
But he was not always able to make his personal choreographic images communicative.


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Republic Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b351,000
389,000
Per share
.10
.12
Year net inc
c1,110,000
960,000
Per share
.33
.30
b-After pre-tax earthquake-related costs of $473,000.


Upheaval in the East: U.S. Policy;   U.S. Keeps Distance From New Rulers in East
LEAD: The Bush Administration has decided to keep a certain distance from the revolutionary government in Rumania, as well as from other new regimes in Eastern Europe, because of doubts that they have committed themselves to democratic free-market reforms, Administration officials said today.


Soyapango Journal;   Why the Sand Diggers Don't Protest Anymore
LEAD: Under the fiery sun on the bed of Las Canas River, sweat flows more freely than water.
Here sand, not coffee, is king.


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledgeware Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
14,310,000
6,202,000
Net inc
1,674,000
1,075,000
Share earns
.14
.13
Shares outst
11,812,000
8,227,000
6mo rev
27,064,000
10,298,000
Net inc
3,705,000
1,376,000
Share earns
.34
.16
Shares outst
10,921,000
8,228,000


'Handoff': Relaying Data Between Air Controllers
LEAD: Air-traffic controllers in Islip, L.I., directing Avianca Flight 52 transferred authority for the Boeing 707 jet to their colleagues in Garden City, L.I., in a routine procedure that they might perform as many as 50 times an hour.
But somehow information about Flight 52's critical fuel problem was never relayed.


Mid-State Fedl Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-State Fedl Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b1,106,000
425,000
Per share
.52
.21
b-Included $1,115,000 in income attributable to the receipt and contribution to the bank's employee stock ownership plan of the excess assets from the termination of its pension plan, and included $107,000 of expenses related to the bank's previously announced acquisition transaction with First Florida Banks Inc.


Both Joy and Sadness Inspire Gifts to Neediest Cases Fund
LEAD: The mailbag that brings notes and checks to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund every day carries sharp contrasts of joy and sadness, with letters at one extreme or the other not unusual.


Royal Lepage reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Lepage
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
522,900,000
531,500,000
Net inc
28,100,000
26,300,000
Share earns
2.06
1.97
Figures are in Canadian funds.


The Moment Missed;   His 'Integrity Fund': Arbitrary, Unfair
LEAD: The Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund: what a noble-sounding proposal President Bush offers in his new budget.
But it's deceptive nobility, that masks two devastating facts:


Bridge
LEAD: A British partnership completed a remarkable double in London Saturday.
At the end of a three-day battle at the Regents Park Hilton Hotel, Tony Forrester and Andrew Robson were victorious in a field of 14 world-class pairs.
A week earlier they had won a similar event in the Netherlands.


Radiation Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiation Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,389,000
14,070,000
Net inc
1,312,000
1,176,000
Share earns
.24
.22
6mo sales
31,449,000
22,970,000
Net inc
2,156,000
1,703,000
Share earns
.40
.33


Thortec International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thortec International (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,300,000
25,500,000
Net loss
b11,300,000
c5,400,000
Yr rev
99,400,000
109,200,000
Net loss
b100,000
c17,300,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $5,600,000 and $10,300,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fulton Financial Corp.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
4,900,000
4,300,000
Per share
.55
.48
Year net inc
19,400,000
17,800,000
Per share
2.18
2.01
All per share earnings were adjusted for the 10 percent stock dividend declared on Dec.


The 1991 Budget: Reaction;   Democrats Shun Budget Theories Bush Embraces
LEAD: Democrats greeted President Bush's $1.23 trillion budget today with strong skepticism about its central thesis that growth in the nation's economy will eliminate the budget deficit without the need for new taxes.


Ford Unit to Build Missiles for Egypt
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company's Aerospace division said it had entered into a $220 million contract to provide Chaparal air-defense missiles and launchers to Egypt.
The contract represents Ford Aerospace's largest single dollar award for a missile system, Ford said.


Spending in Passaic Sparks H.U.D. New Jersey Inquiry
LEAD: The Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development is investigating 80 federally financed housing programs across New Jersey after discovering that the program in Passaic paid its director $245,000 in salary and ''ineligible'' extras last year.


Spoleto Festival in New York for a Night


Community Psychiatric CenFters reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric CenFters (NYSE)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
80,115,000
72,327,000
Net inc
16,450,000
c16,914,000
Share earns
.36
.37
Shares outst
46,337,000
46,205,000
Yr rev
330,724,000
273,268,000
Net inc
b8,422,000
c70,800,000
Share earns
1.74
1.54
Shares outst
46,251,000
46,077,000


Reports Say More Offer To Testify Against Barry
LEAD: While a Federal grand jury weighs allegations that Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. used drugs and lied about it to the authorities, news reports today said that more witnesses are willing to accuse Mr.
Barry of a pattern of drug use.


U.S. Aides See Shaky Legal Basis For Ban on Fetal Tissue Research
LEAD: A Federal ban on research involving transplanted fetal tissue has ''a shaky legal basis'' and was never made legally permanent, Federal officials said in documents obtained from the Department of Health and Human Services.


By Design;   The Pastels of Summer
LEAD: Conjure up a beautiful summer day in the French countryside, white clouds gliding across piercingly blue skies, gardens of dazzling pink roses, fields of blazing sunflowers.
Such bucolic images suggest the color palette that dominated last week's Paris couture collections.
What was new was seeing these full-bodied pastels for day as well as for evening.


Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cedar Fair L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cedar Fair L.P.  (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
120,013,000
103,157,000
Net inc
31,623,000
22,593,000
Share earns
1.48
1.06


Review/Television;   How Noriega and the U.S. Kept on Using Each Other
LEAD: ''The Noriega Connection'' ends with this judgment, attributed to ''one former C.I.A. official'': ''Over the course of seven Administrations that dealt with Noriega, the national interest was simply a matter of political convenience.'' In its use of an unidentified source to make so sweeping a criticism, tonight's ''Frontline'' documentary, at 10 on Channel 13 and at 9 on Channel 49, succumbs to the less attractive tendencies of a generally admirable series.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.18
9.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.68
8.29
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.63
8.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.43
9.05
30-YR.


Fabricland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fabricland Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,657,000
21,418,000
Net inc
1,448,000
1,289,000
Share earns
.45
.40
6mo sales
42,611,000
37,598,000
Net inc
2,094,000
1,845,000
Share earns
.65
.57


Mandela, 'Faceless Man With a Fax,' Negotiates His and His Nation's Future
LEAD: For the last week, audiences packing a popular dinner theater in a grimy industrial quarter of Johannesburg have reserved one of their biggest laughs for a line offered by the country's best-known political satirist, Pieter-Dirk Uys. ''Who would have thought,'' Mr.
Uys has said each night, strictly deadpan, ''that a faceless man with a fax machine could run the country from a prison?


Philadelphia Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
842,323,000
778,825,000
Net inc
132,619,000
97,651,000
Share earns
.51
.36
Shares outst
210,970,028
205,366,262
Yr rev
3,405,629,000
3,228,712,000
Net inc
590,407,000
565,950,000
Share earns
2.36
2.33
Shares outst
208,900,656
201,516,834


Goalie for Yale Women Faces Constant Barrage
LEAD: The heroine of the week in college hockey is Maureen Magauran, a goalie for the Yale women's team who seldom has a relaxing moment when she is on the ice.


Buffton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Buffton Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
22,978,000
25,156,000
Net loss
554,000
b520,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
3,917,000
4,213,000
b-Net income


Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam;   Dawn for Cambodia?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Judge Sentenced To a 9-Month Term
LEAD: A former state judge from the Bronx was sentenced yesterday to nine months in prison for tax evasion and cocaine possession.


Bairnco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bairnco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
49,318,000
57,771,000
Net inc
2,600,000
b5,500,000
Share earns
.25
.51
Shares outst
10,521,000
10,780,000
Yr sales
196,943,000
211,792,000
Net loss
1,924,000
bc25,465,000
Share earns
-
2.39
Shares outst
10,690,000
10,659,000


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro-Richelieu
Qtr to Dec 23
1989
1988
Revenue
532,215,000
530,387,000
Net loss
462,000
b3,105,000
Share earns
-
.14
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Schultz Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schultz Homes
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
38,437,000
27,473,000
Net inc
601,000
327,000
Share earns
.18
.10
6mo sales
78,318,000
55,824,000
Net inc
1,461,000
b874,000
Share earns
.44
.26
b-Included a tax credit of $52,000, or 1 cent a share.


American Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Pacific Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,654,000
1,356,000
Net inc
2,002,000
b343,000
Share earns
.38
-
Shares outst
5,127,000
4,505,000
b-Net loss
The company said prior year results are not directly comparable because the company was operating in a startup mode for the first 10 months of fiscal 1989.


Terex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
304,444,000
107,080,000
Net inc
4,136,000
2,945,000
Share earns
.51
.38
Shares outst
8,066,000
7,817,000
Yr sales
790,903,000
343,721,000
Net inc
18,771,000
13,202,000
Share earns
2.37
1.79
Shares outst
7,925,000
7,388,000


Body of a Boy Found in Bags On Bronx Path
LEAD: The body of a kidnapped 12-year-old boy whose finger was cut off and sent to his family in December to pressure them into sending ransom money was found Sunday afternoon wrapped in plastic bags off the Hutchinson River Parkway in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.


I.B.M. Is Sued On Patent Data
LEAD: The MIU Automation Corporation said today that it had filed a lawsuit contending that the International Business Machines Corporation is illegally using an MIU patent for a personal-computer security system.


Fountain Powerboat IndusFtries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fountain Powerboat IndusFtries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,846,000
5,334,000
Net loss
b245,000
69,000
Yr sales
19,102,000
20,137,000
Net inc
b130,000
426,000
Share earns
.03
.10
b-Included year-end adjustments for a provision for boat returns of $200,000.


International Game TechFnology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Game TechFnology (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
47,629,000
29,715,000
Net inc
4,166,000
b2,702,000
Share earns
.56
.36
b-After income from discontinued operations of $261,000, or 4 cents a share.


Our Towns;   Promised Land Of Milk, Honey And High Price
LEAD: Thirty-four-year-old Barbara McDermott buys two gallons of milk a week for herself, her husband and her 12-year-old son, so she was delighted when Mike Gabriele, who runs the neighborhood deli, cut his prices by 30 or 40 cents a gallon.
But she didn't know he was breaking the law to do it.


Trial of Accused Mastermind In Bombings Begins in Paris
LEAD: A major terrorism trial opened here today when a tribunal began examining a case involving the 20-person terrorist network allegedly organized by Fouad Ali Saleh, who is said to have belonged to the Beirut-based Party of God, a pro-Iranian militia.


LSI Logic Corp. of Canada Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp. of Canada Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
7,822,000
8,662,000
Net loss
b1,745,000
c17,276,000
Yr rev
33,009,000
40,873,000
Net loss
b2,666,000
c15,893,000
b-Included charges of $1,881,000 for the quarter and $1,660,000 for the year.


Pact to Allow Study Of Major Interchange
LEAD: An environmental-impact study will be conducted on the reconstruction of the interchange of the Meadowbrook and Northern State Parkways, and some work on the project will resume under a settlement reached yesterday, a Westbury official said.


The 1991 Budget: Armed Forces;   CHENEY WOULD CUT DIVISIONS IN ARMY BUT MAINTAIN B-2
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney outlined his long-term plans for reshaping the military today, proposing the elimination of five of the Army's 28 active-duty and reserve divisions and making new investments in costly long-range nuclear programs through the mid-1990's.


Dinkins Makes Choices For 3 More High Posts
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named Carol O'Cleireacain, chief economist of the largest municipal workers union in New York City, to be the city's finance commissioner, and Catherine M. Abate, head of the State Crime Victims Board, as probation commissioner.


Reviews/Music;   5-Part Series on the Songs Of Cole Porter Opens at Y
LEAD: In a letter to Cole Porter early in 1933, Irving Berlin congratulated the songwriter on ''Night and Day,'' calling it his ''best spot.'' A slide showing the actual letter that Berlin sent to Porter was one of the fascinating visual tidbits in the opening program of the Lyrics and Lyricists series at the 92nd Street Y on Sunday as it began its 20th season.


Mrs. Fields Agrees To Marriott Link
LEAD: Mrs.
Fields Inc., the world's largest producer and retailer of cookies, agreed to license the Marriott Corporation to produce and sell Mrs.
Fields products in stores owned and operated by Marriott.
Under the agreement Marriott will finance and build a minimum of 60 Mrs.
Fields cookie stores in the next five years.


Business and Health;   Cutting the Cost Of Medicaid Drugs
LEAD: THE pharmaceutical industry is fighting growing pressure to reduce the prices of prescription drugs used by low-income Americans in the financially pressed Federal-state Medicaid programs.
Medicaid officials said spending on prescription drugs rose last year by 12 percent, to $3.87 billion, from $3.45 billion in 1988.


On Ho Chi Minh Trail, New Villages and Old Bombs
LEAD: This paltry cluster of small houses on stilts, a shabby clinic, a modest Government office and a new covered market was once the strategic center of the Ho Chi Minh trail - or so American and South Vietnamese military briefers used to recite during the war that ended in 1975.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
Defense Helps Louisville Triumph
Tony Kimbro scored 9 of his 17 points in a 19-6 first-half run last night to lead Louisville past Southern Mississippi, 105-88.
Louisville, playing at home, is 15-3 over all and 5-1 in the Metro Conference.
Southern Mississippi is 11-7 and 2-3.(AP)


Coast Guard Says Zoo's Plan Could Disrupt War on Drugs
LEAD: The Coast Guard is opposing a plan to build an 18,000-seat amphitheater at the Metrozoo, saying it could interfere with the war on drugs.


Carter Applauds Nicaraguans On Election-Monitoring Plan
LEAD: Strongly praising Government preparations for the Feb. 25 national elections, former President Jimmy Carter left Managua on Sunday night after mediating between Sandinista and opposition leaders on concerns ranging from reported police intimidation to restrictions on campaign funds.


MAI Basic Four Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MAI Basic Four Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
92,116,000
107,649,000
Net inc
2,447,000
5,463,000
Share earns
.08
.36


BFS Bankorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BFS Bankorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
762,000
717,000
Per share
.53
.50


Victims of Crash of Avianca Flight 52 From Colombia
LEAD: Following is a list of crew members and passengers killed in the crash of Avianca Airlines Flight 52.
The list was provided by the Nassau County Medical Examiner's office.
Crew
CAVIDES HOYAS, Laureno, 56, pilot.
GONZALEZ, Luz Amanda, 40, flight attendant.
KLOTZ, Mauricio, 28, co-pilot.


ABC to Add Program To Follow 'Nightline'
LEAD: ABc will add a new program to follow ''Nightline'' each weeknight starting in July, the network announced yesterday.


CommerceBancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CommerceBancorp
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,567,000
2,537,000
Per share
1.92
1.59


Woman Pleads Guilty in Housing Fund Theft


Kappa Networks reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kappa Networks (AMEX)
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
9,262,992
9,428,994
Net loss
b2,355,653
b1,051,909
Shares outst
1,604,784
1,528,440
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $928,013 for the latest year and $109,159 for 1988.


Ohio Casualty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Casualty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b6,495,000
c42,575,000
Share earns
.31
1.97
Shares outst
21,202,000
21,600,000
Yr net inc
b101,544,000
c128,036,000
Share earns
4.74
5.88
Shares outst
21,429,000
21,778,000


Concurrent Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concurrent Computer (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
89,019,000
90,680,000
Net loss
b2,232,000
c14,823,000
Shares outst
18,206,000
17,862,000
6mo sales
176,010,000
109,402,000
Net loss
b3,859,000
c15,193,000
Shares outst
18,100,000
16,545,000


Valero Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
267,800,000
185,300,000
Net inc
7,200,000
9,900,000
Share earns
.15
.22
Yr rev
941,300,000
770,600,000
Net inc
41,500,000
30,600,000
Share earns
.98
.54


Long Island City Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Long Island City Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
905,004
987,847
Per share
.33
.36
9mo net inc
2,861,327
2,978,454
Per share
1.04
-
Per share earnings not shown; company went public in August 1988.


Brazil Putting Growth First
LEAD: The Brazilian President-elect, Fernando Collor de Mello, said today that Brazil would not sacrifice the growth of its economy to repay and service its $115 billion in foreign debt.


Canada Packers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canada Packers
Qtr to Dec 23
1989
1988
Sales
785,144,000
852,936,000
Net inc
4,552,000
11,534,000
Share earns
.12
.32
9mo sales
2,365,240,000
2,471,596,000
Net inc
12,692,000
24,460,000
Share earns
.35
.67


Du Pont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont Canada
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
340,600,000
337,700,000
Net inc
8,400,000
15,300,000
Share earns
.28
.49
Yr sales
1,420,000,000
1,380,000,000
Net inc
b86,500,000
b117,900,000
Share earns
2.78
3.74


Bio-Medicus reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bio-Medicus (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,945,274
6,837,620
Net inc
1,286,601
1,163,927
Share earns
.17
.16
Shares outst
7,785,996
7,427,325
9mo sales
23,107,383
18,277,624
Net inc
b2,613,543
2,904,260
Share earns
.34
.39
Shares outst
7,778,740
7,389,350


Controllers In Jet Crash Defended
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration today defended the controllers who guided a Colombian jetliner toward Kennedy International Airport, releasing the first verbatim transcripts of communications in the hour before the jet crashed.


Dow Slips 5.85, to 2,553.38, in Light Trading
LEAD: Stock prices dropped again yesterday in sharply slower trading.


Trade Shift For Africans
LEAD: An African economic group, which has been fighting for a decade to cut its dependence on South Africa, will consider this week whether to admit the country as a member.


Datron Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Datron Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
11,664,000
8,935,000
Net inc
1,146,000
947,000
Share earns
.40
.31
Shares outst
2,851,000
3,051,000
9mo sales
32,891,000
25,542,000
Net inc
3,035,000
2,398,000
Share earns
1.03
.81
Shares outst
2,954,000
2,949,000


Painful Political Lesson for AIDS Crusader
LEAD: During the most hotly debated decision of the young Dinkins administration, the naming of a Health Commissioner, much of the heat was felt not by the Mayor nor by his appointee, but by a influential research scientist: Dr.
Mathilde Krim.


Immunogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immunogen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
222,803
352,438
Net loss
2,086,415
872,442
Shares outst
4,508,403
3,886,711
6mo rev
366,658
406,367
Net loss
3,726,576
1,862,950
Shares outst
4,197,587
3,886,519


Stokely Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stokely Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
88,475,000
59,376,000
Net inc
5,032,000
3,934,000
Share earns
.61
.48
9mo sales
183,095,000
145,968,000
Net inc
10,038,000
6,313,000
Share earns
1.22
.77


Altex Industries reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altex Industries
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
619,000
744,000
Net loss
2,112,000
229,000
Year-ago figures included a writedown of $1,894,000.


USBancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USBancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,714,000
888,000
Per share
.56
.23
Year net inc
6,516,000
2,394,000
Per share
2.10
.48


Doctors Cite Gains in Treating Panic Attacks
LEAD: STUDIES are yielding surprising insights into the causes, effects and treatments of one of the most terrifying and crippling psychological disorders: panic attacks.


Asia's Latest Economic Miracle Is Vietnam;   Boat People and U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


First New York Business Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First New York Business Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
620,000
692,000
Per share
.17
.18
Year net inc
3,445,000
2,512,000
Per share
.92
.67


Roadway Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
858,192,000
741,600,000
Net inc
29,940,000
31,793,000
Share earns
.77
.80
Shares outst
39,145,000
39,874,000
Yr rev
2,660,910,000
2,184,531,000
Net inc
95,521,000
80,239,000
Share earns
2.44
2.00
Shares outst
39,154,000
40,120,000


Bond Rating Official Quits Job at Moody's
LEAD: Freda S. Johnson, head of the municipal bond rating department at Moody's Investors Service and one of the most prominent women executives on Wall Street, resigned Friday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What it represents is that there are some white people who understand that the events after Carol Stuart's death had a profound effect on race relations in this city.
What makes it truly remarkable is that it was the family of the victim, not the Mayor or other white leaders, who did it.
It shows that Boston has decent hard-working people who understand how other people, people in the minority community, can suffer, can be victimized.


CBS Donates Anti-Drug Commercials
LEAD: CBS SPORTS dispatched three of its best-known broadcasters to the front lines in the drug war - in an ambulance, a morgue and a prison - to film the commercials that were shown Sunday during the Super Bowl.


Growth Stock Outlook Trust reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Growth Stock Outlook Trust (NYSE)
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
124,278,476
127,842,701
Share earns
10.10
9.59
The latest share earnings is after a distribution of 1.25 cents a share paid in March and 62.60 cents paid in December.


Peoples Westchester Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Westchester Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,073,000
5,891,000
Per share
.58
1.11
Shares outst
5,307,863
5,306,917
Year net inc
10,087,000
b14,903,000
Per share
1.90
2.81
Shares outst
5,307,651
5,306,502


Federal Screw Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Screw Works (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
15,118,000
18,562,000
Net inc
515,000
620,000
Share earns
.43
.51
6mo sales
29,871,000
34,675,000
Net inc
1,060,000
1,225,000
Share earns
.89
1.01


Chili's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chili's Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
82,505,000
67,317,000
Net inc
4,004,000
2,737,000
Share earns
.37
.27
6mo rev
165,928,000
137,644,000
Net inc
8,752,000
6,106,000
Share earns
.81
.60


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
81,252,000
80,625,000
Net loss
494,000
1,754,000
Yr sales
293,395,000
320,150,000
Net loss
1,554,000
b291,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Upheaval in the East;   RUMANIAN RULERS CALL OUT THRONGS AND STAGE A RALLY
LEAD: In a show of strength for the ruling Council of National Salvation, about 20,000 demonstrators poured into the capital today and laid siege to the headquarters of opposition parties.


Trustee for Federated Has Hands Full Again
LEAD: ''We are very much monitoring this case, as we do all cases, but this thing is enormous,'' said Conrad J. Morganstern, the United States Trustee who is overseeing the Federated Stores bankruptcy case. ''There are over 300,000 creditors, and we're still trying to identify the 20 largest.''


Ethiopia Peers West
LEAD: Ethiopia is a long way from Eastern Europe, and the distance is growing.
The East Germans who set up its security police, intelligence system and Communist Party are pulling out.


First Federal Savings Bank of Montana reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Montana (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b687,954
378,268
Per share
.35
.20
6mo net inc
b1,291,813
893,459
Per share
.66
.47
b-Included gain of $72,000 from sale of assets.


Corrections
LEAD: Three recent articles about the Soviet Union - one on Jan. 7 about a Communist Party school, one on Jan. 21 about the political opposition and one on Jan. 22 about the same topic -misstated the number of Soviet Communist Party members.
It is 19 million.


Market Place;   A Corporate Pullback That's Rattling Stocks
LEAD: Corporate America, one of the biggest buyers of shares during the boom years of the 1980's on Wall Street, is apparently pulling back, contributing to the stock market's recent weakness.


Firstmiss Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstmiss Gold (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,014,000
2,518,000
Net loss
944,000
b966,000
Share earns
-
.05
6mo sales
28,073,000
4,537,000
Net loss
323,000
b1,737,000
Share earns
-
.10
b


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constellation Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,987,000
5,403,000
Per share
.50
.98
Year net inc
26,942,000
25,261,000
Per share
3.21
3.45
The net income per common share for the latest quarter and 12 months computed using net income of New Brunswick Savings Bank from Sept.


The Biggest Oil Spills Take Place at Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grenada Sunburst System Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grenada Sunburst System Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,700,000
3,100,000
Per share
.30
.35
Year net inc
6,100,000
12,300,000
Per share
.69
1.39
The company said its 1989 full-year earnings decrease resulted primarily from a previously disclosed $6 million increase in its loan loss provision over the provision's year-earlier level.


25 Named Trustees of Museum of the Indian
LEAD: The trustees of the new National Museum of the American Indian were announced today by Robert McCormick Adams, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.


Upheaval in the East: Rumania;   To an Old Party Chief, The Menace Is Familiar
LEAD: In the early morning, before angry crowds began to surge against the gates of the headquarters of the Peasants' Party, the party's 74-year-old president, Corneliu Coposu, presided in his corner office, chain-smoking Kent cigarettes.


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Microwave (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
28,766,000
17,817,000
Net inc
4,449,000
3,056,000
Share earns
.36
.25
9mo sales
76,179,000
45,589,000
Net inc
11,587,000
8,151,000
Share earns
.94
.67


MOVE BY U.N. CHIEF ON CUBA IRKS U.S.
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle sent a letter of protest today to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar after the Secretary General refused to submit a report on rights abuses by Cuba to a meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, Administration officials said.


Careers;   Management School Shifts With Times
LEAD: FEW graduate schools of business can keep current with world economic and political trends just by analyzing their student rosters, but the Management Education Institute Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., can do just that.
The reason: more than 95 percent of its students come from abroad to study for a master of science degree in management, which is earned over 11 months.


Chrysler Says Most Rebates Will Continue
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said today that it would extend most of its current rebate program through the end of February to maintain rising sales momentum.


Driver Charged With Murder
LEAD: A Colorado man was charged with murder in a hit-and-run case in which witnesses said he made a U-turn across a road divider to kill a pedestrian.
The driver, George T. Kohoutek, a 38-year-old resident of Aspen, Colo., was being held without bail.
Mr.
Kahoutek was arrested Sunday after the police said his Jeep was the car used to kill Rafael Caracheo, 26, on a Dallas street Saturday morning.


Consolidated Freightways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
991,332,000
717,454,000
Net loss
b32,317,000
c40,312,000
Share earns
-
1.07
Shares outst
34,982,371
37,707,837
Yr rev
3,760,193,000
2,689,075,000
Net inc
b19,912,000
113,153,000
Share earns
.33
3.00
Shares outst
36,791,182
37,712,402


Where Cooperation Stops for Bees
LEAD: HONEYBEES may not be as good an example of social cooperation as they were long thought to be, a University of California scientist says.


Casey Tibbs, 60, Dies; Won 9 Rodeo Titles
LEAD: Casey Tibbs, a rodeo rider who won nine world championships from the 1940's to the 1960's, died of cancer Sunday at his home in Ramona, Calif.
He was 60 years old.


Ingersoll Sale To Thomson
LEAD: The Ingersoll Publications Company is selling five daily newspapers in Indiana, Ohio and Wisconsin to the Toronto-based Thomson Newspaper Corporation for $270 million.


Mitek Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mitek Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
3,976,000
3,915,000
Net inc
203,000
b242,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
7,186,813
3,468,235
b-Net loss


Income Up For Month And Year
LEAD: The personal income of Americans grew at a modest annual rate of five-tenths of 1 percent in December and spending grew at twice that rate, the Commerce Department said today.


First Financial Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Holdings (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,540,274
1,552,766
Per share
.46
.47
Shares outst
3,322,380
3,307,085


Myron Matlaw, Professor, 65
LEAD: Myron Matlaw, emeritus professor of English at Queens College, died of complications resulting from amyloidosis, a blood disease, Friday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Knicks Lose Walker For 7 to 10 Days
LEAD: The Knicks have lost Kenny Walker, their best player off the bench of late, for 7 to 10 days, which means he could miss as many as five games.
The 6-foot-8-inch forward suffered back spasms during a practice last Thursday in Salt Lake City and then missed the game against the Denver Nuggets on Saturday.


Lodgistix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lodgistix Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,613,576
5,353,735
Net inc
b42,840
228,213
Share earns
.01
.04
Shares outst
6,066,030
5,966,955
6mo rev
9,933,582
9,519,285
Net inc
b295,407
c608,172
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
6,065,534
5,875,445


Philips Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philips Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
205,841,000
225,839,000
Net inc
3,700,000
9,085,000
Share earns
.13
.32
9mo sales
707,809,000
696,166,0d00
Net inc
30,729,000
37,858,000
Share earns
1.07
1.32


Nova Corp. of Alberta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nova Corp. of Alberta
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,246,000,000
1,363,000,000
Net loss
b26,000,000
cd113,000,000
Share earns
-
.44
Shares outst
298,000,000
245,000,000
Yr rev
4,840,000,000
3,941,000,000
Net inc
b186,000,000
c396,000,000
Share earns
.64
1.63
Shares outst
261,000,000
229,000,000


It's New, It's Feted, but Most Say It's Ugly
LEAD: For years Albany after dark has been a shadowy wasteland of empty office buildings and dark stores.
This week all that is supposed to change.


Link Is Debated Between Delays And Air Crashes
LEAD: Substantial delays encountered by Avianca Airlines Flight 52 before it crashed on Long Island Thursday night are causing some in the airline industry to question whether air traffic delays are becoming safety hazards instead of just passenger inconveniences.


Accounts
LEAD: *
California Department of Health Services, to Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, for a tobacco education campaign, with a 16-month budget of $28.6 million.


Arbor Capital reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arbor Capital
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
85,641,000
79,973,000
Net inc
11,464,000
1,818,000
Share earns
1.47
.23
The company said the results for 1989 included $14,984,000 of non-operating and other income versus $3,375,000 in 1988.


Magma Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magma Power Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
15,845,000
6,514,000
Net inc
6,993,000
2,289,000
Share earns
.31
.10
Shares outst
22,527,000
21,955,000
Yr rev
63,102,000
26,025,000
Net inc
22,295,000
9,280,000
Share earns
1.01
.43
Shares outst
21,999,000
21,608,000


Ameribanc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameribanc Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b428,000
c978,000
Per share
-
.45
Year net inc
1,373,000
d3,474,000
Per share
.63
1.60
b-Included a charge of $835,000 for actual and estimated losses on no longer needed assets, a provision for severance costs for work force reductions to take place in 1990, and an accrual of estimated losses to be incurred in the 1990 closing of branches.


Cannon Express reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cannon Express (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,171,117
3,999,924
Net inc
152,806
367,007
Share earns
.09
.22
6mo rev
8,186,291
8,007,299
Net inc
471,672
804,131
Share earns
.28
.48


Tarpley and Mavericks Sink Nets, 108-88
LEAD: Roy Tarpley, playing in his fourth game after serving a 33-game suspension, scored 23 points tonight to lead the Dallas Mavericks to their sixth consecutive victory, 108-88, and hand the Nets their fifth consecutive defeat.


From Minnow to Sturgeon, North American Fish Are in Peril
LEAD: ONE in three species or subspecies of native freshwater fish in North America is or may be threatened by the degradation of lakes, rivers and streams, scientists say.


Imnet Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imnet Inc. (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,503,000
24,867,000
Net inc
b583,000
c4,275,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
14,135,645
9,733,445
b-Included pre-tax gain of $15,027,000 on the sale of cable television operation.


Witness Says Gotti Ordered A Shooting
LEAD: A key prosecution witness in the trial of John Gotti yesterday described taking part in the shooting of a carpenters union official after meeting with Mr.
Gotti and being told that Mr.
Gotti wanted the official ''whacked.''


Frank R. Heinze, Church Executive, 68
LEAD: The Rev.
Frank R. Heinze, a Presbyterian minister and former information officer for the United Presbyterian Church U.S.A., died yesterday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia after heart surgery.
He was 68 years old and lived in Fort Washington, Pa.


Four Shun Pro Bowl
LEAD: Four Super Bowl players, including the 49ers' Joe Montana and the Broncos' John Elway, have withdrawn from Sunday's Pro Bowl game because of injuries, National Football League officials said.


Upheaval in the East: Soviet Union;   KREMLIN BYPASSED IN MEDIATION OFFER
LEAD: A new sort of political initiative has emerged beyond the Kremlin's orbit with the resourceful Baltic separatist movements persuading their counterparts in the feuding southern republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan to hold peace talks in the Latvian republic.


Andersen Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andersen Group
Qtr to Nov 26
1989
1988
Revenue
6,908,000
11,197,000
Net inc
38,000
b1,867,000
Share earns
.02
1.06
9mo rev
20,192,000
37,673,000
Net inc
174,000
b2,661,000
Share earns
.10
1.51


Bill Would Curb Disclosure Of Phone Caller's Number
LEAD: Responding to concern that a new telephone service is an invasion of privacy - it discloses the phone number of the caller to the party being called - legislation was introduced in the Senate yesterday to give callers the right to block their numbers from being seen.


Big Texas Air Holder Is Sued
LEAD: A New York investor sued the Texas Air Corporation's largest stockholder yesterday, saying the holder sold company shares knowing that Texas Air's Eastern Airlines unit was about to announce an unpopular reorganization plan.
The lawsuit was filed against


TV Ratings Not So Super
LEAD: If the overnight ratings for Super Bowl XXIV are any indication, the game may prove to be the lowest-rated game in two decades.
In 23 cities, according to the A. C. Nielsen Company, the game had a 39.6 rating and was seen by 63 percent of those watching television during the hours of the broadcast.


Alcohol Oddness of Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Off in Light Trading After Drop in Stock Prices
LEAD: The dollar fell against major foreign currencies in light trading yesterday in reaction to a drop in stock prices.


United New Mexico Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United New Mexico Fincl (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,341,000
1,585,000
Per share
.32
.38
Year net inc
5,601,000
4,054,000
Per share
1.32
.97


Data Transmission Network reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Transmission Network (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,903,000
2,527,000
Net inc
75,000
50,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Yr rev
14,171,000
8,047,000
Net inc
510,000
b147,000
Share earns
.16
-


The 1991 Budget;   A Guide to Budget Trouble Spots
LEAD:
ITEM: MILITARY
BUSH: Bush's budget would increase military spending by less than the rate of inflation, but spending would still increase.
DEMOCRATS: Democrats in Congress will want to cut Pentagon spending beyond what Bush has proposed and are more eager to eliminate expensive weapons systems.


Japan in Pact On Mexican Oil
LEAD: Mexico's state-run oil monopoly has signed an agreement to supply Japan with $4 billion worth of petroleum in the next five years, officials said.


Florida Progress Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Progress Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
525,100,000
472,800,000
Net inc
29,100,000
34,300,000
Share earns
.58
.67
Yr rev
2,129,400,000
2,002,000,000
Net inc
187,100,000
179,800,000
Share earns
3.67
3.52


Standex International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standex International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
122,135,000
118,569,000
Net inc
6,337,000
6,458,000
Share earns
.61
.57
6mo rev
228,672,000
225,816,000
Net inc
11,422,000
11,431,000
Share earns
1.10
1.00
Shares outst
10,428,000
11,466,000


Europe Inflation Up
LEAD: The inflation rate in the European Community reached 5.4 percent in December, up from 4.4 percent at the end of 1988, the bloc's statistics office, Eurostat, said today.
For December, consumer prices in the 12-nation economic bloc were three-tenths of 1 percent higher than in November.
All European Community members had higher inflation last year except Portugal, where the December rate of 11.6 percent was down from the 11.7 percent recorded a year earlier.


Upheaval in the East;   Hungarians Protest Prices
LEAD: More than 20,000 demonstrators chanting ''We're fed up!'' rallied in front of Parliament today to demand pay raises and to protest increases in prices for food and transportation. ''We do not want to use our final weapon, the general strike, but we are not ruling it out either,'' said Sandor Nagy, general secretary of the official trade union federation, which helped organize the rally.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
186,276,000
176,838,000
Net inc
16,967,000
9,844,000
Share earns
.31
.18
Yr rev
789,707,000
768,322,000
Net inc
91,308,000
84,721,000
Share earns
1.80
1.70


Bernard J. Ferguson, Lawyer, 88
LEAD: Bernard J. Ferguson, a lawyer and former president of the Queens County Bar Association, died on Saturday at Mary Immaculate Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens, and had previously been a resident of Flushing for more than 60 years.


Valcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
97,199,000
73,713,000
Net inc
2,199,000
1,799,000
Share earns
.49
.40
Shares outst
4,465,300
4,461,000
Yr sales
359,111,000
234,660,000
Net inc
6,265,000
4,953,000
Share earns
1.40
1.12
Shares outst
4,465,300
4,414,000


Unsealed Files Unveil a Part Of Mississippi's Racist Past
LEAD: Newly disclosed documents offer a portrait of a Mississippi state agency, now defunct, that spied on Jewish children and on a black dentist at a white dentist's request.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about a birthday dinner for George W. Ball referred incorrectly to his association with Peter G. Peterson at Lehman Brothers.
It was Mr.
Ball who recruited Mr.
Peterson.


Clarence (C) Sharpe Dead at 53; Played Jazz on Saxophone
LEAD: Clarence (C) Sharpe, an alto saxophonist who exemplified the jazz underground, died on Sunday at Goldwater Memorial Hospital on Roosevelt Island in New York City.
He was 53 years old.


Books of The Times;   Job-Like Ordeals and Episodes of Grace
LEAD:
Comedians
By John L'Heureux
209 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Mayor, Not Panel, Chose Police Commissioner
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dreyfus Strategic GovernFments Income Inc. reports earnings for As of Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreyfus Strategic GovernFments Income Inc. (NYSE)
As of Nov 30
1989
1988
Assets
161,483,117
165,225,767
Share earns
11.07
11.34
Assets represented net assets.


Carpenter Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carpenter Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
139,426,000
151,263,000
Net inc
10,779,000
8,251,000
Share earns
1.21
.90
Shares outst
8,997,000
9,160,000
6mo sales
273,038,000
293,443,000
Net inc
18,627,000
14,818,000
Share earns
2.07
1.62
Shares outst
8,986,000
9,162,000


Keithley Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keithley Instruments (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
23,986,000
20,206,000
Net inc
798,000
1,551,000
Share earns
.23
.44


Chicago Receives Gift From Bulls
LEAD: The Chicago Bulls, hoping to give disadvantaged youths an alternative to drugs and gangs, are donating $1 million to the city's Park District to renovate more than 100 aging basketball courts, about half of them outdoors.


For Bitter Newspaper Rivals, an Uneasy Alliance
LEAD: For decades this city was the site of one of the most impassioned newspaper wars in the country: two bitterly competitive papers, neck-and-neck in circulation, trying to drive each other out of business.
The brawl left them with zealous readers who took sides as if the papers were football teams, but also with annual losses in the tens of millions of dollars.


AIDS Center Will Open In Manhattan
LEAD: One of the world's largest AIDS research laboratories will open this year in New York City under a project with an initial investment of $11 million announced yesterday.


Capitol Bancorp (Mass.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Bancorp (Mass.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
3,969,000
2,820,000
Year net loss
9,791,000
b294,000
Per share
-
.09
b-Net income


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about daily trading in the stock markets referred incorrectly in some editions to the decline in the Dow Jones industrial average since the beginning of the year.
Through the market's close on Monday, the drop in the Dow had been 199.82 points.
The article also misstated the day's change in the stock price for Apple Computer Inc.


Macmillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Macmillan Bloedel
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
786,700,000
801,100,000
Net inc
39,600,000
73,200,000
Share earns
.35
.68
Yr sales
3,273,700,000
3,273,500,000
Net inc
246,700,000
329,800,000
Share earns
2.27
3.08


Some G.O.P. Leaders Balk at Registration Bill
LEAD: The Bush Adminstration and the House Republican leader objected today to a national voter registration bill that supporters, including other Republicans, say would add millions of unregistered Americans to the voter rolls.


Chronicle
LEAD: A libel case brought in High Court in London against PEREGRINE WORSTHORNE, the former editor of The Sunday Telegraph, and his paper ended yesterday.
The winners were ANDREW NEIL, the editor of The Sunday Times, and his paper.


Ipalco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipalco Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
146,414,000
146,035,000
Net inc
19,736,000
19,597,000
Share earns
.53
.52
Yr rev
595,036,000
609,446,000
Net inc
95,514,000
99,038,000
Share earns
2.54
2.64


Economic Scene;   Does Japan Play Fair?
LEAD: THE Japanese do not mean to offend, say the new breed of Japan-watchers, whose revisionist views on international trade and finance have become fashionable from Capitol Hill to the Commerce Department.
But the Japanese hardly understand what is meant by free markets and are not about to be converted by the Heritage Foundation.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Flat
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at commercial banks and savings institutions remained mostly flat in the week ended yesterday compared with the week earlier.


Long Swiss Exile for a Wartime King of Rumania
LEAD: King Michael of Rumania, who has been living in exile for 42 years, wants his throne back.


The Handicapped-Parking Enforcers
LEAD: For years people with disabilities have seethed as they watched others illegally take their reserved parking spaces.
But now many suburbs are beginning to do something about it, sending out volunteers to catch violators where they are parked.


Hope Sweetser Dean, Foundation Head, 72
LEAD: Hope Sweetser Dean, a founder and former president of the Foundation for Children's Books, which sponsors teacher workshops and seminars to encourage children's reading, died Jan. 24 at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She was 72 years old and lived in Marion, Mass.


A Chef's Approach To Stylish Cooking For Dinner Guests
LEAD: NOT the least of the charms of the food that Caprial Pence makes is its simplicity.
Often when a professional's food is described as simple, it does not mean that the amateur cook can whip it up at home.


19 Feared Lost in Channel
LEAD: A Greek-registered cargo ship disappeared during a storm in the English Channel and all 19 crew members were feared dead, the British Coast Guard said today.
Two bodies, one identified as that of a Greek member of the crew, washed ashore on the south coast of England with a lifeboat bearing the ship's name, Flag Theofano.


Capitol Bancorp Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capitol Bancorp Ltd.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
635,000
520,000
Per share
.56
.69
Shares outst
1,142,228
753,623


USX Profits Jump 54.4%
LEAD: The USX Corporation, the large oil and steel producer, said yesterday that its profits jumped by 54.4 percent in the final quarter and by 27.6 percent for the year.


UnionFed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UnionFed Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,525,000
3,756,000
Per share
.48
.75
Shares outst
7,402,000
5,025,000
Year net inc
8,624,000
7,348,000
Per share
1.35
1.46
Shares outst
6,375,000
5,021,000


Accord Set on Tariff Cuts
LEAD: After more than six months of bargaining, international trade officials reached agreement today on how to negotiate tariff cuts.


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* USX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
4,880,000,000
4,410,000,000
Net inc
244,000,000
158,000,000
Share earns
.91
.55
Shares outst
256,047,000
260,309,000
Yr sales
18,717,000,000
16,877,000,000
Net inc
b965,000,000
b756,000,000
Share earns
3.53
2.62
Shares outst
257,209,000
262,154,000


Management Assist. Inc Liquiating Trust reports earnings for As of Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Management Assist. Inc Liquiating Trust
As of Dec 31
1989
1988
Assets
5,940,000
7,362,000
Share earns
.88
1.09
The company said the reduction in net assets reflected the liquidating distribution of 25 cents per unit paid by the liquidating trust during the year.


Schultz Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schultz Homes
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
38,437,000
27,473,000
Net inc
601,000
327,000
Share earns
.18
.10
6mo sales
78,318,000
55,824,000
Net inc
1,461,000
b874,000
Share earns
.44
.26
b-Included a tax credit of $52,000, or 1 cent a share.


Broadway Fincl reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broadway Fincl
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
12,000
950,000
Per share
.01
.56
Shares outst
1,618,000
1,825,000
Year net inc
2,689,000
3,262,000
Per share
1.65
1.94
Shares outst
1,836,000
1,825,000


CGC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CGC Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
56,200,000
60,800,000
Net inc
8,900,000
9,000,000
Share earns
.35
.36
Yr rev
246,000,000
271,500,000
Net inc
38,300,000
47,100,000
Share earns
1.51
1.86
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Standex International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standex International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
122,135,000
118,569,000
Net inc
6,337,000
6,458,000
Share earns
.61
.57
6mo rev
228,672,000
225,816,000
Net inc
11,422,000
11,431,000
Share earns
1.10
1.00
Shares outst
10,428,000
11,466,000


Walter F. Loeb Retires To Publish Newsletter
LEAD: After 16 years as the senior retail analyst for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, Walter F. Loeb, an often-quoted commentator on Wall Street, is retiring to become a consultant and newsletter publisher.


Fidelity Federal Savings (Va.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fidelity Federal Savings (Va.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
129,000
688,000
Per share
.14
.77
Year net inc
3,882,000
1,041,000
Per share
4.33
1.16
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted for a 6-for-5 stock split, paid in November 1989.


Next Selling Retail Unit
LEAD: Next P.L.C., a British retailer, agreed today to sell its Biba chain of women's fashion shops to the Hapeni Portfolio Company for $:47.6 million, or about $76 million.
Biba operates a chain of 60 fashion shops in the North Rhine-Westphalia region of West Germany.


Coherent Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coherent Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
45,787,000
48,203,000
Net inc
1,090,000
2,053,000
Share earns
.12
.23
Shares outst
9,371,000
8,860,000


Coghlan Says He'll Run In the Wanamaker Mile
LEAD: Eamonn Coghlan surprised nobody yesterday when he announced that he would run in the Wanamaker Mile instead of the 3,000-meter run at the Panasonic Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden on Friday.


Southwall Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwall Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
3,337,000
3,025,000
Net inc
b76,000
c1,818,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
7,132,000
6,052,000
Yr rev
14,322,000
12,041,000
Net inc
b508,000
c3,358,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
6,759,000
5,909,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Wells, Rich Keeps Account
LEAD: After an advertising agency review that never officially took place, the Philip Morris Companies has decided to maintain its Benson &amp; Hedges cigarette account at Wells, Rich, Greene.


Newell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
278,514,000
253,689,000
Net inc
29,662,000
21,210,000
Share earns
.49
.39
Shares outst
60,326,000
47,528,000
Yr sales
1,122,895,000
988,177,000
Net inc
85,363,000
61,420,000
Share earns
1.41
1.09
Shares outst
60,058,000
47,454,000


Stokely Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stokely Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
88,475,000
59,376,000
Net inc
5,032,000
3,934,000
Share earns
.61
.48
9mo sales
183,095,000
145,968,000
Net inc
10,038,000
6,313,000
Share earns
1.22
.77


Commonwealth Energy Sysem reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Energy Sysem (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
233,219,000
192,540,000
Net inc
16,242,000
13,105,000
Share earns
1.63
1.33
Yr rev
805,860,000
688,764,000
Net inc
41,618,000
b34,959,000
Share earns
4.14
3.50


Comfed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comfed Bancorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
5,972,000
1,358,000
9mo net loss
9,619,000
b17,000
b-Net income


Smith's Food &amp; Drug reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith's Food &amp; Drug (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
478,016,000
395,551,000
Net inc
7,281,000
4,711,000
Share earns
.29
.24
Shares outst
25,272,000
19,439,000
Yr sales
1,731,559,000
1,393,091,000
Net inc
26,131,000
17,699,000
Share earns
1.16
.91
Shares outst
22,479,000
19,472,000


New Rumanian Government Keeps Some Old Ways
LEAD: The headquarters of Rumania's main opposition parties reopened for business today, claiming new resilience after being battered on Monday by angry crowds mobilized by the ruling Council of National Salvation.


Harold A. Webster, Electrical Contractor, 86
LEAD: Harold A. Webster, a past president of the National Electrical Contractors Association and also of its New York chapter, died on Sunday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, L.I.
He was 86 years old and lived in West Islip.


Wary Gorbachev Sees Momentum Toward Germans' Reunification
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, meeting with Prime Minister Hans Modrow of East Germany, acknowledged today that pressure is building for German reunification.
But he again cautioned against undue haste in dealing with the complicated issue.


Pioneer Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
6,600,000
4,400,000
Latest first quarter's loss if after a provision for loan losses of $1.1 million and an $813,000 provision for losses on real estate owned.
In addition, $655,000 in expense was recorded which related to the sales of the Enterprise Building Corp.


Emerson Radio Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emerson Radio Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
229,881,000
216,827,000
Net inc
4,507,000
b3,590,000
Share earns
.13
.10
9mo sales
713,099,000
590,585,000
Net inc
13,289,000
b8,158,000
Share earns
.37
.22


Numerica Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Numerica Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b9,063,000
11,229,000
Year net loss
b22,836,000
8,204,000
b-Included a net gain of $1.5 million from sale of home equity loans for the quarter and year.


Kashmir Dispute Is Souring India-Pakistan Ties
LEAD: Tensions over the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir have brought relations between India and Pakistan to their worst since 1971, when the two nations last fought a war.


GNW Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GNW Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
957,000
983,000
Per share
.47
.50
Year net inc
b3,618,000
c2,323,000
Per share
1.80
1.19
b-Included gain of $86,000, or 4 cents a share, from cumulative effect of adoption of FAS No.


U.S. and Laos Are Getting Friendlier
LEAD: The Communist leaders of Laos want better relations with the United States and American economic aid, and the United States appears ready to respond.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
511,700,000
486,200,000
Net inc
b33,300,000
30,400,000
Share earns
.77
.71
Yr sales
1,971,500,000
1,909,500,000
Net inc
117,700,000
103,500,000
Share earns
2.71
2.40


TSI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,818,000
8,631,000
Net inc
308,000
545,000
Share earns
.12
.22
9mo rev
25,994,000
24,277,000
Net inc
1,109,000
991,000
Share earns
.44
.40


Foothill Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group (NYSE)
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
99,942,000
92,246,000
Net inc
10,694,000
b13,456,000
Share earns
1.06
1.36
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $359,000, or 4 cents a share.
The company said write-offs for the latest year totaled $2,979,000 compared with $6,491,000 in 1988.


Peruvian Police Ambush and Kill 18 Rebels
LEAD: A police patrol ambushed and killed 18 Marxist guerrillas in Peru's Andean foothills, the Government said today.
The clash added to a surge in rural political violence that has claimed at least 30 lives in the past four days.


Regional Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b582,000
c954,000
Per share
.21
.34
Year net inc
b2,897,000
c4,196,000
Per share
1.03
1.33
Shares outst
2,817,208
3,164,171
b-Included after-tax securities losses of $296,000 for the quarter and $356,000 for the year.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Spaghetti Warehouse (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,273,717
6,382,392
Net inc
569,708
381,078
Share earns
.23
.20
Shares outst
2,524,229
1,906,226
6mo rev
16,580,602
13,311,896
Net inc
1,139,156
785,552
Share earns
.51
.41
Shares outst
2,255,313
1,904,705


Ewing Everett, Lawyer, 92
LEAD: Ewing Everett, a retired Federal tax lawyer, died on Sunday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital after a brief illness.
He was 92 years old and lived in Ridgefield, Conn.


Move to Stop Base Closings Begins Battle Over Spending
LEAD: In the first direct challenge to President Bush's budget, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee filed legislation today that would derail the Pentagon's proposal to consider closing dozens of military bases.


Central Illinois Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
154,234,000
142,692,000
Net inc
14,005,000
11,322,000
Share earns
.37
.29
Yr rev
604,657,000
616,188,000
Net inc
71,222,000
86,244,000
Share earns
1.91
2.35


Sugar Prices Fall Sharply; Grains and Soybeans Drop
LEAD: Sugar futures prices fell sharply yesterday in the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange after a rally, prompted by a forecast of reduced world production, sputtered and failed.


GroveBank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GroveBank for Savings
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
17,000
437,000
Per share
.01
.30
Year net inc
1,301,000
1,559,000
Per share
.88
1.06
The addition of $485,000 to the bank's loan loss reserve reduced latest quarter and year profits by 33 cents a share.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Centerior Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerior Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
532,284,000
461,285,000
Net inc
12,532,000
b327,624,000
Share earns
.09
-
Yr rev
2,302,436,000
2,037,560,000
Net inc
266,886,000
b73,960,000
Share earns
1.90
-


Court Won't Block Offer for Cipher
LEAD: A Federal court declined to block the Archive Corporation's hostile bid of $7.50 a share for Cipher Data Products Inc. and dismissed Cipher's lawsuit against Archive.
Cipher, in an attempt to elude the unsolicited offer, had filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Southern District of


Results Plus
LEAD:
N.B.A.
Cavs Win as Daugherty Returns
John Williams scored 5 of his 24 points in a key fourth-quarter surge last night as the Cleveland Cavaliers, with the center Brad Daugherty playing for the first time this season, beat the Heat, 106-94, at Miami.
Daugherty, back from an injury, scored 7 points in 15 minutes.


Block Drug Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Block Drug Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
102,829,000
94,478,000
Net inc
11,759,000
10,893,000
Share earns
.67
.62
9mo sales
318,777,000
301,201,000
Net inc
34,294,000
32,423,000
Share earns
1.95
1.84


A Correction: Military Bases Being Weighed for Cutbacks
LEAD: Because of a production error at The Times, several entries were misplaced yesterday in a listing of domestic and overseas military bases that are being considered for closing or reductions.
Following is a corrected list by The Associated Press:
Domestic Closings
Army
Detroit Army Tank Plant, Mich.


Astral Bellevue Pathe Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astral Bellevue Pathe Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
75,723,000
57,652,000
Net inc
b1,863,000
c1,299,000
Share earns
.23
.19
Shares outst
7,947,000
6,766,000
9mo rev
191,848,000
159,657,000
Net inc
b6,530,000
c4,520,000
Share earns
.84
.67
Shares outst
7,749,000
6,747,000


Control Data Reports Losses
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation today reported a 1989 loss of $680.4 million on revenues of $2.9 billion.
The results, which were in line with expectations, included a fourth-quarter loss of $196.4 million on revenues of $524 million.


First Federal Savings (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings (Ga.)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b233,574
c284,000
Per share
-
.29
9mo net inc
4,350
1,033,401
Per share
-
1.05
b-After previously reported $300,000 reserve for general potential losses on loans and real estate.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Merrell Dow Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
337,000,000
220,000,000
Net inc
b22,000,000
54,000,000
Share earns
.11
.35
Shares outst
192,000,000
154,000,000
6mo sales
574,000,000
426,000,000
Net loss
b79,000,000
c102,000,000
Share earns
-
.66


Innovex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Innovex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,925,312
5,806,710
Net inc
40,270
56,216
Share earns
.01
.01


Red Eagle Resources reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Red Eagle Resources
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
20,012,000
17,612,000
Net inc
99,000
631,000
Share earns
.01
.05
Shares outst
19,641,000
14,022,000
Results for 1989 included the results of United Drilling Co., acquired on Aug.


Arrow Bank Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Bank Corp.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
5,557,000
4,823,000
Per share
2.30
2.01


Seascape With Revelers and Mendicants
LEAD: If you live all your life in one place, you tend to earmark places within that place that in some ways are your own, that typify your home turf.
These are the places that always make you smile, and to which you inevitably drag out-of-towners for a glimpse into the local soul.


American Filtrona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Filtrona Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
35,333,000
33,870,000
Net inc
1,594,000
1,013,000
Share earns
.43
.28
Shares outst
3,703,000
3,665,000
Yr rev
148,236,000
135,858,000
Net inc
7,797,000
6,127,000
Share earns
2.08
1.68
Shares outst
3,695,000
3,658,000


Standard Register Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Register Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
187,115,000
186,659,000
Net inc
14,832,000
13,959,000
Share earns
.49
.47
Yr rev
708,876,000
675,197,000
Net inc
40,360,000
38,100,000
Share earns
1.35
1.28


Masaru Ogawa, Japanese Journalist, 74
LEAD: Masaru Ogawa, former editor of The Japan Times, Japan's largest English-language newspaper and one of the country's most prominent journalists, died on Sunday of heart failure at his home in Tokyo.
He was 74 years old and had been ill for several weeks.


Gentex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gentex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
6,228,486
4,573,303
Net inc
616,636
239,275
Share earns
.08
.04
Shares outst
7,667,736
5,885,220
Yr sales
23,758,750
14,736,624
Net inc
2,089,804
682,018
Share earns
.31
.12
Shares outst
6,761,337
5,915,529


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: THE traditional French and American way to cook flatfish like sole and flounder is sauteing.
Delicate species like these can be broiled, but they tend to dry out quickly if not watched carefully.
A third method I have used successfully for years is high-temperature roasting.


Hal Draper, 75, Socialist Writer Who Recounted Berkeley Protest
LEAD: Hal Draper, a scholar and writer on Marxism and socialism for 50 years, died of pneumonia Friday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 75 years old.


Emanuel Lazzaro, Executive, 90
LEAD: Emanuel Lazzaro, a retired trucking company executive, died on Saturday at his son's home in Brooklyn.
He was 90 years old and lived in Brooklyn.


Quayle Trip: Resentment Dramatized
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle's trip to Latin America and the Caribbean was supposed to allay some of the region's resentment over the United States invasion of Panama, but instead it seems to have dramatized the depth of that resentment.


Punta del Este Journal;   In Argentina's Playground, It's Pleasure as Usual
LEAD: At the start of this season, summer in the Southern Hemisphere, one of the main concerns in Punta del Este was that all 500 berths in the yacht club had been snapped up within hours of being offered for lease.


But Is the Child Learning? Schools Trying New Tests
LEAD: John Mangini, a biology teacher at Kennedy High School in Waterbury, Conn., recently gave his students some live brine shrimp instead of a test.
Or, rather, the shrimp were the test.


Emmanuel Gordon, Dentist, 93
LEAD: Dr.
Emmanuel Gordon, a retired Queens dentist and past president of the Queens County Dental Society, died of complications of Parkinson's disease on Monday at his home in Royal Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 93 years old.


POPE URGES CHAD TO PURSUE PEACE
LEAD: Pope John Paul II preached reconciliation today in Chad, which has lived with border fighting and intermittent civil war for 25 years.


John Hanson Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* John Hanson Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b44,000
cd412,000
Per share
.01
-
6mo net inc
b2,183,000
d404,000
Per share
.38
.07
b-After extraordinary gains from tax-loss carryforwards of $17,000 for the quarter and $1,121,000, or 19 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Arbour's Return to the Helm Bails Out Islander Sinking Ship
LEAD: There is nothing casual about Al Arbour's relationship with his resurgent New York Islanders, nor is there any end to it in sight.


Impact Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Impact Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
7,848,000
5,355,000
Net loss
594,000
1,913,000
Shares outst
9,393,000
9,360,000
9mo sales
22,819,000
20,106,000
Net loss
1,604,000
1,776,000
Shares outst
9,384,000
9,534,000


Thomaston Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomaston Mills (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
48,908,890
42,015,133
Net inc
1,602,725
b690,257
Share earns
.50
-
6mo sales
97,613,978
81,055,124
Net inc
3,055,956
c285,521
Share earns
.50
.09


Hoyas Trounce Seton Hall By 70-48
LEAD: Mark Tillmon scored 25 points tonight, including 16 in the decisive first half, as Georgetown gained a share of first place in the Big East with a 70-48 victory over Seton Hall.


Christians Fight Muslims and Each Other in Beirut
LEAD: Lebanese Army troops loyal to Gen.
Michel Aoun exchanged fire with Christian militiamen in two quarters of Christian East Beirut today.


MCI Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,710,000,000
1,431,000,000
Net inc
108,000,000
122,000,000
Share earns
.39
.46
Shares outst
256,000,000
248,000,000
Yr rev
6,471,000,000
5,137,000,000
Net inc
558,000,000
346,000,000
Share earns
2.09
1.23
Shares outst
253,000,000
272,000,000


What Really Happens to Social Security Taxes?;   How to Finance Cut?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Emcon Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emcon Associates (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
10,136,000
7,942,000
Net inc
774,000
775,000
Share earns
.19
.19
Shares outst
4,164,000
3,959,000
Yr rev
37,132,000
28,001,000
Net inc
3,664,000
2,958,000
Share earns
.90
.75
Shares outst
4,093,000
3,927,000


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
299,843,000
269,154,000
Net inc
22,296,000
19,981,000
Share earns
.85
.77
Yr rev
982,520,000
883,735,000
Net inc
b47,749,000
35,047,000
Share earns
1.83
1.34


What Really Happens to Social Security Taxes?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Employers Casualty Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Employers Casualty Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,937,876
2,705,617
Share earns
.39
.27
Yr net loss
66,039,144
b24,272,183
Share earns
-
2.41
b-Net income
The company said that earnings reflect the deterioration in underwriting results, primarily due to the reserve strengthening in 1989 on prior year losses as previously reported.


Mid Maine Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid Maine Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
422,614
60,799
Per share
.31
.04
Year net inc
1,591,352
1,093,396
Per share
1.15
.79
The company said securities gains for the latest periods were $182,000 for the quarter and $371,000 for the year, compared with securities losses of $613,000 and $476,000 for the same year-ago periods, respectively.


Conquest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conquest Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
2,883,892
1,565,051
Net loss
1,119,505
1,112,379
Shares outst
4,102,085
1,708,823
6mo rev
5,571,189
2,877,863
Net loss
2,158,874
2,104,555
Shares outst
4,100,325,
1,690,554


Construction Increases 1%
LEAD: Contracts for new construction grew 1 percent nationwide in December, halting a steep slide in the previous two months, the F. W. Dodge division of McGraw-Hill Inc. reported yesterday.


Home Unity Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Unity Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
55,000
b12,694,000
Per share
.03
-
Year net loss
1,127,000
c17,421,000
b-Net loss and reflected a non-recurring loss of $6.9 million incurred in the bank's financial restructuring.


Mellon Bank Selling Unit
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation said today that it was seeking a buyer for Mellon Financial Services, its Illinois-based consumer finance company.


Comair Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comair Holdings Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
37,775,000
28,398,000
Net inc
2,458,000
1,234,000
Share earns
.30
.15
Shares outst
8,140,000
8,400,000
9mo rev
111,926,000
86,007,000
Net inc
9,298,000
4,727,000
Share earns
1.14
.55
Shares outst
8,142,000
8,601,000


REAGAN IS ORDERED TO PROVIDE DIARIES IN POINDEXTER CASE
LEAD: A Federal district judge today ordered former President Ronald Reagan to turn over excerpts of his private diaries to John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser, who had argued that they would show Mr.
Reagan had authorized his actions in the Iran-contra affair.


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b4,825,000
5,037,000
Per share
.44
.49
Shares outst
11,009,000
10,268,000
Year net inc
b16,017,000
c10,433,000
Per share
1.48
-
Shares outst
10,821,000
10,047,000


Cetus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cetus Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
8,955,000
6,028,000
Net loss
15,949,000
11,595,000
6mo rev
16,409,000
11,101,000
Net loss
29,124,000
23,254,000
The company said total costs and expenses in the latest quarter increased by $6,372,000 from the year earlier.


Angola Rebel Chief Halts Tour
LEAD: Jonas Savimbi, the leader of Angola's rebels, interrupted a European tour to return to Angola today because of what he said was a concerted air attack by Government forces.


Notebook;   Soviet Fighter Learns to Be a Pro
LEAD: The way Yuri Vaulin remembers it, three or maybe four years ago, ''a hole in the Iron Curtain'' developed, allowing previously unavailable information to reach athletes in the Soviet Union.


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premark International (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
698,300,000
651,200,000
Net inc
b18,000,000
31,900,000
Share earns
.54
.91
Shares outst
35,100,000
34,800,000
Yr sales
2,592,400,000
2,397,000,000
Net inc
78,400,000
c105,300,000
Share earns
2.24
3.03
Shares outst
35,100,000
34,700,000


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Altos Computer Systems, San Jose, Calif., said it would repurchase up to two million shares of its 10.8 million common shares outstanding.


Westport Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westport Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,177,000
99,000
Year net loss
4,659,000
b690,000
Per share
-
.33
b-Net income


Fortune Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fortune Financial Group (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
1,613,000
b908,000
Per share
-
.20
Shares outst
4,369,154
4,585,671
b-Net income


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of East Tennessee
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
142,026
b1,740,571
Per share
.08
-
Year net inc
504,519
b2,730,573
Per share
.27
-
b-Net loss and included a loan loss provision of $1,250,000.


Pioneer Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b845,000
c7,096,000
Per share
.24
2.21
Shares outst
3,571,304
3,123,222
b-Included after-tax charge of $3.4 million for unrealized loss on Freddie Mac stock purchased during the latest quarter and held at Dec.


Dinkins Reported Set to Ask A Half Billion in New Taxes
LEAD: When he presents his preliminary budget for New York City tomorrow, Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose $550 million in new taxes, plus service cuts and other measures, to close a budget gap and allow for some modest new social programs that he holds dear, city officials said yesterday.


Real Estate;   An Addition To Newark's Downtown
LEAD: DOWNTOWN Newark has a striking addition to its evolving skyline, the $74 million Newark Legal Center.
The structure, which was completed last month and got its first tenant this month, was built to house law firms and keep them in the city.


Marion Net Off; Lambert Up
LEAD: Marion Merrell Dow Inc., the recently merged pharmaceutical company based in Kansas City, Mo.. said yesterday that its net income fell 59.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 1989.
Meanwhile the Warner-Lambert Company said its net income for the quarter rose 19.1 percent.


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
891,341,000
903,355,000
Net inc
26,270,000
25,792,000
Share earns
1.55
1.52
6mo rev
1,570,116,000
1,595,371,000
Net inc
b41,009,000
39,804,000
Share earns
2.42
2.35


WINE TALK
LEAD: BEFORE Curly died three years ago, Rowdy was the boss.
He's still on the right wheel, but somehow he doesn't have the old gumption.
And, let's face it, his new partner, Chucky, is practically half his age.


Interstate Power Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power Co (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
66,735,000
66,196,000
Net inc
5,594,000
4,001,000
Share earns
.51
.34
Yr rev
270,712,000
274,321,000
Net inc
b28,627,000
23,011,000
Share earns
2.73
2.11


Crane Plans to Bid For Milton Roy
LEAD: The Crane Company said its board of directors had authorized a $21-a-share offer for the Milton Roy Company.
Stock in Milton Roy, a St.
Petersburg, Fla., maker of measuring instruments, rose $1 today, to $17.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Crane slipped 62.5 cents, to $22.25.
Crane, which sells building products, said it was ready to make the offer but needed the cooperation of Milton Roy's board to insure its shareholder rights plan did not prevent the offer from proceeding.


Stocks Sag Again; Dow Drops 10.14 Points
LEAD: Pessimism about stocks involved in deals, primarily the UAL Corporation, depressed stock prices broadly yesterday as trading volume rose sharply.


Plea Accord Is Accepted by Figure in Barry Inquiry
LEAD: A District of Columbia employee pleaded guilty to drug charges today as part of an agreement with Federal prosecutors to provide evidence in their investigation of drug use by the city's Mayor, Marion S. Barry Jr.
Prosecutors said the city worker, James P. McWilliams, was in a downtown Ramada Inn room in December 1988 when Mr.


For Colombians in Queens, Time of Pain and Questions
LEAD: In the boxcar restaurants and boisterous salsa-pumped bars of Queens, where the talk is all too often of bad things that happen to Colombians, conversations of the last few days have been more painful than usual, and sometimes more bitter.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Putting Back the Words


Cumberland Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cumberland Federal Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net loss
b49,000
c1,648,000
Per share
-
.67
Year net inc
5,019,000
d6,713,000
Per share
2.02
2.72
b-After a pre-tax charge of $5 million ion order to increase the bank's valuation allowance on a real estate project in Nashville.


Two Are Shot After a Clash They Couldn't Hear
LEAD: Joined in deafness, dependent on each other almost since birth, Cesar and Edward Vieira were inseparable.
They overcame their handicaps as best they could, married, built families - and then there was an act of stupefying senselessness.


For Some Harlem Youngsters, New Ranger Is Familiar Face
LEAD: Not many of the youngsters who participate in the Ice Hockey in Harlem program knew who all of the Rangers were when the team held a clinic yesterday afternoon at the Lasker Rink in Central Park.
But they did recognize at least one player from last year's clinic, even though he was wearing a different jersey then.


Mother Guilty in Death Of Her Baby Daughter
LEAD: A woman was found guilty of murder today in the suffocation of one of two infant daughters she claimed were abducted three years apart by a masked man.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''If the President is not serious about deficit reduction, why should Congress be serious?''
- Representative Leon E. Panetta, Democrat of California.


Plastique Moderne reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plastique Moderne
Year to Aug 31
1989
1988
Revenue
41,866,651
42,700,901
Net inc
b917,778
b56,669
Share earns
.17
.01
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $827,915, or 15 cents a share, and $162,202, or 3 cents a share, for the latest and prior year, respectively.


Bucharest Is Newly Free, But It Is Still Bucharest
LEAD: Life in this capital's hotels and restaurants has changed in some important respects since a national uprising ousted the Communist Government last month, but not in every way.


About New York;   Of Circus Bears, Super Bowls And Glasnost
LEAD: How to begin?
Perhaps last June when Brigham Kerr married Angela Surazhsky, whose family moved to New York from the Soviet Union a decade before.
No, we'll start on the evening of Jan. 11, the opening of the Moscow Circus at Radio City Music Hall.


Review/Concert;   20th-Century American, and Nothing But
LEAD: Twentieth-century composers can scarcely complain of neglect this past week in New York.
Parnassus and the New Music Consort have offered substantial programs, the Juilliard School is in the midst of a Schoenberg celebration, and on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall, the American Composers Orchestra under Hugh Wolff played music by Joan Tower, John Adams, Gerald Levinson and Walter


Lessons
LEAD: The assignment for Henry Harms's ninth graders at the Great Hollow Intermediate School in Smithtown, L.I., was to create a model Hovercraft that would travel at least eight feet, suspended in air, over a row of magnets.


A New Decoder to Foil Satellite-TV Pirates
LEAD: After several years of losing hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue from people who watch without paying, the satellite television industry is counterattacking with some success on two fronts.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Oct.-Dec.
Change
1989
From '88
America West Airlines Inc.
$ 1,100,000
-94.2
Borden Inc.
99,900,000
+6.4
Clark Equipment Co.
20,400,000
+70.0
Coca-Cola Co.
757,200,000
+221.5
Control Data Corp.
(196,400,000)
-
Dravo Corp.
3,400,000
*-
Emerson Radio Corp.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,783,000,000
1,590,000,000
Net inc
42,000,000
41,000,000
Share earns
.57
.62
Shares outst
66,188,000
63,812,000
Yr rev
6,762,000,000
5,932,000,000
Net inc
211,000,000
222,000,000
Share earns
3.05
3.51
Shares outst
64,907,000
61,634,000


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
ORANGE CRUSH
Two gray cloud fingers
squeeze the cold orange sun
spilling cascades of Vitamin C
into the Hudson.
Crushed, the sun slips down
and disappears in New Jersey.
ARLENE L. MANDELL


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE ELIMINATION OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Global Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Environmental
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
13,957,360
3,277,958
Net inc
241,932
16,993
Share earns
.11
.01
Shares outst
2,230,508
1,846,950
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 1-T0100 reverse stock split effective on Oct.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Tomato Juice, Anyone?


Scott Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
1,293,300,000
1,285,400,000
Net inc
71,600,000
80,900,000
Share earns
.97
1.05
Shares outst
73,500,000
76,700,000
Yr sales
5,065,600,000
4,726,400,000
Net inc
375,500,000
400,900,000
Share earns
5.11
5.23
Shares outst
73,400,000
76,600,000


Irma Brandeis, Professor, 84
LEAD: Irma Brandeis, a professor of literature at Bard College and an authority on Dante, died on Monday at her home on the Bard campus in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
She was 84 years old.


49 Chilean Guerrillas Use Tunnel To Escape From Jail in Santiago
LEAD: Forty-nine leftist guerrillas, including several accused of taking part in an assassination attempt on President Augusto Pinochet three years ago, escaped today from a Santiago jail.


Eastern European Countries Seek Help From U.N. Human Rights School
LEAD: As Eastern Europe moves toward more democratic government, the authorities in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary and Rumania have asked the United Nations to help them promote greater respect for their citizens' human rights.


FirstFederal Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFederal Financial
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
416,000
566,000
Per share
.40
.54
Year net inc
b1,630,000
2,206,000
Per share
1.55
2.10
b-Included extraordinary loss of $409,000.


Newark Cathedral Worth Visit From Manhattan
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Bordeaux, Wine's Still King But Food Is Gaining Attention
LEAD: AT wineries in Bordeaux, the question of what food to serve with the wine is easily answered.
Chances are it will be roast lamb, roast veal or roast filet of beef, regardless of whether the wine planned for dinner is a Leoville-Las-Cases 1970, a Ducru-Beaucaillou 1971 or a Gruaud-Larose 1980. ''In Bordeaux, we're not too serious about matching food and wine,'' Jean-Eugene Borie, owner of Chateau Ducru-Beaucaillou and several other properties in the Medoc, said at a recent dinner at the winery.


Arch Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arch Petroleum Inc.
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,493,000
2,770,000
Net inc
1,500,000
330,000
Share earns
.09
-


Maury Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maury Federal Savings Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
183,473
282,664
Per share
.32
.49
9mo net inc
549,965
607,538
Per share
.95
1.05


Assix International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Assix International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,556,132
643,483
Net inc
301,360
125,692
Share earns
.08
.03
6mo rev
2,749,442
1,228,083
Net inc
515,672
238,750
Share earns
.13
.06


Sponsors Pleased With Super Bowl
LEAD: Even though Super Bowl XXIV was the lowest-rated football championship in two decades, advertisers may still have scored well.


Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
31,477,000
32,242,000
Net inc
b9,895,000
10,583,000
Share earns
.27
.28
Yr rev
125,692,000
124,824,000
Net inc
b41,128,000
c49,690,000
Share earns
1.10
1.32


Coral Potter, 49, Dies; An Actor and Manager
LEAD: Coral S. Potter, an actor with the Jean Cocteau Repertory Theater for 17 years, died of lung cancer on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old.
Mr.
Potter had been a member of the Cocteau's resident acting company since its second season in 1972.
His many credits included ''The Golem,'' ''The Duchess of Malfi,'' ''Waiting for Godot,'' ''The Cenci,'' ''Hamlet,'' ''Ghosts,'' ''Twelfth Night,'' ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' ''Rhinoceros'' and ''Volpone.


Imperial Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Holly Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
198,310,000
176,040,000
Net inc
b8,720,000
c10,880,000
Share earns
1.38
1.80
9mo sales
561,644,000
505,307,000
Net inc
b15,946,000
c13,514,000
Share earns
2.53
2.30
Shares outst
6,292,918
5,874,515


Review/Theater;   New Interpretation Of Shakespeare's 'Winter's Tale'
LEAD: A director who chooses ''The Winter's Tale,'' one of the most illogical plays in the canon, as his first Shakespearean assignment has to be a lunatic or a visionary or perhaps a little of both.


Suns Defeat Nets, 120-85
LEAD: Kevin Johnson scored 12 of his 30 points in a lopsided third period as the Phoenix Suns beat the Nets, 120-95, tonight for their ninth victory in a row at home.


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,952,904,000
1,983,287,000
Net inc
99,907,000
93,851,000
Share earns
.67
.63
Shares outst
148,231,000
148,023,000
Yr sales
7,593,417,000
7,243,526,000
Net loss
60,552,000
b311,882,000
Share earns
-
2.11
Shares outst
148,213,000
147,838,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a summary article yesterday about President Bush's budget proposals for domestic programs misstated the proposed budget for the Environmental Protection Agency.
It is $5.8 billion.


Ban the Boom
LEAD: Ever since there have been radios, adolescents have turned up the volume to annoy adults.
Portable radios, and later ''boom boxes,'' some the size of large suitcases, made it possible to carry the annoyance out of the house.
Now ''boom cars'' - automobiles fitted with high-powered sound systems - are driving annoyance across town.


Seeq Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seeq Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
12,327,000
14,525,000
Net loss
1,089,000
b1,123,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
12,908,000
13,047,000
b-Net income


Bonn's Central Bank Head Hopeful on Links With East
LEAD: Karl Otto Pohl, the president of West Germany's central bank, said last night that under the right conditions the West German and East German currencies could be gradually linked.


Carmike Cinemas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carmike Cinemas Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
23,498,000
18,774,000
Net inc
944,000
319,000
Share earns
.18
.06
Yr rev
99,444,000
84,476,000
Net inc
6,241,000
3,320,000
Share earns
1.22
.66


Jail Urged in School Drug Case
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has urged a judge to withdraw his promise of probation and impose a jail sentence on a physical education teacher who pleaded guilty to snorting cocaine in a school parking lot.


Arbitration Avoided
LEAD: Two pitchers who had filed for salary arbitration reached agreement on 1990 salaries yesterday.
Ray Searage accepted $342,500 from the Los Angeles Dodgers, a raise of $201,500.


Foster (L.B.) Co.  (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foster (L.B.) Co.  (O)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
56,809,000
64,356,000
Net loss
886,000
b1,337 000
Share earns
-
.13
Yr sales
238,007,000
262,116,000
Net inc
1,309,000
c10,617,000
Share earns
.13
1.08


UAL Plunges $15.50, to $121
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation plunged yesterday to its lowest level since a $6.8 billion buyout bid collapsed in October, reflecting the growing doubts that prospective takeovers can be accomplished.


Gotti Prosecutors Play Tape Said to Show Attack Order
LEAD: Six words said to have been spoken by John Gotti - ''We're gonna, gonna bust him up'' - that prosecutors say is vital evidence against the reported Mafia leader were played yesterday at his trial.


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
119,120,000
106,406,000
Net inc
5,764,000
6,084,000
Share earns
.30
.32
Shares outst
14,721,000
14,548,000
Yr rev
470,002,000
438,385,000
Net inc
39,117,000
43,804,000
Share earns
2.28
2.63
Shares outst
14,657,000
14,473,000


Cenvest Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvest Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
710,000
1,288,000
Per share
.18
.34
Year net inc
1,313,000
4,203,000
Per share
.33
1.15
The company said 1989 results were affected by a $3.6 million increase in general loan loss reserves taken in the quarter ended Sept.


O.A.S. Delegate Arrives to Monitor Nicaraguan Elections


LeMond in Trump Race
LEAD: Greg LeMond, the two-time winner of the Tour de France, and Dag-Otto Lauritzen, last year's winner of the first Tour de Trump, will head an elite professional field for this year's second Tour de Trump.


Metropolitan Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metropolitan Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
7,124,000
5,210,000
Per share
.94
.82
Year net inc
24,078,000
11,356,000
Per share
3.47
1.84


Regional Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regional Federal Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
292,996
335,170
Per share
.38
.44
6mo net inc
491,501
612,087
Per share
.64
.80


Fort Dearborn Income SecuriFties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Dearborn Income SecuriFties (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,309,200
2,209,210
Share earns
.34
.32


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
237,569,000
156,562,000
Net inc
31,457,000
27,515,000
Share earns
.90
.79
Yr rev
792,327,000
557,770,000
Net inc
122,918,000
103,288,000
Share earns
3.52
2.97


In a Wisconsin Port, Liver Is Hailed as the Prized Catch
LEAD: IN the 1940's, Victor Greunke made local culinary history by daring to place on the menu of Greunke's Inn a favorite of the local fishermen: whitefish livers.


Rape Case in Mexico Fuels Outrage at the Police
LEAD: The arrest of four federal policemen accused of having led a gang that raped, beat and robbed more than a dozen women here has stirred widespread public outrage and led to a renewal of calls for a sweeping overhaul of Mexico's police and public-security apparatus.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GBC Bancorp
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,024,000
2,146,000
Per share
.56
.40
Shares outst
5,365,000
5,337,000
Year net inc
10,780,000
7,139,000
Per share
2.01
1.60
Shares outst
5,356,000
4,473,000


Shearson Chief, Symbol of 80's Boom, Is Out
LEAD: In a move that reflects the continuing turmoil on Wall Street, Peter A. Cohen, the chairman and chief executive of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., resigned under pressure last night.


Jorgensen Up $9.50 On Merger Accord
LEAD: The stock of the Earle M. Jorgensen Company leaped 31.2 percent today after the steel and aluminum processor and distributor agreed to merge with Kilsby-Roberts Holdings Inc.
Jorgensen's shares leaped $9.50, to $40, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Scientists Get First Look at Satellite Captured by Shuttle


Vera Hahn, 67, Dies; Interior-Design Editor
LEAD: Vera Hahn, an interior-design editor for several magazines, died of lymphoma on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived on Roosevelt Island.


Colombia Flight Got No Priority, Officials Report
LEAD: Local air traffic controllers assigned Avianca Flight 52 a normal path of approach to Kennedy International Airport behind other jets in the area, giving it no special landing priority, Federal officials said today.


Tyson Shaping Up for Douglas Fight


Roy Rogers Chain Is Sold to Hardee's
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation, the big hotel company, took the first step today in its strategy of withdrawing from the fast-food business by announcing the sale of its Roy Rogers restaurant chain to a rival, Hardee's, for $365 million in cash.


BCE Mobile Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BCE Mobile Communications
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
69,300,000
50,600,000
Net loss
3,700,000
b3,700,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
241,800,000
170,600,000
Net loss
6,900,000
b2,000,000
Share earns
-
.03


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
72,719,000
75,872,000
Net loss
961,000
b1,842,000
Share earns
-
.44
Shares outst
5,424,000
4,189,000
b-Net income


Miniature Golf, the New City Game
LEAD: Outside, a bitter wind is slicing off Lake Michigan, and the sidewalks are glazed with ice.
But on the third floor of a refurbished warehouse on the North Side, where an open area has been rearranged as an 18-hole miniature golf course, the little fairways are as crowded as Pebble Beach on a Sunday morning.


Senate Votes Economic Sanctions Against China
LEAD: The Senate unanimously approved legislation today that included a series of economic sanctions against China.


Children's Opera on Crack: Scenes From Real Life
LEAD: Jose is only 10 years old, but already he feels the pangs of being an outsider.
He tries crack and sings, ''I feel strong.'' As his addiction grows, however, he becomes morose and hostile.
In the end, he dies from a drug-induced heart-attack.


Banta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banta Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
146,233,000
137,520,000
Net inc
5,240,000
c4,922,000
Share earns
.41
.39
Shares outst
12,762,179
12,741,723
Yr sales
568,392,000
475,380,000
Net inc
b33,599,000
c23,115,000
Share earns
2.64
1.86
Shares outst
12,744,812
12,441,473


Knicks Hope to Make Boston Garden Just Another Stop on the Road
LEAD: Once it was a house of horrors for visiting teams.
Now the Boston Garden is becoming just another stop on the National Basketball Association schedule.


To Azerbaijanis, Conflict Isn't Religious
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place;   Mutual Fund Investors Acting Nervous Again
LEAD: Mutual fund investors, who showed increasing confidence in the stock market for most of 1989, have begun to withdraw money from equity mutual funds for the first time in months, fund officials said yesterday.


New York Should Collect Fines From Landlords
LEAD: To the Editor:


Guinness Import To Buy All Brand
LEAD: The Guinness Import Company said it had agreed to acquire All Brand Importers Inc. and the rights to distribute several of its brands, including Moosehead Premium Canadian Lager and Dos Equis, for $21 million.
The deal will make Guinness Import, based in Stamford, Conn., the fourth-largest beer importer in the United States, according to the trade publication


Review/Television;   Confessions About Women By an Earnest 18-Year-Old
LEAD: Much of ''Women and Wallace'' can sound like the intensely earnest confession of an 18-year-old.
Why not?
It is.
Jonathan Marc Sherman was just that age when he wrote the play, which went on to become a 1988 winner in the Young Playwrights Festival in New York.
Tonight at 10 on Channel 13, the ''American Playhouse'' series is presenting ''Women and Wallace'' in an adaptation of a version originally done for Playwrights Horizons Off Broadway.


Nicaragua Set to Free Foes Under General Pardon
LEAD: The Nicaraguan Government began work today on a final list of more than 1,000 rebel supporters and former National Guardsmen who are to be released next month under a general pardon for imprisoned opponents of the Sandinista Government.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Texas Petroleum Holdngs Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
254,100,000
254,800,000
Net inc
16,300,000
14,800,000
Share earns
.05
.03
Shares outst
84,145,451
83,954,800
Yr rev
1,159,700,000
1,152,000,000
Net inc
172,600,000
109,300,000
Share earns
1.49
.73
Shares outst
84,034,443
84,551,611


Antley Hopes to Return
LEAD: Chris Antley, a top jockey whose career was interrupted by drug use, could get his license back by March 15.
The New York State Racing and Wagering Board announced yesterday that it would act on Antley's application for a license on or after that day.


Dravo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dravo Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
68,776,000
67,978,000
Net inc
b3,416,000
c18,132,000
Share earns
.19
-
Yr rev
279,464,000
273,594,000
Net inc
b17,752,000
c7,744,000
Share earns
1.02
-


First Financial Management reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Management (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
228,647,000
139,887,000
Net inc
20,120,000
11,551,000
Share earns
.75
.56
Shares outst
26,942,000
20,605,000
Yr rev
666,740,000
427,608,000
Net inc
56,774,000
34,481,000
Share earns
2.29
1.72
Shares outst
24,815,000
20,008,000


Lease Finance Orders Jets
LEAD: The International Lease Finance Corporation, an airplane leasing company based in Beverly Hills, Calif., said today that it had placed firm orders to buy 42 new jets worth $1.9 billion from three manufacturers: the Boeing Company, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Airbus Industries.


Momentum Grows for Military Spending Cuts in West Europe
LEAD: The upheavals in the Communist countries in Eastern Europe and the Bush Administration's talk of closing bases and withdrawing troops from Greece, Britain, Italy, West Germany and Turkey have stepped up the political momentum toward greater military spending cuts in Western Europe.


Duke Power Bonds To Yield 9.715%
LEAD: The Duke Power Company, Charlotte, N.C., yesterday priced through competitive bidding $200 million in first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2020.


Fund Agency Acquired
LEAD: The American Express Company said Monday that its unit for processing information for mutual funds had acquired a mutual-fund transfer agency from the Mellon Bank Corporation.
The Boston-based American Express unit, Shareholder Services Group Inc., acquired Mellon Mutal Fund Services Group for an undisclosed price.


In Parliament Shift, Prague Communists Become a Minority
LEAD: The Communist Party handed over more than 100 of its parliamentary seats to pro-democracy groups today to end its four-decade hold on Czechoslovakia's legislature.


Burr-Brown Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
39,744,000
43,828,000
Net inc
1,571,000
2,856,000
Share earns
.16
.30
Shares outst
9,625,000
9,677,000
Yr sales
169,470,000
176,673,000
Net inc
8,710,000
11,549,000
Share earns
.90
1.19
Shares outst
9,668,000
9,704,000


Mystery of the Bottom-Opened Cigarette Pack
LEAD: To the Editor:


Committee Criticizes Eastern Air
LEAD: The committee representing the preferred stockholders at Eastern Air Lines said yesterday that it had lost faith in the airline's management and called for dramatic steps to salvage any value that was left in the airline.


Writer and Baker Muses on Breads, Ovens and Flours
LEAD: ED BEHR likes to bake.
Out of his oven tumbles a profusion of breads, biscuits, brioches, pizzas, cookies, even, truth to tell, some of the more interesting types of cake, although texture is one of the aspects of baking that fascinates him and the texture of most cake, he says, is, well, boring.


JAPANESE PARTIES AGREE TO A DEBATE
LEAD: For the first time in 30 years, Japan's major political parties have agreed to face each other in an open debate before an election.


COMPANY NEWS Stride Rite Rejects $32-a-Share Bid
LEAD: The Stride Rite Corporation announced it had rejected a $900 million takeover bid from a group of investors, declaring the company would best be served by pursuing an independent strategy for growth.
Stride Rite, the leading children's shoe maker in the country, received the $32-a-share offer in December from a group led by Walsh, Greenwood &amp; Company, a Greenwich, Conn., investment concern.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, several entries in a list of military bases being considered for closing or reductions were misplaced in some copies yesterday.
A corrected list appears today on page A12.


Allied Security Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Security Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
27,173,744
22,904,343
Net inc
794,862
584,562
Share earns
1.63
1.19
Shares outst
486,873
498,476
6mo rev
54,548,955
44,746,446
Net inc
1,862,266
b552,248
Share earns
3.82
1.11


Tokyo Opposes Cuts in U.S. Forces in Asia
LEAD: Reacting to the cutbacks announced in President Bush's proposed military budget, a senior Japanese Government official argued today against any reduction in the United States' military presence in Japan or the rest of Asia because of a continuing Soviet menace.


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Surgical (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
93,933,000
76,197,000
Net inc
7,661,000
5,864,000
Share earns
.63
.51
Shares outst
12,169,000
11,450,000
Yr sales
345,205,000
290,858,000
Net inc
b30,608,000
23,203,000
Share earns
2.61
2.00
Shares outst
11,746,000
11,612,000


New Chief Executive Named By Combustion
LEAD: Combustion Engineering Inc., a maker of industrial equipment, has a new name and a new chief executive.
The new name is Asea Brown Boveri Inc.; the new boss, with the titles of president and chief executive, is George S. Kimmel.


Thortec International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thortec International (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
21,300,000
25,500,000
Net loss
b11,300,000
c5,400,000
Yr rev
99,400,000
109,200,000
Net loss
b100,000
c17,300,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $5,600,000 and $10,300,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


Terex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Terex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
304,444,000
107,080,000
Net inc
4,136,000
2,945,000
Share earns
.51
.38
Shares outst
8,066,000
7,817,000
Yr sales
790,903,000
343,721,000
Net inc
18,771,000
13,202,000
Share earns
2.37
1.79
Shares outst
7,925,000
7,388,000


Blues Beat Islanders, 2-1


Campbell Soup
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company said it plans to sell its Juice Bowl Products Inc. subsidiary and close a foreign plant.
Campbell acquired Juice Bowl in 1982 to produce the company's tomato-based juices and expand the company's vegetable juice line.
The Camden-based company said that Juice Bowl, based in Lakeland, Fla., was no longer needed.


Title Rings Strike The Wrong Note
LEAD: Last year's Little League champions finally received their championship rings.
Unfortunately, they bore the wrong inscription.


F.D.A. Panel Seeks Expanded Use of AIDS Drug
LEAD: A Federal advisory committee recommended today that the AIDS drug AZT be approved for the treatment of people who are infected with the AIDS virus and have faltering immune systems but no symptoms of illness.


Fiserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fiserv Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
43,949,000
37,823,000
Net inc
3,072,000
2,448,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Yr rev
164,035,000
125,029,000
Net inc
11,350,000
9,234,000
Share earns
1.34
1.12


Galaxy Cheese Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galaxy Cheese Co.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
5,991,000
3,500,846
Net inc
202,392
25,333
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
4,198,855
4,085,343
9mo sales
15,323,313
11,130,286
Net inc
255,668
b435,839
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
4,147,769
4,008,221


Cheney's Wary First Step
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's budget represents a first step toward restructuring the military but stops short of the overhaul that some members of Congress and outside experts have advocated as a response to the diminishing Soviet threat and changes in Eastern Europe.


Classroom Discipline and Lessons in Social Values
LEAD: Laurel Cress, a third-grade teacher, has done away with all the usual ways of maintaining order.
Students do not get points or candy for behaving well.
The names of problem students are not posted on the blackboard or anywhere else in the classroom.


Nalco Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nalco Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
283,200,000
261,951,000
Net inc
32,613,000
28,094,000
Share earns
.82
.72
Shares outst
40,747,000
39,045,000
Yr rev
1,070,754,000
994,150,000
Net inc
119,909,000
105,971,000
Share earns
3.01
2.70
Shares outst
40,436,000
39,287,000


Talented Seventh Graders Face an S.A.T. Challenge
LEAD: Some high school students taking the college boards over the weekend found themselves sitting next to people who looked more like kid brothers or sisters than prospective college students.


Lavalintech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lavalintech Inc.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
393,268
371,344
Net inc
133,010
62,073
Share earns
.04
.02
Results are in Canadian funds.


Donald J. Newman, Criminologist And Ex-SUNY Dean, Dies at 65
LEAD: Donald J. Newman, a criminologist and former dean of the School of Criminal Justice at the State University of New York at Albany, died of a stroke on Friday at the Albany Medical Center.
He was 65 years old and lived in the Albany suburb of Slingerlands.


A Chance to Expand Democracy
LEAD: Why don't Americans vote?
While other parts of the world edge closer to democracy, America's democracy is shrinking.
Reflecting a steady decline in participation, barely half the voting-age population took part in the 1988 Presidential election - the worst turnout in 64 years.
The uninspiring campaign surely didn't help.


Radiation Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radiation Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
17,389,000
14,070,000
Net inc
1,312,000
1,176,000
Share earns
.24
.22
6mo sales
31,449,000
22,970,000
Net inc
2,156,000
1,703,000
Share earns
.40
.33


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Automobile Protection reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automobile Protection
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
3,439,518
2,659,458
Net inc
596
176,697
Share earns
-
.04
Shares outst
5,204,000
4,107,600


Trial Is Told of General's Suicide After He Defied Ceausescu's Order
LEAD: An officer testified today that President Nicolae Ceausescu's Defense Minister shot himself in the heart because he could not bring himself to obey the dictator and order troops to fire on demonstrators during last month's uprising.


Review/Film;   A Wizard Who's Hexed by Hollywood
LEAD: Has any film maker ever worked harder to win his audience's affections than Mike Jittlov, the writer, director, co-producer and star of ''The Wizard of Speed and Time''?
On the evidence of Mr.
Jittlov's world-class home movie, it hardly seems possible that anyone has.
Mr.
Jittlov, for whom this is clearly a labor of love as well as a Herculean effort, attempts every conceivable trick in the special-effects book in order to wow his viewers, and at times the results are literally dizzying.


Sweeter Offer Seen for Aristech
LEAD: The Salt Lake City investor Jon Huntsman, who is pursuing a takeover of the Aristech Chemical Corporation, said he expected to sweeten his bid for the chemicals company to top a competing offer.


5 MORE ARE KILLED IN YUGOSLAV RIOTS
LEAD: At least five people were reported killed Tuesday as riots swept the southern Yugoslav province of Kosovo, and Belgrade television said the situation was approaching civil war.


School Bus With 38 Children Skids Off Road
LEAD: A school bus with 38 kindergarten and first-grade students skidded off an Orange County road and into a tree today, injuring most of the children, the authorities said.
At least four of the children were seriously hurt.


Aim of New Project Is to Foster Musicals
LEAD: A plan to create, develop and provide a working home for new American musicals was announced yesterday by Martin J. Bell, producing director of New Musicals, the organization that is to present the works.


First National Corp. (San Diego) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp. (San Diego) (A)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
1,418,000
1,252,000
Per share
.43
.40
Year net inc
5,305,000
3,269,000
Per share
1.62
1.07


Merchants Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,295,902
2,016,161
Per share
.60
.53
Year net inc
8,966,326
7,591,946
Per share
2.34
1.98
Year-ago quarter and prior year results restated to reflect a 50 percent and 5 percent stock dividend paid in 1989.


Canbra Foods Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canbra Foods Ltd.
Year to Sept 30
1989
1988
Sales
98,447,000
-
Net inc
1,101,000
-
Share earns
.39
-
The company said it changed its fiscal year-end to Sept. 30 from Dec. 30.
Results are in Canadian dollars.


About Education
LEAD: ''Rumanians Call for Freedom in Schools,'' read a recent headline in The New York Times.
Student leaders were demanding a purge of Communist-dominated and academically threadbare schools and universities.


New Oil Find in Sahara
LEAD: The Algerian petroleum agency, Sonatrach, and its Italian partner, AGIP, have struck oil at about 12,000 feet at Zemoul el-Kedar in the Sahara, the official press agency A.P.S. said Sunday.
It said the find, the second in the area, was promising and confirmed the quality of the reservoir.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Tracy-Locke Account
LEAD: Tracy-Locke, Dallas, has won the $15 million advertising account of Budget Rent-A-Car, which was formerly handled in-house.
A spokeswoman for the car rental company said it had also awarded its public relations account to Ketchum Public Relations.


Bronx Couple Charged With Robbing Schoolgirls
LEAD: A Bronx couple was arrested last night and charged with robbing three young girls in a University Heights school yard to raise money to buy drugs, the police said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Intel Target: Customers' Customers
LEAD: In an unusual advertising campaign, the Intel Corporation is bypassing its customers, the computer makers that use its microprocessors, to try to persuade computer users that they would be better off with its more powerful 386SX chip than its older 286 chip.


Of Budgets And Truth
LEAD: Shaken by the political appeal of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's plan to cut the Social Security tax, the Bush Administration has put a new gloss on an old proposal.
In the budget submitted to Congress on Monday, the Administration called for creation of a new ''Social Security Integrity and Debt Reduction Fund.


Chronicle
LEAD: He can't read music and has never played an instrument.
But ROBERT FULGHUM, 52, will lead the Minneapolis Chamber Symphony in the fourth movement of Beethoven's monumental Ninth Symphony, his Walter Mitty dream-come-true.


State of the Union Message
LEAD: President Bush will deliver his State of the Union Message to a joint session of Congress tonight at 9.


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tolland Bank
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
177,000
319,000
Per share
.15
.27
Year net inc
961,000
1,077,000
Per share
.83
.93


Crash Victim Passes Condoms With Cocaine
LEAD: A man who was badly injured in the crash of a Colombian jet has passed 18 condoms containing cocaine, the Nassau County police said today.


Warner-Lambert Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner-Lambert Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
1,043,401,000
997,883,000
Net inc
92,304,000
77,548,000
Share earns
1.37
1.14
Shares outst
67,481,000
67,798,000
Yr sales
4,195,750,000
3,908,421,000
Net inc
412,660,000
340,304,000
Share earns
6.10
5.00
Shares outst
67,668,000
68,035,000


New York Assembly Chiefs Offer $62 Million Hospital Rescue Plan
LEAD: Signaling that the rescue of the state's troubled hospitals will be a legislative priority, the Democratic leadership of the State Assembly today proposed spending $62 million to ease the crisis caused by crowding in emergency rooms, drug abuse, AIDS and increased labor costs.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Key Events in Shearson's History
LEAD:
April 1981: American Express Company, founded in 1850, begins its push into the securities business by announcing plans to buy Shearson Loeb Rhoades, Wall Street's second-largest brokerage house, for about $915 million in stock.
Sanford I. Weill, chairman of Shearson becomes chairman of Shearson/American Express Inc.; Peter A.


Devils Hit Skids Against Kings
LEAD: To the Devils, it all must have looked like an attractive stretch of the schedule a couple of months ago.
There was this game in Los Angeles and then three off days before the next game in Vancouver.


Listless Islanders Are Beaten by Blues
LEAD: Against St.
Louis tonight, the Islanders rarely showed any of the signs that brought them a nine-game winning streak earlier this month and thrust them into first place in the Patrick Divisio.
The result of New York's lackadaisical approach was a 2-1 loss to the Blues.


Sunrise Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunrise Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
376,805
362,429
Per share
.45
.43
6mo net inc
711,300
681,721
Per share
.85
.81


What Really Happens to Social Security Taxes?;   No Change to Deficit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cricket Match Leads to Clash in South Africa


Panel to Study Move by Campeau
LEAD: Representative Jack Brooks said today that the House Judiciary Committee, which he heads, would review the bankruptcy of the American retailing operations of the Campeau Corporation and examine the need for legislation to restrict corporate takeovers.


Big Three's Auto Production Is Likely to Rise in Quarter
LEAD: Car and truck production in the United States and Canada, which was severely curtailed in January, will improve during the rest of the first quarter if the Big Three auto makers adhere to their production schedules.


First of Michigan Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of Michigan Capital Corp.
Qtr to Dec 29
1989
1988
Revenue
14,075,210
8,568,183
Net inc
2,640,915
383,055
Share earns
1.08
.16
Shares outst
2,434,841
2,448,325


State Education Chief Resigns in New Jersey
LEAD: Dr.
Saul Cooperman, the New Jersey Commissioner of Education credited with engineering the education reform movement of former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, said today that he was leaving the post he has held for nearly eight years.


Washington Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Gas Light (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
274,912,000
231,792,000
Net inc
37,072,000
21,136,000
Share earns
1.64
1.15
Yr rev
798,700,000
698,001,000
Net inc
58,189,000
45,067,000
Share earns
2.95
2.52
Shares outst
19,277,000
17,393,000


Mosinee Paper reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
58,499,000
52,819,000
Net loss
b8,541,000
c3,583,000
Share earns
-
.48
Yr sales
233,114,000
231,947,000
Net inc
b6,651,000
9,477,000
Share earns
.92
1.24


Court Frees Honecker, Finding Him Too Sick
LEAD: Erich Honecker, East Germany's former Communist leader, was released from detention today after a court ruled he was too ill to be held but he still faces a treason trial in March.


Union Carbide Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Canada (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
123,497,000
127,059,000
Net loss
b9,965,000
c39,000
Yr sales
516,098,000
486,733,000
Net inc
b19,667,000
d48,527,000
Share earns
.97
2.41
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $2,853,000 for the quarter and $7,098,000 for the year, and extraordinary losses of $17,790,000 and $15,854,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


One Yugoslavia or Six?
LEAD: Yugoslavia has come to the brink of radical change later than its Eastern European neighbors.
Now it faces fundamental questions, like the future of Communist rule and its survival as a single country.
Yet unity is not automatically the top priority.
Yugoslavia's most compelling need now is for effective reforms to halt its slide toward ethnic conflict and economic ruin.


ARGUMENTS HEARD IN CONSPIRACY CASE
LEAD: Opening arguments began today in a conspiracy case against a lawyer accused in the July 1988 disappearance of a Mississippi woman whose husband is one of the state's wealthiest citizens.


Madrid and Catalonia Divide Dali Paintings
LEAD: A year after the death of the Surrealist painter Salvador Dali, the Spanish Culture Ministry and the Catalan regional government have agreed on how to divide his artistic legacy.


Environmental Tectonics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Tectonics
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
4,383,000
6,153,000
Net inc
286,000
261,000
Share earns
.10
.09
Shares outst
2,853,000
2,800,000
9mo sales
14,191,000
14,884,000
Net inc
728,000
185,000
Share earns
.26
.07


Expanding PC Use With Radio Waves
LEAD: rrCommunicating by personal computer has long required a telephone.
But yesterday the International Business Machines Corporation and Motorola Inc. announced a joint venture to make it possible for roving employees like sales and repair personnel to reach their computers at headquarters by radio waves.


Clark Equipment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clark Equipment Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
377,515,000
345,570,000
Net inc
b20,367,000
c11,997,000
Share earns
1.19
.70
Yr sales
1,391,940,000
1,278,277,000
Net inc
b68,913,000
c46,091,000
Share earns
4.02
2.70


THE POP LIFE
LEAD:
Songs of Love, Etc.


Royal Lepage reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Lepage
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
522,900,000
531,500,000
Net inc
28,100,000
26,300,000
Share earns
2.06
1.97
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Westerners Discount Reports Of Unrest in North Albania
LEAD: Western diplomats and people who have traveled recently in Albania are discounting reports of anti-Communist demonstrations in the northern part of the country.
But they cite signs that the Albanian Government has grown concerned that the democratic tide rolling through Eastern Europe may yet threaten Europe's last


Baker's Moscow Talks Delayed a Second Time
LEAD: Talks in Moscow next week between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union have been postponed for a day, for the second time, so as not to interfere with a critical Communist Party meeting, the State Department announced today.


Fletcher Leisure reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fletcher Leisure
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Sales
47,727,000
39,387,000
Net inc
b2,008,000
b1,796,000
Share earns
.48
.43
b-Included extraordinary credits of $175,000, or 4 cents a share, for the latest year and $197,000, or 5 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


General Employment EnterFprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Employment EnterFprises (AMEX)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
4,207,914
4,038,663
Net inc
64,764
204,185
Share earns
.04
.13


Poland May Seek to Join European Parliament


INSIDE
LEAD:
Pressure for NATO Cuts
The Soviet bloc upheavals and American troop cuts have accelerated momentum toward military spending cuts in Western Europe.
Page A24.
A Center for AIDS Research
One of the world's largest AIDS research laboratories will open in New York City, financed largely by an $8 million foundation grant.


HBO &amp; Co reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
59,959,000
51,583,000
Net inc
6,325,000
4,912,000
Share earns
.41
.31
Yr rev
203,556,000
187,409,000
Net inc
15,453,000
12,519,000
Share earns
.99
.81
Shares outst
15,632,000
15,471,000


Bush's Address On TV Tonight
LEAD: President Bush's State of the Union Message will be broadcast live at 9 o'clock Eastern time tonight on the ABC, CBS and NBC television networks, on the Cable News Network (CNN) and on the Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network (C-Span).


The Ghost Who Batted For Boston
LEAD: rrIn the first game of a doubleheader between the Boston Red Sox and the Chicago White Sox, someone, or some thing, pinch-hit for the Red Sox pitcher, Dick Newsome, in the seventh inning.


Lifecore Biomedical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifecore Biomedical
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
1,127,000
1,231,000
Net loss
287,000
b132,000
Share earns
-
.03
6mo rev
2,124,000
2,417,000
Net loss
493,000
b300,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Masses of Liberian Refugees Flee Rebellion and Reprisal Killings
LEAD: In hospital wards here, a bedraggled and stunned group of refugees from Liberia are struggling to sort out the reasons behind the outburst of violence that has led to hundreds of deaths there.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in SportsMonday this week about a legal settlement between the United States Golf Association and the Karsten Manufacturing Corporation misidentified the golf clubs involved.


Philadelphia Journal;   Grand Marriage, Maybe, But Not of Convenience
LEAD: Miralda, a Spanish artist whose work includes a scale model of Barcelona in chocolate, was at the Philadelphia Museum of Art this week to check his latest work, a bridal cape for the Statue of Liberty.


Court Security Reviewed After Rifle Delivery
LEAD: Security at the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn has been reviewed after a booby-trapped rifle was delivered in a briefcase to a Federal prosecutor on Monday, United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney said yesterday.
But he added that there was no way to insure that a similar incident could not occur.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-17
Stunned refugees from Liberia have reached the Ivory Coast with accounts of an outburst of violence between rebels and Government troops that left hundreds dead.
Page A1


Savings Fugitive Indicted; U.S. Offers $200,000 Reward
LEAD: Prosecutors call it the latest chapter in the Maryland savings and loan scandal, which shook financial markets in the summer of 1985, gave the country vivid pictures of depositors lined up in front of savings associations and became a grim harbinger of the nationwide scandal to come.


A Panel Hears Tales of Fears and 'Wilding'
LEAD: In a voice choked with emotion, a Brooklyn mother told a City Hall hearing yesterday that when she sends her children to school by public transportation each morning, she worries she will not see them alive again because of marauding groups of violent youths.


Cold Numbers Provide The Stuff of Hot Debate
LEAD: Thanks to the Founding Fathers, even the whiz kid of the executive branch, even a budget director who quotes Hegel and snipes at Congressional budget-making as a journey through Wonderland, at some point has to take the long drive up Capitol Hill and face Leon Panetta and Marty Russo.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
9.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.77
8.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.72
7.73
8.41
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.44
8.47
9.02
30-YR.


Rival Seeking to Freeze Amgen Profits on Drug
LEAD: Moving aggressively after a recent court decision over patent rights to a lucrative new anti-anemia drug, Genetics Institute Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., fired another volley in its battle with Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif.


Coca-Cola Net Sets Record, Rising to $1.7 Billion in 1989
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that its profits reached an all-time high last year of $1.7 billion, bolstered by a fourth quarter in which earnings more than tripled.


Kansas City Life Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Life Insurance
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
9,150,000
4,619,000
Share earns
1.31
.64
Yr net inc
25,422,000
20,046,000
Share earns
3.56
2.73


Once Again Now
LEAD: This week we had the budget.
The budget is a big story in Washington, which is probably why we have it.
To understand the budget, remember: The budget is not a budget.
The budget is a story.


America West Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* America West Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
278,251,000
211,832,000
Net inc
b1,148,000
c19,066,000
Share earns
.04
1.18
Shares outst
19,284,000
15,747,000
Yr rev
993,409,000
775,675,000
Net inc
b20,018,000
c9,361,000
Share earns
1.00
.51
Shares outst
18,388,000
15,162,000


New Program Helps the Law and the Handicapped


Review/Music;   More From Schoenberg and Colleagues
LEAD: Though the Juilliard School's series called Focus 1990, the World of Arnold Schoenberg, might appear to be another crash course in 20th-century musical history, its real goals may lie beyond the scope of a thumbnail survey.
The necessarily disjointed programs assembled by Joel Sachs can serve a purpose if they stimulate listeners not only to examine this often murky subject through the lens of one composer's development but also to think afresh about the social and political climate in which 20th-century music grew.


Chronicle
LEAD: THOMAS W. SIMONS Jr and CHARLES H. THOMAS 2d are expected to be the next Ambassadors to Poland and Hungary, respectively.
Both are career State Department officials and currently serve as Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for European and Canadian Affairs.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   G.M.'s Response To 'Roger &amp; Me'
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation has asked its advertising agencies not to place commercials on television programs that feature Michael Moore, the director and star of the satirical documentary film ''Roger &amp; Me,'' an executive at one of G.M.'s agencies said yesterday.


RECESSION CHANCES HAVE DIMINISHED, GREENSPAN INSISTS
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, told Congress today that the chance of an imminent recession has diminished markedly since spring and that the nation's current slow growth is likely to prove only a ''temporary hesitation.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Gearon Hoffman Conlon &amp; Nye Advertising will handle advertising and public relations for the David M. Winfield Foundation.


Genisco Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genisco Technology Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1989
1988
Revenue
8,839,655
5,700,601
Net inc
b1,488,719
c3,616,197
Share earns
.55
-
Yr rev
34,709,913
29,084,804
Net inc
b1,743,388
c12,353,795
Share earns
.65
-


Iraqi Army Is Accused of Attacking Civilians
LEAD: Amnesty International said today that the Iraqi Army attacked dozens of villages in southern Iraq this month and killed many civilians, apparently in an effort to capture army deserters.


Pioneer Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
332,655
326,255
Per share
.19
.18
Shares outst
1,741,421
1,813,621


Rumor on Gorbachev Sends Dollar Up in a Jittery Day
LEAD: The dollar jumped against major currencies in nervous trading yesterday on an unconfirmed news report that the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, would resign as Communist Party chairman.


A Felony Charge Is Ruled Out In Strawberry Domestic Dispute
LEAD: Law enforcement authorities said today that no felony charges would be filed against Darryl Strawberry in connection with a domestic dispute that landed him in jail.


Books of The Times;   A White House Speechwriter's Words and Deeds
LEAD:
What I Saw at the Revolution
A Political Life in the Reagan Era
By Peggy Noonan
353 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Cuomo Now Forecasts a Bigger Budget Gap
LEAD: Just two weeks after he presented his new budget, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he had probably overestimated revenues and would have to propose additional taxes or spending cuts to bring the budget into balance.


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
292,700,000
310,900,000
Net inc
3,100,000
3,200,000
Share earns
.16
.16
Yr rev
1,078,700,000
1,226,000,000
Net inc
13,300,000
20,800,000
Share earns
.67
1.07


Bridge
LEAD: For a quarter of a century the New York metropolitan area has been the home of the world's biggest bridge store.
But Barclay Bridge Supplies, which has sold books and supplies, largely by mail, from its headquarters in Port Chester, N.Y., will close its doors today.
The business has been acquired by Baron Bridge Supplies in Louisville,


Riders' Rights, Beggars' Rights
LEAD: The subway is not the street, not Hyde Park or Union Square Park where ideas and commerce flourish with room to spare.
It is an underground space sometimes shadowed with narrow nooks and scary stairways and sometimes peopled by wild-eyed vagrants who just might be loony enough to push someone in front of a train.


Memorabilia Is Stolen
LEAD: Jerseys belonging to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Walt Frazier were stolen on Sunday afternoon from the Basketball Hall of Fame, Joseph O'Brien, the executive director of the sports museum in Springfield, Mass., said.


Drug-Laced Air Called Risk to Babies
LEAD: There is growing medical concern that the very young children of cocaine-addicted parents can be injured by breathing the drug-laced air in their homes.


Jerusalem Says It Has No Policy To Settle Soviet Jews in West Bank
LEAD: The Israeli Government said today that it had no official policy of settling Soviet Jewish immigrants in the West Bank or Gaza Strip, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir dismissed the debate over the issue as an ''artificial storm'' created by panicked Arab leaders.


Southwest National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest National
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
860,000
1,387,000
Per share
.31
.51
Year net inc
3,912,000
4,928,000
Per share
1.43
1.80


Broad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Broad Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
3,270,000
b19,363,000
Share earns
.10
-
Shares outst
33,365,000
31,118,000
b-Net loss
Year-ago quarter included a pretax loss of $27,685,000 on corporate restructuring.


City Opera Pact Ratified
LEAD: The singers, dancers, choristers and stage managers of the New York City Opera voted yesterday to ratify a five-year contract between their union, the American Guild of Musical Artists, and the opera company.
For most members of the company, the agreement calls for a salary increase of $50 a week in the first three years and in the fifth year, with a $25 increase in the fourth year.


Millipore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millipore Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
171,816,000
170,459,000
Net inc
b16,984,000
16,760,000
Share earns
.61
.60
Shares outst
27,861,000
27,899,000
Yr sales
657,515,000
621,893,000
Net inc
b52,880,000
54,548,000
Share earns
1.90
1.96
Shares outst
27,886,000
27,892,000


Hugo Cohn, Engineer And Consultant, 102
LEAD: Hugo Cohn, an electrical engineer who helped develop radio beacons for distinguishing between friendly and enemy aircraft, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 102 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Community Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Banks Inc.
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
2,169,000
1,911,000
Per share
1.72
1.51
The year-ago per share earnings adjusted to reflect 5 percent stock dividend paid in December 1989.


Battle Mountain Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Battle Mountain Gold (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
29,635,000
32,436,000
Net inc
5,155,000
12,146,000
Share earns
.08
.18
Yr sales
130,640,000
140,838,000
Net inc
26,418,000
59,444,000
Share earns
.40
.91


Holiday RV Superstores Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Holiday RV Superstores Inc. (OTC)
Year to Oct 31
1989
1988
Revenue
40,941,725
32,653,075
Net inc
1,043,016
1,047,708
Share earns
.15
.15


Mentor Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Graphics (OTC)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
98,369,000
83,509,000
Net inc
11,788,000
9,749,000
Share earns
.32
.28
Shares outst
37,033,000
35,169,000
Yr rev
380,034,000
300,750,000
Net inc
44,803,000
33,540,000
Share earns
1.22
.96
Shares outst
36,865,000
34,890,000


Gifts to the Neediest Are Often Prompted By a Second Motive
LEAD: Katsumi Tashiro of Harrison, N.Y., had an unusual motive for sending a gift to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, a desire to alter the perceptions that some New Yorkers have about Japanese people.


American Brands Shifts Directors
LEAD: American Brands Inc. said yesterday that five inside members of its board had resigned, prompting speculation on Wall Street that some of the company's managers were preparing a buyout bid.
But the company said it was making the board's structure more like that of other large corporations, in which the outside directors are a majority.


Yale Honoring Keeper of Flame;   For 25 Years, Cozza Has Stoked a Glowing Football Tradition
LEAD: If you think Ivy League colleges de-emphasize football, please don't mention that while the Joel E. Smilow '54 Coach of Football at Yale University is interviewing a hot prospect.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
2,248,911,000
2,026,829,000
Net inc
b757,229,000
c235,491,000
Share earns
2.22
.65
Shares outst
338,944,000
356,962,000
Yr rev
8,965,786,000
8,337,831,000
Net inc
b1,723,825,000
c1,044,703,000
Share earns
4.92
2.85
Shares outst
345,981,000
364,612,000


Judge Delays Noriega Hearing
LEAD: A ruling on the argument by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, the deposed Panamanian strongman, that he cannot be tried on drug charges because he is a prisoner of war has been delayed a week, court officials said today.


Control Data reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Data (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
524,000,000
933,000,000
Net loss
196,400,000
12,800,000
Yr rev
2,900,000,000
3,600,000,000
Net loss
b680,400,000
c1,700,000,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Included a $663.3 million restructuring charge, $214.7 million of which came in the fourth quarter.


First Financial Caribbean reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Financial Caribbean
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
9,843,000
7,203,000
Net inc
899,000
c2,613,000
Share earns
.37
-
Shares outst
2,437,799
2,154,657
Yr rev
38,328,000
28,854,000
Net inc
b3,861,000
1,100,000
Share earns
1.61
.51
Shares outst
2,391,775
2,154,657


Thinking Machines Seen in Japan Deal
LEAD: The Thinking Machines Corporation, a maker of parallel supercomputers, will announce this week that it has sold its first machine in Japan.
The Japanese organization, Auditory and Visual Perception Research Laboratories, is associated with the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Company.
The group said it was buying the supercomputer, known as a CM-2 Connection


FirstFed America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FirstFed America Inc.
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Net inc
b2,131,000
c3,079,000
Per share
.56
.81
b-Included pre-tax gain of $25,000 on sale of mortgage loans.
c-Included pre-tax gain of $1,338,000 on sale of investment securities.


Ford Loses Patent Suit On Wipers
LEAD: A former engineering professor who says he invented the intermittent windshield wiper now used by most major car and truck manufacturers has won a bellwether patent-infringement case against the Ford Motor Company.


Stephenson Is Mending
LEAD: Jan Stephenson, who underwent surgery last week for a double fracture of her left ring finger, said yesterday that she had started rehabilitation and hoped to rejoin the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour soon.


MCI's Net Off 11.5%
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation, the long-distance telephone company, reported disappointing fourth-quarter earnings today.


Kaufel Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaufel Ltd.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Sales
27,784,000
24,188,000
Net inc
2,818,000
2,566,000
Share earns
.19
.21
Results are in Canadian funds.


Mitterrand Is Said to Agree to Free Hunger Striker
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand has promised to release a convicted pro-Iranian terrorist in exchange for his agreement to end a four-month hunger strike, published reports said today.


Small Quakes Jolt California
LEAD: Five earthquakes, none of them higher than 2.9 on the Richter scale, struck the Southern California desert within two hours today, seismologists reported.
The epicenter was 25 miles north of El Centro, near the Salton Sea, according to the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
The quake times and readings were: 6:01 A.M., 2.8; 6:02 A.M., 2.8; 6:04 A.M., 2.9; 6:16 A.M., 2.7, and 7:54 A.M., 2.5.


Fund American Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fund American Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
874,276,000
909,578,000
Net loss
15,500,000
b71,337,000
Share earns
-
1.34
Shares outst
35,695,000
53,245,000
Yr rev
3,490,124,000
3,703,688,000
Net inc
73,267,000
c235,409,000
Share earns
.99
4.51
Shares outst
43,009,000
52,219,000


Sealed Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealed Air Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1989
1988
Sales
97,767,000
88,607,000
Net inc
1,365,000
6,311,000
Share earns
.16
.77
Yr sales
385,040,000
345,612,000
Net inc
7,290,000
25,295,000
Share earns
.88
3.10


Woman, 93, Saved From Fire
LEAD: A 93-year-old woman who was trapped by a fire in her apartment above the White Horse Tavern, a Greenwich Village landmark, was rescued yesterday by three police officers, officials said.
The woman, Katherine Fitzgibbons, was removed from her smoke-filled apartment at 561 Hudson Street by the police at 8:30 A.M.


BULGARIAN LEADER COURTS OPPOSITION
LEAD: The Bulgarian Communist leader, Petar Mladenov, invited the political opposition today to join a government of national unity to run the country until free elections in May.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 30
1989
1988
Sales
484,987,000
484,229,000
Net inc
19,582,000
23,519,000
Share earns
1.10
1.32
Yr sales
1,909,256,000
1,824,760,000
Net inc
64,850,000
b52,846,000
Share earns
3.64
2.98
Shares outst
17,816,000
17,718,000


Bond Prices Up After Hectic Day
LEAD: A rumor from Moscow overtook news reports from Washington in the credit markets yesterday and prices of Treasury securities closed higher after a volatile session.


Brand-Name Lean Beef: Is It Really Better?
LEAD: FOR years when shoppers brought home a sirloin steak or a chuck roast, it was surrounded by at least an inch of fat and was generally graded choice.
It was sold under the supermarket's name, and consumers had no idea who produced it.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Burlington Northern Railroad Co., Fort Worth, a unit of Burlington Northern Inc., named William E. Greenwood chief operating officer.
John Anderson will succeed Mr.
Greenwood as executive vice president for marketing and sales.


Nancy Gruver, Leader In Bridge, Is Dead at 58
LEAD: Nancy Gruver, one of the nation's leading contract bridge players, died of a heart attack Sunday at Howard County General Hospital in Maryland.
She was 58 years old and lived in Ellicott City, Md.


Pipe Bomb Explodes in Houston Church
LEAD: A pipe bomb apparently mailed to one of Houston's largest churches exploded this morning, injuring the pastor's daughter, the police said.


Chum Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chum Ltd.
Qtr to Nov 30
1989
1988
Revenue
50,639,000
47,704,000
Net inc
4,942,000
4,587,000
Share earns
.38
.35
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Connecticut Alarmed as an Old and Trusted Bank Falters
LEAD: Financial troubles at one of Connecticut's oldest and largest banks, Connecticut Bank and Trust, have brought home to people across the state the harsh reality of New England's economic downturn.


The Royal Shakespeare: Ready to Move On
LEAD: The artistic director and chief executive of the Royal Shakespeare Company, the ''embattled Terry Hands,'' as he is so often described in the British press, sat dressed in black in his white-walled London office the other day and stated for what might have been the thousandth time that his 29-year-old theater company was embattled, yes, but not yet ready for embalming.


